     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The History of the Origins of Christianity. Book II. The
                  Apostles.
      Creator(s): Renan, Joseph Ernest (1823-1892).
   CCEL Subjects: All; History
      LC Call no: BR165.R42 V.2
     LC Subjects:

                  Christianity

                  History

                  By period

                  Early and medieval
     __________________________________________________________________

THE HISTORY

  OF THE

                            ORIGINS OF CHRISTIANITY.

BOOK II.

THE APOSTLES.

  BY

ERNEST RENAN

    MEMBER OF THE FRENCH ACADEMY.

London:

MATHIESON & COMPANY

25, Paternoster Square E.C.
     __________________________________________________________________

CONTENTS.

   CHAP.   A.D. Page
   INTRODUCTION.
   CRITICISM OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS.
   I.

   Formation of Beliefs Relative to the Resurrection of Jesus.--The
   Apparitions at Jerusalem
   33 1
   II.

   Departure of the Disciples from Jerusalem.--Second Galilean Life of
   Jesus
   33 15
   III.

   Return of the Apostles to Jerusalem.--End of the Period of Apparitions
   33-34 25
   IV.

   Descent of the Holy Spirit.--Ecstatical and Prophetical Phenomena
   34 31
   V.

   First Church of Jerusalem; it is entirely cenobitical
   35 41
   VI.

   The Conversion of Hellenistic Jews and of Proselytes
   36 55
   VII.

   The Church Considered as an Association of Poor People--Institution of
   the Diaconate, Deaconesses, and Widows
   36 62
   VIII.

   First Persecution.--Death of Stephen.--Destruction of the First Church
   of Jerusalem
   36-37 74
   IX. First Missions.--Philip, the Deacon 38 62
   X.

   Conversion of St. Paul.--Ridiculous to put Paul's Conversion A.D.
   38.--Aretas settles the date as about 34
   38 89
   XI.

   Peace and Interior Developments of the Church of Judea
   38-41 103
   XII. Foundation of the Church of Antioch 41 117
   XIII.

   The Idea of an Apostolate to the Gentiles.--Saint Barnabas
   42-44 124
   XIV. Persecution by Herod Agrippa the First 44 131
   XV.

   Movements Parallel to Christianity, or imitated from it.--Simon of
   Gitton
   45 141
   XVI. General Progress of Christian Missions 45 149
   XVII.

   State of the World at the Middle of the First Century
   45 163
   XVIII. Religious legislation at this period 45 184
   XIX. The Future of Missions 45 193
     __________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION.

  CRITICISM OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS.

   The first book of our history of the Origins of Christianity has traced
   the story as far as the death and burial of Jesus. We must now resume
   the narrative at the point where we left it--to wit, Saturday, 4th
   April, 33. This will be for some time yet a continuation, in some sort,
   of the Life of Jesus. Next, after the months of joyous rapture, during
   which the great Founder laid the foundation of a new order for
   humanity, these last years were the most decisive in the history of the
   world. It is still Jesus, some sparks of whose sacred fire have been
   deposited in the hearts of a few friends who created institutions of
   the greatest originality, moves, transforms souls, imprints upon
   everything his divine seal. We have to show how, under this ever active
   and victorious influence over death, the faith of the resurrection, the
   influence of the holy Spirit, the gift of tongues, and the power of the
   Church, established themselves. We shall describe the organization of
   the Church at Jerusalem, its first trials, its first conquests, the
   earliest missions which it despatched. We shall follow Christianity in
   its rapid progress in Syria, as far as Antioch, where was formed a
   second capital, more important in a sense than that of Jerusalem, which
   it was destined to supplant. In this new centre, where the converted
   Pagans constituted the majority, we shall see Christianity separating
   itself definitely from Judaism, and receiving a name of its own; we
   shall see especially the birth of the grand idea of distant missions,
   destined to carry the name of Jesus into the world of the Gentiles. We
   shall pause at the important moment when Paul, Barnabas, and John Mark
   set out for the execution of this great design. There we shall
   interrupt our narrative, and cast a glance at the world which those
   daring missionaries undertook to convert. We shall endeavour to give an
   account of the intellectual, political, religious, and social condition
   of the Roman Empire about the year 45, the probable date of the
   departure of Saint Paul upon his first mission.

   Such is the subject-matter of this second book, which we have entitled,
   The Apostles, for the reason that it expounds the period of common
   action during which the small family created by Jesus acted in concert,
   and was grouped morally around a single point--Jerusalem. Our next
   work, the third, will take us out of this company, and we shall be
   devoted almost exclusively to the man who, more than any other,
   represents conquering and travelling Christianity--Saint Paul.
   Although, from a certain epoch, he called himself an apostle, Paul had
   not the same right to the title as the Twelve; he is a workman of the
   second hour, and almost an intruder. The state in which historical
   documents have reached us are at this stage-misleading. As we know
   infinitely more of the history of St. Paul than that of the Twelve, as
   we possess his authentic writings and original memoirs detailing
   minutely certain periods of his life, we assign to him an importance of
   the first order, almost exceeding that of Jesus. This is an error. Paul
   was a great man: in the foundation of Christianity he played a most
   important part. Still, we must not compare him with Jesus, nor even
   with any of the immediate disciples of the latter. Paul never saw
   Jesus, nor did he ever taste the ambrosia of the Galilean preaching.
   Hence, the most commonplace man who had had his part of the celestial
   manna, was from that very circumstance superior to him who had only had
   an after-taste. Nothing can be more false than an opinion which has
   become fashionable in these days, that Paul was really the founder of
   Christianity. The real founder of Christianity was Jesus. The first
   places, next to him, ought to be reserved to those grand and obscure
   companions of Jesus, to those faithful and zealous women, who believed
   in him despite his death. Paul was, in the first century, a kind of
   isolated phenomenon. He did not leave an organized school. On the
   contrary he left bitter opponents, who strove, after his death, to
   banish him from the Church and to place him, in a sort of way, on the
   same footing as Simon Magus. They tried to take away from him that
   which we regard as the peculiar work--the conversion of the Gentiles.
   The church of Corinth, which he himself had founded, claimed to owe its
   origin to him and to St. Peter. In the second century Papias and St.
   Justin never mention his name. It was later, when oral tradition came
   to be regarded as nothing, and when the Scriptures took the place of
   everything, that Paul assumed a leading part in Christian theology.
   Paul, it was true, had a theology. Peter and Mary Magdalene had none.
   Paul left behind him considerable works: none of the writings of the
   other apostles are to be compared with his, either in regard to their
   importance or authenticity.

   At first glance the documents for the period embraced in this volume
   are rare and altogether insufficent. The direct testimony is reduced to
   the first chapters of the Acts of the Apostles--chapters, the
   historical value of which is open to serious objections. Yet, the light
   which these last chapters of the Gospels cast upon that obscure
   interval, especially the Epistles of St. Paul, dispels, to some extent,
   the darkness. An old writing serves to make known, first, the exact
   date at which it was composed, and, secondly, the period which preceded
   its composition. Every writing suggests, in fact, retrospective
   inductions as to the state of society which produced it. Composed, for
   the most part, between the years 53 and 62, the Epistles of St. Paul
   are replete with information concerning the early years of
   Christianity. Moreover, seeing that we are here speaking of great
   events without precise dates, the essential point is to show the
   conditions under which they formed themselves, On this subject I ought
   to remark once for all that the current date inscribed at the head of
   each chapter is never more than approximate. The chronology of these
   first years has but a very small number of fixed land-marks. Yet,
   thanks to the care which the editor of the Acts has taken, not to
   interrupt the succession of events; thanks to the Epistle to the
   Galatians, where are to be found some numerical indications of the
   greatest value; and to Josephus, who gives the dates of events of
   profane history connected with some facts concerning the apostles, we
   are able to create for the history of these last a very probable canvas
   upon which the chances of error are confined within very narrow limits.

   I shall again repeat at the beginning of this book what I have already
   said at the beginning of my Life of Jesus. In histories of that kind,
   where the general effect alone is certain, and where almost all the
   details lend themselves more or less to doubt, in consequence of the
   legendary character of the documents, hypothesis is essential. Upon
   periods of which we know nothing no hypothesis is possible. To
   endeavour to reproduce a group of ancient sculpture, which has
   certainly existed, but of which we possess only a few fragments, and
   concerning which we possess scarcely any written account, is an
   altogether arbitrary work. But to attempt to recompose the entire
   building of the Parthenon from what remains to us by the aid of the
   ancient text, availing ourselves of the drawing made in the seventeenth
   century of all the information possible; in one word, inspiring
   ourselves with the style of those inimitable fragments, trying to seize
   their soul and their life--what can be more legitimate? We need not
   boast of having found the ancient sculptor once more; but we have done
   what we could to approach him. Such a work is so much the more
   legitimate in history since language permits doubtful forms, which
   marble does not allow. There is oven nothing to prevent the reader from
   proposing a choice between diverse theories. The conscience of the
   writer may be easy since he has put forward as certain that which is
   certain, as probable that which is probable, as possible that which is
   possible. In those places where the footing between history and legend
   is uncertain, the general effect alone is all that need be sought
   after. Our third book, for which we shall have absolutely historical
   documents, where we shall have to paint characters of flesh and blood,
   and to speak of clearly defined facts, will offer a more definite
   story. It will be seen, however, that the character of that period is
   not known with greater certainty. Absolute facts speak more loudly than
   biographical details. We know very little of the incomparable artists
   who have created these masterpieces of Greek art. But these
   masterpieces tell us more about the personality of their authors and
   the public who appreciate them, than the most circumstantial
   narratives, and the most authentic texts could do.

   For the knowledge of the decisive events which happened in the first
   days after the death of Jesus the authorities are the last chapters of
   the Gospels containing the narratives of the appearance of the
   resuscitated Christ. I need not repeat here what I have said in the
   Introduction to my Life of Jesus as to the value of these documents. On
   that side we have happily a control which was too often wanting in the
   life of Jesus; I intend to imply an important passage of St. Paul (1
   Cor. xv 5-8), which establishes: 1st the reality of the appearances;
   2nd, the long duration of the apparitions as opposed to the narrative
   of the synoptical Gospels; 3rd, the variety of places in which the
   apparitions took place in contradiction to Mark and Luke. The study of
   this fundamental text, together with other reasons, confirms us in the
   views which we have enunciated as to the reciprocal relation of the
   Synoptics with the fourth Gospel. In all that concerns the narrative of
   the resurrection and the apparitions, the fourth Gospel maintains that
   superiority which it has for all the rest of the Life of Jesus. If we
   wish to find a consecutive logical narrative, which allows that which
   is hidden behind the allusions to be conjectured, it is there that we
   must look for it. I am approaching the most difficult of the questions
   connected with the origin of Christianity. "What is the historic value
   of the fourth Gospel?" The use which I have made of it in my Life of
   Jesus is the point to which enlightened critics have taken the most
   objection. Almost all the scholars who apply the rational method to the
   history of theology reject the fourth Gospel as apocryphal in every
   aspect. I have anew reflected much upon this problem, and I am unable
   sensibly to modify my first opinion. Only as I differ on this point
   from the general opinion I have thought it necessary to explain in
   detail the reasons for my persistency. I intend to make it the subject
   of an appendix at the end of a revised and corrected edition of the
   Life of Jesus which will shortly appear.

   The Acts of the Apostles are the most important document for the
   history which we are about to relate. I ought to explain myself hero as
   to the character of that work, its historical value, and the use which
   I have made of it.

   The one thing beyond question is that the Acts had the same author as
   the third Gospel, of which they are a continuation. It is not worth
   while to stop to prove this position, which, however, has never been
   disputed. The preface at the beginning of both writings, the dedication
   of both to Theophilus, the perfect similarity of style and of ideas
   furnish abundant demonstrations in this regard.

   A second proposition, which is not quite so self-evident, but which may
   be regarded as very probable is, that the author of the Acts was a
   disciple of Paul. who accompanied him during a great part of his
   journeyings. At the first glance this proposition appeared indubitable.
   In many places beginning with the 10th verse of chapter xvi., the
   author in his story makes use of the pronoun "we," indicating thus that
   thenceforward he made one of the company of Paul. That appears to be
   beyond question. One issue only presents itself to destroy the force of
   this argument: it is that of supposing that the passages where the
   pronoun "we" appears have been copied by the last editor of the Acts
   from an earlier manuscript by, for example, Timothy, and that the
   editor, out of inadvertence, had omitted to substitute for "we" the
   name of the narrator. This explanation is scarcely admissible. Such an
   inadvertence might easily occur in a vulgar compilation. But the third
   Gospel and the Acts are compositions most carefully edited, composed
   with reflection, and even with art, written by the same hand, and
   according to a deliberate plan. The two books together form a whole of
   absolutely the same style, offering the same favourite locutions, and
   the same manner of quoting the Scripture. A blunder of editing so
   really shocking as that would be inexplicable. We are then forced
   invincibly to conclude that he who wrote the end of the work wrote the
   beginning also, and that the narrator of all is he who wrote "we" in
   the passages mentioned.

   This becomes still more striking, if we note in what circumstances the
   narrator thus puts himself in company with Paul. The use of "we" begins
   at the moment when Paul goes into Macedonia for the first time (xvi.
   10). It ceases at the moment when Paul leaves Philippi, It is renewed
   when Paul, visiting Macedonia for the last time, again goes by way of
   Philippi (xx. 5-6.) Thenceforward the narrator never again separates
   himself from Paul until the end. If we further remark that the chapters
   in which the narrator accompanies the apostle have a specially precise
   character, it is impossible to believe that the narrator could have
   been a Macedonian, or rather a man of Philippi, who went before Paul to
   Troas during his second mission, who remained at Philippi after the
   departure of the apostle, and who at the last passage of the apostle
   through that city (third mission) joined him, not again to leave him.
   Can it be understood that an editor, writing at a distance, could thus
   have allowed himself to be ruled by the remembrance of another? Such
   memories would spoil the unity of the whole, The narrator who says "we"
   would have his own style; his special expressions; he would be more
   Paulinian than the editor himself. Now that is not so: the work is
   perfectly homogeneous.

   There will, perhaps, be some surprise that a thesis so evident should
   have been contradicted. But criticism of the writings of the New
   Testament shows that many things which appear to be perfectly clear
   are, upon examination, full of uncertainty. In the matter of style,
   thoughts, and doctrines, the Acts are scarcely what might be expected
   from a disciple of Paul. They in no way resemble his epistles. There is
   not a trace of the lofty doctrines which constitute the originality of
   the Apostle of the Gentiles. The temperament of Paul is that of a stiff
   and self-contained Protestant; the author of the Acts gives us the
   impression of a good Catholic, docile, optimist, calling every priest a
   "holy father," every bishop "a great bishop," ready to swallow any
   fiction, rather than believe that these holy fathers and great bishops
   quarrel amongst themselves and often make rude war. Whilst professing a
   great admiration for Paul, the author of the Acts avoids giving him the
   title of apostle, and is anxious that the initiative of the conversion
   of the Gentiles should belong to Peter. We should say, in short, that
   he is a disciple of Peter, rather than of Paul. We shall soon show
   that, in two or three circumstances, his principles of conciliation
   have led him gravely to falsify the biography of Paul; he makes
   mistakes and omissions of things which are very strange in a disciple
   of this last. He does not mention a single one of his epistles; he
   keeps back, in the most surprising fashion, explanations of the first
   importance. Even in the part, where he must have been the companion of
   Paul, he is sometimes singularly dry, ill-informed and dull. In short,
   the softness and vagueness of some of his narratives, the
   conventionality which may be discerned in them, suggest to us a writer
   who had no personal communication with the apostles, and who wrote
   between the years 100 and 120.

   Must we insist upon these objections? I think not, and I persist in
   believing that the last editor of the Acts is really the disciple of
   Paul who says "we" in the last chapters. All the difficulties,
   insoluble though they may appear, should be, if not set on one side, at
   least held in suspense by an argument as decisive as that which results
   from this word "we." We may add, that by attributing the Acts to a
   companion of Paul, two important peculiarities are explained: on the
   one hand, the disproportion of the work of which more than three-fifths
   are consecrated to Paul; on the other, the disproportion which may be
   remarked, even in the biography of Paul himself, whose first mission is
   dispatched with great brevity, whilst certain parts of the second and
   third missions, especially his last journey, are told with minute
   details. A man altogether a stranger to the apostolic history, would
   not have exhibited these inequalities. His work would have been better
   planned as a whole. That which distinguishes history composed from
   documents, from history written wholly or in part by an actor in it, is
   exactly this disproportion: The historian of the closet takes for his
   framework the events themselves; the author of memoirs takes his
   recollections for his framework, or, at least, his personal relations.
   An ecclesiastical historian, a sort of Eusebius, writing about the year
   120, would have bequeathed to us a book very differently distributed
   after chapter xiii. The bizarre fashion in which the Acts at this time
   leaves the orbit in which they had revolved until then can, to my
   thinking, be explained only by the peculiar situation of the author and
   by his relations with Paul. This result will be naturally confirmed if
   we find amongst the known fellow labourers of Paul the name of the
   author to whom tradition attributes our writing.

   This is in effect what took place. Manuscripts and tradition assign as
   the author of the third Gospel a certain Lucas or Lucanus. From what
   has been said it is evident that if Lucas be really the author of the
   third Gospel, he is also the author of the Acts. Now we find this Lucas
   mentioned precisely as the companion of Paul in the Epistle to the
   Colossians (iv. 14); in that to Philemon (24), and in the II Timothy
   (iv. 11.) This last Epistle is of more than doubtful authenticity. The
   Epistle to the Colossians and to Philemon on their side, although very
   probably authentic, are not, however, the most undoubted of Paul's
   Epistles. But those writings are, in any ease, of the first century,
   and suffice to prove that there was a Luke amongst the disciples of
   Paul. The fabricator of the Epistles to Timothy, in short, is certainly
   not the author of those to the Colossians and to Philemon (supposing,
   contrary to our opinion, that these last are apocryphal). To admit that
   a forger should have attributed an imaginary companion to Paul is to
   suppose something very improbable. But assuredly different forgers
   would not have pitched upon the same name. Two circumstances give to
   this reasoning a peculiar force. The first is that the name of Luke, or
   Lucanus, is an uncommon one amongst the early Christians; the second
   that the Luke of the Epistles had no other celebrity. To write a
   celebrated name at the top of a document, as is done in the second
   Epistle of Peter, and very probably in Paul's Epistles to Titus and
   Timothy, was in no way contrary to the habits of the time. But to write
   at the top of such a document a false name, otherwise obscure, is not
   to be believed. Was it the intention of the forger to throw over his
   book the authority of Paul? If it were, why did he not take the name of
   Paul himself? or at least the name of Timothy or Titus, disciples of
   the Apostle of the Gentiles, who were much bettor known? Luke scarcely
   had a place in tradition, legend, or history. The three passages of the
   Epistles above mentioned are not sufficient to make his name a
   generally accepted guarantee. The Epistles to Timothy were probably
   written after the Acts. The mention of Luke in the Epistles to the
   Colossians and to Philemon are equivalent to one only, the two
   documents being really but one. We think, therefore, that the author of
   the Acts was really Luke, the disciple of Paul.

   The very name of Luke, or Lucanus, and the profession of physician,
   which the disciple of Paul thus named exercised, answer completely to
   the indications which the two books furnish as to their author. We have
   shown in effect that the author of the third Gospel and of the Acts was
   probably from Philippi, a Roman colony, where Latin was the prevailing
   language. Further, the author of the Gospel and of the Acts knew little
   of Judaism and the affairs of Palestine; he scarcely knew Hebrew. He is
   abreast of the ideas of the Pagan world, and he writes Greek with
   tolerable correctness. The work was composed far from Judea for the use
   of people who knew little of its geography, who cared nothing for
   either profound Rabbinical learning's or for Hebrew names. The dominant
   idea of the author is, that if the people had been free to follow their
   inclinations they would have embraced the faith of Jesus, and that it
   was the Jewish aristocracy who prevented them. The word Jew is always
   used by him in a bad sense, and as synonymous with enemy of Christians.
   On the other hand he shows himself very favourable to the Samaritan
   heretics.

   What date may we give to the composition of this important document?
   Luke appears for the first time in company with Paul on the occasion of
   the first journey of the apostle to Macedonia, about the year 52.
   Suppose that lie was then 25 years of age; there is nothing unnatural
   in supposing him to have lived to the year 100. The narrative of the
   Acts stops at the year 63. But the edition of the Acts being evidently
   later than that of the third Gospel, and the date of that third Gospel
   being fixed with sufficient precision in the years which followed the
   destruction of Jerusalem (70), we cannot dream of placing the
   production of the Acts earlier than 71 or 72.

   If it were certain that the Acts were composed immediately after the
   Gospel we might stop at this point. But doubt is permissible. Some
   facts lead to the belief that a considerable interval passed between
   the composition of the third Gospel and that of the Acts. Thus there is
   a singular contradiction between the last chapters of the Gospel and
   the first of the Acts. According to the former account the ascension
   took place on the very day of the resurrection; according to the Acts
   it took place only after forty days. It is clear that the second
   version presents the legend to us in a more advanced form--a form which
   was adopted when the need was felt for creating a place for the various
   apparitions, and for giving to the life beyond the tomb of Jesus a
   complete and logical frame-work. We are even tempted to suppose that
   the new fashion of conceiving things was not told to the author or did
   not come into his head except in the interval between the composition
   of the two works. In any case it is very remarkable that the author
   finds himself compelled to add new circumstances to his first account
   and to extend it. If his first book were still in his hands why did he
   not make the additions to his first account which, separated as they
   are, look so awkward? That, however, is not decisive, and a grave
   circumstance leads to the belief that Luke conceived at the same time
   the plan of both. That is the preface placed at the head of the Gospel,
   which appears common to the two books. The contradiction we have
   pointed out may perhaps be explained by the little rare which was taken
   to present an accurate account of the way in which the time was spent.
   This it is which makes all the accounts of the life of Jesus after his
   resurrection in complete disagreement as to the duration of that life.
   So little care was taken to be historical that the same narrator made
   no scruple about proposing two irreconcilable systems in succession.
   The three accounts of the conversion of Paul in the Acts present also
   little differences, which prove simply that the author did not trouble
   himself much about the exactness of the details.

   It appears then that we shall be very near the truth in supposing that
   the Acts were written about the year 80. The spirit of the book, in
   fact, corresponds completely with the age of the first Flavians. The
   author carefully avoids all that can wound the Romans. He loves to show
   how favourable the Roman authorities were to the new sect; how they
   sometimes even embraced it; how they at least defended it against the
   Jews; how greatly superior is imperial justice to the passions of the
   local powers. He insists especially on the advantages which Paul owed
   to his rights as a Roman citizen. He abruptly cuts his narrative short
   at the moment of the arrival of Paul at Rome, perhaps in order to avoid
   the necessity of relating the cruelties of Nero towards the Christians.
   The contrast with the Apocalypse is striking. The Apocalypse, written
   in the year 68, is full of the memory of the iniquities of Nero; a
   horrible hatred of Rome overspreads it. Here we see a mild man, who
   lives in a period of calm. After about the year 70 until the last years
   of the first century, the situation was not altogether unpleasant for
   the Christians. Personages of the Flavian family attached themselves to
   Christianity. Who knows if Luke did not know Flavius Clemens, if he
   were not of his familia, if the Acts were not written for that powerful
   personage, whose official position required caution? Some indications
   have led to the belief that this book was composed at Rome. One might
   have said indeed that the principles of the Roman Church weighed upon
   the author. That Church, from the earliest ages, had the political and
   hierarchical character which has always distinguished it. The good Luke
   could enter into that spirit. His ideas of ecclesiastical authority are
   very advanced: we see the form of the episcopate sprouting. He writes
   history in that tone of an apologist at any cost which is that of the
   official historians of the court of Rome. He acts as an ultramontane
   historian of Clement XIV would act; praising at the same time the Pope
   and the Jesuits, and seeking to persuade by a narrative full of
   compunction that both sides in that debate observed the rules of
   charity. In two hundred years it will also be settled that Cardinal
   Antonelli and Mgr de Merode loved each other like two brothers. The
   author of the Acts was, but with a simplicity which will not again be
   equalled, the first of those complacent narrators, sanctimoniously
   satisfied, determined to believe that everything goes on in the Church
   in an evangelic fashion. Too loyal to condemn his master Paul, too
   orthodox not to share the official opinion which prevailed, he smoothed
   over differences of doctrine, to allow only the common end to be
   seen--that end which all these great founders pursued in effect by
   paths so opposed and through rivalries so energetic.

   We can understand how a man who has placed himself intentionally in
   such a disposition of mind, is the least capable in the world of
   representing things as they really happened. Historical fidelity is a
   matter of indifference to him; edification is all he cares for. Luke
   scarcely conceals this; he writes in order that Theophilus may
   recognise the truth of what the catechists have taught him. There was
   then already a recognised system of ecclesiastical history, which was
   officially taught, and the framework of which, as well as that of the
   Gospel history itself, was probably already settled. The dominant
   character of the Acts, like that of the third Gospel, is a tender
   piety, a lively sympathy with the Gentiles, a conciliatory spirit, an
   extreme pro. occupation with the supernatural, love for the humble and
   lowly, a grand democratic sentiment, or rather the persuasion that the
   people are naturally Christian, that it is the great who prevent them
   from following their good instincts, an exalted idea of the power of
   the Church and of its heads, a remarkable taste for community of life.
   The system of composition is the same in both books, so that we are
   with respect to the history of the apostles on the same footing as we
   should be with regard to the Gospel history if we had one single text
   only, the Gospel of Luke.

   The disadvantages of such a situation are manifest. The life of Jesus,
   as related by the third evangelist alone, would be extremely defective
   and incomplete. We know it, because so far as the life of Jesus is
   concerned, comparison is possible. Together with Luke we possess
   (without speaking of the fourth Gospel) Matthew and Mark, who, as
   compared with Luke, are in part, at least, original. We can lay a
   finger on the violent proceedings by means of which Luke dislocates or
   mixes up anecdotes, on the way in which he modifies the colour of
   certain facts according to his personal views, of the pious legends
   which he adds to the most authentic traditions. Is it not evident that
   if we could make such a comparison of the Acts, we should find faults
   of a precisely similar description? The first chapters of the Acts
   would even appear, without doubt, inferior to the third Gospel, for
   these chapters were probably composed with fewer and less universally
   accepted documents.

   A fundamental distinction, in fact, is here necessary. From the point
   of view of historical value, the book of the Acts divides itself into
   two parts; one, including the first twelve chapters, and relating the
   principal facts of the history of the primitive Church; the other
   containing the remaining sixteen chapters, all devoted to the missions
   of St. Paul. That second part includes in itself two distinct kinds of
   narrative; those on the one hand, of which the narrator gives himself
   out as eye-witness; on the other, those in which he relates only what
   he has been told. It is clear that oven in the last case his authority
   is great. Often the conversations of Paul have furnished his
   information. Towards the end, moreover, the narrative assumes an
   astonishing character of precision. The last pages of the Acts are the
   only completely historical pages which we possess of the origins of
   Christianity. The first, on the contrary, are those which are most open
   to attack of all the New Testament. It is especially in the first years
   that the author obeyed impulses like those which preoccupied him in the
   composition of his gospel, and even more deceptive. His system of forty
   days; his account of the ascensions, closing by a species of final
   carrying off, theatrical solemnity; the strange life of Jesus; his
   manner of relating the descent of the Holy Ghost, and the miraculous
   preachings; his mode of understanding the gift of tongues, so different
   from that of St. Paul, unveil the preoccupation of a period relatively
   low when the legend is very ripe, rounded as it were in all parts.
   Everything is done with him with a strange setting and a great display
   of the marvellous. It must be remembered that the author wrote half a
   century after the events, far from the country where they happened,
   concerning incidents which neither he nor his master had seen,
   according to traditions in part fabulous or transmogrified. Not merely
   is Luke of another generation than the first founders of Christianity,
   but he is of another world; he is Hellenist with but very little of the
   Jew, almost a stranger to Jerusalem and the secrets of the Jewish life;
   he has not touched the primitive Christian society; he has scarcely
   known its last representatives. We see in the miracles, which he
   relates, rather inventions a priori than transformed facts; the
   miracles of Peter and Paul form two series, which answer each other.
   His persons resemble each other. Peter differs in nothing from Paul,
   nor Paul from Peter. The discourses, which he puts into the mouths of
   his heroes, though admirably appropriate to the circumstances, are all
   in the same style, and belong to the author rather than to those to
   whom he attributes them. We even find impossibilities. The Acts, in a
   word, are a dogmatic history, arranged to support the orthodox doctrine
   of the time, or to inculcate the ideas which seemed most agreeable to
   the piety of the author. Let us add that it could be no otherwise. The
   origin of every religion is known only by the narratives of the
   faithful. It is only scepticism which writes history ad narrandum.

   These are not simple suspicions, conjectures of a criticism defiant to
   excess. They are solid inductions; every time that we are permitted to
   examine the narrative of the Acts, we find it incorrect and
   unsystematic. The examination of the Gospels, which can be done only by
   comparison with the Synoptics, we can make with the help of the
   Epistles of Paul, especially of the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians.
   It is clear that where the Acts and the Epistles clash, the preference
   ought always to be given to the Epistles--texts of an absolute
   authenticity, more ancient, of a complete sincerity, and free from
   legends. In history documents have the more authority the less they
   possess of historical form. The authority of all the chronicles must
   yield to that of an inscription, of a medal, of a map, of an authentic
   letter. From this point of view, the letters of certain authors, or of
   certain dates, are the basis of all the history of the origins of
   Christianity. Without them, it might be said that doubt would attach to
   them, and would ruin, from top to bottom, even the life of Jesus
   itself. Now, in two very important particulars, the Epistles put in a
   striking light the private tendencies of the author of the Acts, and
   his desire to efface all trace of the divisions which existed between
   Paul and the Apostles of Jerusalem.

   And first, the author of the Acts says that Paul, after the incident at
   Damascus (ix, 19 et seq., xxii, 17 et seq.), having come to Jerusalem
   at a period when his conversion was hardly known; that he was presented
   to the Apostles; that he lived with the Apostles and the faithful on a
   footing of the greatest cordiality; that he disputed publicly with the
   Hellenist Jews; that a plot of theirs, and a celestial revelation,
   brought about his departure from Jerusalem. Now Paul tells us that
   things came about very differently. To prove that he owed nothing to
   the Twelve, and that he received his doctrine and his mission from
   Jesus, he asserts (Gal. i., 11 et seq.), that after his conversion he
   avoided taking counsel with anyone whatever, or going to Jerusalem to
   those who were apostles before him; that he went of his own accord, and
   without commission from anyone, to preach in Hauran; that three years
   later, it is true, he accomplished the journey to Jerusalem to make
   acquaintance with Peter; that he stayed there fifteen days with him;
   but that he saw no other apostle unless it were James, the Lord's
   brother, so that his face was unknown to the churches of Judea. The
   effort to soften down the asperities of the rude apostle by presenting
   him as a follow worker with the Twelve, labouring at Jerusalem in
   concert with them, evidently appears hero. Jerusalem is made his
   capital and point of departure; it is desired that his doctrine shall
   be so identified with that of the apostles, that he might in some sort
   replace them in the preaching; his first apostolate is reduced to the
   synagogues of Damascus; he is described as having been disciple and
   auditor, which he certainly never was; the time between his conversion
   and his first journey to Jerusalem is materially abridged; his stay in
   that city is prolonged; he is described as preaching there to the
   general satisfaction; as having lived intimately with all the apostles,
   although he himself says that he saw only two; the brethren of
   Jerusalem are described as watching over him, whilst Paul declares that
   his face was unknown to them.

   The desire to make of Paul an assiduous visitor to Jerusalem, which has
   led our author to advance and to prolong his first stay in that city
   after his conversion, appears to have induced him to ascribe to the
   apostle one journey too many. According to him Paul came to Jerusalem
   with Barnabas, bearing the offering of the faithful during the famine
   of the year 44 (Acts xi. 30, xii. 25). Now Paul declares expressly that
   between the journey which took place three years after his conversion
   and the journey about the business of the circumcision, he did not go
   to Jerusalem (Gal. i. and ii.) In other words, Paul formally excludes
   the idea of any journey between Acts ix. 26 and Acts xv. 2. If we were
   to deny, against all reason, the identity of the journey related Acts
   xv. 2, et seq. we should not obtain the smallest contradiction. "After
   three years," says St. Paul, "I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter . . .
   Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas."
   It has been doubted whether these fourteen years date from the
   conversion, or the journey which followed three years after that event.
   Let us take the first hypothesis, which is the most favourable to those
   who would defend the account in the Acts. There would then be eleven
   years, at least, according to St. Paul, between his first and his
   second journey to Jerusalem; now. surely there were not eleven years
   between what is told Acts ix. 26 et seq. and what is told Acts xi, 30!
   And if against all probability that hypothesis is maintained, we find
   ourselves in the presence of another impossibility. In fact, what is
   told in Acts xi. 30 is contemporaneous with the death of James the son
   of Zebedee, which furnishes the only date fixed by the Acts of the
   Apostles, since it proceded by very little the death of Herod Agrippa
   I. which happened in the year 44. The second journey of Paul having
   taken place at least fourteen years after his conversion, if Paul had
   really made that journey in the year 44, the conversion would have
   taken place in the year 30, which is absurd. It is, therefore,
   impossible to maintain for the journey related Acts xi. 30 and xii. 35
   any reality.

   These comings and goings appear to have been related by our author in a
   very inexact fashion. In comparing Acts xvii. 14-16; xviii. 5, with I.
   Thess. iii. 1-2, we find another disagreement. But seeing that does not
   concern matters of dogma, we need not speak of it here.

   That which is most important about our present subject which furnishes
   thin critical ray of light for the difficult question of the historical
   value of the Acts is a comparision of the passages relative to the
   business of the circumcision in the Acts (chap. xv.) and in the Epistle
   to Galatians (chap. ii). According to the Acts the brethren in Judea
   being come to Antioch and having maintained the necessity of
   circumcision for the converted Pagans, a deputation, composed of Paul,
   Barnabas and many others was sent from Antioch to Jerusalem to consult
   the apostles and the elders in this question. They were received with
   much warmth by the whole community; a great assembly took place.
   Dissension scarcely showed itself, checked as it was under the
   effusions of a common charity and the happiness of finding themselves
   together. Peter announces the opinion which he had expected to find in
   the mouth of Paul, that converted Pagans do not become subject to the
   law of Moses. James appends to that only a very slight restriction.
   Paul does not speak, and, to say the truth, is under no necessity of
   speaking, since his doctrine is put into the mouth of Peter. The
   opinion of the brethren of Judea is supported by none. A solemn decree
   is formulated by the advice of James. This decree is signified to the
   churches by deputies specially appointed.

   Let us now compare the account of Paul in the Epistle to the Galatians.
   Paul's version is that the journey to Jerusalem which he undertook on
   that occasion was the effect of a spontaneous movement, and even the
   result of a revolution. Arrived at Jerusalem, he communicates his
   gospel to those whom it concerned; he has, in particular, interviews
   with those who appear to be considerable personages. They do not offer
   him a single criticism; they communicate nothing to him; they only ask
   that he should remember the poor of Jerusalem. If Titus, who
   accompanied him, consented to allow himself to be circumcised it is
   "because of false brethren unawares brought in." Paul makes this
   passing concession to them, but he does not submit himself to them. As
   to men of importance (Paul speaks of them only with a shade of
   bitterness and irony), they have taught him nothing new. More, Peter,
   having come later to Antioch, Paul "withstood him to the face, because
   he was to be blamed." First, in effect, Peter ate with all
   indiscriminately. The emissaries of James having arrived, Peter hides
   himself and avoids the uncircumcised. "Seeing that they walked not
   uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel," Paul apostrophises
   Peter before them all, and reproaches him bitterly with his conduct.

   The difference is palpable. On the one hand a solemn agreement, on the
   other anger ill-restrained, extreme susceptibilities. On the one side a
   sort of council; on the other nothing resembling it. On one side a
   formal decree issued by a recognized authority; on the other different
   opinions, which remain in existence without any reciprocal yielding,
   save for form's sake. It is useless to say which version merits the
   preference. The account in the Acts is scarcely probable, since
   according to this account the council was occasioned by a dispute of
   which no trace is to be found when the council has met. The two orators
   expressed themselves in a sense altogether different from that which we
   know to have been otherwise their usual part. The decree which the
   council is said to have decided upon is assuredly a fiction. If this
   decree of which James would have settled the terms had been really
   promulgated, why those terrors of the good and timid Peter? Why did he
   hide himself? He and the Christian community of Antioch were acting in
   the fullest conformity with the decree the terms of which had been
   settled by James himself. The business of the circumcision occurred
   about the year 51. Some years afterwards, about the year 56, the
   quarrel which the decree ought to have ended is more lively than ever.
   The Church of Galatia is troubled by new envoys from the Church of
   Jerusalem. Paul answered this new attack of his enemies by his
   thundering epistle. If the decree mentioned in Acts xv. had had any
   real existence, Paul had a very simple means of silencing debate--he
   had only to quote it. Now all that he says supposes the non-existence
   of this decree. In 57, Paul, writing to the Corinthians, ignores the
   same decree, and even violates its prescriptions. The decree orders
   abstinence from meats offered to idols. Paul, however, is of opinion
   that those meats may be eaten if no one is scandalized thereby, but
   they ought to be abstained from in cases where scandal would arise. In
   58, then, about the time of the last journey of Paul to Jerusalem,
   James is more obstinate than ever. One of the characteristic features
   of the Acts--a feature which proves plainly that the author proposes to
   himself less to prevent historical truth and even to satisfy logic,
   than to edify pious readers--is the circumstance that the question of
   the admission of the uncircumcised is always settled, yet is always
   open. It is settled at first by the baptism of the eunuch of Queen
   Candace, then by the baptism of the centurion Cornelius, both
   miraculously ordained; then by the foundation of the church of Antioch
   (xi. 19, et. seq.) then by the pretended Council of Jerusalem, which
   does not prevent that; on the last pages of the book (xxi. 20-21.) the
   question is still in suspense. To tell the truth it has always remained
   in that state. The two fractions of the nascent Christianity never
   agreed upon it. One of them, however, that which clung to the practices
   of Judaism remained infertile, and faded into obscurity. Paul was so
   far from being accepted by all that after his death a part of
   Christendom anathematized him, and pursued him with calumnies.

   In our third book we shall have to deal in detail with the question
   which lies at the root of all those curious incidents. Here we have
   desired to give only some examples of the manner in which the author of
   the Acts understands history, of his system of conciliation, of his
   preconceived ideas. Must we conclude from them that the first chapters
   of the Acts are devoid of authority, as some celebrated critics think,
   that fiction so far enters as to create both pieces and persons, such
   as the eunuch of Candace, the centurion Cornelius, and even the deacon
   Stephen and the pious Tabitha? I think by no means. It is probable that
   the author of the Acts has not invented the persons, but is a skilful
   advocate, who writes to prove his case, and who makes the most of the
   facts which have come to his knowledge to support his favourite
   theories, which are the legitimacy of the calling of the Gentiles, and
   the divine institution of the hierarchy. Such a document must be used
   with great caution, but to reject it absolutely is as uncritical as to
   follow it blindly. Some paragraphs, besides, even in the first part,
   have a universally recognised value, and represent authentic memoirs
   extracted by the last editor. Chapter xii., in particular, is excellent
   matter, and may have been the work of John-Mark.

   It may be seen in what distress we should be if the only documentary
   authorities we have for this history were a legendary book like this.
   Happily, we have others which refer directly to the period which will
   be the subject of our third book, and which shed a great light upon
   this. These are the Epistles of St. Paul. The Epistles to the Galatians
   especially is a veritable treasury, the basis of the chronology of this
   age, the key which opens everything, the testimony which ought to
   re-assure the most sceptical as to the reality of matters concerning
   which they might doubt. I beg, serious readers who may be tempted to
   regard me as too bold or too credulous, to read again the two first
   chatters of that remarkable document. They are certainly the two most
   important chapters for the study of nascent Christianity. The Epistles
   of St. Paul have, in fact, an unequalled advantage in that history:
   their absolute authenticity. No doubt has ever been raised by serious
   criticism as to the authenticity of the Epistle to the Galatians. of
   the two Epistles to the Corinthians, of the Epistle to the Romans. The
   reasons for which the two Epistles to the Thessalonians and that to the
   Philippians, have been attacked are valueless. At the beginning of our
   third volume we shall have to discuss the more specious, although
   indecisive, objections which have been raised against the Epistle to
   the Colossians, and the note to Philemon; the special problem presented
   by the Epistle to the Ephesians; the strong reasons, finally, which
   point to the rejection of the two Epistles to Timothy, and that to
   Titus. The epistles of which we shall have to make use in this volume
   are those whose authenticity is indisputable; for, at least, the
   inductions which we shall draw from the others are independent of the
   question of whether they have or have not been dictated by St. Paul.

   It is not necessary to refer in this place to the rules of criticism
   which have been followed in the composition of this work; that has
   already been done in the introduction to the Life of Jesus. The first
   twelve chapters of the Acts are in effect a document analogous to the
   synoptical Gospels, and require to be treated in the same fashion.
   Documents of this kind, half historical, half legendary, can never be
   regarded as wholly legend or wholly history. Almost everything in them
   is false in detail, nevertheless it may enclose some precious truths.
   To translate these narratives pure and simple is not to write history.
   These narratives are, in fact, often contradicted by other and more
   authentic texts. In consequence, even when there is only one text, one
   is always constrained to fear that if there had been others there would
   have been the same contradictions. For the Life of Jesus the narrative
   of Luke is continually controlled and corrected by the two other
   synoptical Gospels and by the fourth. Is it not probable, I repeat,
   that if we had for the Acts the analogue of the Synoptics and of the
   fourth Gospel, the Acts would be corrected on a host of points where we
   have now only their testimony? In our third book, where we shall be in
   clear and definite history, and where we shall have in our hands
   original and often biographical information, we shall be guided by
   other rules. When St. Paul himself tells us the story of some episode
   of his life which he had no interest in presenting in any particular
   light, it is clear that all that we need do is to insert his very
   words, word for word, in our narrative, according to the method of
   Tillemont. But when we are concerned with a narrator preoccupied with a
   system, writing as the advocate of certain ideas, editing after this
   infantine fashion, with vague and soft outlines, colours absolute, and
   strongly marked such as legend always offers, the duty of the critic is
   not to stick close to the text; his duty is to discover what truth the
   text may embody, without ever being too certain of having found it. To
   debar criticism from such interpretations would be as unreasonable as
   to command an astronomer to concern himself only with the apparent
   state of the heavens. Does not astronomy, on the contrary, consist in
   rectifying the parallax caused by the position of the observer, and to
   construct a real and veracious chart instead of a deceptive apparent
   one?

   How besides can it be pretended that documents should be followed to
   the letter when they are full of impossibilities? The first twelve
   chapters of the Acts are a tissue of miracles. Now it is an absolute
   rule of criticism to give no place in historical documents to
   miraculous circumstances. This is not the result of a metaphysical
   system, but simply a matter of observation. Facts of that kind can
   never be verified. All the pretended miracles that we can study closely
   resolve themselves either into illusions or impostures. If a single
   miracle were proved, we could hardly reject all those of ancient
   history in a mass, for after all, admitting that a great number of
   these last were false, it is still possible to believe that certain of
   them were true. But it is not thus. All discussable miracles fade away.
   May we not reasonably conclude from that fact that the miracles which
   are removed from us by centuries, and concerning which there is no way
   of establishing an exhaustive discussion, are also without reality? In
   other words, there is no miracle except when one believes it; the
   substance of the supernatural is faith. Catholicism itself, which
   pretends that the miraculous power is not yet extinct within its bosom,
   undergoes the power of this law. The miracles which it pretends to work
   happen only in places of its choice. When there is so simple a method
   of proving its authenticity, why not do so in open daylight? A miracle
   in Paris, under the eyes of competent and learned men, would put an end
   to all doubts. But alas! that is what never happens. Never has a
   miracle been wrought before the public whom it is desirable to convert,
   I would say before the incredulous. The condition of the miracle is the
   credulity of the witness. No miracle is performed before those who
   might discuss and criticise it. To that rule there is not a single
   exception. Cicero said, with his usual good sense and acuteness, "Since
   when has that secret force disappeared? Is it not since men have become
   less credulous?"

   "But," it is said, "if it is impossible to prove that there has ever
   been a supernatural fact, it is equally impossible to prove that there
   has not been one. The positive savant who denies the supernatural
   proceeds then as gratuitously as the believer who admits it." In no
   way. It is for him who affirms a proposition to prove it. He, before
   whom it is affirmed, has but one thing to do, to wait for the proof,
   and to yield if it is good. Supposing we had called upon Buffon to give
   a place in his Natural History to sirens and centaurs, Buffon would
   have answered, "Show me a specimen of these beings, and I will admit
   them; until you do, they do not exist for me"--"But prove that they do
   not exist?"--"It is for you to prove that they exist." The burden of
   proof in science rests upon those, who make the assertion. Why do we
   not believe in angels or devils, although innumerable historic texts
   assume their existence? Because the existence of an angel or a devil
   has never yet been proved.

   To maintain the reality of the miracle appeal is made to the phenomena,
   which, it is said, could have been produced only by going beyond the
   laws of nature, the creation of man for example. "The creation of man,"
   it is said, "could have come about only by the direct intervention of
   the Deity; why should not that intervention be repeated at other
   decisive moments of the development of the universe?" I shall not
   insist upon the strange philosophy, and the paltry idea of the Divinity
   which such a method of reasoning involves, for history has its method,
   independent of all philosophy. Without entering, in the smallest
   degree, upon the province of theodicy, it is easy to show how defective
   such an argument is. It is equivalent to saying that everything which
   does not happen in the existing state of the world, everything which we
   cannot explain by the existing condition of science, is miraculous. But
   then the sun is a miracle, for science is far from having explained the
   sun; the conception of every man is a miracle, for philosophy is still
   silent on that point; conscience is a miracle, for it is an absolute
   mystery; every animal is a miracle, for the origin of life is a problem
   concerning which we have almost no information. If we say that all
   life, that every soul is in effect of a superior order in nature, we
   are simply playing upon words. We are anxious that this should be
   understood; but then there must be an explanation of the word miracle.
   Can that be a miracle which happens every day and every hour? Miracle
   is not the unexplained; it is a formal derogation in the name of a
   particular will of known laws. What we deny is the exceptional; those
   are the private interventions, like that of a clockmaker, who has made
   a clock, very well, it is true, but to which he is from time to time
   obliged to put his hand to supply the deficiencies of the wheel-work.
   That God permeates everything, especially everything that lives, is
   distinctly our theory; we only say that no special intervention of a
   supernatural force has ever been proved. We deny the reality of private
   supernaturalism until a demonstrated fact of this kind has been
   presented to us. To seek this fact before the creation of man; to fly
   beyond history to periods, where all verification is impossible, in
   order to escape from verifying historical miracles, is to take refuge
   behind a cloud, to prove one obscure thing by another still morn
   obscure, to dispute a known law, because of a fact of which we are not
   certain. Miracles are appealed to which took place before any witness
   existed, simply because it is impossible to quote one of which there is
   any credible witness.

   Without doubt, in distant ages, things happened in the universe,
   phenomena which offer themselves no more, at least upon the same scale
   in the actual state of things. But these phenomena may be explained by
   the date at which they have occurred. In the geological formation a
   great number of minerals and precious atones are found, which it would
   appear are no longer produced in nature. Nevertheless Messrs.
   Mitscherlich, Ebelman, de Snarmont, Daubree have artificially
   recomposed the majority of these minerals and precious stones. If it is
   doubtful whether they will ever succeed in artificially producing life,
   it is because the artificial reproduction of the circumstances under
   which life commences (if it ever does commence) will be always out of
   the reach of humanity. How can we bring back a state of the planet
   which has disappeared for thousands of years? How are we to try an
   experiment which will occupy centuries? The diversity of the moans and
   the centuries of slow evolution--these are the things that are
   forgotten when we speak of the phenomena of old times, which do not
   happen to-day as miracles. In some celestial body at the present moment
   things are perhaps being done which have ceased upon this earth for an
   infinite period of time. Surely the formation of humanity is the most
   shocking and absurd thing in the world, if it is supposed to be sudden,
   instantaneous. It reverts to general analogies (without ceasing to be
   mysterious) if we see in it the result of a slow progress continued
   during incalculable periods. We must not apply the laws of maturity to
   embryonic life. The embryo develops all its organs one after another;
   the adult man, on the contrary, creates no more organs. He creates no
   more because he is no longer of an age to create; he does not even
   invent language because he is not called upon to invent it. But what is
   the use of meeting adversaries who continually evade the question? We
   ask for an authenticated historical miracle; we are told that there
   were such things before history existed. Assuredly, if a proof were
   required of the necessity for supernatural beliefs in certain states of
   the soul, it might be found in the fact that minds penetrating enough
   in every other respect have been able to rest the edifice of their
   faith on such a desperate argument.

   Others, abandoning miracles of the physical order, entrench themselves
   behind moral miracles, without which they maintain that these events
   cannot be explained. Certainly the formation of Christianity is the
   greatest event in the religious history of the world. But it is not a
   miracle for all that. Buddhism, Babism have had martyrs as numerous, as
   exalted, as resigned as Christianity. The miracles of the foundation of
   Islam are of a wholly different character, and I confess that they
   affect me little. It must, however, be remarked that the Mussulman
   doctors base upon the establishment of Islam, upon its diffusion as by
   a train of fire, upon its rapid conquests, upon the force which gives
   it everywhere an absolute reign, the same reasonings which the
   Christian apologists base upon the establishment of Christianity, and
   assert that they clearly behold there the finger of God. Let us allow,
   if it is desired, that the foundation of Christianity is a unique fact.
   Hellenism is another absolutely unique fact, understanding by that word
   the ideal perfection in literature, in art, in philosophy, which Greece
   has achieved. Greek art surpasses all other art, as Christianity
   surpasses all other religions, and the Acropolis at Athens--a
   collection of masterpieces by the side of which everything else is no
   bettor than clumsy fumbling, or more or less successful imitation--is
   perhaps that which in its way most successfully defies comparison.
   Hellenism, in other words, is as much a miracle of beauty as
   Christianity is a miracle of sanctity. A unique thing is not a
   miraculous thing. God is in varying degrees in all that is beautiful,
   good, and true. But he is never in one of his manifestations in so
   exclusive a fashion that the presence of his breath in a religious or a
   philosophical movement ought to be deemed a privilege or exception.

   I hope that the interval of two years and a half passed since the
   publication of the Life of Jesus will lead some of my readers to
   consider these problems with greater calmness. Religious controversy is
   always one of bad faith, without any intention or desire that it should
   be so. There is no independent discussion; no anxious seeking for the
   truth; it is the defence of a position already taken up to prove that
   the dissident is ignorant or dishonest. Calumnies, misinterpretations,
   falsifications of ideas and of texts, triumphant reasonings over things
   that an opponent has never said, cries of victory over mistakes which
   he has not made, nothing appears disloyal to the man who would hold in
   his hand the interests of absolute truth. I should have ignored history
   if I had not expected all that. I am cool enough to be almost
   insensible to it, and I have a sufficiently lively taste for matters of
   faith to be able to understand in a kindly spirit what there is that is
   often touching in the sentiment which inspired those who contradicted
   me. Often, in seeing so much simplicity, such a pious assurance, a
   wrath coming so frankly from good and pure souls, I have said, with
   John Huss, at the sight of an old woman who sweated under a faggot for
   his burning: Oh, sancta simplicitas! I have regretted certain emotions,
   which could only be profitless. According to the beautiful expression
   of the Scriptures, "God is not in the tempest." Ah! without doubt, if
   this trouble led to the discovery of the truth, we should be consoled
   for many agitations. But it is not thus: truth does not exist for the
   passionate man. It is reserved for the minds of those who seek for it
   without prejudice, without persistent love, without lasting hatred,
   with an absolute liberty, and without any after intention of acting in
   the business of humanity. These problems are only some of the
   innumerable questions of which the world is full, and which the curious
   examine. No one is offended by the enunciation of a theoretical
   opinion. Those who hold to their faith as to a treasure have a very
   simple method of defending it--that of taking no note of works written
   in a sense different from their own. The timid do better not to read
   them.

   There are practical persons who, with regard to a work of science, ask
   what political party the author proposes to satisfy, and who are
   anxious that every poem should convey a moral lesson. Such persons do
   not admit that it is possible to write for something else besides a
   propaganda. The idea of art and of science aspiring only to find the
   true, and to realize the beautiful, outside of all politics, is to them
   incomprehensible. Between us and such persons misunderstandings are
   inevitable. "These people," as the Greek philosopher said, "take back
   with their left hand what they give with their right." A host of
   letters, dictated by a worthy sentiment, which I have received, may be
   summed up thus:--"What do you want? What end do you propose?" Good God!
   the same that every one proposes in writing history. If I had many
   lives at my disposal I would devote one to writing the history of
   Alexander, another to writing the history of Athens, a third, it may
   be, to writing a history of the French Revolution, or a history of the
   Order of St. Francis. What end should I propose to myself in writing
   those works? One only, to find the truth and to make it live, to work
   so that the great things of the past may be known with the greatest
   possible exactitude, and expounded in a manner worthy of them. The
   notion of overthrowing the faith of anyone is far removed from me.
   These works ought to be executed with a supreme indifference, as if one
   were writing for a deserted planet. Every concession to scruples of an
   inferior order is a failure in the worship of art and of truth. Who
   does not admit that the absence of the proselytising spirit is at once
   the quality and the defect of a work composed in this spirit?

   The first principle of the critical school in effect is that in matters
   of faith everyone admits what he wants to admit, and, as it were, makes
   the bed of his belief in proportion to his own stature. Why should we
   be so senseless as to mix ourselves up with what depends upon
   circumstances concerning which no one knows anything? If anyone accepts
   our principles, it is because he possesses the turn of mind and the
   necessary education for them; all our efforts would give neither, did
   one not already possess those qualities. Philosophy differs from faith,
   inasmuch as faith operates by itself, independently of the
   understanding that we have of the dogmas. We believe, on the contrary,
   that a truth has no value, save when it is reached by itself, when one
   sees the whole order of ideas to which it belongs. We do not force
   ourselves to silence such of our opinions as are not in harmony with
   the belief of a portion of our fellow-man; we make no sacrifice to the
   exigencies of divergent orthodoxies; but on the other hand we do not
   dream of attacking or provoking them; we act as though they did not
   exist. For myself, the day when I may be convicted of an effort to
   convert to my views a single adherent who did not come of himself would
   cause me the most acute pain. I should conclude from it, either that my
   mind had lost its freedom and calmness, or that something was
   oppressing me so that I could not content myself any longer with the
   free and joyous contemplation of the universe.

   If, moreover, my aim had been to make war upon established religions, I
   should have worked in another way, undertaking only to point out the
   impossibilities and the contradictions of the texts and dogmas held as
   sacred. That minute task has been done a thousand times, and done well.
   In 1856, I wrote as follows:--"I protest once for all against the false
   interpretation which would be put upon my labours, if the various
   essays upon the history of religions which I have or may publish in the
   future, be treated as polemical works. Looked at as such, I should be
   the first to admit that these essays were very weak. Controversy
   requires tactics to which I am a stranger; it is necessary to know the
   weak side of one's adversary, to hold to it, never to touch doubtful
   questions, to avoid all concession, that is to say, to renounce the
   very essence of the scientific spirit. Such is not my method. The
   fundamental question upon which religious discussion must turn, that is
   to say, the question of revelation and of the supernatural, I never
   touch, not that that question may not be resolved for me with entire
   certainty, but because the discussion of such a question is not
   scientific, or rather because independent science supposes it to be
   resolved beforehand. Assuredly if I had any polemical or proselytising
   object in view, this would be a cardinal fault, it would be to
   transport into the region of delicate and obscure problems a question
   which is usually treated in the coarsest terms by controversialists and
   apologists. So far from regretting the advantages which I should thus
   give my opponent, I rejoice in them, if thereby I might convince the
   theologians that my writings are of another order than theirs, that in
   them they must look only for pure researches of study, open to attack
   as such, wherein an attempt is sometimes made to apply to the Jewish
   religion and to the Christian the principles of criticism which are
   followed in other branches of history and philology. I intend at no
   time to enter into the discussion of questions of pure theology any
   more than M.M. Burnouf, Creuzer, Guigniaut, and so many other critical
   historians of the religions of antiquity have thought themselves
   obliged to undertake the reputation of, or the apology for, the forms
   of worship with which they were occupied, The history of humanity is
   for me a vast whole, where everything is essentially unequal and
   diverse, but where everything of the same order arises from the same
   causes and obeys the same laws. These laws I inquire into with no other
   intention than that of discovering the exact tint of what really is.
   Nothing will make the change an obscure position, but one which is
   fruitful for science for the part of controversialist, an easy fact,
   inasmuch as it wins for the writer an assured favour amongst people who
   think it their duty to oppose war to war. In that polemic, the
   necessity for which I am far from disputing, but which is neither to my
   taste nor to my abilities, Voltaire is enough. One cannot be at the
   same time a good controversialist and a good historian. Voltaire, weak
   in scholarship; Voltaire, who appears so devoid of the sentiment of
   antiquity to us who are initiated into a better method; Voltaire is
   twenty times victorious over those who are even more innocent of
   criticism than he is himself. A new edition of the works of this great
   man would satisfy the want which appears to be felt at the present
   moment of answering the encroachments of theology; an answer bad in
   itself, but worthy of what it has to fight against; an old-fashioned
   answer to a science that is out of date. Let us do better, we who
   possess love of truth and a vast curiosity; let us leave these disputes
   to those whom they please; let us labour for the small number of those
   who march in the front rank of the human mind. Popularity, I know,
   belongs by preference to writers who, instead of pursuing the most
   elevated form of truth, apply themselves to struggling against the
   opinion of their times; but by a just revenge they have no value so
   soon as the opinion they have contested has ceased to exist. Those who
   refuted the magic and judicial astrology in the XVIth and XVIIth
   centuries, rendered an immense service to reason, yet their writings
   are unknown at the present day; their very victory has caused them to
   be forgotten.

   I intend to hold invariably to this rule of conduct--the only one
   worthy of a scholar. I know that the researches of religious history
   touch upon living questions which appear to demand a solution. Persons
   familiar with free speculation do not understand the calm deliberation
   of thought; practical minds grow impatient with science, which does not
   answer to their eagerness. Let us avoid these vain excitements. Let us
   avoid finding anything. Let us rest in our respective Churches,
   profiting by their daily worship and their tradition of virtue,
   participating in their good work, and rejoicing in the poetry of their
   past. Nor should their intolerance repel us, We may even forgive that
   intolerance, for it is like egotism, one of the necessities of human
   nature. To suppose that it will henceforward form now religious
   families, or that the proportion amongst those which now exist will
   ever greatly change is to go against all appearances. There will soon
   be great schism in the Catholic Church; the days of Avignon, of the
   anti-popes, of the Clementists and the Urbanists will probably return.
   The Catholic Church may have its fourteenth Century again, but,
   notwithstanding her divisions, she will still remain the Catholic
   Church. It is probable that within a hundred years the relations
   between the number of Protestants, of Catholics, and of Jews will not
   have sensibly changed. But a great alteration will be made, or, rather,
   will have become apparent to the eyes of all. Each of these religious
   families will have two sorts of faithful ones; some believing
   absolutely as in the Middle Ages; others sacrificing the letter and
   holding only to the spirit. This second fraction will grow in every
   communion, and as the spirit agrees as much as the letter divides, the
   spiritualists of each communion will have reached such a point of
   agreement that they will altogether neglect to amalgamate. Fanaticism
   will be lost in a general tolerance. Dogma will become a mysterious ark
   which no one will ever want to open. If the ark is empty, then what
   matters it. One single religion will, I fear, resist this dogmatic
   softening; that is Islamism. There are amongst certain Mussulmans of
   the old school and amongst certain eminent men in Constantinople, there
   are in Persia, especially, forms of a large and conciliatory spirit. If
   these good forms are suffocated by the fanaticism of the ulemas,
   Islamism will perish, for two things are evident: the first, that
   modern civilization does not desire that the ancient religions should
   die out altogether; the second is, that it will not allow itself to be
   hampered in its work by old religious institutions. These last have the
   choice between submission and death.

   As for pure religion, the pretension of which is not to be a sect or a
   Church apart, why should it submit to the inconveniences of a position
   of which it has none of the advantages? Why should it raise flag
   against flag when it knows that salvation is possible everywhere and to
   everybody; that it depends on the degree of nobility which each carries
   in himself? We can understand how Protestantism in the sixteenth
   century brought about an open rupture. Protestantism began with a very
   absolute faith. Far from corresponding to a weakening of dogmatism, the
   Reformation marked a renaissance of the most rigid Christian spirit.
   The movement of the nineteenth century, on the contrary, springs from a
   sentiment which is the very reverse of dogmatism; it arises not in
   sects or separate Churches, but in a general softening of all the
   Churches. The marked divisions increase the fanaticism of orthodoxy and
   provoke reactions. The Luthers and Calvins made the Caraffa, the
   Ghislieri, the Loyolas, the Philip II.'s. If our Church rejects them
   let us not recriminate; let us learn to appreciate the sweetness of
   modern manners, which has rendered those hatreds powerless; let us
   console ourselves by dreaming of that invisible Church which takes in
   the excommunicated saints, the best souls of every century. The
   banished of a Church are always its best men; they are in advance of
   their times; the heretic of to-day is the orthodox of to-morrow. What
   besides is the excommunication of men? Our Heavenly Father
   excommunicates only dry souls and narrow hearts. If the priest refuses
   to admit us to the cemetery, let us forbid our families to cry out. God
   is the Judge; the earth is a good mother who makes no differences; the
   corpse of a good man entering the unconsecrated corner carries
   consecration with it.

   Undoubtedly there are circumstances in which the application of these
   principles is difficult. The spirit breathes where it will; the spirit
   is liberty. Now it is to persons who are as it were chained to absolute
   faith I would speak; of men in holy orders or clothed with some
   ministerial authority. Even then a fine soul knows how to find the ways
   of issue. A worthy country priest, by his solitary studies and by the
   purity of his his, comes to see the impossibility of literal dogmatism;
   must he sadden those whom he has hitherto consoled by explaining to
   them simple changes which they cannot understand? God forbid! There are
   not two men in the world who have exactly the same duties. The good
   Bishop Colenso accomplished an act of honesty such as the Church has
   not seen since its origin, in writing his doubts as soon as they came
   to him. But the humble Catholic priest, in a country of narrow and
   timid minds, ought to hold his tongue. How many discreet tombs around
   our village churches hide in this way poetic reserves--angelic
   silences! Will those whose duty it has been to speak equal the merit of
   those secrets known to God alone?

   Theory is not practice. The ideal must remain the ideal; it must fear
   lest it soil itself by contact with reality. Thoughts which are good
   for those who are preserved by their nobility from all moral danger may
   not be, if they are, applied without their inconveniences for those who
   are surrounded with baseness. Great things are achieved only with ideas
   strictly defined; the man absolutely without prejudice would be
   powerless. Let us enjoy the liberty of the sons of God; but let us take
   care lest we become accomplices in the diminution of virtue which would
   menace society if Christianity were to grow weak. What should we be
   without it? What could replace the great schools of seriousness and
   respect, such as St. Sulpice, or the devoted ministry of the Sisters of
   Charity? How can we avoid being affrighted by the pettiness and the
   cold heartedness which have invaded the world? Our disagreement with
   persons who believe in positive religions is, after all, purely
   scientific; at heart we are with them! We have only one enemy who is
   theirs also--vulgar materialism, the baseness of the interested man.

   Peace then, in God's name! Let the various orders of humanity live side
   by side, not falsifying their own intelligence in order to make
   reciprocal concessions which will lessen them, but in naturally
   supporting each other. Nothing ought to reign here below to the
   exclusion of its opposite. No one force ought to be able to suppress
   the others. The harmony of humanity results from the free emission of
   the most discordant notes. If orthodoxy should succeed in killing
   science we know what would happen. The Mussulman world of Spain died
   from having too conscientiously performed that task. If Rationalism
   wishes to govern the world without regard to the religious needs of the
   soul, the experience of the French Revolution is there to teach us the
   consequences of such a blunder. The instincts of art, carried to the
   highest point of refinement, but without honesty, made of the Italy of
   the Renaissance a den of thieves, an evil abode. Weariness, stupidity,
   mediocrity are the punishment of certain Protestant countries where,
   under the pretence of good sense and Christian spirit, art has been
   suppressed and science reduced to something paltry. Lucretius and St.
   Theresa, Aristophanes and Socrates, Voltaire and Francis of Assisi,
   Raphael and Vincent, St. Paul have an equal right to exist, and
   humanity would be the less if one of the elements which compose it were
   wanting.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 THE APOSTLES.

CHAPTER I.

  FORMATION OF BELIEFS RELATIVE TO THE RESURRECT1ON OF JESUS--THE APPARITIONS AT
  JERUSALEM.

   Jesus, although speaking constantly of resurrection, of new life, never
   stated distinctly that he would rise again in the flesh. The disciples,
   in the hours immediately following his death, had not, in this respect,
   any settled expectations. The sentiments, in which they have so
   unaffectedly taken us into their confidence, implied even that they
   believed all was finished. They wept, and interred their friend, if not
   as they would at the death of a common person, at least as a person
   whose loss was irreparable. They were sad and cast down. The hope that
   they had cherished of seeing him realise the salvation of Israel is now
   proved to have been vanity. They were spoken of as men who had been
   robbed of a grand and dear illusion.

   But enthusiasm and love do not recognise conditions barren of results.
   They dallied with the impossible, and, rather than abdicate hope, they
   did violence to all reality. Several phrases of the Master, which were
   recalled, especially those in which he predicted his future advent,
   might be interpreted in the sense that he would leave the tomb. Such a
   belief was, besides, so natural that the faith of the disciples would
   have sufficed to create it in every part. The great prophets, Enoch and
   Elijah, had not tasted death. They began even is believe that the
   patriarchs and the men of the first order in the old law, were not
   really dead, and that their bodies were in their sepulchres at Hebron,
   alive and animated. It was to happen to Jesus, what had happened to all
   men who have captivated the attention of their fellow-men. The world,
   accustomed to attribute to them superhuman virtues, cannot admit that
   they would have to undergo the unjust, revolting and iniquitous law, to
   wit, a common death. At the moment when Mahomet expired, Omar issued
   from the tent, sabre in hand, and declared that he would strike off the
   head of anyone who dared to say that the prophet was no more. Death is
   a thing so absurd--when it strikes down a man of genius, or the
   large-hearted man--that people will not believe in the possibility of
   such an error in nature. Heroes do not die. Is not true existence that
   which is implanted in the hearts of those whom we love? This adored
   Master had filled for some years the little world which pressed around
   him with joy and with hope; would people consent to leave him to rot in
   the tomb? No; he had lived too much in those who surrounded him for
   people not to declare after his death that he still lived.

   The day which followed the burial of Jesus (Saturday, 15th April) was
   crowded with these thoughts. People were interdicted from all manner of
   manual labour, because of the Sabbath. But never was repose more
   fruitful. The Christian conscience had on that day but one object--the
   Master laid low in the tomb. The women, in particular, embalmed him in
   ointment with their most tender caresses. Not for a moment did their
   thoughts abandon that sweet friend, reposing in his myrrh, whom the
   wicked had killed! Ah! the angels are doubtless surrounding him,
   veiling their faces in his shroud! He, indeed, did say that he should
   die, that his death would be the salvation of the sinner, and that he
   should rise in the kingdom of his Father. Yes; he shall live again; God
   will not leave his Son to be a prey to hell; He will not suffer his
   chosen one to see corruption. What is this tombstone which weighs upon
   him? He will raise it up; he will reascend to the right hand of his
   Father, whence he descended. And we shall see him again; we shall hear
   his charming voice; we shall enjoy anew his conversations, and it is in
   vain that they have crucified him.

   The belief in the immortality of the soul, which, through the influence
   of the Grecian philosophy, has become a dogma of Christianity, readily
   permits of one resigning oneself to death, inasmuch as the dissolution
   of the body in that hypothesis was only a deliverance of the soul,
   freed henceforth from vexatious bonds, without which it can exist. But
   that theory of man, considered as a being composed of two substances,
   did not appear very clear to the Jews. To them the reign of God and the
   reign of Spirit consisted in a complete transformation of the world and
   in the annihilation of death. To acknowledge that death could be
   victorious over Jesus, over him who came to extinguish its empire, was
   the height of absurdity. The very idea that he could suffer had
   previously disgusted his disciples. The latter, then, had no choice
   between despair or heroic affirmation. A man of penetration might have
   announced on that Saturday that Jesus would rise again; the little
   Christian Society on that day wrought the veritable miracle; it
   resurrected Jesus in its heart, because of the intense love that it
   bore for him. It decided that Jesus had not died. The love of these
   passionate souls was, in truth, stronger than death; and, as the
   property of passion is to be communicative, to light like a torch a
   sentiment which resembles itself, and, consequently, to be indefinitely
   propagated; Jesus, in a sense, at the moment of which we speak, is
   already risen from the dead. Let but one material fact, insignificant
   itself, permit the belief that his body is no longer here below, and
   the dogma of the resurrection will be established for eternity.

   It was that which happened in the circumstances which, though part
   obscured, because of the incoherency of the traditions, and especially
   because of the contradictions which they presented, can, nevertheless,
   be grasped with a sufficient degree of probability.

   Early on Sunday morning, the Galilean women who on Friday evening had
   hastily embalmed the body, visited the tomb in which he had been
   temporarily deposited. These were Mary Magdalene, Mary Cleophas,
   Salome, Joanna, wife of Kouza, and others. They came, probably, each on
   her own account, for it is difficult to call in question the tradition
   of the three synoptical gospels, according to which several women came
   to the tomb; on the other hand, it is certain that in the two most
   authentic narratives which we possess of the resurrection, Mary
   Magdalene alone played a part. In any case she had, at that solemn
   moment, taken a part altogether out of line. It is she whom we must
   follow step by step, for she bore on that day, for an hour, all the
   burden of a Christian conscience; her testimony decided the faith of
   the future.

   Let us not forget that the vault in which the body of Jesus had been
   enclosed, was a vault which had been recently cut in the rock, and was
   situated in a garden near the place of execution. It had, for the
   latter reason been specially taken, seeing that it was late in the day
   and that they were desirous of not desecrating the Sabbath. The first
   gospel alone adds one circumstance, to wit, that the vault belonged to
   Joseph of Arimatha. But, in general, the anecdotical circumstances
   annexed by the first gospel to the common fund of the tradition, are
   without any value, especially when the matter in hand is the last days
   of the life of Jesus. The same gospel mentions another detail which, in
   view of the silence of the others, has not any probability; we refer to
   the public seals and a guard being placed at the tomb. We must also
   remember that the mortuary vaults were low chambers, cut into an
   inclining rock, in which was contrived a vertical cutting. The door,
   ordinarily downwards, was closed by a very heavy stone, fitted into a
   groove. These chambers had not a lock and key, the weight of the stone
   was the sole safeguard that one had against thieves or profaners of
   tombs; it was likewise so arranged that, to remove it, either a machine
   or the combined efforts of several persons were required. All the
   traditions agree on that point, that the stone had been put at the
   mouth of the vault on the Friday evening.

   But when Mary Magdalene arrived on the Sunday morning, the stone was
   not in its place. The vault was open. The body was no longer there. In
   her mind the idea of the resurrection was as yet little developed. That
   which filled her soul was a tender regret and the desire to render
   funeral honours to the body of her divine friend. Her first sentiments,
   moreover, were those of surprise and of sadness. The disappearance of
   the cherished body had stripped her of the last joy upon which she had
   calculated. She could not touch him again with her hands! And what had
   become of him? The idea of a desecration was present to her and she was
   shocked at it. Perhaps, at the same time, a glimmer of hope crossed her
   mind. Without losing a moment, she ran to a house in which Peter and
   John were together. "They have taken away the body of our Master," said
   she, "and I know not where they have laid him."

   The two disciples got up hastily and ran with all their might to see.
   John, the younger, arrived first. He stooped down to look into the
   interior. Mary was right. The tomb was empty. The linen which had
   served to enshroud him was scattered about the sepulchre. They both
   entered, examined the linen, which was no doubt stained with blood, and
   remarked in particular the napkin, which had enveloped his head, rolled
   up in a corner apart. Peter and John returned home extremely perplexed.
   If they did not now pronounce the decisive words: "He is risen!" we may
   be sure that such a consequence was the irrevocable conclusion, and
   that the generating dogma of Christianity was already established.

   Peter and John departed from the garden; Mary remained alone at the
   mouth of the sepulchre. She wept profusely. One single thought engaged
   her: Where have they put the body? Her woman's heart did not go beyond
   the desire of holding the well-beloved body again in her arms. Suddenly
   she heard a slight noise behind her. A man is standing near her. She
   thinks at first it is the gardener. "Sir," said she, "if thou have
   borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him
   away." In response, she heard herself called by her name, "Mary!" It
   was the voice which had so often before thrilled her. It was the voice
   of Jesus. "Oh, my master!" she exclaimed. She made as if to touch him.
   A sort of instinctive movement induced her to kneel down and kiss his
   feet. The vision gently receded, and said to her: "Touch me not!"
   Gradually the shadow disappeared. But the miracle of love was
   accomplished. What Cephas was not able to do, Mary had done. She knew
   how to extract life, sweet and penetrating words, from the empty tomb.
   It was no longer a question of deducing consequences or of framing
   conjectures. Mary had seen and heard. The resurrection had its first
   immediate witness.

   Frantic with love, inebriated with joy, Mary returned to the city and
   said to the first disciples whom she met: "I have seen him; he has
   spoken to me." Her greatly troubled imagination, her broken and
   incoherent discourse, made her to be taken by some as mad. Peter and
   John, in their turn, related what they had seen. Other disciples went
   to the tomb and saw likewise. The conviction reached by the whole of
   this first group was that Jesus had risen. Many doubts still existed.
   But the assurances of Mary, of Peter and of John, imposed upon the
   others. Subsequently, this was called "the vision of Peter." Paul, in
   particular, does not speak of the vision of Mary, and awards all the
   honour of the first apparition to Peter. But that statement was very
   inexact. Peter only saw the empty sepulchre, the napkin and the winding
   sheet. Mary alone loved enough to dispense with nature and to have
   revived the phantom of the perfect master. In these sorts of marvellous
   crises, to see after others have seen--goes for nothing; all the merit
   consists in being the first to see; for others afterwards model their
   visions on the received type. It is the characteristic of good
   organisations to perceive the image promptly, accurately, and as if by
   a sort of innate sense of design. The glory, then, of the resurrection
   belongs to Mary Magdalene. Next to Jesus, it is Mary who has done the
   most for the establishment of Christianity. The image created by the
   delicate sensibility of Mary Magdalene hovers over the world still.
   Queen and patroness of idealists, Magdalene knew better than any other
   person how to verify her dream, how to impose upon all the holy vision
   of her passionate soul. Her great woman's affirmation, "He is risen!"
   has been the basis of the faith of humanity. Begone hence, powerless
   reason! Seek not to apply cold analysis to this masterpiece of idealism
   and of love. If wisdom renounces the part of consoling that poor human
   race, betrayed by fate, let folly attempt the enterprise. Where is the
   sage who has given to the world so much joy as Mary Magdalene, the
   possessed of devils?

   The other women who had been to the tomb spread meanwhile the news
   abroad. They had not seen Jesus; but they spoke of a man in white, whom
   they had seen in the sepulchre, and who had said to them: "He is not
   here; return into Galilee; he will go before you there; there shall ye
   see him." Perhaps it was these white linen clothes which had originated
   this hallucination. Perhaps, again, they saw nothing, and only
   commenced to speak of their vision when Mary Magdalene had related
   hers. Indeed, according to one of the most authentic texts, they kept
   silence for some time--a silence which was afterwards attributed to
   terror. However this may be, these recitals increased every hour, and
   underwent some singular transformations. The man in white became the
   angel of God; it was told that his garments shone like the snow; that
   his face seemed like lightning. Others spoke of two angels; one of whom
   appeared at the head, the other at the foot of the sepulchre. By
   evening, many, perhaps, already believed that the women had seen this
   angel descend from heaven, move away the stone, and Jesus issue forth
   with a great noise. Doubtless they varied in their depositions;
   suffering from the effect of the imagination of others, as is always
   the case with common people; they borrowed every embellishment, and
   thus participated in the creation of the legend which grew up around
   them and suited their ideas.

   The day was stormy and decisive. The little company was greatly
   dispersed. Some had already departed for Galilee; others hid themselves
   for fear. The deplorable scene of the Friday; the afflicting spectacle
   which they had had before their eyes, in seeing him of whom they had
   expected so much expire upon the gibbet, without his Father coming to
   deliver him, had, moreover, extinguished the faith of many. The news
   imparted by the women and Peter was received on every side with
   scarcely dissembled credulity. Of the diverse stories, some were
   believed; the women went hither and thither with singular and
   inconsistent stories, enriching them as they went. Statements, the most
   opposed, were put forth. Some still wept over the sad event of the day
   before; others were already triumphant; all were disposed to entertain
   the most extraordinary accounts. Nevertheless, the distrust which the
   excitement of Mary Magdalene inspired, the little authority which the
   women had, the incoherency of their narratives, produced grave doubts.
   People were living in the expectation of seeing new visions, and which
   could not fail but come. The state of the sect was altogether
   favourable to the propagation of strange rumours. If all the members of
   the little church had been assembled, the legendary creation would have
   been impossible; those who knew the secret of the disappearance of the
   body, would probably have reclaimed against the error. But in the
   confusion which prevailed, the door was opened for the most prolific
   misapprehensions.

   It is the characteristic of those states of the soul, in which
   originate ecstasy and apparitions, to be contagious. The history of all
   the great religious crises, proves that these sort of visions are
   infectious. In an assembly of persons, entertaining the same beliefs,
   it is sufficient for one member of the body to affirm having seen or
   heard something supernatural for others to see and to hear also.
   Amongst the persecuted Protestants, a report was spread that people had
   heard the angels singing psalms upon a recently destroyed temple: They
   all went there and heard the same psalm. In cases of this kind, it is
   the most excited who give law, and who regulate the temperature of the
   common atmosphere. The exaltation of a few is transmitted to all; no
   one desires to be left behind, or likes to confess that he is less
   favoured than the others. Those who see nothing, are carried away, and
   finish by believing either that they are less clear-sighted, or that
   they do not take proper account of their sensations. In any case, they
   take care not to avow it; they would be disturbers of the common joy,
   would cause sadness to others, and would be playing a disagreeable
   part. When, therefore, one apparition is brought forward in such
   assemblies, it is customary for everyone to see it, or believe he has
   seen it. It is necessary to remember, however, what was the degree of
   intellectual culture possessed by the disciples of Jesus. What is
   called a weak head, very often, is associated with infinite goodness of
   heart. The disciples believed in phantoms; they imagined themselves to
   be compassed about with miracles; they participated in nothing which
   had relation to the positive science of the times. This science existed
   amongst some hundreds of men, scattered over those countries alone
   where Grecian culture had penetrated. But the commonality, in every
   country, participated very little in it. Palestine was, in this
   respect, one of the most backward countries. The Galileans were the
   most ignorant people of Palestine, and the disciples of Jesus might be
   counted amongst the persons the most simple of Galilee. It was to this
   very simplicity that they were indebted for their heavenly election.
   Among such people, belief in marvellous deeds found the most
   extraordinary facilities for propagating itself. Once the opinion on
   the resurrection of Jesus had been noised abroad, numerous visions were
   sure to follow. And so in fact they did follow.

   On the same Sabbath day, at an advanced hour of the morning, when the
   tales of the women had already been circulated, two disciples, one of
   whom was named Cleopatros or Cleopas, set out on a short journey to a
   village named Emmaus, situated a short distance from Jerusalem. They
   talked together of recent events, and were filled with sadness On the
   way, an unknown companion joined them, and inquired as to the cause of
   their sorrow. "Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem?" said they, "And
   hast not known the things which are come to pass in these days?" And he
   said unto them, "What things?" And they said unto him, "Concerning
   Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before
   God and all the people: And how the chief priests and our rulers
   delivered him to be condemned to death and have crucified him. But we
   trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel: and
   besides all this, to-day is the third day since these things were done.
   Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which
   were early at the sepulchre: and when they found not his body, they
   came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said
   that he was alive. And certain of them which were with us went to the
   sepulchre, and found it even so as the women had said: but him they saw
   not." The unknown individual was a pious man, well versed in the
   Scriptures, citing Moses and the prophets. These three good people
   became friendly. Approaching Emmaus, the stranger was making as if he
   would continue his journey, the two disciples begged him to come and
   break bread with them. The day was far spent; the recollections of the
   two disciples became then more vivid. This hour of the evening for
   refreshments, was the one which they looked back to as being at once
   the most charming and most melancholy. How many times had they not
   seen, during that hour, their beloved Master forget the burden of the
   day, in the abandon of gay conversation, and enlivened by several sips
   of excellent wine, spoke to them of the fruit of the vine, which he
   would drink anew with them in the Kingdom of his Father. The gesture
   which he made in the breaking of bread, and in offering it to them,
   according to the custom of the heads of Jewish families, was deeply
   engraven on their memories. Filled with a tender sadness, they forgot
   the stranger: it was Jesus they saw holding the bread, then breaking
   and offering it to them. These recollections engrossed them to such an
   extent, that they scarcely perceived that their companion, anxious to
   continue his journey, had quitted them. And when they had awakened out
   of their reverie: "Did we not perceive," they said, "something strange?
   Do you not remember how our hearts burned while he talked with us by
   the way? And the prophecies which he cited, proved clearly that Messiah
   must suffer before entering into his glory." "Did you not recognize him
   at the breaking of bread?" "Yes: up to that time our eyes were closed;
   they were only opened when he vanished." The conviction of the two
   disciples was that they had seen Jesus. They returned with all haste to
   Jerusalem.

   The main body of the disciples were, just at that moment, assembled at
   the house of Peter. Night had completely set in. Each was relating his
   impressions, and what he had seen and heard. The general belief already
   willed that Jesus had risen. At the entrance of the two disciples, the
   brethren hastened to speak to them of that which was called, "the
   vision of Peter." They, on their side, told what had befallen them on
   the way to Emmaus, and how that they had recognized him in the breaking
   of bread. The imaginations of everyone became quite excited. The doors
   were shut; for they feared the Jews. Oriental cities are silent after
   sunset. The silence, hence, for some moments in the interior was
   frequently profound. Every slight sound which was accidentally produced
   was interpreted in the sense of the common expectation. Expectation, as
   is usual, was the progenitor of its object. During a moment of silence,
   a slight breath of wind passed over the face of the assembly. At these
   decisive times, a current of air, a creaking window, a casual murmur,
   suffices to fix the beliefs of people for centuries. At the same moment
   the breath of air was felt, they believed that they heard sounds. Some
   declared that they had seen the word schalom, "happiness" or "peace."
   This was the ordinary salutation of Jesus, and the word by which he
   signalized his presence. It was impossible to doubt; Jesus was present;
   he was there, in the assembly. It was his dear voice; everyone
   recognized it. This idea was the more easily accepted, inasmuch as
   Jesus had said to them, that as often as they came together in his
   name, he would be in the midst of them. It was then an accepted fact,
   that on Sunday evening, Jesus had appeared before his assembled
   disciples. Some of them pretended to have distinguished the marks of
   the nails in his hands and his feet, and in his side the trace of the
   spear thrust. According to a widely-spread tradition, this was the
   self-same evening that he breathed upon his disciples the holy spirit.
   The idea, at least, that his breath had passed over them on
   re-assembling, was generally admitted.

   Such were the incidents of that day, which has decided the fate of
   humanity. The opinion that Jesus had risen was, on that day,
   established in an irrevocable manner. The sect, which was believed to
   be extinguished by the death of the Master, was, from that instant,
   assured of a great future.

   Some doubts were, nevertheless, ventilated. The apostle, Thomas, who
   was not present at the meeting on Sunday evening, avowed that he envied
   those who had seen the marks of the spear and of the nails. Eight days
   after, this envy, it is said, was allayed. But there has attached to
   him, in consequence, some slight blame and a mild reproach. By an
   instinctive feeling of exquisite justness, they understood that the
   ideal was not to be touched with hands, and that it must not be
   subjected to the test of experience. Noli, me tangere (touch me not) is
   the motto of all great affection. The sense of touch leaves nothing to
   faith; the eye, a purer and more noble organ than the hand, which
   nothing can sully, and by which nothing is sullied, became very soon a
   superfluous witness. A singular sentiment began to grow up; any
   hesitation was held to be a mark of disloyalty and lack of love; one
   was ashamed to remain behind hand, and one interdicted oneself from
   desiring to sec. The dictum: "Blessed are they who have not seen and
   yet believed," became the key-note of the situation. It was thought to
   be a thing so much more generous to believe without proof. The really
   sincere friends denied having seen any vision. Just as, in later times,
   Saint Louis refused to be a witness to an eucharistic miracle, so as
   not to detract from the merits of faith. From that time, credulity
   became a hideous emulation, and a kind of out-bidding one another. The
   merit consisted in believing without having seen; faith at any cost;
   gratuitous faith; the faith which went as far as folly--was exalted, as
   if it were the first of the gifts of the soul. The credo quia absurdum
   (I believe because I cannot understand) was established. The law of
   Christian dogmas was to be a strange progression, which no
   impossibility should be able to prevent. A sort of chivalrous sentiment
   prevented one from even looking back. The dogmas, the most dear to
   piety, those to which it was to attach itself with the most heedless
   frenzy, were the most repugnant to reason, in consequence of that
   touching idea, which the moral value of faith augments in proportion to
   the difficulty in believing, the reason of man not being compelled to
   prove any love when he admits that which is clear.

   The first days were hence a period of intense feverishness, in which
   the faithful, infatuated with one another, and imposing one's fancies
   each upon the other, mutually carried away, and imparting to each other
   the most exalted notions. Visions were multiplied without number. The
   evening assemblies were the most common occasions when they were
   produced. When the doors were closed, and when each was beset with his
   fixed idea, the first who was believed to hear the sweet word, schalom,
   "salutation," or "peace," would give the signal. All would then listen,
   and would soon hear the very same thing. It was hence a great joy to
   those unsophisticated souls to know that Jesus was in the midst of
   them. Each tasted of the sweetness of that thought, and believed
   himself to be favoured with some inward colloquy. Other visions were
   noised abroad of a different description, and recalled those of the
   sojourners to Emmaus. During meal time, Jesus was seen to appear,
   taking the bread, blessing it, breaking it, and offering it to him who
   had been honoured with a vision of himself. In a few days, a whole
   string of stories, greatly differing in details, but inspired by the
   same spirit of love, and of absolute faith, was invented and spread
   abroad. It is the gravest of errors to suppose that legends require any
   length of time to be formed. Legend is sometimes born in a day. On
   Sunday evening (16 of Nisan, 5th April), the resurrection of Jesus was
   held to be a reality. Eight days after, the character of the life of
   the risen one, which had been conceived for him, was determined in
   regard at least to three essentials.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II.

  DEPARTURE OF THE DISCIPLES FROM JERUSALEM--SECOND GALILEAN LIFE OF JESUS.

   THE most eager desire of those who have lost a dear friend, is to
   revisit the places where they have lived with them. It was, doubtless,
   this sentiment which, a few days after the events of the Passover,
   induced the disciples to return into Galilee. From the moment of the
   arrest of Jesus, and immediately after his death, it is probable that
   many of the disciples had already found their way to the northern
   provinces. At the time of the resurrection, a rumour was spread abroad,
   according to which, it was in Galilee that he would be seen again. Some
   of the women who had been to the sepulchre came back with the report
   that the angel had said to them that Jesus had already preceded them
   into Galilee. Others said that it was Jesus himself who had ordered
   them to go there. Now and then some people said that they themselves
   remembered that he had said so during his life time. What is certain
   is, that at the end of a few days, probably after the Paschal Feast of
   the Pass-over had been quite over, the disciples believed they had a
   command to return into their own country, and to it accordingly they
   returned. Perhaps the visions began to abate at Jerusalem. A species of
   melancholy seized them. The brief appearances of Jesus were not
   sufficient to compensate for the enormous void left by his absence. In
   a melancholy mood, they thought of the lake and of the beautiful
   mountains where they had received a foretaste of the Kingdom of God.
   The women, especially, wished, at any cost, to return to the country
   where they had enjoyed so much happiness. It must be observed that the
   order to depart cane especially from them. That odious city weighed
   them down. They longed to see once more the ground where they had
   possessed him whom they loved, well assured in advance of meeting him
   again there.

   The majority of the disciples then departed, full of joy and hope,
   perhaps in the company of the caravan, which took back the pilgrims
   from the Feast of the Passover. What they hoped to find in Galilee,
   were not only transient visions, but Jesus himself to continue with
   them, as he had done before his death. An intense expectation filled
   their souls. Was he going to restore the Kingdom of Israel, to found
   definitely the Kingdom of God, and, as was said, "Reveal his justice?"
   Everything was possible. They already called to mind the smiling
   landscapes where they had enjoyed his presence. Many believed that he
   had given to them a rendezvous upon a mountain, probably the same to
   which with them there clung so many sweet recollections. Never, it is
   certain, had there been a more pleasant journey. All their dreams of
   happiness were on the point of being realized. They were going to see
   him once more! And, in fact, they did see him again. Hardly restored to
   their harmless chimeras, they believed themselves to be in the midst of
   the Gospel dispensation period. It was now drawing near to the end of
   April. The ground is then strewn with red anemones, which were probably
   those "lilies of the fields" from which Jesus delighted to draw his
   similes. At each step, his words were brought to mind, adhering, as it
   were, to the thousand accidental objects they met by the way. Here was
   the tree, the flower, the seed, from which he had taken his parables;
   there was the hill on which he delivered his most touching discourses;
   here was the little ship from which he taught. It was like the
   recommencement of a beautiful dream. Like a vanished illusion which had
   reappeared. The enchantment seemed to revive. The sweet Galilean
   "Kingdom of God" had recovered its sway. The clear atmosphere, the
   mornings upon the shore or upon the mountain, the nights passed on the
   lakes watching the nets, all these returned again to them in distinct
   visions. They saw him everywhere where they had lived with him. Of
   course it was not the joy of the first enjoyment. Sometimes the lake
   had to them the appearance of being very solitary. But a great love is
   satisfied with little, if all of us, while we are alive, could
   surreptitiously, once a year, and during a moment long enough to
   exchange but a few words, behold again those loved ones whom we have
   lost--death would not be death!

   Such was the state of mind of this faithful band, in this short period
   when Christianity seemed to return for a moment to his cradle and bid
   to him an eternal adieu. The principal disciples, Peter, Thomas,
   Nathaniel, the sons of Zebedee, met again on the shores of the lake,
   and henceforth lived together; they had taken up again their former
   calling of fishermen, at Bethsaida or at Capernaum. The Galilean women
   were no doubt with them. They had insisted more than the others on that
   return, which was to them a heartfelt love. This was their last act in
   the establishment of Christianity. From that moment, they disappear.
   Faithful to their love, their wish was to quit no more the country in
   which they had tasted their greatest delight. They were quickly
   forgotten, and, as the Galilean Christianity possessed but little of
   futurity, the remembrance of them was completely lost in certain
   ramifications of the tradition. These touching demoniacs, these
   converted fisherwomen, these actual founders of Christianity, Mary
   Magdalene, Mary Cleophas, Joanna, Susanna, all passed into the
   condition of forgotten saints. St. Paul knew them not. The faith which
   they had created almost consigned them to oblivion. We must come down
   to the middle ages before we find justice done them; then, one of them,
   Mary Magdalene, takes her proper place in the Christian hierarchy.

   The visions, at first, on the lake appear to have been pretty frequent
   On board these crafts where they had come in contact with God, how many
   times had the disciples not seen again their Divine Friend? The
   simplest circumstances brought him back to them. Once they had toiled
   all night without taking a single fish; suddenly the nets were filled;
   this was a miracle. It appeared that some one from the land had said to
   them: "Cast your nets to the right." Peter and John regarded one
   another. "It is the Lord," said John. Peter, who was naked, covered
   himself hastily with his fisher's coat, and cast himself into the sea,
   in order to go to the invisible councillor. At other times Jesus came
   and partook of their simple repasts. One day, when they had done
   fishing, they were surprised to find lighted coals, with fish placed
   upon them, and bread near by. A lively sense of their feasts of past
   times crossed their minds, since bread and fish had been always an
   essential part of their diet. Jesus was in the habit of offering these
   to them. After the meal they were persuaded that Jesus himself had sat
   by their side, and had presented to them those victuals which hail
   already become to them eucharistic and sacred, John and Peter were the
   ones who were specially favoured with those private conversations with
   the well-beloved phantom. One day, Peter, dreaming, perhaps (but what
   am I saying! their life on the shore was it not a perpetual dream?)
   believed that he heard Jesus ask him: "Lovest thou Me?" The question
   was repeated three times. Peter, wholly possessed by a tender and sad
   sentiment, imagined that he responded, "Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I
   love thee," and each time the apparition said: "Feed my sheep." On
   another occasion Peter told John, in confidence, a strange dream. He
   had dreamt he had been walking with the Master, John was following a
   few steps behind. Jesus said to him, in terms most obscure, which
   seemed to announce to him a prison or a violent death, and repeated to
   him at different times: "Follow me." Peter, thereupon, pointing his
   finger to John, who was following them, asked: "Lord, and this man?"
   "If I will," said Jesus, "that he tarry till I come, what is that to
   thee? Follow thou me." After the execution of Peter, John remembered
   that dream, and saw in it a prediction of the manner of death his
   friend had died. He recounted it to his disciples; the latter believed
   to discover in it the assurance that their master would not die before
   the final advent of Jesus.

   These grand and melancholy dreams, these never ceasing conversations,
   broken off and recommenced with the death of the cherished one,
   occupied the days and months. The sympathy of Galilee for the prophet
   that the Hierosolymites of Jerusalem had put to death was re-awakened.
   More than five hundred persons were already devoted to the memory of
   Jesus. In default of the lost master, they obeyed the disciples, the
   most authoritative--Peter--in particular. One day, when following in
   the suite of their spiritual chiefs, the faithful Galileans had
   ascended one of those mountains whither Jesus had often conducted them,
   and they imagined that they saw him again. The atmosphere of these
   heights is full of strange mirages. The same vision which formerly had
   occurred to the most intimate disciples was once more produced. The
   whole assembly believed that they saw the divine spectre displayed in
   the clouds; all fell on their faces and worshipped. The sentiment which
   the clear horizon of those mountains inspires is the idea of the extent
   of the world, and the desire of conquering it. On one of the
   neighbouring peaks Satan, pointing out to Jesus with his finger the
   kingdoms of the world and all their glory, offered to give them to him,
   it is stated, if he would only fall down and worship him On this
   occasion, it was Jesus who, from the tops of these sacred summits,
   showed to his disciples the whole world, and assured them of the
   future. They descended from the mountain, persuaded that the son of God
   had given to them the command to convert the whole human race, and
   promised to be with them till the end of time. A strange ardour, a
   divine fire, pervaded them at the close of these conversations. They
   regarded themselves as the missionaries of the world, capable of
   performing supernatural deeds. St. Paul saw several of those who had
   assisted at that extraordinary scene. At the end of twenty-five years
   the impression they left was still as strong and as lively as on the
   first day.

   Nearly a year rolled on, during which they led this life, suspended
   between heaven and earth. The charm, far from diminishing, increased.
   It is a property of great and holy things, always to become grander and
   more pure of themselves. The sentiment in regard to a loved one who has
   been lost, is certainly keener at a distance of time, than on the
   morrow after the death. The greater the distance, the more the
   sentiment gains strength. The sorrow, which at first is a part of it
   and, in a sense, lessens it, is changed into a serene piety. The image
   of the defunct one is transfigured, idealized, becomes the soul of
   life, the principle of all action, the source of all joy, the oracle
   which is consulted, the consolation which is sought in moments of
   despondency. Death is a necessary, condition of every apotheosis.
   Jesus, so beloved during his life, was in this way more so after his
   last breath, or rather his last breath was the commencement of his
   actual life in the bosom of the church. He became the intimate friend,
   the confidant, the travelling companion, the one who, at the turning
   point of the route, joins you, follows you, sits down at table with
   you, and reveals himself at the moment of disappearance. The absolute
   lack of scientific exactitude in the minds of these new believers, made
   it that one could not weigh any question in regard to the nature of
   one's existence. They represented him as impassible, endowed with a
   subtle body, passing through opaque walks, now visible, now invisible,
   but always living. Sometimes they imagined that his body was not
   composed of matter; that it was pure shadow or apparition. At other
   times there was attributed to him a material body, with flesh and
   bones; through a nave scrupulousness, as though the hallucination had
   inclined to take precautions against himself, he was made to drink and
   eat; nay, it was maintained that some of them had touched his body
   gently with their hands. Their ideas on this point were extremely vague
   and uncertain. We have not until now dreamt of putting a frivolous
   question; at the same time the present is one not easily of solution.
   Whilst Jesus had risen in this real manner, that is to say, in the
   hearts of those who loved him; whilst the immovable conviction of the
   apostles was being formed, and the faith of the world prepared, in what
   place did the worms consume the inanimate body which on the Saturday
   evening had been deposited in the tomb? People ignore always this
   point, for, naturally, the Christian traditions can do nothing to clear
   up the subject. It is the spirit which quickeneth; the flesh is
   nothing. The resurrection was the triumph of the idea over the reality.
   Now that the idea had entered upon its immortality, what mattered the
   body?

   About the years 80 or 83, when the actual text of the first Gospel
   received its final additions, the Jews already had on this matter a
   settled opinion. If they are to be believed, the disciples might have
   come by night and stolen away his body. The Christian conscience was
   alarmed at this rumour, and in order to cut short such an objection,
   they invented the circumstance of the military guard, and of the seal
   put on the sepulchre. That circumstance, to be found only in the first
   gospel, mixed up with legends of doubtful authority, is wholly
   inadmissible. But the explanation of the Jews, although irrefutable, is
   far from being altogether satisfactory. It can hardly be admitted that
   those who had so firmly believed Jesus had risen from the dead, were
   the same persons who had taken away his body. Little accustomed as
   these men were to reflection, one can hardly imagine so singular an
   illusion. It must be remembered that the little church at that moment
   was completely dispersed. It had no expectation, no centralisation, no
   regular method of procedure. Beliefs sprang up on every hand, and were
   then amalgamated as best they might. The contradictions between the
   narratives, upon which we base the incidents of the Sabbath morning,
   prove that the rumours were spread through the most diverse channels,
   and that they did not care much about bringing them into accord. It is
   possible that the body may have been taken away by some of the
   disciples, and transported by them into Galilee. The others, who
   remained at Jerusalem, may not have been cognizant of the fact. On the
   other hand, the disciples, who may have carried the body into Galilee,
   could not at first have any knowledge of the stories which were current
   at Jerusalem, so that the belief in the resurrection may have been
   invented after they went away, and must, therefore, have surprised
   them. They did not reclaim, and, even had they done so, it would have
   unsettled nothing. When it is a question of miracles a tardy correction
   is not feared. No material difficulty ever impedes a sentiment from
   being developed and of creating the fictions it has need of. In the
   recent history of the miracle of Salette, the error was demonstrated by
   the clearest of evidence, but that did not hinder the belief from
   springing up, and the faith from spreading. It is allowable also to
   suppose that the disappearance of the body was the work of the Jews.
   Probably they thought by that to prevent the tumultuous scenes which
   might be enacted over the body of a man so popular as Jesus. Probably
   they wished to prevent people from making a noisy funeral display, or
   from raising a tomb to that just man. Finally, who knows that the
   disappearance of the corpse was not the work of the proprietor of the
   garden, or of the gardener. The proprietor, according to all accounts,
   was a stranger to the sect. His sepulchre was chosen because it was the
   nearest to Golgotha, and because they were pressed for time. Probably
   he was dissatisfied with the mode of taking possession of his property,
   and had the body removed. In good truth, the details reported in the
   fourth gospel, of the linen left in the sepulchre, and the napkin
   folded carefully away in the corner, does not accord with such an
   hypothesis.

   This last circumstance would lead one to suppose that a woman's hand
   had crept in there. The five narratives of the visit of the women to
   the tomb are so confused and embarrassing, that it is certainly quite
   allowable for us to suppose that they contained some misapprehension.
   The female conscience, when dominated by passion, is capable of the
   most extravagant illusions. Often it becomes the abettor of its own
   dreams. To these sort of incidents, for the purpose of having them
   considered as marvellous, nobody deliberately deceives; but everybody,
   without thinking of it, is led to connive at them. Mary Magdalene,
   according to the language of the times, had been "possessed of seven
   devils." In all this it is necessary to take account of the lack of the
   precision of mind of the women of the East, of their absolute want of
   education, and of the peculiar shade of their sincerity. Exalted
   conviction renders any return upon herself impossible. When the sky is
   seen everywhere, one is led to put oneself at times in the place of the
   sky.

   Let us draw a veil over these mysteries. In states nt religious crises,
   everything being regarded as divine, the greatest effects may be the
   results of the most trifling causes. If we were witnesses of the
   strange facts which are at the origin of all the works of faith, we
   should discover circumstances which to us would not appear proportioned
   to the importance of the results, and others which would make us smile.
   Our old cathedrals are reckoned among the most beautiful objects in the
   world; one cannot enter them without being in some sort inebriated with
   the infinite. Yet these splendid marvels are almost always the fruit of
   some little conceit. And what does it matter definitively. The result
   alone counts in such matters. Faith purifies all. The material incident
   which has induced belief in the resurrection was not the true cause of
   the resurrection. That which raised Jesus from the dead was love. That
   love was so powerful that a petty accident sufficed to erect the
   edifice of a universal faith. If Jesus had been less loved, if faith in
   the resurrection had had less reason for its establishment, these kind
   of accidents would have occurred in vain, nothing would have come out
   of them. A grain of sand causes the fall of a mountain, when the moment
   for the fall of the mountain has come. The greatest things proceed at
   once from the greatest and smallest causes. Great causes alone are
   real; little ones only serve to determine the production of an effect
   which has for a long time been in preparation.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III.

  RETURN OF THE APOSTLES TO JERUSALEM.--END OF THE PERIOD OF APPARITIONS.

   THE apparitions, in the meanwhile, as happens always in movements of
   credulous enthusiasm, began to abate. Popular chimeras resemble
   contagious maladies; they grow stale quickly and change their form. The
   activity of these ardent souls had already turned in another direction.
   What they believed to have heard from the lips of the dear risen one,
   was the order to go forth and preach, and to convert the world. But
   where should they commence? Naturally, at Jerusalem. The return to
   Jerusalem was then resolved upon by those who at that time had the
   direction of the sect. As these journeys were ordinarily made by
   caravan at the time of the feasts, we now suppose with all manner of
   likelihood, that the return in question took place at the Feast of
   Tabernacles at the close of the year 33, or the Paschal Feast of the
   year 34. Galilee was thus abandoned by Christianity, and abandoned for
   ever. The little church which remained there continued, no doubt, to
   exist; but we hear it no more spoken of. It was probably broken up,
   like all the rest, by the frightful disaster which then overtook the
   country during the war of Vespasian; the wreck of the dispersed
   community sought refuge beyond Jordan. After the war it was not
   Christianity which was brought back into Galilee; it was Judaism. In
   the ii., iii., and iv. centuries, Galilee was a country wholly Jewish;
   the centre of Judaism, the country of the Talmud. Galilee thus counted
   but an hour in the history of Christianity; but it was the sacred hour,
   par excellence; it gave to the new religion that which has made it
   endure--its poetry, its penetrating charms. "The Gospel," after the
   manner of the synoptics, was a Galilean work. But we shall attempt
   further on to show that "The Gospel" thus extended, has been the
   principal cause of the success of Christianity, and continues to be the
   surest guarantee of its future. It is probable that a fraction of the
   little school which surrounded Jesus in his last days remained at
   Jerusalem. At the moment of separation the belief in the resurrection
   was already established. That belief was thus developed from two points
   of view, each having a perceptibly different aspect; and such is, no
   doubt, the cause of the complete divergencies which are remarked in the
   narratives of the apparitions. Two traditions, the one Galilean, the
   other Hierosolymitish, were formed; according to the first, all the
   apparitions (except those of the first period) had taken place in
   Galilee; according to the second, all had taken place at Jerusalem. The
   accord of the two fractions of the little church on the fundamental
   dogma, naturally only served to confirm the common belief. They
   embraced each other effusively; they repeated with the same faith, "He
   is risen." Perhaps the joy and the enthusiasm which were the
   consequences of this agreement, led to some other visions. It is about
   this period that we can place the vision of James, mentioned by Saint
   Paul. James was the brother, or at least, a relation of Jesus. We do
   not find that he had accompanied Jesus on his last sojourn to
   Jerusalem. He probably went there with the apostles, when the latter
   gritted Galilee. All the chief apostles had had their visions; it was
   hard that this "brother of the Lord," should not also have his. It was,
   it seems, an eucharistic vision, that is to say, in which Jesus
   appeared taking and breaking the bread. Later, those portions of the
   Christian family who attached themselves to James, those that were
   called the Hebrews, changed this vision to the same day as the
   resurrection, and wanted it to be looked upon as the first of all.

   In fact, it is very remarkable that the family of Jesus, some of whose
   members during his life had been incredulous and hostile to his
   mission, constituted now a part of the Church, and held in it a very
   exalted position. One is led to suppose that the reconciliation took
   place during the sojourn of the apostles in Galilee. The celebrity
   which had attached itself to the name of their relative, those five
   thousand persons who believed in him, and were assured of having seen
   him after he had arisen, served to make an impression on their minds.
   From the time of the definite establishment of the apostles at
   Jerusalem, we find with them Mary, the mother of Jesus, and the
   brothers of Jesus. In what concerns Mary, it appears that John,
   thinking in this to obey a recommendation of the Master, had adopted
   and taken her to his own home. He perhaps took her back to Jerusalem.
   This woman, whose personal history and character have remained veiled
   in obscurity, assumed hence great importance. The words that the
   evangelist put into the mouth of some unknown women: "Blessed is the
   womb that bare thee, and the babes which thou has sucked," began to be
   verified. It is probable that Mary survived her son a few years. As for
   the brothers of Jesus, their history is wrapped in obscurity. Jesus had
   several brothers and sisters. It seemed probable, however, that in the
   class of persons which were called "Brothers of the Lord," there were
   included relations in the second degree. The question is only of moment
   so far as it concerns James. This James the Just, or "brother of the
   Lord," whom we shall see playing a great part in the first thirty years
   of Christianity, was the James, the son of Alphus, who appears to have
   been a cousin germain of Jesus, or a whole brother of Jesus? The data
   in respect of him are altogether uncertain and contradictory. What we
   do know of this James represents him to be such a different person from
   Jesus, that we refuse to believe that two men so dissimilar were born
   of the same mother. If Jesus was the true founder of Christianity,
   James was its most dangerous enemy; he nearly ruined everything by his
   narrow-mindedness. Later, it was certainly believed that James the Just
   was a whole brother of Jesus. But perhaps some confusion was mixed up
   with the subject.

   Be that as it may, the apostles henceforth separated no more, except to
   make temporary journeys. Jerusalem became their head-quarters; they
   seemed to be afraid to disperse, while certain acts served to reveal in
   them the prepossession of being opposed to return again into Galilee,
   which latter had dissolved its little society. An express order of
   Jesus is supposed to have interdicted their quitting Jerusalem, before,
   at least, the great manifestations which were to take place.
   Apparitions became more and more rare. They were spoken much less of,
   and people began to believe that they would not see the Master again
   until His grand appearance in the clouds. Peoples' thoughts were turned
   with great force towards a promise which it was supposed Jesus had
   made. During his life-time, Jesus, it was said, had often spoken of the
   Holy Spirit, which was understood to mean a personification of divine
   wisdom. He had promised his disciples that the Spirit would nerve them
   in the combats that they would have to engage in, would be their
   inspirer in difficulties, and their advocate, if they had to speak in
   public. When the visions became rare, the brethren found compensation
   in this Spirit, which they looked upon as a consoler, as another self
   which Jesus had bequeathed to his friends. Sometimes it was supposed
   that Jesus suddenly presented himself in the midst of his disciples
   assembled, and breathed on them out of his own mouth a current of
   vivifying air. At other times the disappearance of Jesus was regarded
   as a premonition of the coming of the Spirit. It was believed that in
   the apparitions he had promised the descent of this Spirit. Many people
   established an intimate connection between this descent and the
   restoration of the kingdom of Israel. All the fervency of imagination
   which the sect had displayed in inventing the legend of Jesus risen
   again, was now about to be employed to create an assemblage of pious
   believers, in regard to the descent of the Spirit and its marvellous
   gilts. It seems, however, that a grand apparition of Jesus had taken
   place at Bethany or upon the Mount of Olives. Certain traditions
   annexed it to that vision of the final recommendations of Jesus, and
   the reiterated promise of the sending down of the Holy Spirit, the act
   which was to invest the disciples with the power of remitting sins. The
   features of these apparitions became more and more vague; they were
   confounded one with another; and people came not to think much about
   them. It was an accepted fact that Jesus was living; that he manifested
   himself by a number of apparitions, sufficient to prove his existence;
   that he would again be manifested in some partial visions, until the
   grand final revelation which would be the consummation of all. Thus,
   Saint Paul presents the vision he had on the way to Damascus, as of the
   same order as those we have just been speaking of. At all events, it
   was admitted. in an idealistic sense, that the Master was to be with
   his disciples and he would remain with them unto the end. In the first
   period the apparitions were very frequent. Jesus was conceived as
   dwelling permanently on the earth and fulfilling more or less the
   functions of terrestrial life. When the visions became rare, they were
   made to conform to another idea. Jesus was represented as having
   entered into his glory, and as being seated at the right hand of his
   Father. "He is ascended to Heaven," it was said. This statement rested
   mainly on a vague conception of the idea, or on an induction. But it
   was converted by many into a material scene. It was desired that it
   should follow the last vision common to all the apostles, and in which
   he gave them his supreme recommendations. Jesus was received up into
   Heaven. Later, the scene was developed and became a complete legend. It
   was recounted that some heavenly messengers, agreeably to the divine
   manifestations, most brilliant, appeared at the moment when a cloud
   enveloped him, and consoled his disciples by the assurance of his
   return in the clouds, resembling wholly the scene of which they had
   just been witnesses. The death of Moses had been surrounded in the
   popular imagination with circumstances of the same kind. Perhaps they
   also called to mind the ascension of Elias. A tradition placed the
   locality of this scene near Bethany, upon the summit of the Mount of
   Olives. That quarter remained very dear to his disciples, doubtless
   because Jesus had lived there.

   The legend would make it appear that the disciples, after that
   marvellous scene, re-entered Jerusalem "with joy." For ourselves, it is
   with sadness that we have to say to Jesus a final adieu. To have found
   him living again his shadow life, has been to us a great consolation.
   That second life of Jesus, a pale image of the first, is yet full of
   charm. Now, all scent of him is lost. Raised on a cloud to the right
   hand of his Father, he has left us with men, but, oh, Heaven! the fall
   is terrible! The reign of poetry is past. Mary Magdalene, retired to
   her native village, buried there her recollections. In consequence of
   that eternal injustice which ordains that man appropriates to himself
   alone the work in which woman has had as great a share as he, Cephas
   eclipsed her, and made her to be forgotten! No more sermons on the
   Mount; no more of the possessed of devils healed; no more courtesans
   touched; no more of those strange female fellow workers in the work of
   redemption whom Jesus had not repelled! God has verily disappeared. No;
   history of the church is to be most often henceforth the history of
   treasons to blot out the name of Jesus. But such as it is, that history
   is still a hymn to his glory. The wools and the image of the
   illustrious Nazarene shall remain in the midst of infinite miseries as
   a sublime ideal. We shall comprehend better how great it was when we
   have seen how little were his disciples.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV.

  DESCENT OF THE HOLY SPIRIT--ECSTATICAL, AND PROPHETICAL PHENOMENA.

   Mean, narrow, ignorant, inexperienced they were, as completely so as it
   was possible to be. Their simplicity of mind was extreme; their
   credulity had no limits. But they had one quality: they loved their
   Master to foolishness. The recollection of Jesus was the only moving
   power of their lives; it was perpetually with them, and it was clear
   that they lived only for him, who, during two or three years, had so
   strangely attached and seduced them. For souls of a secondary standard,
   who cannot love God directly, that is to say, discover truth, create
   the beautiful, do right of themselves, salvation consists in loving
   some one in whom there shines a reflection of the true, the beautiful,
   and the good. The great majority of mankind require a worship of two
   degrees. The multitude of worshippers desire an intermediary between it
   and God.

   When a person has succeeded in attracting to himself, by an elevated
   moral bond, several other persons, when he dies, it always happens that
   the survivors, who, up to that time are often divided by rivalries and
   dissensions, beget a strong friendship the one for the other. A
   thousand cherished images of the past, which they regret, become to
   them a common treasure. There is .a manner of loving the dead, which
   consists in loving those with whom we have known him. We are anxious to
   meet one another, in order to re-call the happy times which are no
   more. A profound saying of Jesus is found then to be true to the
   letter: The dead one is present in the midst of those who are united
   again by his memory.

   The affection that the disciples had the one for the other, while Jesus
   was alive, was thus enhanced tenfold after his death. They formed a
   very small and very retired society, and lived exclusively by
   themselves. At Jerusalem they numbered about one-hundred-and-twenty.
   Their piety was active, and, as yet, completely restrained by the forms
   of Jewish piety. The temple was then the chief place of devotion. They
   worked, no doubt, for a living; but at that time, manual labour in
   Jewish society engaged very few. Everyone had a trade, but that trade
   by no means hindered a man from being educated and well-bred. With us,
   material wants are so difficult to satisfy, that the man living by his
   hands is obliged to work twelve or fifteen hours a day; the man of
   leisure alone can follow intellectual pursuits; the acquisition of
   instruction is a rare and costly affair. But in those old societies (of
   which the East of our days gives still an idea), in those climates,
   where nature is so prodigal to man and so little exacting, in the life
   of the labourer there was plenty of leisure. A sort of common
   instruction puts every man au courant of the ideas of the times. Mere
   food and clothing satisfied their wants; a few hours of moderate labour
   provided these. The rest was given up to day dreaming, and to passion.
   Passion had attained in the minds of those people a decree of energy
   which is to us inconceivable. The Jews of that time appear to us to be
   in truth possessed, each pursuing with a blind fatality the idea with
   which he had been seized.

   The dominant idea in the Christian community, at the moment at which we
   are now arrived, and when apparitions had ceased, was the coming of the
   Holy Spirit. People were believed to receive it in the form of a
   mysterious breath, which passed over the assembly. Mary pretended that
   it was the breath of Jesus himself. Every inward consolation, every
   bold movement, every flush of enthusiasm, every feeling of lively, and
   pleasant gaiety, which was experienced without knowing whence it came,
   was the work of the Spirit. These simple con-sciences referred, as
   usual, to some exterior cause the exquisite sentiments which were being
   created in them. It was in the assemblies, particularly, that these
   fantastic phenomena of illumination were produced. When all were
   assembled, and when they awaited in silence, inspiration from on high,
   a murmur, any noise whatever, was believed to be the coming of the
   Spirit. In the early times, it was the apparitions of Jesus which were
   produced in this manner. Now the turn of ideas had changed. It was the
   divine breath which passed over the little church, and filled it with a
   celestial effluvia.

   These beliefs were strengthened by notions drawn from the Old
   Testament. The prophetic spirit is represented in the Hebrew books as a
   breathing which penetrates man and inspires him. In the beautiful
   vision of Elijah, God passes by in the form of a gentle wind, which
   produces a slight rustling noise. This ancient imagery had handed down
   to later ages beliefs analogous to those of the Spiritualists of our
   days. In the ascension of Isaiah, the coming of the Spirit is
   accompanied by a certain rustling at the doors. More often, however,
   people regarded this coming as another baptism, to wit, the "baptism of
   the Spirit," far superior to that of John. The hallucinations of touch
   being very frequent among persons so nervous and so excited, the least
   current of air, accompanied by a shuddering in the midst of the
   silence, was considered as the passage of the Spirit. One conceived
   that he felt it; soon everybody felt it; and the enthusiasm was
   communicated from one to another. The correspondence of these phenomena
   with those which are to be found amongst the visionaries of all times
   is easily apprehended. They are produced daily, partly under the
   influence of the Acts of the Apostles, in the English or American sects
   of Quakers, Jumpers, Shakers, Irvingites; amongst the Mormons; in the
   camp-meetings and revivals of America; we have seen them reproduced
   amongst ourselves in the sect called the Spiritualists. But an immense
   difference ought to be made between aberrations, which are without
   bounds, and without a future, and the illusions which have accompanied
   the establishment of a new religious code for humanity.

   Amongst all these "descents of the Spirit," which appear to have been
   frequent enough, there was one which left a profound impression on the
   nascent Church. One day, when the brethren were assembled, a
   thunder-storm burst forth. A violent wind threw open the windows: the
   heavens were on fire. Thunderstorms, in these countries, are
   accompanied by prodigious sheets of lightning; the atmosphere is, as it
   were, everywhere furrowed with ridges of flame. Whether the electric
   fluid had penetrated the room itself, or whether a dazzling flash of
   lightning had suddenly illuminated the faces of all, everyone was
   convinced that the Spirit had entered, and that it had alighted on the
   head of each in the form of tongues of fire. It was a prevalent opinion
   in the theurgic schools of Syria, that the communication of the Spirit
   was produced by a divine fire, and under the form of a mysterious
   glare. People fancied themselves to be present at the splendours of
   Sinai, at a divine manifestation analogous to those of former days. The
   baptism of the Spirit thenceforth became also a baptism of fire. The
   baptism of the Spirit and of fire was opposed to, and greatly preferred
   to, the baptism of water, the only baptism which John had known. The
   baptism of fire, was only prepared on rare occasions. Thy apostles and
   the disciples of the first guest-chamber alone were reputed to have
   received it. But the idea that the Spirit had alighted on them in the
   form of jets of Ilene, resembling tongues of fire, gave rise to a
   series of singular ideas, which took a foremost place in the thought of
   the period.

   The tongue of the inspired man was supposed to receive a kind of
   sacrament. It was pretended that many prophets, before their mission,
   had been stammerers; that the Son of God had passed a coal over their
   lips, which purified them and conferred on them the gift of eloquence.
   In preaching, the man was supposed not to speak of his own volition.
   His tongue was considered as the organ of divinity which inspired it.
   These tongues of fire appeared a striking symbol. People were convinced
   that God desired to signify in this manner that he poured out upon the
   apostles his most precious gifts of eloquence, and of inspiration. But
   they did not stop there. Jerusalem was, like the majority of the large
   cities of the East, a city in which many languages were spoken. The
   diversity of tongues was one of the difficulties which one found there
   in the way of propagating a universal form of faith. One of the things,
   moreover, which alarmed the apostles, at the commencement of a ministry
   destined to embrace the world, was the number of languages which was
   spoken there: they were asking themselves incessantly how they could
   learn so many tongues. "The gift of tongues" became thus a marvellous
   privilege. It was believed that the preaching of the Gospel would clear
   away the obstacle which was created by the diversity of idioms. It was
   imagined that, in some solemn circumstances, the auditors had heard the
   apostle preaching each in his own tongue: in other words, that the
   apostolic preaching translated itself to each of the listeners. At
   other times, this was understood in a somewhat different manner. To the
   apostles was attributed the gift of knowing, by divine inspiration, all
   tongues, and of speaking them at will. There was in this a liberal
   idea; they meant to imply that the Gospel should have no language of
   its own; that it should be translatable into every tongue; and that the
   translation should be of the came value as the original. Such was not
   the sentiment of orthodox Judaism. Hebrew was for the Jews of Jerusalem
   the holy tongue; no language could be compared to it. Translations of
   the Bible were lightly esteemed, whilst the Hebrew text was
   scrupulously guarded. In translations, changes and modifications were
   permitted. The Jews of Egypt, and the Hellenists of Palestine,
   practised, it is true, a more tolerant system. They employed Greek in
   prayer, and perused constantly Greek translations of the Bible. But the
   first Christian idea was even broader. According to that idea the word
   of God has no language of its own: it is free and unhampered by
   idiomatic fetters; it is delivered to all spontaneously, and needs no
   interpreter. The facility with which Christianity was detached from the
   Semetic tongue which Jesus had spoken, the liberty which it left at
   first each nation to create its own liturgy, and its versions of the
   Bible in its natural tongue, served as a sort of emancipation of
   tongues. It was generally admitted that the Messiah would gather into
   one all tongues as well as all peoples. Common usage and the
   promiscuity of languages were the first steps towards that great era of
   universal pacification.

   For the rest, the gift of tongues soon underwent a considerable
   transformation, and resulted in more extraordinary effects. Brain
   excitement led to ecstacy and prophecy. In these ecstatic moments the
   faithful, impelled by the Spirit, uttered inarticulate and incoherent
   sounds, which were taken for the words of a foreign language, and which
   they innocently sought to interpret. At other times it was believed
   that the ecstatically possessed spoke new and hitherto unknown
   languages, or even the language of the angels. These extravagant
   scenes, which led to abuses, did not become habitual until a later
   period. Yet it is probable that from the earliest years of Christianity
   they were produced. The visions of the ancient prophets had often been
   accompanied by phenomena of nervous excitation. The dythyrambic state
   amongst the Greeks produced the same kind of occurrences; the Pythia
   used by preference foreign or obsolete words, which were called, as in
   the apostolic phenomena, glosses. Many of the passwords of primitive
   Christianity, which were properly bilingual, or formed by anagrams,
   such as Abba pater, anathema, maran-atha, were probably derived from
   these strange paroxysms, intermingled with sighs, stifled groans,
   ejaculations, prayers, and sudden transports, which were taken for
   prophecies. It resembled a vague music of the soul, uttered in
   indistinct sounds, and which the auditors sought to transform into
   images and determinate words, or rather as the prayers of the Spirit
   addressed to God, in a language known to God only, and which God knew
   how to interpret. No ecstatic person, in short, understood anything of
   what he uttered, and had not even any cognizance of it. People listened
   with eagerness and attributed to the incoherent utterances the thoughts
   which there and then occurred to them. Each referred to his own tongue
   and ingenuously sought to explain the unintelligible sounds by what
   little he actually knew of languages. In this they always more or less
   succeeded, the auditor filling in between the broken sentences the
   thoughts he had in mind.

   The history of fanatical sects is fruitful in instances of the same
   kmd. The preachers of the Cevennes displayed similar instances of
   "glossolaly." The most striking instance, however, is that of the
   "readers" of Sweden, about the years 1841-43. Involuntary utterances,
   enunciations, having no meaning to those who uttered them, and
   accompanied by convulsions and fainting fits, were for a long time
   practised daily in that little sect. The thing became perfectly
   contagious, and occasioned a considerable popular movement. Amongst the
   Irvingites the phenomenon of tongues has been produced with features
   which reproduce in the most striking manner the stories of the Acts and
   of Saint Paul. Our own century has witnessed illusive scenes of the
   same kind, which we will not recount here; for it is always unjust to
   compare the inseparable credulity of a great religious movement with
   the credulity which results from dulness of intellect.

   These strange phenomena were sometimes produced out of doors. The
   ecstatic persons, at the very moment when they were a prey to their
   extravagant illuminations, had the hardihood to go out and show
   themselves to the multitude. They were taken for drunken persons.
   Although sober-minded in point of mysticism, Jesus had more than once
   presented in his own person the ordinary phenomena of the ecstatic
   state. The disciples, for two or three years, were beset with these
   ideas. Prophesying was frequent and considered as a gift analogous to
   that of tongues. Prayers, accompanied by convulsions, rhythmic
   modulations, mystic sighs, lyrical enthusiasm, songs with graceful
   attitudes, were a daily exercise. A rich vein of "canticles," "psalms,"
   "hymns," in imitation of those of the Old Testament, was thus found to
   be open to them. Sometimes the mouth and heart mutually accompanied one
   another; sometimes the heart sang alone, accompanied inwardly by grace.
   No language being able to render the new sensations which were
   produced, they indulged in an indistinct muttering, at once sublime and
   puerile, in which what one might call "the Christian language," was
   wafted in a state of embryo. Christianity, not finding in the ancient
   languages an appropriate instrument for its needs, has shattered them.
   But whilst the new religion was forming a language suited to its use,
   centuries of obscure effort and, so to speak, of childish prattle, were
   required. The style of Saint Paul, and, in general, that of the authors
   of the New Testament, what is its characteristic, if it be not stifled,
   halting, informal, improvisation of the "glossolalist"? Language failed
   them. Like the prophets, they aped the a, a, a, of the infant. They did
   not know how to speak. The Greek and the Semetic tongues equally
   betrayed them. Hence that shocking violence which nascent Christianity
   inflicted on language. It might be compared to a stutterer, in whose
   mouth the tones being stifled, clash with and against each other, and
   terminate in a confused medley, but yet marvellously expressive.

   All this was very far from the sentiment of Jesus; but for minds
   penetrated with a belief in the supernatural, these phenomena possessed
   great importance. The gift of tongues, in particular, was considered as
   an essential sign of the new religion, and as a proof of its truth. In
   any case, there resulted from it much fruit for edification. Many
   Pagans were converted in this way. Up to the third century "glossolaly"
   was manifested in a manner analogous to that described by St. Paul, and
   was considered as a perpetual miracle. Many of the sublime words of
   Christianity are derived from these incoherent sighs. The general
   effect was touching and penetrating. Their manner of offering in common
   their inspirations and of handing them over to the community for
   interpretation established in time amongst the faithful a strong bond
   of fraternity.

   As in the case of all mvstics, the new sectaries led fasting and
   austere lives. Like the majority of Orientals, they ate little, which
   contributed to maintain them in a state of excitement. The sobriety of
   the Syrian, the cause of his physical weakness, keeps him in a
   perpetual state of fever and of nervous susceptibility. Our severe,
   continuous, intellectual efforts, are impossible under such a regimen.
   But this cerebal debility and muscular laxity, produces, apparently
   without cause, lively alternations of sorrow and joy, and puts the soul
   in constant relationship with God. That which was called "Godly sorrow"
   passed for a Heavenly gift. All the teachings of the Fathers concerning
   the life spiritual, such as John Climacus, as Basil, as Nilus, as
   Arsenius,--all the secrets of the grand art of the inward life, one of
   the most glorious creations of Christianity--were in germ in the
   peculiar state of mind which possessed, in their mouths of ecstatic
   expectation, those illustrious ancestors of all "The men of longings."
   Their moral condition was peculiar; they lived in the supernatural.
   They acted only upon visions, dreams, and the most insignificant
   circumstances appeared to them to be admonitions from heaven. Under the
   name of gifts of the Holy Spirit were thus concealed the rarest and
   most exquisite effusions of soul, love, piety, respectful fears,
   objectless sighings, sudden languors, and spontaneous tenderness. All
   the good that is born in man, without man having any part in it, was
   attributed to a breathing from on high. Tears, above all, were regarded
   as a heavenly favour. This charming gift, the exclusive privilege of
   souls most good and most pure, was produced with infinite sweetness. We
   know what power, delicate natures, especially in women, find in the
   divine faculty of being able to weep much. It is to them prayer, and,
   assuredly, the most holy of prayers. We must come down quite to the
   middle ages to that piety, drenched with the tears of St. Bruno, St.
   Bernard and St. Francis de Assisi, to find again the chaste melancholy
   of those early days, when they truly sowed in tears in order that they
   might reap with joy. To weep became a pious act. Those who were not
   qualified to preach, work, speak languages, nor to perform miracles,
   wept. It might, indeed, be said that their souls were melted, and that
   they desired, in the absence of a language which would interpret their
   sentiments, to display themselves outwardly, by a vivid and brief
   expression of their whole inner being.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V.

  FIRST CHURCH OF JERUSALEM; IT IS ENTIRELY CENOBITICAL.

   The custom of living together, holding the same faith, and indulging
   the same expectation, necessarily produced many common habits. Very
   soon rules were framed, which made that primitive church resemble, to
   some extent, the establishments of the cenobitical life, rules with
   which Christianity subsequently became acquainted. Many of the precepts
   of Jesus conduced to this; the true ideal of evangelical life is a
   monastery, not a monastery enclosed with iron bars, a prison after the
   type of the Middle Ages, with the separation of the sexes, but an
   asylum in the midst of the world, a place set apart for spiritual life,
   a free association or little private confraternity, surrounded by a
   barrier, which may serve to ward off the cares which are prejudicial to
   the liberty of the Kingdom of God.

   All, then, lived in common, having but one heart and one mind. No one
   possessed anything which was his own. On becoming a disciple of Jesus,
   one sold one's goods and made a gift of the proceeds to the society.
   The chiefs of the society then distributed the common possessions to
   each, according to his needs. They lived in the same quarter, They took
   their meals together, and continued to attach to them the mystic sense
   that Jesus had prescribed. They passed long hours in prayers. Their
   prayers were sometimes improvised aloud, but more often meditated in
   silence. Trances were frequent, and each one believed oneself to be
   constantly favoured with divine inspiration. The concord was perfect;
   no dogmatic quarrels, no disputes in regard to precedence. The tender
   recollection of Jesus effaced all dissensions. Joy, lively and
   deep-seated, was in every heart. Their morals were austere, but
   pervaded by a soft and tender sentiment. They assembled in houses to
   pray, and to devote themselves to ecstatic exercises. The recollection
   of these two or three first years remained and seemed to them like a
   terrestrial paradise, which Christianity will pursue henceforth in all
   its dreams and to which it will vainly endeavour to return. Who does
   not see, in fact, that such an organisation could only be applicable to
   a very small church? But, subsequently, the monastic life will resume
   on its own account that primitive ideal which the church universal will
   hardly dream of realising.

   That the author of the Acts, to whom we are indebted for the picture of
   this primitive Christianity at Jerusalem, has laid on his colours a
   little too thickly, and, in particular, exaggerated the community of
   goods which obtained in the sect, is certainly possible. The author of
   the Acts is the same as the author of the third gospel, who, in his
   life of Jesus, had the habit of adapting his facts to suit his
   theories, and with whom a tendency to the doctrine of ebonism, that is
   to say, of absolute poverty, is very perceptible. Nevertheless, the
   narrative of the Acts cannot here be destitute of some foundation.
   Although Jesus himself would not have given utterance to any of the
   communistic axioms which one reads in the third gospel, it is certain
   that a renunciation of worldly goods and of the giving of alms pushed
   to the length of self-despoilment, were perfectly conformable to the
   spirit of his preaching. The belief that the world is coming to an end
   has always produced a distaste for worldly goods, and a leaning to the
   communistic life. The narrative of the Acts is, however, perfectly
   conformable to that which we know of the origin of other ascetic
   religions--of Buddhism for example. These sorts of religion commence
   always with monastical life. Their first adepts are some species of
   mendicant monks. The layman does not appear in them until later, and
   when these religions have conquered entire societies, in which monastic
   life can only exist under exceptional circumstances.

   We admit, then, in the Church of Jerusalem a period of cenobitical
   life. Two centuries later Christianity produced still on the Pagans the
   effect of a communistic sect. It must be remembered that the Essenians
   or Therapeutians had already given the model of this species of life,
   which sprang very legitimately from Mosaism. The Mosaic code being
   essentially moral and not political, its natural product was a social
   Utopia (church, synagogue and convent) not a civil state, nation or
   city. Egypt had had for many centuries recluses, both male and female,
   maintained by the state, probably in fulfilment of charitable legacies,
   near the Serapeum at Memphis. It must especially be remembered that
   such a life in the East is by no means what it has been in our West. In
   the East, one can very well enjoy nature and existence without
   possessing anything. Man, in these countries, is always free, because
   he has few wants; the slavery of toil is there unknown. We readily
   admit that the communism of the primitive church was neither so
   rigorous nor so universal as the author of the Acts would have. What is
   certain is, that there was at Jerusalem a large community of poor,
   governed by the apostles, and to whom were sent gifts from every
   quarter of Christendom. This community was obliged, no doubt, to
   establish some rather seven rules, and some years later, it was even
   necessary, in order to enforce these rules, to employ terror. Some
   frightful legends were circulated, according to which the mere fact of
   having retained anything beyond that which one gave to the community,
   was looked upon as a capital crime and punished by death.

   The porticoes of the temple, especially the portico of Solomon, which
   looked down on the Valley of Cedron, was the place where the disciples
   usually met during the day. There they could recall the hours Jesus had
   spent in the same place. In the midst of the extreme activity which
   reigned all about the Temple, they were little noticed. The galleries,
   which formed a part of the edifice, were the resort of numerous schools
   and sects, the theatre of endless disputations. The faithful followers
   of Jesus were, however, regarded as extreme devotees; for they still,
   without scruple, observed the Jewish customs, praying at the appointed
   hours, and observing all the precepts of the Law. They were Jews,
   differing only from others in believing that the Messiah had already
   come. The common people who were not informed as to their concerns, and
   they were an immense majority, regarded them as a sect of Hasidim, or
   pious people. One needed not to be either a schismatic or a heretic, in
   order to affiliate oneself with them, any more than one need cease to
   be a Protestant in order to be a disciple of Spencer, or a Catholic, in
   order to belong to the sect of Saint Francis or of Saint Bruno. The
   people loved them, because of their piety, their simplicity, their
   kindly disposition. The aristocrats of the Temple looked upon them, no
   doubt, with displeasure. But the sect made little noise; it was
   tranquil, thanks to its obscurity.

   At eventide, the brethren returned to their quarters, and partook of
   the meal, being divided into groups, in sign of paternity, and in
   remembrance of Jesus, whom they always believed to be present in the
   midst of them. The one at the head of the table broke the bread,
   blessed the cup, and sent them round as a symbol of union in Jesus. The
   most common act of life became in this way the most sacred and the most
   holy. These meals en famille, which were always enjoyed by the Jews,
   were accompanied by prayers, pious raptures, and pervaded by a sweet
   cheerfulness. They believed themselves once more to be in the time when
   Jesus animated them by his presence: they imagined they saw him, and it
   was not long before the rumour went abroad that Jesus had said: "As
   often as ye break the bread, do it in remembrance of Me." The bread
   itself became in some sort Jesus, conceived to be the only source of
   strength for those who had loved him, and who still lived by him. These
   repasts, which were always the chief symbol of Christianity, and the
   soul of its mysteries, took place at first every evening. Usage,
   however, soon restricted them to Sunday evenings. Later on, the mystic
   repast was changed to the morning. It is probable that at the period of
   the history which we have now reached, the holy day of each week was
   still, with the Christians, the Saturday.

   The apostles chosen by Jesus, and who were supposed to have received
   from him a special mandate to announce to the world the Kingdom of God,
   had, in the little community, an incontestable superiority. One of the
   first cares, as soon as they saw the sect settle quietly down at
   Jerusalem, was to fill the vacancy that Judas of Kerioth had left in
   its ranks. The opinion that the latter had betrayed his master, and had
   been the cause of his death, became more and more general. The legend
   was mixed up with him, and every day one heard of some new circumstance
   which enhanced the black-heartedness of his deed. He had bought a field
   near the old necropolis of Hakeldama, to the south of Jerusalem, and
   there he lived retired. Such was the state of artless excitation in
   which the little Church found itself, that, in order to replace him, it
   was resolved to have recourse to a vote of some sort. In general, in
   great religious agitations we decide upon this method of coming to a
   determination, since it is admitted on principle that nothing is
   fortuitous, that the question in point is the chief object of divine
   attention, and that God's part in an action is so much the more greater
   in proportion as that of man's is the more feeble. The sole condition
   was, that the candidate should be chosen from the groups of the oldest
   disciples, who had been witnesses of the whole series of events, from
   the time of the baptism of John. This reduced considerably the number
   of those eligible. Two only were found in the ranks, Joseph Bar-Saba,
   who bore the name of Justus, and Matthias. The lot fell upon Matthias,
   who was accounted as one of the Twelve. But this was the sole instance
   of such a replacing. The apostles were hitherto regarded as having been
   nominated, once for all, by Jesus, and not as having successors. The
   danger of a permanent college, reserving to itself all the life and the
   strength of the association, was, with extraordinary instinct,
   discarded for a time. The concentration of the Church into an oligarchy
   did not happen until later.

   For the rest, it is necessary to guard against the misunderstandings,
   which the name of "apostle" might provoke, and which it has not failed
   to occasion. From a very early period, people were led by some passages
   in the Gospel, and, above all, by the analogy of the life of Saint
   Paul, to regard the apostles as essentially wandering missionaries,
   distributing in a kind of way the world in advance, and traversing as
   conquerors all the kingdoms of the earth. A cycle of legends was
   founded upon that data, and imposed upon ecclesiastical history.
   Nothing could be more contrary to the truth. The body of Twelve lived,
   generally, permanently at Jerusalem. Till about the year 60 the
   apostles did not leave the holy city except upon temporary missions.
   This explains the obscurity in which the majority of the members of the
   central council remained. Very few of them had a rle. This council was
   a kind of sacred college or senate, destined only to represent
   tradition, and a spirit of conservatism. It finished by being relieved
   of every active function, so that its members had nothing to do but to
   preach and pray; but as yet the brilliant feats of preaching had not
   fallen to their lot. Their names were hardly known outside Jerusalem,
   and about the year 70 or 80 the lists which were given of these chosen
   Twelve, agreed only in the principal names.

   The "brothers of the Lord" appear often by the side of the "apostles,"
   although they were distinct from them. Their authority, however, was
   equal to that of the apostles. Here two groups constituted, in the
   nascent Church, a sort of aristocracy, founded solely on the more or
   less intimate relations that their members had had with the Master.
   These were the men whom Paul denominated "the pillars" of the Church at
   Jerusalem. For the rest, we see that no distinctions in the
   ecclesiastical hierarchy yet existed. The title was nothing; the
   personal authority was everything. The principle of ecclesiastical
   celibacy was already established, but it required time to bring all
   these germs to their complete development. Peter and Philip were
   married, and had sons and daughters.

   The term used to designate the assembly of the faithful was the Hebrew
   Kahal, which was rendered by the essentially democratic word Ecclesia,
   which is the convocation of the people in the ancient Grecian cities,
   the summons to the Pnyx or the Agora. Commencing with the second or the
   third century before Jesus Christ, the words of the Athenian democracy
   became a sort of common law in Hellenic language; many of these terms,
   on account of their having been used in the Greek confraternities,
   entered into the Christian vocabulary. It was, in reality, the popular
   life, which; restrained for centuries, resumed its power under forms
   altogether different. The Primitive Church was, in its way, a little
   democracy. Even election by lot, a method an dear to the ancient
   Republics, had sometimes found its way into it. Less harsh, and less
   suspicious, however, than the ancient cities, the Church voluntarily
   delegated its authority. Like all theocratic societies, it inclined to
   abdicate its functions into the hands of a clergy, and it was easy to
   foresee that one or two centuries would not roll over before all this
   democracy would resolve itself into an oligarchy.

   The power which was ascribed to the Church assembled and to its chiefs
   was enormous. The Church conferred every mission, and was guided solely
   in its choice by the signs given by the Spirit. Its authority went as
   far as decreeing death. It is recorded that at the voice of Peter,
   several delinquents had fallen back and expired immediately. Saint
   Paul, a little later, was not afraid, in excommunicating a fornicator
   "to deliver him to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
   spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus" (1 Cor., v. vii.).
   Excommunication was held to be equivalent to a sentence of death. It
   was not doubted that any person whom the apostles or the elders of the
   Church had cut off from the body of the Saints, and delivered over to
   the power of evil, was not lost. Satan was considered as the author of
   diseases. To deliver over to him the corrupted member was to deliver
   over the latter to the natural executor of the sentence. A premature
   death was ordinarily held to be the result of these occult sentences,
   which, according to the expressive Hebrew phrase, "cut off a soul from
   Israel." The apostles were believed to be invested with supernatural
   powers. In pronouncing such condemnations, they thought that their
   anathemas could not fail but be effectual. The terrible impression
   which their excommunications produced, and the hatred manifested by the
   brethren against all the members thus cut off, were sufficient, in
   fact, in many cases, to bring about death, or at least to compel the
   culprit to expatriate himself. The same terrible ambiguity was found in
   the ancient law. "Extirpation" implied at once death, expulsion from
   the community, exile, and a solitary and mysterious demise. So with the
   apostate, or blasphemer. To destroy his body in order to save his soul
   came to be looked on as legitimate. It must be remembered that we are
   treating of the times of zealots, who regarded it as an act of virtue
   to poignard anyone who failed to obey the Law; and it must not be
   forgotten that certain Christians were or had been zealots. Accounts
   like those of the death of Ananias and Saphira did not excite any
   scruple. The idea of the civil power was so foreign to all that world
   placed without the pale of the Roman law, people were so persuaded that
   the Church was a complete society, sufficient in itself, that no person
   saw, in a miracle leading to death or the mutilation of an individual,
   an outrage punishable by the civil law. Enthusiasm and faith covered
   all, excused everything. But the frightful danger which these
   theocratic maxims laid up in store for the future is readily perceived.
   The Church is armed with a sword; excommunication is a sentence of
   death. There was henceforth in the world a power outside that of the
   state, which disposed of the life of citizens. Certainly, if the Roman
   authority had limited itself to repressing amongst the Jews precepts so
   condemnatory, it would have been a thousand times in the right. Only,
   in its brutality, it confounded the most legitimate of liberties, that
   of worshipping in one's own manner, with abuses which no society has
   ever been able to support with impunity.

   Peter had amongst the apostles a certain precedence, derived directly
   from his zeal and his activity. In these first years, he was hardly
   ever separate from John, son of Zebedee. They went almost always
   together, and their amity was doubtless the corner stone of the new
   faith. James, the brother of the Lord, almost equalled them in
   authority, at least amongst a fraction of the Church. In regard to
   certain intimate friends of Jesus, like the Galilean women, and the
   family of Bethany, we have already remarked that no more mention is
   made of them. Less solicitous of organizing and of establishing a
   society, the faithful companions of Jesus were content with loving in
   death him whom they had loved in life. Absorbed in their expectation,
   these noble women, who have formed the faith of the world, were almost
   unknown to the important men of Jerusalem. When they died, the most
   important elements of the history of nascent Christianity were put into
   the tomb with them. Only those who played active parts earned renown.
   Those who were content to love in secret, remained obscure but
   assuredly they chose the better part.

   It is needless to remark that this little group of simple people had no
   speculative theology. Jesus wisely kept himself far removed from all
   metaphysics. He had only one dogma, his own divine sonship and the
   divinity of his mission. The whole symbol of the primitive church might
   be embraced in one line: "Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God." This
   belief rested upon a peremptory argument--the fact of the resurrection,
   of which the disciples claimed to be witnesses. In reality nobody (not
   even the Galilean women) said they had seen the resurrection. But the
   absence of the body and the apparitions which had followed, appeared to
   be equivalent to the fact itself. To attest the resurrection of Jesus
   was the task which all considered as being specially imposed upon them.
   It was, however, very soon put forth that the master had predicted this
   event. Different sayings of his were recalled, which were represented
   as having not been well understood, and in which was seen, on second
   thoughts, an announcement of the resurrection. The belief in the near
   glorious manifestation of Jesus was universal. The secret word which
   the brethren used amongst themselves, in order to be recognized and
   confirmed, was maran-atha, the "Lord is at hand." They believed to
   remember a declaration of Jesus, according to which their preaching
   would not have time to go over all the cities of Israel, before that
   the Son of Man appeared in his majesty. In the meanwhile the risen
   Jesus had seated himself at the right hand of his Father. Here he is to
   remain until the solemn day on which he shall conic, seated upon the
   clouds, to judge the quick and the dead.

   The idea which they had of Jesus was the one which Jesus had given them
   of himself. Jesus had been "a prophet, mighty in deed and word," a man
   chosen of God, having received a special mission on behalf of humanity,
   a mission which he had proved by his miracles, and especially by his
   resurrection. God had anointed him with the Holy Spirit and had clothed
   him with power; he passed his time in doing good, and in healing those
   who were under the power of the devil, for God was with him He is the
   Son of God; that is to say, a perfect man of God, a representation of
   God upon earth; he is the Messiah, the Saviour of Israel, announced by
   the prophets (Acts x. 38). The reading of the books of the Old
   Testament, especially of the Prophets and the Psalms, was habitual in
   the sect. They carried into that reading a fixed idea--that of
   discovering everywhere the type of Jesus. They were persuaded that the
   ancient Hebrew books were full of him, and from the very first years
   they formed a collection of texts drawn from the Prophets, the Psalms,
   and from certain apocryphal books, wherein they were convinced that the
   life of Jesus was predicted and described in advance. This method of
   arbitrary interpretation belonged at that time to all the Jewish
   schools. The Messianic missions were a sort of jeu d'esprit, analogous
   to the allusions which the ancient preachers made of passages of the
   Bible, diverted from their natural sense and accepted as the simple
   ornaments of sacred rhetoric.

   Jesus with his exquisite tact in religious matters had instituted no
   new ritual. The new sect had not yet any special ceremonies. The
   practices of piety were Jewish. The assemblies had, in a strict sense,
   nothing liturgic. They were the meetings of confraternities, at which
   prayers were offered up, devoted themselves to glossolaly or prophecy,
   and the reading of correspondence. There was nothing yet of
   sacerdotalism. There was no priest (cohen); the presbyter was the
   "elder," nothing more. The only priest was Jesus: in another sense, all
   the faithful were priests. Fasting was considered a very meritorious
   practice. Baptism was the token of admission to the sect. The rite was
   the same as administered by John, but it was administered in the name
   of Jesus. Baptism was, however, considered an insufficient initiation.
   It had to be followed by the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which were
   effected by means of a prayer, offered up by the apostles, upon the
   head of the new convert, accompanied by the imposition of hands.

   This imposition of hands, already as familiar to Jesus, was the
   sacramental act par excellence. It conferred inspiration, universal
   illumination, the power to produce prodigies, prophesying, and the
   speaking of languages. It was what was called the Baptism of the
   Spirit. It was supposed to recall a saying of Jesus: "John baptised you
   with water, but as for you, you shall be baptised by the Spirit."
   Gradually, all these ideas became amalgamated, and baptism was
   conferred "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
   Ghost." But it is not probable that this formula, in the early days in
   which we now are, was yet employed. We see the simplicity of this
   primitive Christian worship. Neither Jesus nor the apostles had
   invented it. Certain Jewish sects had adopted, before them, these grave
   and solemn ceremonies, which appeared to have come in part from
   Chaldea, where they are still practised with special liturgies by the
   Sabans or Mendates. The religion of Persia embraced also many rites
   of the same description.

   The beliefs in popular medicine, which constituted a part of the force
   of Jesus, were continued in his disciples. The power of healing was one
   of the marvellous gifts conferred by the Spirit. The first Christians,
   like almost all the Jews of the time, looked upon diseases as the
   punishment of a transgression, or the work of a malignant demon. The
   apostles passed, just as Jesus did, for powerful exorcists. People
   imagined that the anointings of oil administered by the apostles, with
   imposition of hands, and invocation of the name of Jesus, were all
   powerful to wash away the sins which were the cause of disease, and to
   heal the afflicted one. Oil has always been in the East the medicine
   par excellence. For the rest, the simple imposition of the hands of the
   apostles was reputed to have the same effect. This imposition was made
   by immediate contact. Nor is it impossible that, in certain cases, the
   heat of the hands, being communicated suddenly to the head, insured to
   the sick person a little relief.

   The sect being young and not numerous, the question of deaths was not
   taken into account until later on. The effect caused by the first
   demises which took place in the ranks of the brethren was strange.
   People were troubled by the manner of the deaths. It was asked whether
   they were less favoured than those who were reserved to see with their
   eyes the advent of the Son of Man. They came generally to consider the
   interval between death and the resurrection as a kind of blank in the
   consciousness of the defunct. The idea set forth in the Phdon, that
   the soul existed before and after death, that death was a boon, that it
   was the philosophical state par excellence, inasmuch as the soul was
   then free and disengaged; this idea, I say, was by no means settled in
   the minds of the first Christians. More often it would seem that man,
   to them, could not exist without the body. This conception endured for
   a long time, and was only given up when the doctrine of the immortality
   of the soul, in the sense of the Greek philosophy, made its entry into
   the Church, and united in itself so much good and bad with the
   Christian dogma of the resurrection and with the universal renovation.
   At the time of which we speak, belief in the resurrection almost alone
   prevailed. The funeral rite was undoubtedly the Jewish rite. No
   importance was attached to it; no inscription indicated the name of the
   dead. The great resurrection was near; the bodies of the faithful had
   only to make in the rock a very short sojourn. It did not require much
   persuasion to put people in accord on the question as to whether the
   resurrection was to be universal, that is to say, whether it would
   embrace the good and the bad, or whether it would apply to the elect
   only. One of the most remarkable phenomena of the new religion was the
   reappearance of prophecy. For a long time people had spoken but little
   of prophets in Israel. That particular species of inspiration seemed to
   revive in the little sect. The primitive Church had several prophets
   and prophetesses analogous to those of the Old Testament. The psalmists
   also reappeared. The model of our Christian psalms is without doubt
   given in the canticles which Luke loved to disseminate in his gospel,
   and which were copied from the canticles of the Old Testament. These
   psalms and prophesies are, as regards form, destitute of originality,
   but an admirable spirit of gentleness and of piety animates and
   pervades them. It is like a faint echo of the last productions of the
   sacred lyre of Israel. The Book of Psalms was in a measure the calyx
   from which the Christian bee sucked its first juice. The Pentateuch, on
   the contrary, was, as it would seem, little read and little studied;
   there was substituted for it allegories after the manner of the Jewish
   midraschim in which all the historic sense of the books was suppressed.

   The music which was sung to the new hymns was probably that species of
   sobbing, without distinct notes, which is still the music of the Greek
   Church, of the Maronites, and in general of the Christians of the East.
   It is less a musical modulation than a manner of forcing the voice and
   of emitting by the nose a sort of moaning in which all the inflexions
   follow each other with rapidity. That odd melopoeia was executed
   standing, with the eyes fixed, the eyebrows crumpled, the brow knit,
   and with an appearance of effort. The word amen, in particular, was
   given out in a quivering, trembling voice. That word played a great
   part in the liturgy. In imitation of the Jews, the new adherents
   employed it to mark the assent of the multitude to the words of the
   prophet or the precentor. People, perhaps, already attributed to it
   some secret virtues and pronounced it with a certain emphasis. We do
   not know whether that primitive ecclesiastical song was accompanied by
   instruments. As to the inward chant, by which the faithful "made melody
   in their hearts," and which was but the overflowing of those tender,
   ardent, pensive souls, it was doubtless executed like the catilenes of
   the Lollards of the middle ages, in medium voice. In general, it was
   joyousness which was poured out in these hymns. One of the maxims of
   the sages of the sect was: "Is any afflicted among you, let him pray.
   Is any merry, let him sing psalms" (James v. 13). Moreover, this
   Christian literature being destined purely for the edification of the
   assembled brethren, was not written down. To compose books was an idea
   which had occurred to nobody. Jesus had spoken; people remembered his
   words. Had he not promised that the generation to whom he had spoken
   should not pass away, until he appeared again?
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI.

  THE CONVERSION OF HELLENISTIC JEWS AND OF PROSELYTES.

   Till now, the Church of Jerusalem presents itself to the outside world
   as a little Galilean colony. The friends whom Jesus had made at
   Jerusalem, and in its environs, such as Lazarus, Martha, Mary of
   Bethany, Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, had disappeared from the
   scene. The Galilean group, who pressed around the Twelve, alone
   remained compact and active. The preachings of these zealous disciples
   were incessant, and subsequently, after the destruction of Jerusalem,
   and far away from Judea, the sermons of the apostles were represented
   as public occasions, being delivered in presence of assembled
   multitudes. Such a construction appears to have been put upon a number
   of those convenient images of which legend is so prodigal. The
   authorities who had caused Jesus to be put to death would not have
   permitted the renewal of such scandals. The proselytism of the faithful
   was chiefly carried on by means of struggling conversions, in which the
   fervour of their souls was communicated to their neighbours. Their
   preachings under the porticoes of Solomon were addressed to circles,
   not at all numerous. But the effect of this was only the more profound.
   Their discourses consisted principally of quotations from the Old
   Testament, by which it was sought to prove that Jesus was the Messiah.
   The reasoning was at once subtle and feeble, but the entire exegesis of
   the Jews of that time was of the same kind, while the deductions which
   the doctors of the Mischna drew from the texts of the Bible were no
   more convincing.

   More feeble still was the proof invoked in support of their arguments,
   which was drawn from pretended prodigies. It was impossible to doubt
   that the apostles did not believe that they could work miracles.
   Miracles were regarded as the sign of every divine mission. Saint Paul,
   imbued with much of the spirit the most ripe of the first Christian
   school, believed he wrought them. It was held as certain that Jesus had
   performed them. It was but natural that the series of these divine
   manifestations should be continued. In fact, thaumaturgy was a
   privilege of the apostles until the end of the first century. The
   miracles of the apostles were of the same character as those of Jesus,
   and consisted principally, but not exclusively, in the healing of the
   sick, and in exorcising the possessed of devils. It was pretended that
   their shadows alone sufficed to operate these marvellous cures. These
   prodigies were accounted to be the regular gifts of the Holy Spirit,
   and held the same rank as the gifts of knowledge, preaching and
   prophesy. In the third century the Church believed itself still to be
   in possession of the same privileges, and to exercise as a sort of
   right the power of healing diseases, of casting out devils, and of
   predicting the future. Ignorance rendered everything possible in this
   respect. Do we not see in our day, honest men, who, however, lack
   scientific knowledge, deceived in an enduring manner by the chimeras of
   magnetism and other illusions?

   It is not by reason of innocent errors, or by the pitiful discourses we
   read in the Acts, by which we are to judge of the means of conversion
   which laid the foundations of Christianity. The real preaching was the
   private conversations of these good and sincere men; it was the
   reflection always noticeable in their discourses, of the words of
   Jesus; it was above all their piety, their gentleness. The attraction
   of communistic life carried with it also a great deal of force. Their
   houses were a sort of hospitals, in which all the poor and the forsaken
   found asylum and succour.

   One of the first to affiliate himself with the rising society was a
   Cypriote, named Joseph Hallevi, or the Levite. Like the others, he sold
   his land and carried the price of it to the feet of the Twelve. He was
   an intelligent man, with a devotion proof against everything, and a
   fluent speaker. The apostles attached him closely to themselves and
   called him Bar-naba, that is to say, "the son of prophesy," or of
   "preaching." He was accounted, in fact, of the number of the prophets,
   that is to say, of the inspired preachers. Later on we shall see him
   play a capital part. Next to Saint Paul, he was the most active
   missionary of the first century. A certain Mnason, his countryman, was
   converted about the same time. Cyprus possessed many Jews. Barnabas and
   Mnasou were undoubtedly Jewish by race. The intimate and prolonged
   relations of Barnabas with the Church at Jerusalem, induces the belief
   that Syro-Chaldaic was familiar to him.

   A conquest, almost as important as that of Barnabas was that of one
   John, who bore the Roman surname of Marcus. He was a cousin of
   Barnabas, and was circumcised. His mother, Mary, enjoyed an easy
   competency; she, was likewise converted, and her dwelling was more than
   once made the rendezvous of the apostles. These two conversions appear
   to have been the work of Peter. In any case, Peter was very intimate
   with mother and son; he regarded himself as at home in their house.
   Even admitting the hypothesis that John-Mark was not identical with the
   real or supposed author of the second Gospel, his rle was,
   nevertheless, a very considerable one. Later, we shall see him
   accompanying Paul, Barnabas, and even Peter himself, in their apostolic
   journeys.

   The first flame was thus spread with great rapidity. The men, the most
   celebrated of the apostolic century, were almost all gained over to the
   cause in two or three years, by a sort of simultaneous attraction. It
   was a second Christian generation, similar to that which had been
   formed five or six years previously, upon the shores of Lake Tiberias.
   This second generation had not seen Jesus, and could not equal the
   first in authority. But it was destined to surpass it in activity and
   in its love for distant missions. One of the best known among the new
   converts was Stephen, who, before his conversion, appears to have been
   only a simple proselyte. He was a man full of ardour and of passion.
   His faith was of the most fervent, and he was considered to be favoured
   with all the gifts of the Spirit. Philip, who, like Stephen, was a
   zealous deacon and evangelist, attached himself to the community abort
   the sane time. He was often confounded with his namesake, the apostle.
   Finally, there were converted it this epoch, Andronicus and Junia,
   probably husband and wife, who, like Aquila and Priscilla, later on,
   were the model of an apostolic couple, devoted to all the duties of
   missionary work. They were of the blood of Israel, and were in the
   closest relations with the apostles.

   The new converts, when touched by grace, were all Jews by religion, but
   they belonged to two very different classes of Jews. The one class was
   the Hebrews; that is to say, the Jews of Palestine, speaking Hebrew or
   rather Armenian, reading the Bible in the Hebrew text; the other class
   was "Hellenists," that is to say, Jews speaking Greek, and reading the
   Bible in Greek. These last were further sub-divided into two classes,
   the one being of Jewish blood, the other being proselytes, that is to
   say, people of non-Israelitish origin, allied in divers degrees to
   Judaism. These Hellenists, who almost all came from Syria, Asia Minor,
   Egypt, or Cyrene, lived at Jerusalem in distinct quarters. They had
   their separate synagogues, and formed thus little communities apart.
   Jerusalem contained a great number of these special synagogues. It was
   in these that the words of Jesus found the soil prepared to receive it
   and to make it fructify.

   The primitive nucleus of the Church at Jerusalem had been composed
   wholly and exclusively of Hebrews; the Aramaic dialect, which was the
   language of Jesus, was alone known and employed there. But we see that
   from the second or third years after the death of Jesus, Greek was
   introduced into the little community, where it soon became dominant. In
   consequence of their daily relations with the new brethren, Peter,
   John, James, Jude, and in general the Galilean disciples, acquired the
   Greek with much more facility than if they had already known something
   of it. An incident, of which we are soon to speak, shows that this
   diversity of tongues caused at first some divisions in the community,
   and that the relations of the two factions were not of the most
   agreeable kind. After the destruction of Jerusalem, we shall see the
   "Hebrews," retire to beyond Jordan, to the heights of Lake Tiberias,
   and form a separate Church, which had a separate destiny. But in the
   interval, between these two events, it does not appear that the
   diversity of languages was of any consequence in the Church. The
   Orientals have a great facility for learning languages; in the cities
   everybody invariably speaks two or three tongues. It is then probable
   that those of the Galilean apostles who played an active part, acquired
   the practise of speaking Greek; and came even to make use of it in
   preference to the Syro-Chaldaic, when the faithful, speaking Greek,
   became the much more numerous. The Palestinian dialect came, therefore,
   to be abandoned from the day in which people dreamed of a wide-spread
   propaganda. A provincial patois, which was rarely written, and which
   was not spoken beyond Syria, was as little adapted as could be to such
   an object. Greek, on the contrary, was necessarily imposed on
   Christianity. It was at the time the universal language, at least for
   the eastern basin of the Mediterranean. It was, in particular, the
   language of the Jews who were dispersed over the Roman empire. At that
   time, as in our day, the Jews adopted with great facility the tongues
   of the countries in which they resided. They did not pique themselves
   on purism; and this is the reason that the Greek of primitive
   Christianity is so bad. The Jews, even the most instructed, pronounced
   badly the classic tongue. Their sentences were always modelled upon the
   Syriac; they never got rid of the unwieldiness of the gross dialects
   which the Macedonian conquest had imported.

   The conversions to Christianity became soon much more numerous amongst
   the "Hellenists" than amongst the "Hebrews." The old Jews at Jerusalem
   were but little drawn towards a sect of provincials, moderately
   advanced in the single science that a Pharisee appreciated--the science
   of the law. The position of the little Church in regard to Judaism was,
   as with Jesus himself, rather equivocal. But every religious or
   political party carries in itself a force that dominates it, and
   obliges it, despite itself, to revolve in its own orbit. The first
   Christians, whatever their apparent respect for Judaism was, were in
   reality only Jews by birth or by exterior customs. The true spirit of
   the sect came from another source. That which grew out of official
   Judaism was the Talmud; but Christianity has no affinity with the
   Talmudic school. This is why Christianity found special favour amongst
   the parties, the least Jewish belonging to Judaism. The rigid
   orthodoxists took to it but little; it was the new corners, people
   scarcely catechised, who had not been to any of the great schools, free
   from routine, and not initiated into the holy tongue, which lent an ear
   to the apostles and the disciples. Lightly considered by the
   aristocracy of Jerusalem, these parvenues of Judaism took in this way a
   sort of revenge. It is always the young and newly formed portions of a
   community that have the least respect for tradition, and who are the
   most carried away by novelties.

   In these classes so little subject to the doctors of the law, credulity
   was also, it seems, more naive and more complete. That which
   distinguished the Talmudic Jews was not credulity. The credulous Jew,
   the lover of the marvellous, whom the Latin satirists knew, was not the
   Jew of Jerusalem; he was the Hellenist Jew, at once very religious and
   little instructed, and, consequently, very superstitious. Neither the
   half-incredulous Sadducee, nor the rigorous Pharisee, could be much
   affected by the theurgy popular in the apostolic circle. But the Judus
   Apella, at whom the epicurean Horace laughed, was easy to convince.
   Social questions, besides, interested particularly those not benefited
   by the wealth which the temple and the central institutions of the
   nation caused to flow into Jerusalem. Yet it was in allying itself to
   the desires so very analogous to what is now called "socialism" that
   the new sect laid the solid foundation upon which was to be reared the
   edifice of its future.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VII.

  THE CHURCH CONSIDERED AS AN ASSOCIATION OF POOR PEOPLE.--INSTITUTION OF THE
  DIACONATE--DEACONESSES AND WIDOWS.

   A general truth is revealed to us in the comparative history of
   religions; to wit: all those which have had a beginning, and have not
   been contemporary with the origin of language itself, were established
   rather on account of social than theological reasons. This was
   assuredly the case with Buddhism. That which was the cause of the
   enormous success of that religion was not the nihilistic philosophy
   which served it as a basis; it was its social element. It was in
   proclaiming the abolition of castes, in establishing, to use his own
   words, "a law of grace for all," that Cakya-Mouni and his disciples
   drew after them first India, then the greater part of Asia. Like
   Christianity, Buddhism was a movement proceeding from the common
   people. The great attraction which it had was the facility it afforded
   the disinherited classes to rehabilitate themselves by the profession
   of a religion which bettered their condition, and offered infinite
   resources of assistance and sympathy.

   The number of the poor, at the beginning of the first century of our
   era, was very considerable in Judea. The country is materially
   destitute of the resources which procure luxury. In these countries,
   where there is no industry, fortunes almost always originate either in
   richly endowed religious institutions, or in favours shown by She
   Government. The wealth of the temple had for a long time been the
   exclusive appanage of a limited number of nobles. The Asmoneans had
   formed around their dynasty a circle of rich families; the Herods
   augmented lunch the luxury and well-being of a certain class of
   society. But the true theocratic Jew, when turning his back on the
   Roman civilization, became only the poorer. There was formed a class of
   holy rocs, pious, fanatical, rigid observers of the Law, and outwardly
   altogether miserable. It was from this class that the sects and the
   fanatical parties, so numerous at this period, were recruited. The
   universal dream was the reign of the proletariat Jew, who remained
   faithful, and the humiliation of the rich, who were esteemed as
   renegades and traitors, given up to a profane life, and to a foreign
   civilization. Never did hatred equal that of these poor children of God
   against the splendid edifices which began to cover the country, and
   against the works of the Romans. Being obliged, so as not to die of
   hunger, to toil at these edifices, which appeared to them monuments of
   pride and of forbidden luxury, they believed themselves to be the
   victims of wicked, rich, corrupt men, and infidels, before the Law.

   We can conceive how, in such a social state, an association for mutual
   assistance would be eagerly welcomed. The small Christian Church must
   have seemed a paradise. This family of simple and united brethren drew
   associates from every quarter. In return for that which these brought,
   they obtained an assured future, the society of a congenial
   brotherhood, and precious hopes. The general custom, before entering
   the sect, was for each one to convert his fortune into specie. These
   fortunes ordinarily consisted of small rural, semi-barren properties,
   and difficult of cultivation. It had one advantage, especially for
   unmarried people; it enabled them to exchange these plots of land
   against funds sunk in an assurance society, with a view to the Kingdom
   of God. Even some married people came to the fore in that arrangement;
   and precautions were taken to insure that the associates brought all
   that they really possessed, and did not retain anything outside the
   common fund. Indeed, seeing that each one received out of the latter a
   share, not in proportion to what one put in, but in proportion to one's
   needs, every reservation of property was actually a theft made upon the
   community. We see in such attempts at organisation on the part of the
   proletariat, a wonderful resemblance to certain Utopias, which have
   been introduced at a period not very distant from the present. Yet
   there is an important difference, arising out of the fact that the
   Christian communism had religion for a basis, whilst modern socialism
   has nothing of the kind. It is clear that an association in which the
   dividend was made in virtue of the needs of each person, and not by
   reason of the capital put in, could only rest upon a very exalted
   sentiment of self-abnegation, and upon an ardent faith in a religious
   ideal.

   Under such a social constitution, the administrative difficulties were
   necessarily very numerous, whatever might be the degree of fraternal
   feeling which prevailed. Between two factions of a community, whose
   language was not the same, misapprehensions were inevitable. It was
   difficult for well-descended Jews not to entertain some contempt for
   their co-religionists, who were less noble. In fact, it was not long
   before murmurs began to be heard. The "Hellenists," who each day became
   more numerous, complained because their widows were not so well-treated
   at the distributions as those of the "Hebrews." Till now, the apostles
   had presided over the affairs of the treasury. But in face of these
   protestations, they felt the necessity of delegating to others this
   part of their powers. They proposed to the community to confide these
   administrative cares to seven experienced and considerate men. The
   proposition was accepted. The seven chosen were Stephanas, or Stephen,
   Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas and Nicholas. The last was
   from Antioch, and was a simple proselyte. Stephen was perhaps of the
   same condition. It appears that contrary to the method employed in the
   election of the apostle Matthiasit was decided not to choose the seven
   administrators from the group of primitive disciples, but from amongst
   the new converts, and especially from amongst the Hellenists. Every one
   of them, indeed, bore purely Greek names. Stephen was the most
   important of the seven, and, in a sense, their chief. The seven were
   presented to the apostles, who, in accordance with a rite already
   consecrated, prayed over them, while imposing their hands upon their
   heads.

   To the administrators thus designated were given the Syriac name of
   Schammaschin. They were also sometimes called "The Seven," to
   distinguish them from "The Twelve." Such, then, was the origin of the
   Diaconate, which is found to be the most ancient ecclesiastical
   function, the most ancient of sacred orders. Later, all the organised
   churches, in imitation of that of Jerusalem, had deacons. The growth of
   such an institution was marvellous. It placed the claims of the poor on
   an equality with religious services. It was a proclamation of the truth
   that social problems are the first which should occupy the attention of
   mankind. It was the foundation of political economy in the religious
   sense. The deacons were the first preachers of Christianity. We shall
   see presently what part they played as evangelists. As organisers,
   financiers, and administrators, they filled a yet more important part.
   These practical men, is constant contact with the poor, the sick, the
   women, went everywhere, observed everything, exhorted, and were most
   efficacious in converting people. They accomplished more than the
   apostles, who remained on their seats of honour at Jerusalem. They were
   the founders of Christianity, in respect of that which it possessed
   which was most solid and enduring.

   At an early period, women were admitted to this office. They were
   designated, as in our day, by the name of "sisters." At first widows
   were selected; later, virgins were preferred. The tact which guided the
   primitive church in all this was admirable. These simple and good men,
   with the most profound skill, because it proceeded only from the heart,
   laid the basis of that grand Christian feature, par
   excellence--charity. They had no models of similar institutions to go
   upon. A vast ministry of benevolence and reciprocal succour, into which
   the two sexes threw their diverse talents and concentrated their
   efforts with a view to the alleviation of human misery, was the holy
   creation which resulted from the labour of these two or three first
   years--years the most fruitful in the history of Christianity. We feel
   that the thoughts of Jesus still lived in the bosoms of his disciples,
   and directed them, with marvellous lucidity, in all their acts. To be
   just, it is indeed to Jesus to whom must be referred the honour of that
   which the apostles did which was great. It is probable that, during his
   life, he had laid the basis of these establishments which were
   developed with such marvellous success immediately after his death.

   The women were naturally drawn towards a community in which the weak
   were surrounded by so many guarantees. Their position in the society
   was then humble and precarious; the widow in particular, despite
   several protective laws, was the most often abandoned to misery, and
   the least respected. Many of the doctors advocated the not giving of
   any religious education to women. The Talmud placed in the same
   category with the pests of the world the gossiping and inquisitive
   widow, who passed her life in chattering with her neighbours, and the
   virgin who wasted her time in praying. The new religion created for
   these disinherited unfortunates an honourable and sure asylum. Some
   women held most important places in the church, and their houses served
   as places for meeting. As for those women who had no houses, they were
   formed into a species of order, or feminine presbyterial body, which
   also comprised virgins, who played so capital a role in the collection
   of alms. Institutions, which are regarded as the later fruit of
   Christianity--congregations of women, nuns, and sisters of
   charity--were its first creations, the basis of its strength, the most
   perfect expression of its spirit. In particular, the grand idea of
   consecrating by a sort of religious character and of subjecting to a
   regular discipline the women who were not in the bonds of marriage, is
   wholly Christian. The term "widow" became synonymous with religious
   person, consecrated to God, and, by consequence, a "deaconess." In
   those countries where the wife, at the age of twenty-four, is already
   faded, where there is no middle state between the infant and the old
   woman, it was a kind of new life, which was created for that portion of
   the human species, the most capable of devotion.

   The times of the Seleucid had been a terrible epoch for female
   depravity. Never were so many domestic dramas seen, or such a series of
   poisonings and adulteries. The sages of that time came to consider
   woman as a pest to humanity, as the origin of baseness, and of shame,
   as an evil genius, whose only object in life was to destroy every noble
   germ in the opposite sex. Christianity changed all this. At that age
   which seems to us still youth, but at which the life of Oriental woman
   is so gloomy, so fatally prone to evil suggestions, the widow could, by
   covering her head with a black shawl, become a respectable person, be
   worthily employed, a deaconess, the equal of men, the most highly
   esteemed. This position, so distressing for a childless widow,
   Christianity elevated, rendered it holy. The widow became almost the
   equal of the maiden. She was calogrie, "beautiful in old age,
   venerated, useful, treated as a mother." These women, constantly going
   to and fro, were admirable missionaries of the new religion.
   Protestants are mistaken in carrying into the recognition of these
   facts our modern ideas of individuality. As a mere question of
   Christian history, socialism and cenobitism are its primitive features.

   The bishop and the priest, as we now know them, did not yet exist.
   Still, the pastoral ministry, that intimate familiarity of souls, not
   bound by ties of blood, had already been established. This latter has
   ever been the special gift of Jesus, and a kind of heritage from him.
   Jesus had often said, that to everyone he was more than a father and a
   mother, and that in order to follow him, it was necessary to forsake
   those the most dear to us. Christianity placed soma things above
   family; it instituted brotherhood, and spiritual marriage. The ancient
   form of marriage, which placed the wife unreservedly in the power of
   the husband, was pure slavery. The moral liberty of the woman began
   when the Church gave to her in Jesus a guide and a confidant, who
   should advise and console her, listen always to her, and on occasion,
   council resistance on her part. Woman needs to be governed, and is
   happy in so being; but it is necessary that she should love him who
   governs her. This is what neither ancient societies, nor Judaism, nor
   Islamism, have been able to do. Woman has never had, up to the present
   time, a religious conscience, a moral individuality, an opinion of her
   own, except in Christianity. Thanks to the bishops and monastic life,
   Radegonda could find means to escape from the arms of a barbarous
   husband. The life of the soul being all which is of account, it is just
   and reasonable that the pastor who knows how to make the divine chords
   of the heart vibrate, the secret counsellor who holds the key of
   consciences, should be more than father, more than husband.

   In a sense, Christianity was a re-action against the too narrow
   domestic economy of the Aryan race. The old Aryan societies did not
   only admit but few besides married men, but also interpreted marriage
   in the strictest sense. It was something analogous to an English
   family, a narrow, exclusive, contracted circle, an egotism of several,
   as withering for the soul, as the egotism of the individual.
   Christianity, with its divine conception of the liberty of the Kingdom
   of God, corrected these exaggerations. It first guarded itself against
   imposing upon everyone the duties of the generality of mankind. It
   discovered that family was not the sole thing in life, that the duty of
   reproducing the species did not devolve on everyone, and that there
   should be persons freed front these duties--duties undoubtedly sacred
   but not designed for all.

   The exception which Greek society made in favour of the hetrae, like
   Aspasia, and of the cortigiana, like Imperia, in consequence of the
   necessities of polite society, Christianity made for the priest, the
   nun and the deaconess, with a view to the general good. It recognised
   different classes in society. There are souls who find more sweetness
   in the love of five or six hundred people than in that of five or six;
   for such the ordinary conditions of family seem insufficient, cold and
   wearisome. Why extend to all, the exigences of our dull and mediocre
   societies? The temporal family suffices not for man. He requires
   brothers and sisters not of the flesh.

   By its hierarchy of different social functions, the primitive church
   appeared to conciliate these opposing requirements. We shall never
   comprehend how happy these people were, under these holy restrictions,
   which maintained liberty, without restraining it, rendering at once
   possible the pleasures of communistic life, and those of private life.
   It was altogether different from the hurly-burly of our modern
   societies, artificial, and without love, in which the sensitive soul is
   sometimes so cruelly isolated. In these little refuges, which are
   called churches, the atmosphere was genial and sweet. People lived
   together in the same faith and in the same hope. But it is clear also
   that these conditions would be inapplicable to a large society. When
   entire countries embraced Christianity, the rules of the first churches
   became a Utopian idea, and sought refuge in monasteries. The monastic
   life is, in this sense, but the continuation of the primitive churches.
   The convent is the necessary consequence of the Christian spirit. There
   is no perfect Christianity without the convent, seeing that the
   evangelical idea can be realized there only.

   A large allowance of credit, ought certainly to be made to Judaism in
   these great creations. Each of the Jewish communities scattered along
   the coasts of the Mediterranean, was already a sort of church,
   possessing its funds for mutual succour. Almsgiving, always recommended
   by the sages, had become a precept: it was done in the Temple, and in
   the synagogues: it was regarded as the first duty of the proselyte. In
   all times Judaism has been distinguished by its care for its poor, and
   for the fraternal sentiment of charity which it inspires.

   There is a supreme injustice in opposing Christianity to Judaism by way
   of reproach, since all which Primitive Christianity possesses came
   bodily from Judaism. It is while thinking of the Roman world that one
   is struck by the miracles of charity and free association undertaken by
   the Church. Never did profane society, recognizing reason alone for its
   basis, produce such admirable results. The law of every profane, or, if
   I may say so, philosophical society, is liberty, sometimes equality;
   never fraternity. Charity, viewed from the point of right, has nothing
   about it obligatory; it concerns only individuals; it is even found to
   possess certain inconveniences, on which account it is distrusted.
   Every attempt to apply the public funds for the benefit of the poor
   savours of communism. When a man dies of hunger, when entire classes
   languish in misery, profane policy limits itself to finding out the
   cause of the misfortune. It points out at once that there can be no
   civil or political order without liberty; but the consequence of that
   liberty is that he who has nothing, and can earn nothing, must die of
   hunger. That is logical: but nothing can withstand the abuse of logic.
   The wants of the most numerous class always prevail in the long run.
   Institutions purely political and civil do not suffice; social and
   religious aspirations have also a right to a legitimate satisfaction.

   The glory of the Jewish people is that they have loudly proclaimed this
   principle, from which emanated the ruin of the ancient empires, but
   which will never be eradicated. The Jewish law is social and
   non-political; the prophets, the authors of the apocalypses, were the
   promoters of social revolutions. In the first half of the first
   century, in the presence of profane civilization, the Jews had but one
   idea, which was to refuse the benefits of the Roman law, that
   philosophical and Atheistic law, which placed everyone on an equality,
   and to proclaim the excellence of their theocratic law, which formed a
   religious and moral society. "The Law is Happiness": this was the idea
   of all Jewish thinkers, such as Philo and Josephus. The laws of other
   peoples were designed that justice should have its course; it mattered
   little whether men were good or happy. The Jewish law took account of
   the minutest details of moral education. Christianity is due to the
   development of the same idea. Each church is a monastery, in which all
   possess equal rights, in which there ought to be neither poor nor
   wicked, in which, consequently, each watches over and commands each
   other. Primitive Christianity may be defined as a great association of
   poor people, a heroic struggle against egotism, based upon the idea
   that each has a right to no more than is necessary for him, that all
   superfluity belongs to those who have nothing. We can at once see that
   between such a spirit and the Roman spirit, would be established a war
   to the death, and that Christianity, on its part, will never attain to
   dominating over the world, except on the condition of making important
   modifications in its inherent tendencies and in its original programme.

   But the wants which it represents will always endure. The communistic
   life, commencing with the second half of the Middle Ages, having served
   for the abuses of an intolerant Church, the monastery having too often
   become but a feudal fief, or the barracks of a dangerous and fanatical
   military, the modern mind evinced a most bitter opposition in regard to
   cenobitism. But we forget that it was in the communistic life that the
   soul of man tasted its fullest joy. The canticle, "Behold, how good and
   joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity," has
   ceased to be our refrain. But when modern individualism shall have
   borne its latest fruits; when humanity, shrunken, saddened, and become
   impotent, will return to these grand institutions, and stern
   disciplines; when our pitiful bourgeois society--I speak unadvisedly,
   our world of pigmies--shall have been scourged with whips by the heroic
   and idealistic portions of mankind, then the communistic life will
   regain all its value. Many great things, science, for example, will be
   organized under a monastic form, with hereditary rights, but not those
   of blood. The importance which our century attributes to family will
   diminish. Egotism, the essential rule of civil society, will not be
   sufficient for great minds. All, proceeding from the most opposite
   points of view, will league themselves against vulgarity. We shall
   return again to the words of Jesus, and the ideas of the Middle Ages in
   regard to poverty. We will comprehend how that to possess anything
   could have been regarded as a mark of inferiority, and how that the
   founders of the mystic life could have disputed for centuries in order
   to discover whether Jesus owned even so much as the things which were
   necessary for his daily wants. These Franciscan subtleties will become
   once more great social problems. The splendid ideal, traced by the
   author of the Acts, will be inscribed as a prophetic revelation on the
   gates of the paradise of humanity. "And the multitude of them that
   believed were of one heart and of one soul; neither said any of them,
   that the things which he possessed were his own, but they had all
   things in common, neither was there any of them that lacked; fur as
   many as were possessors of land or houses sold them, and brought the
   price of things that were sold, and laid them down at the apostles
   feet, and distribution was made to every man according as he had need.
   And they, continuing with one daily accord in the temple, and breaking
   bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
   singleness of heart." (Acts ii., 44-47.)

   But let us not anticipate events. It was now about the year 36.
   Tiberius, at Caprea, has little idea of the enemy to the empire which
   is growing up. In two or three years the sect had made surprising
   progress. It numbered several thousand of the faithful. It was already
   easy to forsee that its conquests would be effected chiefly amongst the
   Hellenists and proselytes. The Galilean group which had listened to the
   master, though preserving always its precedence, seemed as if swamped
   by the floods of new corners speaking Greek. One could already perceive
   that the principal parts were to be played by the latter. At the time
   at which we are arrived, no Pagan, that is to say, no man without some
   anterior connection with Judaism, had entered into the Church.
   Proselytes, however, performed very important functions in it. The
   circle de provenance of the disciples had likewise largely extended; it
   is no longer a simple little college of Palestineans; we can count in
   it people from Cyprus, Antioch, and Cyrene, and from almost all the
   points of the eastern coasts of the Mediterranean, where Jewish
   colonies had been established. Egypt alone was wanting in the primitive
   Church, and for a long time continued to be so. The Jews of that
   country were almost in a state of schism with Judea. They lived after
   their own fashion, which was superior in many respects to the life in
   Palestine, and scarcely felt the shock of the religious movements at
   Jerusalem
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VIII.

  FIRST PERSECUTION.--DEATH OF STEPHEN.--DESTRUCTION OF THE FIRST CHURCH OF
  JERUSALEM.

   It was inevitable that the preachings of the new sect, although
   delivered with so much reserve, should revive the animosities which had
   accumulated against its founder, and eventually brought about his
   death. The Sadducee family of Hanan, who had caused the death of Jesus,
   was still reigning. Joseph Caiaphas occupied, up to 36, the sovereign
   Pontificate, the effective power of which he gave over to his
   father-in-law Hanan, and to his relatives, John and Alexander. These
   arrogant and pitiless men viewed with impatience a troop of good and
   holy people, without official title, winning the favour of the
   multitude. Once or twice, Peter, John, and the principal members of the
   apostolic college, were put in prison and condemned to flagellation.
   This was the chastisement inflicted on heretics. The authorization of
   the Romans was not necessary in order to apply it. As we might indeed
   suppose, these brutalities only served to inflame the ardour of the
   apostles. They came forth from the Sanhedrim where they had just
   undergone flagellation, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
   suffer shame for him whom they loved. Eternal puerility of penal
   repressions applied to things of the soul! They were regarded, no
   doubt, as men of order, as models of prudence and wisdom; these
   blunderers, who seriously believed in the year 36, to gain the upper
   hand of Christianity by means of a few strokes of a whip!

   These outrages proceeded chiefly from the Sadducees, that is to say,
   from the upper clergy, who crowded the Temple and derived from it
   immense profits. We do not find that the Pharisees exhibited towards
   the sect the animosity they displayed to Jesus. The new believers were
   strict and pious people, somewhat resembling in their manner of life
   the Pharisees themselves. The rage which the latter manifested against
   the founder arose from the superiority of Jesus--a superiority which he
   was at no pains to dissimulate. His delicate railleries, his wit, his
   charm, his contempt for hypocrites, had kindled a ferocious hatred. The
   apostles, on the contrary, were devoid of wit; they never employed
   irony. The Pharisees were at times favourable to them; many Pharisees
   had even become Christians. The terrible anathemas of Jesus against
   Pharisaism had not yet been written, and the accounts of the words of
   the Master were neither general nor uniform. These first Christians
   were, besides, people so inoffensive, that many persons of the Jewish
   aristocracy, who did not exactly form part of the sect, were well
   disposed towards them. Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, who had known
   Jesus, remained no doubt with the Church in the bonds of brotherhood.
   The most celebrated Jewish doctor of the age, Rabbi Gamaliel the elder,
   grandson of Hillel, a man of broad and very tolerant ideas, spoke, it
   is said, in the Sanhedrim in favour of permitting gospel preaching. The
   author of the Acts credits him with some excellent reasoning, which
   ought to be the rule of conduct of governments, on all occasions when
   they find themselves confronted with novelties of an intellectual or
   moral order. "If this work is frivolous," said he, "leave it alone, it
   will fall of itself; if it is serious, how dare you resist the work of
   God? In any case, you will not succeed in stopping it." Gamaliel's
   words were hardly listened to. Liberal minds in the midst of opposing
   fanaticisms have no chance of succeeding. A terrible commotion was
   produced by the deacon Stephen. His preaching had, as it would appear,
   great success. Multitudes flocked around him, and these gatherings
   resulted in acrimonious quarrels. It was chiefly Hellenists, or
   proselytes, habitues of the synagogue, called Libertini, people of
   Cyrene, of Alexandria, of Cilicia, of Ephesus, who took an active part
   in these disputes. Stephen passionately maintained that Jesus was the
   Messiah, that the priests had committed a crime in putting him to
   death, that the Jews were rebels, sons of rebels, people who rejected
   evidence. The authorities resolved to dispatch this audacious preacher.
   Several witnesses were suborned to seize upon some words in his
   discourses against Moses. Naturally they found that for which they
   sought. Stephen was arrested and led into the presence of the
   Sanhedrim. The sentence with which they reproached him was almost
   identical with the one which led to the condemnation of Jesus. They
   accused him of saying that Jesus of Nazareth would destroy the Temple
   and change the traditions attributed to Moses. It is quite possible,
   indeed, that Stephen had used such language. A Christian of that epoch
   could not have had the idea of speaking directly against the Law,
   inasmuch as all still observed it; as for traditions, however, Stephen
   might combat them as Jesus had himself done; nevertheless, these
   traditions were foolishly ascribed by the orthodox to Moses, and people
   attributed to them a value, equal to that of the written Law.

   Stephen defended himself by expounding the Christian thesis, with a
   wealth of citations from the written Law, from the Psalms, from the
   Prophets, and wound up by reproaching the members of the Sanhedrim with
   the murder of Jesus. "Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart," said
   he to them, "you will then ever resist the Holy Ghost as your fathers
   also have done. Which of the prophets have not your fathers prosecuted?
   They have slain those who announced the coming of the Just One, whom
   you have betrayed, and of whom you have been the murderers. This law
   that you have received from the mouth of angels you have not kept." At
   these words a scream of rage interrupted him. Stephen, his excitement
   increasing more and more, fell into one of those transports of
   enthusiasm which were called the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. His
   eyes were fixed on high; he witnessed the glory of God and Jesus by the
   side of his Father, and cried out: "Behold, I see the heavens opened,
   and the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of God." The whole
   assembly stopped their ears, and threw themselves upon him, gnashing
   their teeth. He was dragged outside the city and stoned. The witnesses,
   who, according to the law, had to cast the first stones, divested
   themselves of their garments and laid them at the feet of a young
   fanatic named Saul, or Paul, who was thinking with secret joy of the
   renown he was acquiring in participating in the death of a blasphemer.

   In all this there was an observance to the letter of the prescriptions
   of Deuteronomy, chapter xiii. But viewed from a civil law point, this
   tumultuous execution, carried out without the sanction of the Romans,
   was not regular. In the case of Jesus, we have seen that it was
   necessary to obtain the ratification of the Procurator. It may he that
   this ratification was obtained in the case of Stephen and that the
   execution did not follow his sentence quite so closely as the narrator
   of the Acts would have us believe. It may have happened also that the
   Roman authority was at this time somewhat relaxed. Pilate had been, or
   was about to be, suspended from his functions. The cause of this
   disgrace was simply the too great firmness which he had shown in his
   administration. Jewish fanaticism had rendered his life insupportable.
   Possibly he was tired of refusing the outrages these frantic people
   demanded of him, and the proud family of Hanan had reached the point
   that they no longer required the sanction of the Procurator to
   pronounce sentences of death. Lucius Vetellius (the father of him who
   was emperor) was then imperial legate at Syria. He sought to win the
   good graces of the population; and he restored to the Jews the
   pontificial vestments, which, since the time of Herod the Great, had
   been deposited in the tower of Antonia. Instead of sustaining the
   rigorous acts of Pilate, he lent an ear to the complaints of the
   natives and sent Pilate back to Rome, to answer the accusations of his
   subordinates (commencement of the year 36). The chief grievance of the
   latter was that the Procurator would not lend himself with sufficient
   complacency to their intolerant behests. Vitellius replaced him
   provisionally by his friend Marcellus, who was undoubtedly more careful
   not to displease the Jews, and, consequently, more willing to indulge
   them in their religious murders. The death of Liberius (16 March, 37)
   only encouraged Vitellius in this policy. The two first years of the
   reign of Caligula was an epoch of general relaxation of the Roman
   authority in Syria. The policy of that prince, before he lost his
   reason, was to restore to the peoples of the East their autonomy and
   their native chiefs. It was thus that he established the kingdoms or
   principalities of Comagene, of Herod Agrippa, of Soheym, of Cotys, of
   Polemon II., and permitted that of Harth to aggrandise itself. When
   Pilate arrived at Rome, the new reign had already begun. It is probable
   that Caligula held him to be in the wrong, inasmuch as he confided the
   government of Jerusalem to a new functionary, Marcellus, who appears
   not to have excited, on the part of the Jews, the violent
   recriminations which overwhelmed poor Pilate with embarrassment, and
   filled him with disgust.

   At all events, that which is important to remark is, that in that epoch
   the persecutors of Christianity were not Romans; they were orthodox
   Jews. The Romans preserved in the midst of this fanaticism a principle
   of tolerance and of reason. If we can reproach the imperial authority
   with anything, it is with being too lenient, and with not having cut
   short with a stroke the civil consequences of a sanguinary law which
   visited with death religious derelictions. But as yet the Roman
   domination was not so complete as it became later; it was only a sort
   of protectorate or suzerainty. Its condescension even went the length
   of not putting the head of the emperor on the coins struck during the
   rule of procurators, so as not to shock Jewish ideas. Rome did not yet,
   in the East at least, seek to impose upon vanquished peoples her laws,
   her gods, her manners; she left them, outside the Roman laws, their
   local customs. Their semi-independence was simply a further indication
   of their inferiority. The imperial power in the East, at that epoch,
   resembled somewhat the Turkish authority, and the condition of the
   native population, that under the Rajahs. The notion of equal rights
   and equal protection for all did not exist. Each provincial group had
   its jurisdiction, just as at this day the various Christian Churches
   and the Jews have in the Ottoman Empire, In Turkey, a few years ago,
   the patriarchs of the different communities of Rajahs, provided that
   they had some sort of understanding with the Porte, were sovereigns as
   far as their subordinates were concerned, and could sentence them to
   the most cruel punishments.

   As Stephen's death may have taken place at any time during the years
   36, 37, 38, we cannot, therefore, affirm whether Caiaphas ought to be
   held responsible for it. Caiaphas was deposed by Lucius Vitellius, in
   the year 36, shortly after the time of Pilate; but the change was
   inconsiderable. He had for a successor his brother-in-law, Jonathan,
   son of Hanan. The latter, in turn, was succeeded by his brother
   Theophilus, son of Hanan, who continued the Pontificate in the house of
   Hanan till the year 42. Hanna was still alive, and, possessed of the
   real power, maintained in his family the principles of pride, severity,
   hatred against innovators which were, so to speak, hereditary.

   The death of Stephen produced a great impression. The proselytes
   solemnized his funeral with tears and groanings. The separation of the
   new secretaries from Judaism was not yet absolute. The proselytes and
   the Hellenists, leas strict in regard to orthodoxy than the pure Jews,
   considered that they ought to render public homage to a man who
   respected their constitution, and whose peculiar beliefs did not put
   him without the pale of the Law.

   Thus began the era of Christian martyrs. Martyrdom was not an entirely
   new thing. Not to mention John the Baptist and Jesus, Judaism at the
   time of Antiochus Epiphanus, had had its witnesses, faithful even to
   the death. But the series of courageous victims, beginning with Saint
   Stephen, has exercised a peculiar influence upon the history of the
   human mind. It introduced into the western world an element which it
   lacked, to wit, absolute and exclusive faith, the idea that there is
   but one good and true religion. In this sense, the martyrs began the
   era of intolerance. It may be avouched with great assurance, that he
   who can give his life for his faith would, if he were master, be
   intolerant. Christianity, when it had passed through three centuries of
   persecution, and became, in its turn, dominant, was more persecuting
   than any religion had ever been. When people have shed their blood for
   a cause they are too prone to shed the blood of others, so as to
   conserve the treasure they have gained.

   The murder of Stephen, moreover, was not an isolated event. Taking
   advantage of the weakness of the Roman functionaries, the Jews brought
   to bear upon the Church a real persecution. It seems that the vexations
   pressed chiefly on the Hellenists and the proselytes whose free
   behaviour exasperated the orthodox. The Church of Jerusalem, which
   though already strongly organized, was compelled to disperse. The
   apostles, according to a principle which seems to have seized strong
   hold of their minds, did not quit the city. It was probably so, too,
   with the whole purely Jewish group, those who were denominated the
   "Hebrews." But the great community with its common table, its diaconal
   services, its varied exercises, ceased from that time, and was never
   re-formed upon its first model. It had endured for three or four years.
   It was for nascent Christianity an unequalled good fortune that its
   first attempts at association, essentially communistic, were so soon
   broken up. Essays of this kind engender such shocking abuses, that
   communistic establishments are condemned to crumble away in a very
   short time, or to ignore very soon the principle upon which they are
   founded. Thanks to the persecution of the year 37 the cenobitic Church
   of Jerusalem was saved from the test of time. It was nipped in the bud,
   before interior difficulties had undermined it. It remained like a
   splendid dream, the memory of which animated in their life of trial all
   those who had formed part of it, like an ideal to which Christianity
   incessantly aspires without ever succeeding in reaching its goal. Those
   who know what an inestimable treasure the memory of Menilmontant is to
   the members still alive of the St. Simonian Church, what friendship it
   creates between them, what joy kindles in their eyes, when they speak
   of it, will comprehend the powerful bond which was established between
   the new brethren, from the fact of having first loved and then suffered
   together. It is almost always a principle of great lives, that during
   several months they have realised God, and the recollection of this
   suffices to fill up the entire after-years with strength and sweetness.

   The leading part in the persecution we have just related belonged to
   that young Saul, whom we have above found abetting, as far as in him
   lay, the murder of Stephen. This hot-headed youth, furnished with a
   permission from the priests, entered houses suspected of harbouring
   Christians, laid violent hold on men and women and dragged them to
   prison, or before the tribunals. Saul boasted that there was no one of
   his generation so zealous as himself for the traditions. True it is,
   that often the gentleness and the resignation of his victims astonished
   him; he experienced a kind of remorse; he fancied he heard these pious
   women, whom, hoping for the Kingdom of God, he had cast into prison,
   saying during the night, in a sweet voice: "Why persecutest thou us?"
   The blood of Stephen, which had almost smothered him, sometimes
   troubled his vision. Many things that he had heard said of Jesus went
   to his heart. This superhuman being, in his ethereal life, whence he
   sometimes emerged, revealing himself in brief apparitions, haunted him
   like a spectre. But Saul shrunk with horror from such thoughts; he
   confirmed himself with a sort of frenzy in the faith of his traditions,
   and meditated new cruelties against those who attacked him. His name
   had become a terror to the faithful; they dreaded at his hands the most
   atrocious outrages, and the most sanguinary treacheries.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IX.

  FIRST MISSIONS.--PHILIP THE DEACON.

   The persecution of the year 37 had for its result, as is always the
   case, the spread of the doctrine which it was wished to arrest. Till
   now, the Christian preaching had not extended far beyond Jerusalem; no
   mission had been undertaken; enclosed within its exalted but narrow
   communison, the mother Church had spread no haloes around herself, or
   formed any branches. The dispersion of the little circle scattered the
   good seed to the four winds of heaven. The members of the Church of
   Jerusalem, driven violently from their quarters, spread themselves over
   every part of Jud and Samaria, and preached everywhere the Kingdom of
   God. The deacons, in particular, freed from their administrative
   functions by the destruction of the community, became excellent
   evangelists. They constituted the young and active element of the sect,
   in contradistinction to the somewhat heavy element formed by the
   apostles, and the "Hebrews." One single circumstance, that of language,
   would have sufficed to create in the latter an inferiority as regards
   preaching. They spoke, at least as their habitual tongue, a dialect
   which was not used by the Jews themselves more than a few leagues from
   Jerusalem. It was to the Hellenists that belonged all the honour of the
   great conquest, the account of which is to be now our main purpose.

   The scene of the first of these missions, which was soon to embrace the
   whole basin of the Mediterranean, was the region about Jerusalem,
   within a radius of two or three days' journey. Philip, the Deacon, was
   the hero of this first holy expedition. He evangelized Samaria most
   successfully. The Samaritans were schismatics; but the young sect,
   following the example of the Master, was less susceptible than the
   rigorous Jews in regard to questions of orthodoxy. Jesus, it was said,
   had shown himself at different times to be quite favourable to the
   Samaritans. Philip appeared to have been one of the apostolical men
   most pre-occupied with theurgy. The accounts which relate to him
   transport us into a strange and fantastic world. The conversions which
   he made in Samaria, and in particular in the capital, Sebaste, are
   explained by prodigies. This country was itself wholly given up to
   superstitious ideas in regard to magic. In the year 36, that is to say,
   two or three years before the arrival of the Christian preachers, a
   fanatic had excited among the Samaritans quite a serious commotion by
   preaching the necessity of a return to primitive Mosaism, the sacred
   utensils of which he pretended to have found. A certain Simon, of the
   village of Gitta or Gitton, who obtained later a great reputation,
   began about that time to gain notoriety by means of his enchantments.
   One feels at seeing the gospel finding a preparation and a support in
   such chimeras. Quite a large multitude were baptized in the name of
   Jesus. Philip had the power of baptizing, but not that of conferring
   the Holy Ghost. That privilege was reserved to the apostles. When
   people learned at Jerusalem of the formation of a group of believers at
   Sebaste, it was resolved to send Peter and John to complete their
   initiation. The two apostles came, laid their hands on the new
   converts, prayed over their heads; the latter were immediately endowed
   with the marvellous powers attached to the conferring of the Holy
   Spirit. Miracles, prophecy, all the phenomena of illusionism were
   produced, and the Church of Sebaste had nothing in this respect to envy
   the Church of Jerusalem for.

   If the tradition about it is to be credited, Simon of Gitton found
   himself from that time in relations with the Christians. According to
   their accounts, he, being converted by the preaching and miracles of
   Philip, was baptized, and attached himself to this evangelist. Then
   when the apostles Peter and John had arrived, and when he saw the
   supernatural powers procured by the imposition of hands, he came, it is
   said, and offered them money, in order that they might impart to him
   the faculty of conferring the Holy Spirit. Peter is then reported to
   have made to him this admirable response: "Thy money perish with thee,
   because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be bought! Thou hast
   neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in the
   sight of God."

   Whether these words were or were not pronounced, they seem to picture
   exactly the situation of Simon regard to the nascent sect. We shall
   see, in fact, that according to all appearances, Simon of Gitton was
   the chief of a religious movement, similar to that of Christianity,
   which might be regarded as a sort of Samaritan counterfeit of the work
   of Jesus. Had Simon already commenced to dogmatize and to perform
   prodigies when Philip arrived at Sebaste? Did he enter thereupon into
   relations with the Christian Church? Has the anecdote, which made of
   him the father of all "Simony," any reality? Must it be admitted that
   the world one day saw face to face two thaumaturgists, one of which was
   a charlatan, the other the "corner-stone," which has been made the base
   of the faith of humanity? Was a sorcerer able to counter-balance the
   destinies of Christianity? This is what, for lack of documentary
   evidence, we do not know; for the narrative of the Acts is here but a
   feeble authority; and, from the first century, Simon became for the
   Christian church a subject of legends. In history, the general idea
   alone is pure. It would be unjust to dwell on that, which is shocking
   in this sad page of the origin of Christianity. To vulgar auditors, the
   miracle proves the doctrine; to us, the doctrine makes us forget the
   miracle. When a belief has consoled and ameliorated humanity, it is
   excusable to employ proofs proportioned to the weakness of the public
   to which it is addressed. But when error after error has been proved,
   what excuse can be alleged? This is not a condemnation which we intend
   to pro. pounce against Simon of Gitton. We shall have to explain later
   on his doctrine, and the part he played which was only made manifest
   under the reign of Claudius. It is of moment only to remark here, that
   an important principle seems to have been introduced by him into the
   Christian theurgy. Compelled to admit that some impostors could also
   perform miracles, orthodox theology attributed these miracles to the
   Evil One. For the purpose of conserving some demonstrative value in
   prodigies, it was necessary to invent rules for distinguishing the true
   from the false miracles. In order to this, they descended to a species
   of ideas utterly childish.

   Peter and John, after confirming the Church of Sebaste, departed again
   for Jerusalem, evangelizing on their tray the villages of the country
   of Samaria. Philip the Deacon, continued his evangelizing journeys,
   directing his steps towards the south, into the ancient country of the
   Philistines. This country, since the advent of the Maccabees had been
   much encroached upon by the Jews; Judaism, however, had not succeeded
   in becoming dominant there. During this journey Philip accomplished a
   conversion which made some noise and which was much talked about
   because of a singular circumstance. One day, as he was journeying along
   the route, a very lonely route, from Jerusalem to Gaza, he encountered
   a rich traveller, evidently a foreigner, for he was riding in a
   chariot, which was a mode of locomotion that has at all times been
   unknown to the inhabitants of Syria and of Palestine. He was returning
   from Jerusalem, and, gravely seated, was reading the Bible in a loud
   voice, according to a custom quite common at that time. Philip, who in
   everything was believed to act on inspiration from on high, felt
   himself drawn towards the chariot. He came up alongside of it, and
   quietly entered into conversation with the opulent personage, offering
   to explain to him the passages, which the latter did not comprehend.
   This was a rare occasion for the evangelist to develop the Christian
   thesis upon the figures employed in the Old Testament. He proved that
   in the books of prophecy everything there related to Jesus; that Jesus
   was the solution of the great enigma; that it was of him in particular
   that the All-Seeing had spoken in this beautiful passage: "He was led
   as a sheep to the slaughter; as a lamb that is dumb before its
   shearers, he opened not his mouth." The traveller listened, and at the
   first water to which they came he said: "Behold, here is water, why
   could I not be baptized." The chariot was stopped: Philip and the
   traveller descended into the water, and the latter was baptized.

   Now this traveller was a powerful personage. He was a eunuch of the
   Candace of Ethiopia, her finance minister, the keeper of her treasures,
   who had come to worship at Jerusalem, and was now returning to Napata
   by the Egyptian route. Candace or Condaoce was the title of feminine
   royalty in Ethiopia, about the period of which we are now speaking.
   Judiasm had already penetrated into Nubia and Abyssinia; many of the
   natives had been converted, or at least were counted among those
   proselytes, who, without being circumcised, worshipped the one God. The
   eunuch probably be-longed to the latter class, a simple pious Pagan,
   like the centurion Cornelius who will figure presently in this history.
   In any case, it is impossible to suppose that he was completely
   initiated into Judaism. From this time we hear no more said about the
   eunuch. But Philip recounted the incident, and at a later period much
   importance was attached to it. When the question of admitting Pagans
   into the Christian Church became an affair of moment, there was found
   here a precedent of great weight. In all this affair, Philip was
   believed to have acted under divine inspiration. This baptism,
   administered by order of the Holy Spirit to a man scarcely a Jew.
   assuredly not circumcised, who had believed in Christianity, only for a
   few hours, possessed a high dogmatic value. It was an argument for
   those who thought that the doors of the new church should be open to
   all.

   Philip, after that adventure, betook himself to Ashdod or Azote. Such
   was the artless state of enthusiasm in which these missionaries lived,
   that at each step they believed they heard the voice of Heaven, and
   received directions from the Spirit. Each of their steps seemed to them
   to be regulated by a superior power, and when they went from one city
   to another, they thought they were obeying a supernatural inspiration.
   Sometimes they fancied they made rial trips. Philip was in this
   respect one of the most privileged. It was, as he believed, on the
   indication of an angel, that he had come from Samaria to the place
   where he had encountered the eunuch; after the baptism of the latter he
   was persuaded that the Spirit had lifted him bodily, and transported
   him with one swoop to Azote.

   Azote and the Gaza route were the limits of the first evangelical
   preachings towards the south. Beyond were the desert and the nomadic
   life upon which Christianity has never taken much hold. From Azote,
   Philip the Deacon turned towards the north and evangelized all the
   coast as far as Cesarea. It is probable that the Church of Joppa and of
   Gydda, which we shall soon find flourishing, were founded by him. At
   Cesarea he settled and founded an important Church. We shall encounter
   him there again twenty years later. Cesarea was a new city and the most
   considerable of Judea. It had been built on the site of a Sidonian
   fortress, called Abdastartes or Shato's Tower, by Herod the Great, who
   gave to it, in honour of Augustus, the name which its ruins bear still
   to-day. Cesarea was much the best part in all Palestine, and tended day
   by day to become its capital. Tired of living at Jerusalem, the Judean
   Procurators were soon to repair thence, to make it their permanent
   residence. It was principally peopled by Pagans; the Jews, however,
   were somewhat numerous there; cruel strifes had often taken place
   between the two classes of the population. The Greek language was alone
   spoken there, and the Jews themselves had come to recite certain parts
   of their liturgy in Greek. The austere Rabbis of Jerusalem regarded
   Cesarea as a dangerous and profane abode, and in which one became
   nearly a Pagan. From all the facts which have just been cited, this
   city will occupy an important place in the sequel of this history. It
   was in a kind of way the port of Christianity, the point by which the
   Church of Jerusalem communicated with all the Mediterranean.

   Many other missions, the history of which is unknown to us, were
   conducted simultaneously with that of Philip. The very rapidity with
   which this first preaching was done, was the reason of its success. In
   the year 38, five years after the death of Jesus, and probably one year
   after the death of Stephen, all this side of Jordan had heard the glad
   tidings from the mouths of missionaries hailing from Jerusalem.
   Galilee, on its part, guarded the holy seed and probably scattered it
   around her, although we know of no missions issuing from that quarter.
   Perhaps the city of Damascus, from the period at which we now are, had
   also some Christians, who received the faith from Galilean preachers.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER X.

  CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL.--RIDICULOUS TO PUT PAUL'S CONVERSION A.D. 38--ARETAS
  SETTLES THE DATE AS ABOUT 34.

   The year 38 is marked in the history of the nascent Church by a much
   more important conquest. During that year we may safely place the
   conversion of that Saul whom we witnessed participating in the stoning
   of Stephen, and as a principal agent in the persecution of 37, but who
   now, by a mysterious act of grace, becomes the most ardent of the
   disciples of Jesus.

   Saul was born at Tarsus, in Cilicia, in the year 10 or 12 of our era.
   Following the custom of the times, his name was latinized into that of
   Paul; he did not, however, regularly adopt this last name until he
   became the apostle of the Gentiles. Paul was of the purest Jewish
   blood. His family, who probably hailed originally from the town of
   Gischala, in Galilee, pretended to belong to the tribe of Benjamin;
   while his father enjoyed the title of a Roman citizen, a title no doubt
   inherited from ancestors who had obtained that honour, either by
   purchase or by services rendered to the state. His grandfather may have
   obtained it for aid given to Pompey during the Roman conquest (63 B.C.)
   His family, like most of the good old Jewish houses, belonged to the
   sect of Pharisees. Paul was brought up according to the strictest
   principles of this sect, and though he afterwards repudiated its narrow
   dogmas, he always retained its exaltation, its asperity, and its ardent
   faith.

   During the epoch of Augustus, Tartus was a very flourishing city. The
   population, though composed chiefly of the Greek and Aramaic races,
   included, as was common in all the commercial towns, a large number of
   Jews. A taste for letters and the sciences was a marked characteristic
   of the place; and no city in the world, not even excepting Athens and
   Alexandria, had so many scientific institutions and schools. The number
   of learned men which Tarsus produced, or who prosecuted their studies
   there, was truly extraordinary; but it must not hence be imagined that
   Paul received a careful Greek education. The Jews rarely frequented the
   institutions of secular instruction. The most celebrated schools of
   Tarsus were those of rhetoric, where the Greek classics received the
   first attention. It seems hardly probable that a man who had taken even
   elementary lessons in grammar and rhetoric, could have written in the
   incorrect non-Hellenistic style of that of the Epistles of St. Paul. He
   talked constantly and even fluently in Greek, and wrote or rather
   dictated in that language; but his Greek was that of the Hellenistic
   Jews, bristling with Hebraisms and Syriacisms, scarcely intelligible to
   a lettered man of that period, and which can only be understood by
   trying to discover the Syriac turn of mind which influenced Paul, at
   the time he was dictating his epistles. He was himself cognizant of the
   vulgar and detective character of his style. Whenever it was possible
   he spoke Hebrew--that is to say, the Syro-Chaldaic of his time. It was
   in this language that he thought, it was in this language he was
   addressed by the mysterious voice on the way to Damascus.

   His doctrine, moreover, shows us no direct adaptation from Greek
   philosophy. The verse quoted from the Thais of Menander, which occurs
   in his writings, is one of those monostich-proverbs that were familiar
   to the public, and could easily have been quoted by one who was not
   acquainted with the original. Two other quotation--one from Epimenides,
   the other from Aratus--which appear under his name, though it is by no
   means certain that he used them, may also be understood as having been
   borrowed at second-hand. The literary training of Paul was almost
   exclusively Jewish, and it is in the Talmud rather than in the Greek
   classics that the analogies of his modes of thought must be sought. A
   few general ideas of popular philosophy, which one could learn without
   opening a single book of the philosophers, alone reached him. His
   manner of reasoning is most singular. He knew nothing certainly of the
   peripatetic logic. His syllogism is not that of Aristotle; on the
   contrary, his dialectics greatly resemble those of the Talmud. Paul, in
   general is carried away by words rather than by thought. When a word
   took possession of his mind it suggested a train of thought wholly
   irrelevant to the subject in hand. His transitions were sudden, his
   treatment disjointed, his periods frequently suspended. No writer could
   be more unequal. We would seek in vain throughout the realm of
   literature for a phenomenon as capricious as that of the sublime
   passage in the thirteenth chapter of the First Epistle to the
   Corinthians, placed by the side of such feeble arguments, painful
   repetitions, and fastidious subtleties.

   His father at the outset intended that he should be a rabbi; and
   following the general custom, gave him a trade. Paul was an
   upholsterer, or rather a manufacturer of the heavy cloths of Cilicia,
   called Cilicium. At various times he had to work at this trade, having
   no patrimonial fortune. It seems quite certain that he had a sister,
   whose son lived at Jerusalem. As regards a brother and other relatives,
   who it is said embraced Christianity, the testimony is vague and
   uncertain.

   Refinement of manners being, according to the modern ideas of the
   middle-classes, in direct proportion to personal wealth, it might be
   imagined, from what has just been said that Paul was badly brought up
   and undistinguished amongst the proletariat. This idea would, however,
   be quite erroneous. His politeness, when he chose, was extreme, and his
   manners, exquisite. Despite the defects in his style, his letters show
   that he was a man of uncommon intelligence, who could find for the
   expression of his lofty sentiments, language of rare felicity; and no
   correspondence displays more careful attention, finer shades of
   meaning, and more charming hesitancy and timidity. Some of his
   pleasantries shock us. But what animation! What a fund of charming
   sayings! What simplicity! One can easily see that his character, when
   his passions did not make him irascible and fierce, was that of a
   polite, earnest, and affectionate man, susceptible at times, and a
   trifle jealous. Inferior as such men are in the eyes of the general
   public, they yet possess within small Churches, immense advantages,
   because of the attachments they inspire, their practical aptitude, and
   their skill in escaping from the greatest difficulties.

   Paul had a sickly appearance, which did not correspond with the
   greatness of his soul. He was uncomely, short, squat, and stooping, his
   broad shoulders awkwardly sustaining a little bald pate. His sallow
   countenance was half concealed in a thick beard; his nose was aquiline,
   his eyes piercing, while his black, heavy eye-brows met across his
   forehead. Nor was there anything imposing about his speech; his timid
   and embarassed air, and incorrect language, gave at first but a poor
   idea of his eloquence. He gloried, however, in his exterior defects,
   and even shrewdly extracted advantage from them. The Jewish rare
   possesses the peculiarity of presenting at once types of the greatest
   beauty, and of the most utter ugliness; but this Jewish ugliness is
   something quite unique. Some of the strange visages which at first
   excite a smile, assume, when lighted up by emotion, a rare brilliance
   and majesty.

   The temperament of Paul was not less peculiar than his exterior. His
   constitution was sickly, yet its singular endurance was tested by the
   way in which he supported an existence full of fatigues and sufferings.
   He makes constant allusions to his bodily weakness. He speaks of
   himself as a sick man, exhausted, and nigh unto death; add to this,
   that he was timid, without any appearance or prestige, without any of
   those personal advantages, calculated to produce an impression, so much
   so, that it was a marvel people were not repelled by such uninviting an
   exterior. Elsewhere, he mysteriously hints at a secret affliction, "a
   thorn in the flesh," which he compares to a messenger of Satan sent,
   with God's permission, to buffet him, "lest he should be exalted above
   measure." Thrice he besought the Lord to deliver him, and thrice the
   Lord replied, "My grace is sufficient for thee." This was evidently
   some bodily infirmity; for it is not to be supposed that he refers to
   the allurements of carnal delights, since he himself informs us in
   another place that he was insensible to these. It would seem he was
   never married: the thorough coldness of his temperament, the result of
   the intense ardour of his brain, manifests itself throughout his life,
   and he boasts of it with an assurance savouring of affectation, to an
   extent which is disagreeable.

   At an early age he came to Jerusalem, and entered, as it is said, the
   school of Gamaliel the Elder. This Gamaliel was the most cultured man
   in Jerusalem. As the name of Pharisee was applied to every prominent
   Jew who was not of a priestly family, Gamaliel was taken for a member
   of that sect. Yet he had none of its narrow and exclusive spirit. He
   was a liberal, intelligent man, acquainted with Greek, and understood
   the heathen. It is possible that the broad ideas professed by Paul
   after he received Christianity, were a reminiscence of the teachings of
   his first master; yet it must be admitted that at first he had not
   learned much moderation from him. Breathing the heated atmosphere of
   Jerusalem, he became an ardent fanatic. He was the leader of a young,
   unbending, and enthusiastic Pharisee party, which carried to extremes
   their keen attachment for the national traditions of the past. He had
   not known Jesus, and was not present at the bloody scene of Golgotha;
   but we have seen him take an active part in the murder of Stephen, and
   among the foremost of the persecutors of the Church. He breathed only
   threatenings and slaughter, and went up and down Jerusalem bearing a
   mandate which authorized and legalized all his brutalities. He went
   from synagogue to synagogue, compelling the more timid to deny the name
   of Jesus, and subjecting others to scourging or imprisonment. When the
   Church of Jerusalem was dispersed, his persecutions were extended to
   the neighbouring cities. Exasperated by the progress of the new faith,
   and learning that there was a group of the faithful at Damascus, he
   obtained from the high-priest Theophilus, son of Hanan, letters to the
   synagogue of that city, which conferred on him the power of arresting
   all evil-thinking persons, and of bringing them bound to Jerusalem.

   The confusion of Roman authority in Judea, explains these arbitrary
   vexations. The insane Caligula was in power, and the administrative
   service was everywhere distracted. Fanaticism had gained all that the
   civil power had lost. After the dismissal of Pilate, and the
   concessions made to the natives by Lucius Vitellius, the country was
   permitted to govern itself according to its own laws. A thousand local
   tyrannies profited by the weakness of an indifferent authority. In
   addition , Damascus had just passed into the hands of Hartat, or
   Hreth, whose capital was at Petra. This bold and powerful prince,
   having beaten Herod Antipas, and withstood the Roman forces, commanded
   by the imperial legate, Lucius Vitellius, had been marvellously aided
   by fortune. The news of the death of Tiberius (16th March, 37), had
   suddenly arrested the march of Vitellius. Hreth seized Damascus, and
   established there an ethnarch or governor. The Jews at the time of this
   new occupation formed a numerous party at Damascus, where they carried
   on an extensive system of proselytizing, especially among the females.
   It was thought advisable to seek to make them contented; and the best
   method of doing so was to grant concessions to their autonomy, and
   every concession was simply a permission to commit further religious
   violences. To punish and even kill those who did not think with them,
   was their idea of independence and liberty.

   Paul, in leaving Jerusalem, followed doubtless the usual road, and
   crossed the Jordan at the "Bridge of the Daughters of Jacob." His
   mental excitement was now at its greatest height, and he was at times
   troubled and shaken in his faith. Passion is not a rule of faith. The
   passionate man flies from one extreme creed to another, but always
   retains the same impetuosity. Now, like all strong minds, Paul almost
   loved that which he hated. Was he sure, after all, that he was not
   thwarting the designs of God? Perhaps he remembered the calm,
   dispassionate views of his master Gamaliel. Often these ardent souls
   experienced terrible revulsions. He felt a liking for those whom ho had
   tortured. The more these excellent sectarians were known, the better
   they were liked; and none had greater opportunities of knowing them
   better than their persecutor. At times he fancied he saw the sweet face
   of the Master who inspired his disciples with no much patience,
   regarding him with an air of pity and tender reproach. He was also much
   impressed by the accounts of the apparitions of Jesus, describing him
   as an ariel being who was at times visible; for at the epochs and in
   the countries when and where there is a tendency to the marvellous,
   miraculous recitals influence equally each opposing party. The
   Mahommedans, for instance, are afraid of the miracles of Elias; and,
   like the Christians, pray to St. George and St. Anthony for
   supernatural cures.

   Having crossed Ithuria, and while in the great plain of Damascus, Paul,
   with several companions, all, as it appears, journeying on foot,
   approached the city, and had probably already reached the beautiful
   gardens which surrounded it The time was noon. The road from Jerusalem
   to Damascus has in nowise changed. It is the one, which, leaving
   Damascus in a south-westerly direction, crosses the beautiful plain
   watered by the streams flowing into the Abana and the Pharpar, and upon
   which are now marshalled the villages of Dareya, Kaukab, and Sasa. The
   exact locality of which we speak, which was the scene of one of the
   most important facts in the history of humanity, could not have been
   beyond Kaukab (four hours from Damascus). It is even probable that the
   point in question was much nearer the city, perhaps about Dareya (an
   hour and a half from Damascus), or between Dareya and Meidan. The great
   city lay before Paul, and the outlines of several of its edifices could
   be dimly traced through the thick foliage: behind him towered the
   majestic dome of Hermon, with its ridges of snow, making it resemble
   the bald head of an old man; upon his right were the Hauran, the two
   little parallel chains which enclose the lower course of the Pharpar,
   and the tumuli of the region of the lakes; and upon his left were the
   outer spurs of the Anti-Libanus stretching out to Mt Hermon. The
   impression produced by these richly-cultivated fields and beautiful
   orchards, separated from one another by trenches and laden with the
   most delicious fruits, is that of peace and happiness. Let one imagine
   to himself a shady road, passing through rich soil, crossed at
   intervals by irrigating canals, bordered by declivities and
   serpentining through forests of olives, walnuts, apricots, and prunes;
   trees draped by graceful festoons of vines; and then will be presented
   to the mind the image of the scene of that remarkable event which has
   exerted so great an influence upon the faith of the world. In the
   environs of Damascus one can scarcely believe oneself in the East;
   especially after leaving the arid and burning regions of the
   Gaulonitide and of Ithuria. It is joy indeed to meet once more the
   works of man and the blessings of Heaven. From the most remote
   antiquity until the present time this zone, which surrounds Damascus
   with freshness and health, has had but one name, has inspired but one
   dream,--that of the "Paradise of God."

   if Paul experienced these terrible visions, it was because he carried
   them in his heart. Every step in his journey towards Damascus awakened
   in him painful perplexities. The odious part of executioner, which he
   was about to undertake, became insupportable. The houses which he saw
   through the trees were, perhaps, those of his victims. This thought
   beset him and delayed his steps; he did not wish to advance; he seemed
   to be resisting a mysterious impulse which pressed him forward. The
   fatigue of the journey, joined to this pre-occupation of mind,
   overwhelmed him. He had, it would seem, inflamed eyes, probably the
   beginning of ophthalmia. In these prolonged journeys, the last hours
   are the most trying. All the debilitating effects of the days just past
   accumulate, the nerves relax their power, and a re-action sets in.
   Perhaps, also, the sudden passage from the sun-smitten clam to the cool
   shades of the gardens enhanced his suffering condition and seriously
   excited the fanatical traveller. Dangerous fevers, accompanied by
   delirium, are quite sudden in these latitudes, and in a few minutes the
   victim is prostrated as by a thunder-stroke. When the crisis is over,
   the sufferer retains only the impression of a period of profound
   darkness, relieved at intervals by dashes of light in which he has seen
   images outlined against a dark background. It is quite certain that a
   sudden stroke instantly deprived Paul of his remaining consciousness,
   and threw him senseless on the ground. From the accounts which we have
   of this singular event, it is impossible to say whether any exterior
   fact led to the crisis to which Christianity owes its most ardent
   apostle. But in such cases, the exterior fact is of little importance.
   It was the state of St. Paul's mind; it was his remorse on his approach
   to the city in which he was to commit the most signal of his misdeeds,
   which were the true causes of his conversion. For my part, I much
   prefer the hypothesis of an affair personal to Paul, and experienced by
   him alone. It is not, however, improbable that a thunder-storm suddenly
   burst forth. The flanks of Mount Hermon are the point of formation for
   thunder-showers which are unequalled in violence. The most
   unimpressionable person cannot observe without emotion these terrible
   hurricanes of fire. It ought to be remembered that in ancient times
   accidents from lightning were considered divine revelations; that with
   the ideas regarding providential interference then prevalent, nothing
   was fortuitous; and that every man was accustomed to view the natural
   phenomena around him as having a direct relation to himself. The Jews
   in particular always considered that thunder was the voice of God, and
   that lightning was the fire of God. Paul at this juncture was in a
   state of great excitement, and it was but natural that he should
   interpret as the voice of the storm the thoughts which were passing in
   his mind. That a delirious fever, resulting from a sun-stroke or an
   attack of ophthalmia, had suddenly seized him; that a flash of
   lightning blinded him for a time; that a peal of thunder had produced a
   cerebral commotion, temporarily depriving him of sight--it matters
   little. The recollections of the apostle on this point appear to be
   rather confused; he was persuaded that the incident was supernatural,
   and such a conviction would not permit him to entertain any clear
   consciousness of material circumstances. Such cerebral commotions
   produce sometimes a sort of retroactive effect, and completely perturb
   the recollections of the moments immediately preceding the crisis.
   Paul, moreover, elsewhere informs us that he was subject to visions;
   and a circumstance, insignificant as it might appear to others, was
   sufficient to make him beside himself.

   And what did he see, what did he hear, while he was a prey to these
   hallucinations? He saw the countenance which had haunted him for
   several days; he saw the phantom of which so much had been told. He saw
   Jesus himself, who spoke to him in Hebrew, saying, "Saul, Saul, why
   persecutest thou me? "Impetuous natures pass instantaneously from one
   extreme to the other. For them there exists solemn moments which change
   the course of a lifetime, which colder natures never experience.
   Reflective men do not change, but are transformed; ardent men, on the
   contrary, change and are not transformed. Dogmatism is a shirt of
   Nessus which they cannot tear off. They must have a pretext for loving
   and hating. Our western races alone have been able to produce those
   minds--large yet delicate, strong yet flexible--which no empty
   affirmation can mislead, no momentary illusion carry away. The East has
   never produced men of this stamp. Instantly, the most thrilling
   thoughts rushed in upon the soul of Paul. Awakened to the enormity of
   his conduct, he saw himself stained with the blood of Stephen, and this
   martyr appeared to him as his father, his initiator into the new faith.
   Touched to the quick, his sentiments experienced a revulsion as
   complete as it was sudden; still, all this was but a new phase of
   fanaticism. His sincerity and his need of an absolute faith precluded
   any middle course; it was already clear that he would one day exhibit
   in the cause of Jesus the same fiery zeal he had shown in persecuting
   him.

   With the assistance of his companions, who led him by the hand, Paul
   entered Damascus. His friends took him to the house of a certain Judas,
   who lived in the street called Straight, a grand colonnaded avenue over
   a mile long and a hundred feet broad, which crossed the city from east
   to west, and the line of which yet forms, with a few deviations, the
   principal artery of Damascus. The blindness and delirium had not yet
   subsided. For three days Paul, a prey to fever, neither ate nor drank.
   It is easy to imagine what passed during this crisis in that burning
   brain maddened by violent disease. Mention was made in his hearing of
   the Christians of Damascus, and in particular of a certain Ananias, who
   appeared to be the chief of the community. Paul had often heard of the
   miraculous powers of new believers over maladies, and he became
   impressed by the idea that the imposition of hands would cure him of
   his disease. His eyes all this time were highly inflamed, and in his
   delirious imaginings he thought he saw Ananias enter the room and make
   to him the sign familiar to Christians. From that moment he felt
   convinced he should owe his recovery to Ananias. The latter, informed
   of this, visited the sick man, spoke kindly, addressed him as his
   "brother," and laid his hands upon his head; and from that hour peace
   returned to the soul of Paul. He believed himself cured; and as his
   ailment had been purely nervous, he was indeed cured. Little crusts or
   scales, it is said, fell from his eyes; he partook of food and
   recovered his strength.

   Almost immediately after this he was baptized. The doctrines of the
   Church were so simple that he had nothing new to learn, and became at
   once a Christian and a perfect one., And from whom else did he need
   instruction? Had not Jesus himself appeared to him? He too, like James
   and Peter, had had his vision of the risen Jesus. He had learned
   everything by direct revelation. Here the fierce and unconquerable
   nature of Paul was again made manifest. Smitten down on the public
   highway, he was willing to submit, but only to Jesus, to that Jesus who
   had left the right hand of the Father to convert and instruct him. Such
   was the foundation of his faith; and such will be the starting point of
   his pretensions. He will maintain that it was by design that he did not
   go to Jerusalem immediately after his conversion, and place himself in
   relations with those who had been apostles before him; he will main-tam
   that he has received a special revelation, for which he is indebted to
   no human agency; that, like the Twelve, he is an apostle by divine
   institution and by direct commission from Jesus; that his doctrine is
   the true one, although an angel from heaven should say to the contrary.

   An immense danger found entrance through this proud man into the little
   society of the poor in spirit who until now had constituted
   Christianity. It will be a real miracle if his violence and his
   inflexible personality do not overthrow everything. But at the same
   time his boldness, his initiative force, his prompt decision, will be
   precious elements when brought into contact with the narrow, timid, and
   indecisive spirit of the saints of Jerusalem! Certainly, if
   Christianity had remained confined to these good people, shut up in a
   conventicle of elect, leading a communistic life, it would, like
   Essenism, have faded away, leaving scarcely a trace behind. It is this
   ungovernable Paul who will secure its success, and who at the risk of
   every peril will boldly launch it on the high seas. By the side of the
   obedient faithful, accepting his creed from his superior without
   questioning him, there will be a Christian disengaged from all
   authority who will believe only from personal conviction. Protestantism
   thus existed five years after the death of Jesus, and St. Paul was its
   illustrious founder. Surely Jesus had not anticipated such disciples;
   and it was such as these who would most largely contribute to the
   vitality of his work and insure its eternity.

   Violent natures disposed to proselytism only change the object of their
   passion. As ardent for the new faith as he had been for the old, St.
   Paul, like Omar, dropped in one day his part of persecutor for that of
   apostle. He did not return to Jerusalem, where his position towards the
   Twelve would have been peculiar and delicate. He tarried at Damascus
   and in the Hauran for three years (38-41), preaching that Jesus was the
   Son of God. Herod Agrippa I. held the sovereignty of the Hauran and of
   the neighbouring countries; but his power was at several points
   superseded by that of a Nabatian king, Hreth. The decay of the Roman
   power in Syria had delivered to the ambitious Arab the great and rich
   city of Damascus, besides a part of the countries beyond Jordan and
   Mount Hermon, then just being opened up to civilization. Another emir,
   Soheyn, perhaps a relative or lieutenant of Hreth, had received from
   Caligula the command of Ithuria. It was in the midst of this great
   awakening of the Arab nation, upon this strange soil, where an
   energetic race manifested with great success its feverish activity,
   that Paul first displayed the ardour of his apostolic soul. Perhaps the
   material and so remarkable a movement which revolutionized the country
   was prejudicial to a theory and to a preaching wholly idealistic, and
   founded on a belief of a near approach of the end of the world. Indeed,
   there exists no traces of an Arabian Church founded by St. Paul. If the
   region of the Hauran became, towards the year 70, one of the most
   important centres of Christianity, it was owing to the emigration of
   Christians from Palestine; and it was the Ebonites, the enemies of St.
   Paul, who had in this region their principal establishment.

   At Damascus, where there were many Jews, the teachings of Paul received
   more attention. In the synagogues of that city he entered into warm
   arguments to prove that Jesus was the Christ. Great indeed was the
   astonishment of the faithful on beholding him who had persecuted their
   brethren at Jerusalem, and who had come to Damascus "to bring
   themselves bound unto the chief-priests," now appearing as their chief
   defender. His audacity and personal peculiarities almost alarmed them.
   He was alone; he sought no counsel; he established no school; and the
   emotions he excited were those of curiosity rather than those of
   sympathy. The faithful felt that he was a brother, but a brother
   distinguished by singular peculiarities. They believed him to be
   incapable of treachery; but amiable and mediocre natures always
   experience sentiments of mistrust and alarm when brought in contact
   with powerful and original minds, who they know must one day supersede
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XI.

  PEACE AND INTERIOR DEVELOPMENTS OF THE CHURCH OF JUDEA.

   From the year 38 to the year 44 no persecution seems to have been
   directed against the Church. The faithful were, no doubt, far more
   prudent than before the death of Stephen, and avoided speaking in
   public. Perhaps, too, the troubles of the Jews who, during all the
   second part of the reign of Caligula, were at variance with that
   prince, contributed to favour the nascent sect. The Jews, in fact,
   became active persecutors in proportion to the good understanding they
   maintained with the Romans. To buy or to recompense their tranquility,
   the latter were led to augment their privileges, and in particular the
   one to which they clung most closely--the right of killing persons whom
   they regarded as inimical to their law. But the period at which we have
   arrived was one of the most stormy in the turbulent history of this
   singular people.

   The antipathy which the Jews, in consequence of their moral
   superiority, their odd customs, as well as their harshness, excited in
   the populations among which they lived, was at its height, especially
   at Alexandria. This accumulated hatred, for its own satisfaction, took
   advantage of the coming to the imperial throne of one of the most
   dangerous lunatics that ever wore a crown. Caligula, at least after the
   malady which completed his mental derangement (October, 37), presented
   the frightful spectacle of a maniac governing the world endowed with
   the most enormous powers ever put into the hands of any man. The
   atrocious law of Csarism rendered such horrors possible, and left the
   governed without remedy. This lasted three years and three mouths. One
   cannot without shame set down in a serious history that which is now to
   follow. Before entering upon the recital of these saturnalia we cannot
   but exclaim with Suetonius: Reliqua ut de monstro narranda sunt.

   The most inoffensive pastime of this madman was the care of his own
   divinity. In order to do this he used a sort of bitter irony, a mixture
   of the serious and the comic (for the monster was not wanting in wit),
   a sort of profound derision of the human race. The enemies of the Jews
   were not slow to perceive the advantage they might gain from this
   mania. The religious abasement of the world was such that not a protest
   was heard against the sacrilege of the Csar; every cult hastened to
   bestow upon him the titles and the honours which it had reserved for
   its gods. It is to the eternal glory of the Jews that, amidst this
   ignoble idolatry, they uttered the cry of outraged conscience. The
   principle of intolerance which was in them, and which led them to so
   many cruel acts, exhibited here its bright side. Alone in affirming
   their religion to be the absolute religion, they would not bend to the
   odious caprice of the tyrant. This was the source of endless troubles
   for them. It needed only that there should be in a city some person
   discontented with the synagogue, spiteful, or simply mischievous, to
   bring about frightful consequences. At one time people would insist on
   erecting an altar to Caligula in the very place where the Jews could
   least of all suffer it? At another, a troupe of the rag-tags would
   collect, and cry out against the Jews for being the only people who
   refused to place the statue of the emperor in their houses of prayer.
   Anon, people would run to the synagogues and the oratories; they would
   install there the bust of Caligula; and the unfortunate Jews were
   placed in the alternative of either renouncing their religion, or be
   guilty of high treason. Thence followed frightful vexations.

   Such pleasantries had been several times repeated when a still more
   diabolical idea was suggested to the emperor. This was to place a
   colossal golden statue of himself in the sanctuary of the temple at
   Jerusalem, and to have the temple itself dedicated to his own divinity.
   This odious design very nearly hastened by thirty years the revolt and
   the ruin of the Jewish nation. The moderation of the imperial legate,
   Publius Petronius, and the intervention of King Herod Agrippa, a
   favourite of Caligula, averted the catastrophe. But until the moment in
   which the sword of Chra delivered the earth from the most execrable
   tyrant it had as yet endured, the Jews lived everywhere in terror.
   Philo has preserved for us the monstrous scene which occurred when the
   deputation of which he was the chief was admitted to see the emperor.
   Caligula received them during a visit he was paying to the villas of
   Mcenas and of Lamia, near the sea, in the environs of Pozzuoli. On
   that day he was in a vein of gaiety. Helicon, his favourite joker, had
   been relating to him all sorts of buffooneries about the Jews. "Ah,
   then, it is you," said he to them, with a bitter smile, and showing his
   teeth, "who alone will not recognize me for a god, and who prefer to
   adore one whose name you cannot even utter!" He accompanied these words
   with a horrible blasphemy. The Jews trembled; their Alexandrian enemies
   were the first to take up speech: "You would still more, O Sire, detest
   these people and all their nation, if you knew the aversion they have
   for you; for they alone have refused to offer sacrifices for your
   health when all the other peoples have done so!" At these words, the
   Jews exclaimed that it was a calumny, and that they had three times
   offered for the prosperity of the emperor the most solemn sacrifices
   their religion would allow. "Yes," said Caligula, with comical
   seriousness, "you have sacrificed; so far, good; but it was not to me
   that you sacrificed. What advantage do I derive therefrom?" Thereupon,
   turning his back upon them, he strode through the apartments, giving
   orders for repairs, going up and down stairs incessantly. The
   unfortunate deputies, and among them Philo, eighty years of age, the
   most venerable man of the time, perhaps--Jesus being no longer
   living--followed him up and down, trembling and out of breath, the
   object of derision to the assembled company. Caligula turning suddenly,
   said to them: "By the by, why will you not eat pork?" The flatterers
   burst into laughter! some of the officers, in a severe tone, reminded
   them that in laughing immoderately they offended the majesty of the
   emperor. The Jews were stunned; one of them awkwardly said: "There are
   some persons who do not eat lamb." "Ah!" said the emperor, "such people
   are right; lamb is insipid." Some time after, he made a show of
   inquiring into their business; then, when they had just begun to inform
   him of it, he left them and went off to give orders about the
   decorations of a hall which he wanted to have adorned with specular
   stones. Returning, he affected an air of moderation, and asked the
   deputation if they had anything to add; and as the latter resumed their
   interrupted discourse, he turned his back upon them to go and see
   another hall which he was ornamenting with paintings. This game of
   tiger sporting with its prey lasted for hours. The Jews were expecting
   death; but at the last moment the monster withdrew his fangs. "Well,"
   said Caligula, while repassing "these folks are decidedly less guilty
   than pitiable for not believing in my divinity." Thus could the gravest
   questions be treated under the horrible regime created by the baseness
   of the world, cherished by a soldiery and a populace about equally
   vile, and maintained by the dissoluteness of nearly all.

   We can easily understand how so painful a situation must have taken
   from the Jews of the time of Marullus much of that audacity which made
   them speak so boldly to Pilate. Already almost entirely detached from
   the temple, the Christians must have been much less alarmed than the
   Jews at the sacrilegious projects of Caligula. Their numbers were,
   moreover, too few for their existence to be known at Rome. The storm at
   the time of Caligula, like that which resulted in the taking of
   Jerusalem by Titus, passed over their heads, and was in many regards
   serviceable to them. Everything which weakened Jewish independence was
   favourable to them, since it was so much taken away from the power of a
   suspicious orthodoxy, which maintained its pretensions by severe
   penalties.

   This period of peace was fruitful in interior developments. The nascent
   church was divided into three provinces; Judea, Samaria, Galilee, to
   which Damascus was no doubt attached. The primacy of Jerusalem was
   uncontested. The church of this city, which had been dispersed after
   the death of Stephen, was quickly reconstituted. The apostles had never
   quitted the city. The brothers of the Lord continued to reside there,
   and to wield a great authority. It does not seem that this new church
   of Jerusalem was organized in so strict a manner as the first: the
   community of goods was not strictly re-established in it. But there was
   founded a large fund for the poor, to which was added the contributions
   sent by minor churches to the mother church, which latter was the
   origin and permanent source of their faith.

   Peter undertook frequent apostolical journeys in the environs of
   Jerusalem. He had always a great reputation as a thaumaturgist. At
   Lydda in particular he was reputed to have cured a paralytic named
   neas, a miracle which is said to have led to numerous conversions in
   the plain of Saron. From Lydda he repaired to Joppa, a city which
   appears to have been a centre for Christianity. Cities of workmen, of
   sailors, of poor people, where the orthodox Jews were not dominant,
   were those in which the new sect found people the best disposed towards
   them. Peter made a long sojourn at Joppa, at the house of a tanner
   named Simon, who dwelt near the sea. Working in leather was an industry
   regarded as unclean, according to the Mosaic code; it was not lawful to
   associate with those who carried it on, so that the curriers had to
   reside in a district by themselves. Peter, in selecting such a host,
   gave a proof of his indifference to Jewish prejudices, and worked for
   that ennoblement of petty callings which constitutes a grand feature of
   the Christian spirit.

   The organization of works of charity was soon actively entered upon.
   The church of Joppa possessed a woman most appropriately named in
   Aramaic, Tabitha (gazelle), and in Greek, Dorcas, who consecrated all
   her time to the poor. She was rich, it seems, and distributed her
   wealth in alms. This worthy lady had formed a society of pious widows,
   who passed their days with her in weaving clothes for the poor. As the
   schism between Christianity and Judaism was not yet consummated, it is
   probable that the Jews participated in the benefit of these acts of
   charity. The "saints and widows" were thus pious persons, doing good to
   all, a sort of friars and nuns, whom only the most austere devotees of
   a pedantic orthodoxy could suspect, fraticelli, loved by the people,
   devout, charitable, full of pity.

   The germ of those associations of women, which are one of the glories
   of Christianity, thus existed in the first churches of Judea. At Jaffa
   commenced those societies of veiled women, clothed in linen, who were
   destined to continue through centuries the tradition of charitable
   secrets. Tabitha was the mother of a family which will have no end as
   long as there are miseries to be relieved and feminine instincts to be
   gratified. It is related further on, that Peter raised her from the
   dead. Alas! death, however unmindful and revolting, in such a case, is
   inflexible. When the most exquisite soul has sped, the decree is
   irrevocable; the most excellent woman can no more respond to the
   invitation of the friendly voices which would fain recall her, than can
   the vulgar and frivolous. But ideas are not subject to the conditions
   of matter. Virtue and goodness escape the fangs of death. Tabitha had
   no need to be resuscitated. For the sake of a few days more of this sad
   life, why disturb her sweet and eternal repose? Let her sleep in peace;
   the day of the just will come!

   In these very mixed cities, the problem of the admission of Pagans to
   baptism was propounded with much persistency. Peter was strongly
   pre-occupied by it. One day while he was praying at Joppa, on the
   terrace of the tanner's house, having before him the sea that was soon
   going to bear the new faith to all the empire, he had a prophetic
   ecstasy. Plunged into a state of reverie, he thought he experienced a
   sensation of hunger, and asked for something to eat. And while they
   were making it ready for him, he saw the heavens opened, and a cloth
   tied at the four corners descend. Looking inside the cloth he saw there
   all sorts of animals, and thought he heard a voice saying to him: "Kill
   and eat" On his objecting that many of these animals were impure, he
   was answered: "Call not that unclean which God has cleansed." This, as
   it appears, was repeated three times. Peter was persuaded that these
   animals represented the mass of the Gentiles, which God himself had
   just rendered fit for the holy communion of the Kingdom of God.

   An occasion was soon presented for applying these principles. From
   Joppa, Peter went to Cesarea. There he came in contact with a centurion
   named Cornelius. The garrison of Cesarea was formed, at least in part,
   of one of those cohorts composed of Italian volunteers which were
   called Italic. The complete name which this term represented may have
   been cohors prima Augustus Italica civium Romamorum. Cornelius was a
   centurion of this cohort, consequently an Italian and a Roman citizen.
   He was a man of probity, who had long felt himself drawn towards the
   monotheistic worship of the Jews. He prayed; gave alms; practised, in a
   word, those precepts of natural religion which are taken for granted by
   Judaism; but he was not circumcised; he was not a proselyte in any
   sense whatever; he was a pious Pagan, an Israelite in heart, nothing
   more. His whole household and some soldiers of his command were, it is
   said, in the same state of mind. Cornelius applied for admission into
   the new Church. Peter, whose nature was open and benevolent, granted it
   to him, and the centurion was baptized.

   Perhaps Peter at first saw no difficulty in this; but on his return to
   Jerusalem he was severely reproached for it. He had openly violated the
   Law; he had gone amongst the uncircumcized and had eaten with them. The
   question was an important one; it was no other than whether the Law was
   abolished; whether it was permissible to violate it in proselytism;
   whether Gentiles could be freely received into the Church. Peter
   related in self defence the vision he had at Joppa. Subsequently the
   fact of the centurion served as an argument in the great question of
   the baptism of the uncircumcized. To give it more importance it was
   pretended that each phase of this important business had been marked by
   a revelation from heaven. It was related that after long prayers
   Cornelius had seen an angel who ordered him to go and inquire for Peter
   at Joppa; that the symbolical vision of Peter took place at the very
   hour of the arrival of the messengers from Cornelius; that, moreover,
   God himself had undertaken to legitimize all that had been done, seeing
   that the Holy Ghost had descended upon Cornelius, and upon his
   household the latter having spoken strange tongues and sung psalms
   after the fashion of the other believers. Was it natural to refuse
   baptism to persons who had received the Holy Ghost?

   The Church of Jerusalem was still exclusively composed of Jews and of
   proselytes. The Holy Ghost being shed upon the uncircumcized before
   baptism, appeared an extraordinary fact. It is probable that there
   existed thenceforward a party opposed in principle to the admission of
   Gentiles, and that all did not accept the explanations of Peter. The
   author of the Acts would have us believe that the approbation was
   unanimous. But in a few years we shall see the question revived with
   much greater intensity. This matter of the good centurion was, perhaps,
   like that of the Ethiopian eunuch, accepted as an exceptional case,
   justified by a revelation and an express order from God. Still the
   matter was far from being settled. This was the first controversy which
   had taken place in the bosom of the Church; the paradise of interior
   peace had lasted for six or seven years.

   About the year 40, the great question upon which depended all the
   future of Christianity appears thus to have been propounded. Peter and
   Philip took a very just view of what was the true solution, and
   baptized Pagans. It is difficult, no doubt, in the two accounts given
   us by the author of the Acts on this subject, and which are partly
   borrowed one from the other, not to recognize an argument. The author
   of the Acts belonged to a party of conciliation, favourable to the
   introduction of Pagans into the Church, and who was not willing to
   confess the violence of the divisions to which the affair gave rise.
   One feels strongly that in writing the account of the eunuch, of the
   centurion, and even of the conversion of the Samaritans, this author
   means not only to narrate facts, but also seeks special precedents for
   an opinion. On the other hand, we cannot admit that he invents the
   facts which he narrates. The conversions of the eunuch of Candace, and
   of the centurion Cornelius, are probably real facts, which are
   presented and transformed according to the needs of the thesis in view
   of which the book of the Acts was composed.

   Paul, who was destined, some ten or twelve years later, to give to this
   discussion so decisive a bearing, had not yet meddled with it. He was
   in the Hauran, or at Damascus, preaching, refuting the Jews, placing at
   the service of the new faith the same ardour he had shown in combatting
   it. The fanaticism, of which he had once been the instrument, was not
   long in pursuing him in turn. The Jews resolved to kill him. They
   obtained from the ethnarch, who governed Damascus in the name of
   Hreth, an order to arrest him. Paul hid himself. It was known that he
   was to leave the city; the ethnarch, who wanted to please the Jews,
   placed detachments at the gates to seize his person; but the brethren
   secured his escape by night, letting him down in a basket from the
   window of a house which over-looked the ramparts.

   Having escaped this danger, Paul turned his eyes towards Jerusalem. He
   had been a Christian for three years, and had not yet seen the
   apostles. His stern, unyielding character, prone to isolation, had made
   him at first turn his back as it were upon the great family into which
   he had just entered in spite of himself, and prefer for his first
   apostolate a new country, in which he would find no colleague. There
   was awakened in him, how. ever, a desire to see Peter. He recognized
   his authority, and designated him, as every one did, by the name of
   Cephas, "the stone." He repaired then to Jerusalem, taking the same
   road, whence he had come three years before in a state of mind so
   different.

   His position at Jerusalem was extremely false and embarrassing. It had,
   no doubt, been understood there that the persecutor had become the most
   zealous of evangelists, and one of the first defenders of the faith
   which he had formerly sought to destroy. But there remained great
   prejudices against him. Many dreaded on his part some horrible plot.
   They had seen him so enraged, so cruel, so zealous in entering houses
   and tearing open family secrets in order to find victims, that he was
   believed capable of playing an odious farce in order to destroy those
   whom he hated. He resided, as it seems, in the house of Peter. Many
   disciples remained deaf to his advances, and shrank from him. Barnabas,
   a man of courage and will, took at this moment a decisive part. As a
   Cypriote and a new convert, he understood better than the Galilean
   disciples the position of Paul. He came to meet him, took him by the
   hand, introduced him to the most suspicious, and became his surety. By
   this sagacious and far-seeing act, Barnabas earned at the hands of the
   Christian worlds the highest degree of merit. It was he who appreciated
   Paul; it is to him that the Church owes the most extraordinary of her
   founders. The advantageous friendship of these two apostolic men, a
   friendship that no cloud ever tarnished, notwithstanding many
   differences in opinion, afterwards led to their association in the work
   of missions to the Gentiles. This grand association dates, in one
   sense, from Paul's first sojourn at Jerusalem. Amongst the sources of
   the faith of the world, we must count the generous movement of
   Barnabas, who stretched out his hand to the suspected and forsaken
   Paul; the profound intuition which led him to discover the soul of an
   apostle under that downcast mien; the frankness with which be broke the
   ice and levelled the obstacles raised between the convert and his new
   brethren by the unfortunate antecedents of the former, and perhaps,
   also, by certain traits in his character.

   Paul, however, systematically avoided seeing the apostles. He himself
   says so, and he takes the trouble to affirm it with an oath; he saw
   only Peter, and James the brother of the Lord. His sojourn lasted but
   two weeks. It is certainly possible that at the time in which he wrote
   the Epistle to the Galatians (towards 56), Paul may have found himself
   constrained by the exigencies of the moment, to alter a little the
   nature of his relations with the apostles; to represent them as more
   harsh, more imperious, than they were in reality. Towards 56 the
   essential point for him to prove was that he had received nothing from
   Jerusalem--that he was in no wise the mandatory of the Council of the
   Twelve established in this city. His attitude at Jerusalem would have
   been the proud and lofty bearing of a master, who avoids relations with
   other masters in order not to have the air of subordinating himself to
   them, and not the humble and repentant mien of a sinner ashamed of the
   past, as the author of the Acts represents. We cannot believe that from
   the year 41 Paul was animated by this jealous care to preserve his own
   individuality, which he showed at a later day. The few interviews he
   had with the apostles, and the briefness of his sojourn at Jerusalem,
   arose probably from his embarrassment in the presence of people, whose
   nature was different from his own, and who were full of prejudices
   against him, rather than from a refined policy, which would have
   revealed to him fifteen years in advance the disadvantages there might
   be in his frequenting their society.

   In reality, that which must have erected a sort of wall between the
   apostles and Paul, was the difference of their character and of their
   education. The apostles were all Galileans; they had not been at the
   great Jewish school; they had seen Jesus; they remembered his words;
   they were good and pious folk, at times a little solemn and
   simple-hearted. Paul was a man of action, full of fire, only moderately
   mystical, enrolled, as by a superior power, in a sect which was not
   that of his first adoption. Revolt, protestation, were his habitual
   sentiments. His Jewish education was much superior to that of all his
   new brethren. But not having heard Jesus, not having been appointed by
   him, he was, according to Christian ideas, greatly inferior.

   Now Paul was not the man to accept a secondary place. His haughty
   temperament required a position for itself. It was probably about this
   time that there sprang up in him the singular idea that after all he
   had nothing to envy those who had known Jesus, and had been chosen by
   him, since he also had seen Jesus, and had received from Jesus a direct
   revelation and the commission of his apostleship. Even those who had
   been honoured by the personal appearance of the risen Christ were no
   better than he was. Although the last apostle, his vision had been none
   the less remarkable. It had taken place under circumstances which gave
   it a peculiar stamp of importance and of distinction. A signal error!
   The echo of the voice of Jesus was found in the discourses of the
   humblest of his disciples. With all his Jewish science, Paul could not
   make up for the immense disadvantage under which he was placed in
   consequence of his tardy initiation. The Christ whom he had seen on the
   road to Damascus was not, whatever he might say, the Christ of Galilee;
   it was the Christ of his imagination, of his own conception. Although
   he may have been most industrious in learning the words of the Master,
   it is clear that he was only a disciple at second-hand. If Paul had met
   Jesus during his life, it is doubtful whether he would have attached
   himself to him. His doctrine must be his own, not that of Jesus; the
   revelations of which he was so proud were the fruit of his own brain.

   These ideas, which he dared not as yet communicate, rendered his stay
   at Jerusalem disagreeable. At the end of a fortnight he took leave of
   Peter, and went away. He had seen so few people that he ventured to say
   that no one in the Churches of Judea knew him by sight, or knew aught
   of him, save by hearsay. At a subsequent period he attributed this
   sudden departure to a revelation. He related that being one day in the
   temple praying, he was in an ecstasy, and saw Jesus in person, and
   received from him the order to quit Jerusalem immediately, "because
   they were not inclined to receive his testimony." As a compensation for
   these hard hearts, Jesus had promised him the Apostolate of distant
   nations, and an auditory who would listen more willingly to his words.
   Those who would fain hide the traces of the many ruptures caused by the
   coming of this intractable disciple into the church, pretended that
   Paul remained a long while at Jerusalem, living with the brethren on a
   footing of the most complete amity; but that, having begun to preach to
   the Hellenic Jews, he was nearly killed by them, so that the brethren
   had to protect him, and to send him safely to Csarea.

   It is probable, indeed, that from Jerusalem he did repair to Csarea.
   But he stayed there only a short time, and then set out to traverse
   Syria, and afterwards Cilicia. He was, no doubt, already preaching, but
   it was on his own account, and without any understanding with anybody.
   Tarsus, his native place, was his habitual sojourn during this period
   of his apostolic life, which we may reckon as having lasted about two
   years. It is possible that the Churches of Cilicia owed their origin to
   him. Still, the life of Paul was not at this epoch that which we see it
   to be subsequently. He did not assume the title of an apostle, which
   latter was then strictly reserved to the Twelve. It was only from the
   time of his association with Barnabas (in 45) that he entered upon that
   career of sacred peregrinations and preachings which were to make of
   him the typical travelling missionary.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XII.

  FOUNDATION OF THE CHURCH OF ANTIOCH.

   The new faith was spread from place to place with marvellous rapidity.
   The members of the church of Jerusalem, who had been dispersed
   immediately after the death of Stephen, pushing their conquests along
   the coast of Phoenicia, reached Cyprus and Antioch. They were at first
   guided by the sole principle of preaching the Gospel to the Jews only.

   Antioch, "the metropolis of the East," the third city of the world, was
   the centre of this Christian movement in northern Syria. It was a city
   with a population of more than 500,000 souls, almost as large as Paris
   before its recent extensions, and the residence of the Imperial Legate
   of Syria. Suddenly advanced to a high degree of splendour by the
   Seleucid, it reaped great benefit from the Roman occupation. In
   general, the Seleucid were in advance of the Romans in the taste for
   theatrical decorations, as applied to great cities. Temples, aqueducts,
   baths, basilicas, nothing was wanting at Antioch in what constituted a
   grand Syrian city of that period. The streets, flanked by colonnades,
   their cross-roads being decorated with statues, had more of symmetry
   and regularity than anywhere else. A Corso, ornamented with four rows
   of columns, forming two covered galleries, with a wide avenue in the
   midst, traversed the city from one side to the other, the length of
   which was thirty-six stadia (more than a league). But Antioch not only
   possessed immense edifices of public utility; it had also that which
   few of the Syrian cities possessed--the noblest specimens of Grecian
   art, beautiful statues, classical works of a delicacy of detail which
   the age was no longer capable of imitating. Antioch, from its
   foundation, had been wholly a Grecian city. The Macedonians of Antigone
   and Seleucus had brought with them into that country of the Lower
   Orontes their most lively recollections, their worship, and the names
   of their country. The Grecian mythology was there adopted as it were in
   a second home; they pretended to show in the country a crowd of "holy
   places" forming part of this mythology. The city was full of the
   worship of Apollo and of the nymphs. Daphne, an enchanting place two
   short hours from the city, reminded the conquerors of the pleasantest
   fictions. It was a sort of plagiarism, a counterfeit of the myths of
   the mother country, analogous to that which the primitive tribes
   carried with them in their travels--their mythical geography, their
   Berecyntha, their Arvanda, their Ida, their Olympus. These Greek fables
   was for them an antiquated religion, scarcely more serious than the
   Metamorphoses of Ovid. The ancient religions of the country,
   particularly that of Mount Cassius, contributed a little seriousness to
   it. But Syrian levity, Babylonian charlatanism, and all the impostures
   of Asia, mingling at this border of the two worlds, had made Antioch
   the capital of all lies, and the sink of every description of infamy.

   In fact, besides the Greek population, which in no part of the East
   (with the exception of Alexandria) was as numerous as here, Antioch
   counted amongst its population a considerable number of native Syrians,
   speaking Syriac. These natives were a low class, inhabiting the suburbs
   of the great city, and the populous villages which formed a vast suburb
   all around it--Charandama, Ghisira, Gandigura, and Apate (chiefly
   Syrian names). Marriages between the Syrians and the Greeks were
   common: Seleucus had made naturalization a legal obligation binding on
   every stranger establishing himself in the city, so that Antioch, at
   the end of three centuries and a half of its existence, became one of
   the places in the world where race was most blended with race. The
   degradation of the people was awful. The peculiarity of these centres
   of moral putrefaction is to reduce all the race of mankind to the same
   level. The depravity of certain Levantine cities, which are dominated
   by the spirit of intrigue and delivered up entirely to low cunning, can
   scarcely give us an idea of the degree of corruption reached by the
   human race at Antioch. It was an inconceivable medley of mountebanks,
   quacks, buffoons, magicians, miracle-mongers, sorcerers, false priests;
   a city of races, games, dances, processions, fetes, revels, of
   unbridled luxury, of all the follies of the East, of the most unhealthy
   superstitions and of the fanaticism of the orgy. By turns servile and
   ungrateful, cowardly and insolent, the people of Antioch were the
   perfect model of peoples devoted to Csarism, without fatherland,
   without nationality, without family honour, without a name to guard.
   The great Corso which traversed the city was like a theatre, where
   rolled, day after day, the waves of a trifling, light-headed,
   changeable, insurrection-loving populace--a populace sometimes witty,
   occupied with songs, parodies, squibs, impertinence of all kinds. The
   city was very literary, but literary only in the literature of
   rhetoricians. The sights were strange; there were some games in which
   bands of naked young girls took part, with nothing but a mere fillet
   around them; at the celebrated festival of Maiouma, troops of
   courtesans swam in public in basins filled with limpid water. It was
   like an intoxication, like a dream of Sardanapalus, where all the
   pleasures, all the debaucheries, not excluding, however, some of a most
   delicate kind, were unrolled pell-mell. The river of filth, which,
   making its exit by the mouth of the Orontes, was invading Rome, had
   here its principal source. Two hundred decurions were employed in
   regulating the religious ceremonies and celebrations. The municipality
   possessed great public domains, the rents of which the decemvirs
   divided amongst the poor citizens. Like all cities of pleasure, Antioch
   had a lowest class living on the public or on sordid gains.

   The beauty of works of art, and the infinite charm of nature, prevented
   this moral degradation from sinking entirely into hideousness and
   vulgarity. The site of Antioch is one of the most picturesque in the
   world. The city occupied the space between the Orontes and the slopes
   of Mount Silpius, one of the spurs of Mount Cassius. Nothing could
   equal the abundance and limpidness of the waters. The fortified
   portion, climbing up perpendicular rocks, by a master-piece of military
   architecture, enclosed the summit of the mountains, and formed, with
   the rocks at a tremendous height, an indented crown of marvellous
   effect. This disposition of ramparts, uniting the advantages of the
   ancient acropolis with those of the great walled cities, was in general
   preferred by the generals of Alexander, as one sees in the Pierian
   Seleucia, in Ephesus, in Smyrna, in Thessalonica. The result was
   astonishing perspectives. Antioch had within its walls mountains seven
   hundred feet in height, perpendicular rocks, torrents, precipices, deep
   ravines, cascades, inaccessible caves; and, in the midst of all these,
   delightful gardens. A thick wood of myrtles, of flowering box, of
   laurels, of evergreen plants --and of the richest green--rocks carpeted
   with pinks, with hyacinths, and cyclamens, gave to these wild heights
   the aspect of gardens suspended in the air. The variety of the flowers,
   the freshness of the turf, composed of an incredible number of delicate
   grasses, the beauty of the plane trees which border the Orontes,
   inspire the gaiety, the tinge of sweet odour, with which the fine
   genius of Chrysostom, Libanius, and Julian was, as it were,
   intoxicated. On the right bank of the river stretches a vast plain
   bounded on one side by the Amanus, and the oddly-shaped mountains of
   Pieria; on the other side by the plateaus of Cyrrhestica, behind which
   is concealed the dangerous neighbourhood of the Arab and the desert.
   The valley of the Orontes, which opens to the west, puts this interior
   basin into communication with the sea, or rather with the vast world,
   in the bosom of which the Mediterranean has constituted from all time a
   sort neutral highway and federal bond.

   Amongst the different colonies which the liberal ordinances of the
   Seleucid had attracted to the capital of Syria, that of the Jews was
   one of the most numerous; it dated from the time of Seleucus Nicator,
   and enjoyed the same rights as the Greeks. Although the Jews had an
   ethnarch of their own, their relations with the Pagans were very
   frequent. Here, as at Alexandria, these relations often degenerated
   into quarrels and aggressions. On the other hand, they afforded a field
   for an active religious propagandism. The official polytheism becoming
   more and more insufficient to meet the wants of serious minds, the
   Grecian philosophy and Judaism attracted all those whom the vain pomps
   of Paganism could not satisfy. The number of proselytes was
   considerable. From the first days of Christianity, Antioch had
   furnished to the Church of Jerusalem one of its most influential
   members, viz. Nicholas, one of the deacons. There existed there
   promising germs, which only waited for a ray of grace to cause thorn to
   burst forth into bloom and to bear the most excellent fruits which had
   hitherto been produced.

   The Church of Antioch owed its foundation to some believers originally
   from Cyprus and Cyrene, who had already been much engaged in preaching.
   Up to this time they had only addressed themselves to the Jews. But in
   a city where pure Jews--Jews who were proselytes, "people fearing
   God"--or half-Jewish Pagans and pure Pagans, lived together, exclusive
   preaching restricted to a group of houses, became impossible. That
   feeling of religious aristocracy on which the Jews of Jerusalem so much
   prided themselves, did not exist in those large cities, where
   civilization was altogether of the profane sort, where the scope was
   greater, and where prejudices were less firmly rooted The Cypriot and
   Cyrenian missionaries were then constrained to depart from their rule.
   They preached to the Jews and to the Greeks indifferently.

   The dispositions of the Jewish and of the Pagan population appeared at
   this time to have been very unsatisfactory. But circumstances of
   another kind probably subserved the new ideas. The earthquake, which
   had done serious damage to the city on 23rd March, of the year 37,
   still occupied their minds. The whole city was talking about an
   impostor named Debborius, who pretended to be able to prevent the
   recurrence of such accidents by silly talismans. This sufficed to
   direct preoccupied minds towards supernatural matters. But, be this as
   it may, the success of the Christian preaching was great. A young,
   innovating, and ardent Church, full of the future, because it was
   composed of the most diverse elements, was quickly founded. All the
   gifts of the Holy Spirit were there poured out, and it was easy to
   perceive that this new church, emancipated from the strict Mosaism
   which erected an insuperable barrier around Jerusalem, would become the
   second cradle of Christianity. Assuredly, Jerusalem must remain for
   ever the capital of the Christian world; nevertheless, the point of
   departure of the Church of the Gentiles, the primordial focus of
   Christian missions, was, in truth, Antioch. It was there that for the
   first time, a Christian Church was established, freed from the bonds of
   Judaism; it was there that the great propaganda of the Apostolic age
   was established; it was there that St. Paul assumed a definite
   character. Antioch marks the second halting-place of the progress of
   Christianity and in respect of Christian nobility, neither Rome, nor
   Alexandria, nor Constantinople can be at all compared with it.

   The topography of ancient Antioch is so effaced that we should search
   in vain over its site, nearly destitute as it is of any vestiges of the
   antique, for the spot to which to attach such grand recollections.
   Here, as everywhere, Christianity was, doubtless, established in the
   poor quarters of the city and among the petty tradespeople. The
   basilica, which is called "the old" and "apostolic" in the fourth
   century, was situated in the street called Singon, near the Pantheon.
   But no one knows where this Pantheon was. Tradition and certain vague
   analogies would induce us to search the primitive Christian quarter
   near the gate, which even to-day is still called Paul's gate,
   Bb-bolos, and at the foot of the mountain, named by Procopius Stavrin,
   on which stands the south-east side of the ramparts of Antioch. It was
   one of the quarters of the town which least abounded in Pagan
   monuments. There, are still to be seen the remains of ancient
   sanctuaries dedicated to St. Peter, St. Paul and St. John. These appear
   to have been the quarter where Christianity was longest maintained
   after the Mohammedan conquest. There, too, as it appeared, was the
   quarter of "the saints," in opposition to the profane Antioch. The rock
   is honey-combed, like a beehive, with grottoes which seem to have been
   used by the Anchorites. When one walks on these sharp-cut declivities,
   where, about the fourth century, the good Stylites, disciples at once
   of India and of Galilee, of Jesus and of Cakya-Mouni, disdainfully
   contemplated the voluptuous city from the summit of their pillar or
   from their flower-adorned cavern, it is probable that one is not far
   from the very spot where Peter and Paul dwelt. The Church of Antioch is
   the one whose history is most authentic, and least encumbered with
   fables. Christian tradition, in a city where Christianity was
   perpetuated with so much vigour, must possess some value.

   The prevailing language of the Church of Antioch was the Greek. It is,
   however, very probable that the suburbs where Syriac was spoken,
   furnished a great number of converts to the sect. Hence, Antioch
   already contained the germ of two rival, and, at a later, period,
   hostile Churches; the one speaking Greek, and now represented by the
   Syrian Greeks, whether orthodox or Catholics; the other, whose actual
   representatives are the Maronites, who previously spoke Syriac and
   guard it still as if it were a sacred tongue. The Maronites, who under
   their entirely modern Catholicism conceal a high antiquity, are
   probably the last descendants of those Syrians anterior to Seleucus, of
   those suburbans, pagani of Ghisra, Charandama, &c., who from the first
   ages became a separate church, were persecuted by the orthodox emperors
   as heretics, and escaped into the Libanus, where, from hatred of the
   Grecian Church and in consequence of deeper sympathies, they allied
   themselves with the Latins.

   As for the converted Jews at Antioch, they too were very numerous. But
   we are bound to believe that they accepted from the very first a
   fraternal alliance with the Gentiles. It was then on the shores of the
   Orontes that the religious fusion of races, dreamed of by Jesus, or to
   speak more fully, by six centuries of prophets, became a reality.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIII.

  THE IDEA OF AN APOSTOLATE TO THE GENTILES.--SAINT BARNABAS.

   Great was the excitement at Jerusalem when it was learned what had
   taken place at Antioch. Notwithstanding the kindly wishes of some of
   the principal members of the Church of Jerusalem, Peter in particular,
   the Apostolic College continued to be influenced by the meanest ideas.
   On every occasion when it was told that the glad tidings had been
   announced to the heathen, some of the elders manifested signs of
   disappointment. The man who at this time triumphed over this miserable
   jealously, and who prevented the narrow exclusiveness of the "Hebrews"
   from ruining the future of Christianity, was Barnabas. He was the most
   enlightened member of the Church at Jerusalem. He was the chief of the
   liberal party, which desired progress, and wished the Church to be open
   to all. He had already powerfully contributed towards removing the
   mistrust with which Paul was regarded; and he now, also, exercised a
   marked influence. Sent as a delegate of the apostolical body to
   Antioch, he inquired into and approved of all that had been done, and
   declared that the new Church had only to continue in the course upon
   which it had entered. Conversions were effected in great numbers. The
   vital and creative force of Christianity appeared to be centred at
   Antioch. Barnabas, whose zeal sought every occasion to display itself
   with the utmost vigour, remained there. Antioch thenceforth was his
   Church, and it was there that he exercised his most influential and
   important ministry. Christianity has always done injustice to this
   great man in not placing him in the first rank of her founders.
   Barnabas was the patron of all good and liberal ideas. His
   discriminating boldness often served to counterbalance the obstinacy of
   the narrow-minded Jews who formed the conservative party of Jerusalem.

   A magnificent idea sprung up in this noble heart at Antioch. Paul was
   at Tarsus in forced repose, which, to an active man like him, must have
   been perfect torture. His false position, his haughtiness, and his
   exaggerated pretensions, were sapping many of his other and better
   qualities. He was fretting himself, and remained almost useless.
   Barnabas knew how to apply to its true work that force which was
   wasting away in this unhealthy and dangerous solitude. For the second
   time, Barnabas held out the hand of friendship to Paul, and led this
   intractable character into the society of those brethren whom he wished
   to avoid. He went himself to Tarsus, sought him out, and brought him to
   Antioch. He did that which those obstinate old brethren of Jerusalem
   would never have brought themselves to do. To win over this great
   shrinking and susceptible soul; to accommodate oneself to the caprices
   and whims of a man full of ardour, and at the same time most personal;
   to take a secondary place to him, and forgetful of oneself, to prepare
   the field of operations for the most favourable display of his
   abilities--all this is certainly the very climax of virtue; and this is
   what Barnabas did for Paul. Most of the glory, which has accrued to the
   latter, is really due to the modest man, who excelled him in
   everything, brought his merits to light, prevented more than once his
   faults from resulting deplorably to himself and his cause, and the
   illiberal views of others from exciting him to revolt; and also
   prevented mean personalities from interfering with the work of God.

   During an entire year Barnabas and Paul worked together. This was a
   most brilliant, and, without doubt, the most happy year in the life of
   Paul. The prolific originality of these two great men raised the Church
   of Antioch to a degree of grandeur to which no Christian Church had
   previously attained. Few places in the world had experienced more
   intellectual activity than the capital of Syria. During the Roman
   epoch, as in our time, social and religious questions were brought to
   the surface principally at the centres of population. A sort of
   reaction against the general immorality, which made Antioch later, the
   special abode of Stylites and hermits, was already felt; and the true
   doctrine thus found in this city, more favourable conditions for
   success than it had yet met.

   An important circumstance proves, besides, that it was at Antioch that
   the sect for the first time felt the full consciousness of its
   existence; for it was in this city that it received a distinct name.
   Hitherto its adherents had called themselves "believers," "the
   faithful," "saints," "brothers," "the disciples;" but the sect had no
   public and official name. It was at Antioch that the title of
   Christianus was devised. The termination of the work is Latin, not
   Greek, which would indicate that it was selected by the Roman authority
   as a police designation, like Herodiani, Pompeiana, Csariani. In any
   event it is certain that such a name was formed by the heathen
   population. It included an error, for it implied that Christus, a
   translation of the Hebrew Maschiah (the Messiah), was a proper name.
   Not a few of those who were unfamiliar with Jewish or Christian ideas,
   were by this name led to believe that Christus or Chrestus was a
   sectarian leader yet living. The vulgar pronunciation of the name
   indeed was Chrestiani.

   The Jews did not adopt, in a regular manner, at least, the name given
   by the Romans to their schismatic co-religionist. They continued to
   call the new converts "Nazarenes" or "Nazorenes," because no doubt they
   were accustomed to call Jesus Han-nasri or Han-nosri, "the Nazarene;"
   and even unto the present day, this name is still applied to them
   throughout the entire East.

   This was a most important moment. Solemn indeed is the hour when the
   new creation receives its name, for that name is the direct symbol of
   its existence. It is by its name that a being, individual or
   collective, really becomes itself, and is distinct from others. The
   formation of the word "Christian" marks thus the precise date of the
   separation from Judaism of the Church of Jesus. For a long time to come
   the two religions were still confounded; but this confusion could only
   take place in those countries where the spread of Christianity was slow
   and backward. The sect quickly accepted the appelation which was
   applied to it, and viewed it as a title of honour. It is really
   astonishing to reflect that ten years after the death of Jesus, his
   religion had already, in the capital of Syria, a name in the Greek and
   Latin tongues. Christianity was now completely weaned from its mother;
   the true sentiments of Jesus had triumphed over the indecision of his
   first disciples; the Church of Jerusalem was left behind; the Aramaic
   language, in which Jesus spoke, was unknown to a portion of his
   followers; Christianity spoke Greek, and was finally launched into that
   great vortex of the Greek and Roman world, whence it has never
   departed.

   The feverish activity of ideas manifested by this young Church must
   have been truly extraordinary. Great spiritual manifestations were
   frequent. All believed themselves to be inspired in various ways. Some
   were "prophets," others "teachers." Barnabas, as his name indicates,
   was no doubt among the prophets. Paul had no special title. Among the
   leaders of the Church at Antioch are also mentioned Simeon, surnamed
   Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, and Menahem, who had been the foster-brother
   of Herod Antipas, and was consequently rather old. All these personages
   were Jews. Among the converted heathen was, perhaps, already that
   Evhode, who, at a certain period, seems to have occupied the first
   place in the church of Antioch. Undoubtedly the heathen who heard the
   first preaching were slightly inferior, and did not shine in the public
   exercises of using unknown tongues, of preaching, and prophecy.

   In the midst of the congenial society of Antioch, Paul quickly adapted
   himself to the order of things. Later, he manifested opposition to the
   use of tongues, and it is probable that he never practised it; but he
   had many visions and immediate revelations. It was apparently at
   Antioch where occurred that ecstatic trance which he describes in these
   terms: "I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago (whether in the
   body I cannot tell; or whether out of the body I cannot tell--God
   knoweth); such an one was caught up to the third heaven. And I knew
   such a man (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell--God
   knoweth); how that he was caught up into paradise, and heard
   unspeakable words which it is not lawful for a man to utter." Paul,
   though in general, prudent and practical, shared the prevalent ideas of
   the day in regard to the supernatural. Like so many others, he believed
   that he was working miracles, like everybody; it was impossible that
   the gifts of the Holy Sprit, which were acknowledged to be the common
   right of the church, should be denied to him.

   But men permeated with so lively a faith could not content themselves
   with merely exuberant piety, so they panted soon for action. The idea
   of great missions, destined to convert the heathen, beginning in Asia
   Minor, seized hold of the public mind. Had such an idea been formed at
   Jerusalem, it could not have been realized, because the church there
   was without pecuniary resources. An extensive undertaking of
   propagandism requires a certain capital to work on. Now, the common
   treasury at Jerusalem was entirely devoted to the support of the poor,
   and was frequently insufficient for that purpose; and to save these
   noble mendicants from dying from hunger, it was necessary to obtain
   help from all quarters. Communism had created at Jerusalem an
   irremediable poverty and a total incapacity for great enterprises. The
   church at Antioch was exempt from such a calamity. The Jews in these
   profane cities had attained to affluence, and in some cases had
   accumulated vast fortunes. The faithful were wealthy when they entered
   the church. Antioch furnished the capital for the founding of
   Christianity, and it is easy to imagine the total difference in manner
   and spirit which this circumstance alone would create between the two
   churches. Jerusalem remained the city of the poor of God, of the
   ebionim, of those simple Galilean dreamers, intoxicated, as it were,
   with the expectation of the kingdom of Heaven. Antioch, almost a
   stranger to the words of Jesus, whom it had never heard, was the church
   of action and of progress. Antioch was the city of Paul; Jerusalem was
   the seat of the old apostolic college, wrapped up in its dreamy
   fantasies, and unequal to the new problems which were opening, but
   dazzled by its incomparable privileges, and rich in its unsurpassed
   events.

   A certain circumstance soon brought all these traits into bold relief.
   So great was the lack of forethought in this half-starved Church of
   Jerusalem, that the least accident threw the community into distress.
   Now, in a country destitute of economic organization, where commerce
   was but little developed, and where the sources of welfare were
   limited, famines were inevitable. A terrible famine occurred in the
   reign of Claudius, in the year 44. When its threatening symptoms became
   apparent, the elders of Jerusalem decided to seek succour from the
   members of the richer churches of Syria. An embassy of prophets was
   sent from Jerusalem to Antioch. One of them, named Agab, who was in
   high repute for his prophetic powers, was suddenly inspired, and
   announced that the famine was now at hand. The faithful were deeply
   moved at the evils which menanced the mother Church, to which they
   still deemed themselves tributary. A collection was made, at which
   every one gave according to his means, and Barnabas was selected to
   carry the funds thus obtained to the brethren in Judea. Jerusalem for a
   long time remained the capital of Christianity. There were centred the
   objects peculiar to the faith, and there only were the apostles. But a
   great forward step had been taken. For several years there had been
   only one completely organised Church, that of Jerusalem--the absolute
   centre of the faith, the heart from which all life proceeded and to
   which it flowed back again; such was no longer the case. The Church at
   Antioch was now a perfect Church. It possessed all the hierarchy of the
   gifts of the Holy Ghost. It was the starting-point of the missions, and
   their head-quarters. It was a second capital, or rather a second heart,
   which had its own proper action, exercising its force and influence in
   every direction.

   It was now easy to forsee that the second capital must soon eclipse the
   first. The decay of the Church at Jerusalem was, indeed, rapid. It is
   natural that institutions founded on communism should enjoy at the
   beginning a period of brilliancy, for communism involves always high
   mental exaltation; but it is equally natural that such institutions
   should very quickly degenerate, because communism is contrary to the
   instincts of human nature. In his virtuous fits, man readily believes
   that he can entirely sacrifice his selfish instincts and his peculiar
   interests; but egotism has its revenge, by proving that absolute
   disinterestedness engenders evils more serious than those it is hoped
   to avoid by the renunciation of personal rights to property.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIV.

  PERSECUTION BY HEROD AGRIPPA THE FIRST.

   Barnabas found the church of Jerusalem in great trouble. The year 44
   was perilous to it. Besides the famine, the fires of persecution, which
   had been smothered since the death of Stephen, were rekindled.

   Herod Agrippa, grandson of Herod the Great, had succeeded, since the
   year 41, in reconstructing the kingdom of his grandfather. Thanks to
   the favour of Caligula, he had reunited under his sway Batanea,
   Trachonitis a part of the Hauran, Abilene, Galilee, and the Perea. The
   ignoble part he played in the tragi-comedy which raised Claudius to the
   empire, completed his fortune. This vile Oriental, in return for the
   lessons of baseness and perfidy he had given at Rome, obtained for
   himself Samaria and Judea, and for his brother Herod, the kingdom of
   Chalcis. He had left at Rome the worst memories, and the cruelties of
   Caligula were in part attributed to his counsels. His army, and the
   Pagan cities of Sebaste and Cesarea, which he sacrificed to Jerusalem,
   were averse to him. But the Jews found him generous, munificient, and
   sympathetic. He sought to make himself popular with them, and pursued a
   policy quite different from that of Herod the Great. The latter was
   much more mindful of the Greek and Roman world than of the Jewish.
   Herod Agrippa, on the contrary, loved Jerusalem, rigorously observed
   the Jewish religion, affected scrupulousness, and never let a day pass
   without attending to his devotions. He went so far as to receive good
   naturedly the advice of the rigorists, and was at the pains to justify
   himself against their reproaches. He returned to the inhabitants of
   Jerusalem the tribute which each family owed him. The orthodox, in a
   word had in him a king after their own heart.

   It was inevitable that a prince of this character should persecute the
   Christians. Sincere or not, Herod Agrippa was, in the strictest sense
   of the word, a Jewish Sovereign. The house of Herod, as it became
   weaker, took to devotion. It held no longer to that broad profane idea
   of the founder of the dynasty, which sought to make the most diverse
   religions live together under the common empire of civilization. When
   Herod Agrippa, for the first time after he had become king, set foot in
   Alexandria, it was as a King of the Jews that he was received: it was
   this title which irritated the population and gave rise to endless
   buffooneries. Now what was a King of the Jews, if he did not become the
   guardians of the laws and the traditions, a sovereign theocrat and
   persecutor? From the time of Herod the Great, under whom fanaticism was
   entirely suppressed, until the breaking out of the war which led to the
   destruction of Jerusalem, there was thus a constantly increasing
   process of religious ardour. The death of Caligula (24th Jan., 41) had
   produced a reaction favourable to the Jews. Claudius was generally
   benevolent towards them, as a result of the favourable ear he lent to
   Herod Agrippa and Herod King of Chalcis. Not only did he decide in
   favour of the Jews of Alexandria in their quarrels with the inhabitants
   and allow them the right of choosing an ethnarch, but he published, it
   is said, an edict by which he granted to the Jews, throughout the whole
   empire, that which he had granted to those of Alexandria; that is to
   say, the freedom of living according to their own laws, on the sole
   condition of not abusing other worships. Some attempts at vexations,
   analagous to those which were inflicted under Caligula, were repressed.
   Jerusalem was greatly enlarged: the suburb of Bezetha was added to the
   city. The Roman authority scarcely made itself felt, although Vibius
   Marsus, a prudent man, of wide public experience, and of a very
   cultivated mind, who had succeeded Publius Petronius in the function of
   imperial legate of Syria, drew the attention of the authorities at Rome
   from time to time to the danger of these semi-independent Eastern
   Kingdoms.

   The species of feudality which, since the death of Tiberius, tended to
   establish itself in Syria and the neighbouring countries, was in fact
   an interruption in the imperial policy and had almost uniformly
   injurious results. The "Kings" coming to Rome were great personages,
   and exercised there a detestable influence. The corruption and
   abasement of the people, especially under Caligula, proceeded in great
   part from the spectacle furnished by these wretches, who were seen
   successively dragging their purple at the theatre, at the palace of the
   Csar, and in the prisons. So far as concerns the Jews, we have seen
   that autonomy meant intolerance. The Sovereign Pontificate quitted for
   a moment the family of Hanan, only to enter that of Bothus, a family
   no less haughty and cruel. A sovereign anxious to please the Jews could
   not fail, but to grant them what they most desired; that is to say,
   severities against everything which diverged from rigorous orthodoxy.

   Herod Agrippa, in fact, became towards the end of his reign a violent
   persecutor. Some time before the Passover of the year 44, he cut off
   the head of one of the principal members of the apostolical college,
   James, son of Zebedee, brother of John. The offence was not
   re-presented as a religious one; there was no inquisitorial trial
   before the Sanhedrim: the sentence, as in the case of John the Baptist,
   was pronounced by virtue of the arbitrary power of the sovereign.
   Encouraged by the good effect which this execution produced upon the
   Jews, Herod Agrippa was unwilling to stop upon so easy a road to
   popularity. It was the first days of the Feast of the Passover, which
   were ordinarily marked by redoubled fanaticism. Agrippa ordered the
   imprisonment of Peter in the Tower of Antonia, and sought to have him
   judged and put to death in the most ostentations manner before the
   multitude of people then assembled.

   A circumstance with which we are unacquainted, and which was regarded
   as miraculous, opened Peter's prison. One evening, as many of the
   disciples were assembled in the house of Mary, mother of John-Mark,
   where Peter constantly resided, there was suddenly a knock heard at the
   door. The servant, named Rhoda, went to listen. She recognised Peter's
   voice. Transported with delight, instead of opening the door she ran
   back to announce that Peter was there. They regarded her as mad. She
   avowed she spoke the truth. "It is his angel," said some of them. The
   knocking was continued; it was indeed he. Their delight was infinite.
   Peter immediately announced his deliverance to James, brother of the
   Lord, and to the other disciples. It was believed that the angel of God
   had entered into the prison of the apostle and made the chains drop
   from his hands, and the bolts of the doors fall. Peter related, in
   fact, all that had passed while he was in a sort of ecstasy; that after
   he had passed the first and second guard, and gone through the iron
   gate which led into the city, the angel accompanied him the distance of
   a street, then quitted him; that then he came to himself and recognized
   the hand of God, who had sent a celestial messenger to deliver him.

   Agrippa survived these violences but a short time. In the course of the
   year 44, he went to Cesarea to celebrate games in honour of Claudius.
   The concourse of people was very great; and many from Tyre and Sidon,
   who had difficulties with him, came thither to sue for pardon. These
   festivals were very displeasing to the Jews, both because they took
   place in the city of Csarea, and because they were held in the
   theatre. Previously, on one occasion, the king having quitted Jerusalem
   under similar circumstances, a certain rabbi Simeon had proposed to
   declare him an alien to Judaism, and to exclude him from the temple.
   Herod Agrippa had carried his condescension so far as to place the
   rabbi beside him in the theatre in order to prove to him that nothing
   passed there contrary to the law, and thinking he had thus satisfied
   the most austere, he allowed himself to indulge his taste for profane
   pomps. The second day of the festival he entered the theatre very early
   in the morning, clothed in a tunic of silver fabric, of marvellous
   brilliancy. The effect of this tunic, glittering in the rays of the
   rising sun, was extraordinary. The Phoenicians who surrounded the king
   lavished upon him adulations borrowed from Paganism. "It is a god,"
   they cried, "and not a man." The king did not testify his indignation,
   and did not blame this expression. He died five days afterwards; and
   Jews and Christians believed that he was struck dead for not having
   repelled with horror a blasphemous flattery. Christian tradition
   represents that he died of a vermicular malady, the punishment reserved
   for the enemies of God. The symptoms related by Josephus would lead
   rather to the belief that he was poisoned; and what is said in the Acts
   of the equivocal conduct of the Phoenicians, and of the care they took
   to gain over Blastus, valet of the king, would strengthen this
   hypothesis.

   The death of Herod Agrippa I. led to the end of all independence for
   Jerusalem. The administration by procurators was resumed, and this
   rgime lasted until the great revolt. This was fortunate for
   Christianity; for it is very remarkable that this religion, which was
   des-tined to sustain subsequently so terrible a struggle against the
   Roman empire, grew up in the shadow of the Roman rule, under its
   protection. It was Rome, as we have already several times remarked,
   which hindered Judaism from giving itself up fully to its intolerant
   instincts, and stifling the free instincts which were stirred within
   its bosom. Every diminution of Jewish authority was a benefit to the
   nascent sect. Cuspius Fadus, the first of this new series of
   procurators, was another Pilate, full of firmness, or at least of
   good-will. But Claudius continued to show himself favourable to Jewish
   pretensions, chiefly at the instigation of the young Herod Agrippa, son
   of Herod Agrippa I., whom he kept near to his person, and whom he
   greatly loved. After the short administration of Cuspius Fadus, we find
   the functions of procurator confided to a Jew, to that Tiberius
   Alexander, nephew of Philo, and son of the alabarque of the Alexandrian
   Jews who attained to high position, and played a great part in the
   political affairs of that century. It is true that the Jews did not
   like him; and regarded him, not without reason, as an apostate.

   To put an end to these incessantly renewed disputes, recourse was had
   to an expedient based on sound principles. A sort of separation was
   made between the spiritual and temporal. The political power remained
   with the procurators; but Herod, king of Chalcis, brother of Agrippa
   I., was named prefect of the temple, guardian of the pontifical habits,
   treasurer of the sacred fund, and invested with the right of nominating
   the high-priests. At his death, in 48, Herod Agrippa II., son of Herod
   Agrippa I., succeeded his uncle in his offices, which he retained until
   the great war. Claudius, in all this, manifested the greatest kindness.
   The high Roman functionaries in Syria, although not so strongly
   disposed as the emperor to concessions, acted also with great
   moderation. The procurator, Ventidius Cumanus, carried condescension so
   far as to have a soldier beheaded in the midst of the Jews, drawn up in
   line, for having torn a copy of the Pentateuch. But all was in vain;
   Josephus, with good reason, dates from the administration of Cumanus
   the disorders which ended only with the destruction of Jerusalem.

   Christianity took no part in these troubles. But these troubles, like
   Christianity itself, were one of the symptoms of the extraordinary
   fever which devoured the Jewish people, and the Divine work which was
   being accomplished in its midst. Never had the Jewish faith made such
   progress. The temple of Jerusalem was one of the sanctuaries of the
   world, the reputation of which was most widely extended, and in which
   the offerings were the most liberal. Judaism had become the dominant
   religion of several portions of Syria. The Asmonean princes had
   forcibly converted entire populations to it (Idumeans, Itureans, &c.).
   There were many instances of circumcision having been imposed by force;
   the ardour for making proselytes was very great. Even the house of
   Herod aided powerfully the Jewish propaganda. In order to marry
   princesses of this family, whose wealth was immense, the princes of the
   little dynasties of Emese, of Pontus, and of Cilicia, vassals of the
   Romans, became Jews. Arabia and Ethiopia contained also a great number
   of converts. The royal families of Mesene and of Adiabene, tributaries
   of the Parthians, were gained over, especially by their women. It was
   generally admitted that happiness was found in the knowledge and
   practice of the Law. Even when circumcision was not practised, religion
   was more or less modified in the direction of Judaism; a sort of
   monotheism was becoming the general spirit of religion in Syria. At
   Damascus, a city which was in nowise of Israelitish origin, nearly all
   the women had adopted the Jewish religion. Behind the Pharisaical
   Judaism there was thus formed a sort of liberal Judaism containing some
   alloy, which did not know all the secrets of the sect, brought only its
   goodwill and kind heart, but which had a much greater future. The
   situation was, in some respects similar to that of Catholicism of
   to-day, where we see, on the one hand, narrow and haughty theologians,
   who, of themselves, would gain no more souls for Catholicism than the
   Pharisees gained for Judaism; on the other, pious laymen, in many
   instances heretics, without knowing it, but full of a touching zeal,
   rich in good works and in poetic sentiments, wholly occupied in
   dissimulating or in repairing by complaisant excuses the faults of
   their doctors.

   One of the most extraordinary examples of this pen-chant of religious
   souls towards Judaism was that given by the royal family of Adiabene,
   upon the Tiger. This house, Persian by origin and in manners, and in a
   measure acquainted with Greek culture, became wholly Jewish, and
   affected extreme devotion; for, as we have said, those proselytes were
   often more pious than Jews by birth. Izate, the head of the family,
   embraced Judaism through the preaching of a Jewish merchant named
   Ananias, who, having occasion to enter the seraglio of Abennerig, King
   of Mesene, to prosecute his pedlar business, had succeeded in
   converting all the women, and constituted himself their spiritual
   preceptor. The women put Izate into communication with him. Helen, his
   mother, had herself instructed in the true religion by another Jew.
   Izate, with the zeal of a new convert, desired forthwith to be
   circumcised. But his mother and Ananias earnestly dissuaded him against
   it. Ananias proved to him that the keeping of the commandments of God
   was more important than circumcision, and that one could be a good Jew
   without submitting to that ceremony. Tolerance such as this existed
   only in the case of a few of the more enlightened minds. Some time
   after, a Galilean Jew, named Eleazar, finding the King one day engaged
   in reading the Pentateuch, proved to him from texts that he could not
   observe the law without being circumcised. Izate was persuaded by him,
   and underwent the operation immediately.

   The conversion of Izate was followed by that of his brother Monobaze
   and almost the whole of his family. About the year 44, Helen
   established herself at Jerusalem, where she had erected for the royal
   house of Adiabene a palace and a family mausoleum, which still exists.
   She made herself to be beloved of the Jews by her affability and her
   alms. It was a source of great edification to see her, like a devout
   Jewess, frequenting the Temple, consulting the doctors, reading the
   Law, and instructing her sons in it. In the plague of the year 44, this
   holy woman was a god-send to the city. She bought a large quantity of
   wheat in Egypt, and dried figs in Cyprus. Izate, on his part, sent
   considerable sums to be distributed amongst the poor. The wealth of
   Adiabene was expended in part at Jerusalem. The son of Izate came there
   to learn the usages and the language of the Jews. The whole of this
   family was thus the resource of the city of mendicants. It acquired
   there a sort of citizenship; several of its members were found there at
   the time of the siege of Titus; others figure in the Talmudic writings,
   and are represented as models of piety and disinterestedness.

   It is in this way that the royal family of Adiabene belongs to the
   history of Christianity. Without in fact being Christian, as certain
   traditions would have it, this family represented, under various
   aspects, the promises of the Gentiles. In embracing Judaism, it obeyed
   a sentiment which was to eventuate in Christianizing the entire Pagan
   world. The true Israelites, according to God, were rather those
   foreigners animated by so profoundly sincere a religious sentiment than
   the malevolent and roguish Pharisee, to whom religion was but a pretext
   for hatred and disdain. These good proselytes, although they were truly
   saints, were by no means fanatics. They admitted that true religion
   could be practised under the empire of a code of civil laws the most
   unduly adverse. They separated completely religion from politics. The
   distinction between the seditious sectaries, who were savagely to
   defend Jerusalem, and the pacific devotees who on the first rumour of
   war were going to flee to the mountains, became more and more manifest.

   We see at least that the question of proselytes was put forward in a
   similar manner, both in Judaism and in Christianity. On both hands the
   necessity for enlarging the door of entrance was felt. For those who
   were thus situated, circumcision was a useless or noxious practice; the
   Mosaic rite was simply a sign of race, of no value except for the
   children of Abraham. Before becoming the universal religion, Judaism
   was compelled to reduce itself to a sort of deism, imposing only the
   duties of natural religion. There was thus a sublime mission to fulfil,
   and a part of Judaism in the first half of the first century lent
   itself to it in a very intelligent manner. On one side, Judaism was one
   of the innumerable forms of natural worship which filled the world, and
   the sanctity of which came only from what its ancestors had worshipped;
   on the other, Judaism was the absolute religion made for all and
   destined to be adopted by all. The frightful outbreak of fanaticism
   which gained the upper hand in Judea, and which brought about the war
   of extermination, cut short that future. It was Christianity which
   undertook the work which the Synagogue had not known how to accomplish.
   Leaving on one side all questions of ritual, Christianity continued the
   monotheistic propaganda of Judaism. That which made up the strength of
   Judaism amongst the women of Damascus; in the harem of Abennerig, with
   Helen, with so many pious proselytes, composed the force of
   Christianity in the entire world. In this sense the glory of
   Christianity is really confounded with that of Judaism. A generation of
   fanatics deprived this last of its reward and prevented it from
   gathering the harvest which it had sown.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XV.

  MOVEMENTS PARALLEL TO CHRISTIANITY OR IMITATED FROM IT--SIMON OF GITTON.

   Christianity was now really established. In the history of religions it
   is always the first years which are most difficult to traverse. When
   once a faith has borne up against the hard trials, which every new
   institution has to endure, its future is assured. More clever than the
   other sectaries of the same date, Epenians, Baptists, partizans of John
   the Gaulonite, which simply came out of the Jewish world, and perished
   with it, the founders of Christianity, with a singular clearness of
   sight, cast themselves very early into the great world, and took their
   place in it. The scantiness of the references to the Christians, which
   are to be found in Josephus, in the Talmud, and in the Greek and Latin
   writers, ought not to be surprising. Josephus has reached us through
   Christian copyists, who have suppressed all that was disagreeable to
   their faith. It is easy to believe that he spoke at greater length of
   Jesus and of the Christians than he does in the version which has come
   down to us. The Talmud has in the same way undergone in the Middle Ages
   many retrenchments and alterations since its first publication. The
   Christian censure was exercised with severity upon its text, and a host
   of unhappy Jews were burned for having been found in possession of a
   book containing passages which were considered blasphemous. It is not
   astonishing that the Greek and Latin writers occupied themselves but
   little with a movement which they could not understand, and which took
   place in a world which was closed to them, Christianity in their eyes
   lost itself in the depths of Judaism; it was a family quarrel in the
   bosom of an abject race; what was the use of troubling about it? The
   two or three passages in which Tacitus or Suetonius speaks of the
   Christians prove that, in spite of being outside the circle of everyday
   affairs, the new sect was already a very considerable fact, since, from
   one or two glimpses, we see it across the cloud of general inattention,
   picture itself with sufficient clearness.

   The circumstance that Christianity was not an isolated movement has
   contributed not a little towards the effacement of its outlines in the
   history of the Jewish world in the first century of our era. Philo, at
   the moment at which we have arrived, has finished his career--a career
   consecrated to the love of the good. The sect of Judas, the Gaulonite,
   still existed. The agitator had for continuers of his idea, his sons
   James, Simon, and Menahem, Simon and James were crucified by order of
   the renegade procurator, Tiberius Alexander. Menahem will play an
   important part in the final catastrophe of the nation. In the year 44
   an enthusiast, named Theudas, arose announcing the approaching
   deliverance, and invited the mob to follow him into the desert,
   promising, like another Joshua, to make them pass dryshod over Jordan,
   this passage being, according to his explanation, the true baptism to
   initiate his believers into the Kingdom of God. More than four hundred
   souls followed him. (Acts v., 36.) The procurator Cuspius Fadius, sent
   cavalry against him, dispersed his force, and killed him. Some years
   earlier all Samaria had been moved by the voice of a fanatic, who
   pretended to have had a revelation of the site of Garizim, where Moses
   had hidden the holy instruments of worship. Pilate had repressed this
   movement with great vigour. Peace was at an end in Jerusalem. After the
   arrival of the procurator Vontidius Cumanus (48), disturbances were
   incessant. Excitement was pushed to such a point that life there became
   impossible; the most insignificant circumstances brought about an
   explosion. Everywhere was felt a strange fermentation, a sort of
   mysterious trouble. Imposters multiplied everywhere. The frightful
   scourge of the zealots (Kenaim), or assassins, began to appear.
   Scoundrels, armed with daggers, glided into the crowds, struck their
   victims, and were the first to shriek "Murder." Hardly a day passed
   without the report of an assassination of this kind. An extraordinary
   terror prevailed. Josephus represents the crimes of the zealots as
   sheer wickedness, but it is indubitable that fanaticism mixed itself
   with them. It was in defence of the Law that these wretches took up the
   dagger. Whoever neglected to fulfil one of its ordinances, found his
   sentence pronounced, and immediately executed. They thought in this way
   to accomplish a work, the most meritorious and agreeable to God.

   Dreams like that of Theudas were everywhere renewed. Persons,
   pretending to be inspired, stirred up the people, and led them out into
   the desert, under pretence of showing to them, by manifest signs that
   God was about to deliver them. The Roman authorities exterminated these
   agitators and their dupes by thousands. A Jew of Egypt, who came to
   Jerusalem about the year 56, was skilful enough to draw after him
   30,000 persons, amongst whom wore 4,000 zealots. From the desert he
   wished to take them to Mount Olivet, whence, he said, they might see
   the walls of Jerusalem fall at the sound of his voice alone. Felix, who
   was then procurator, marched against him, and dispersed his band. The
   Egyptian escaped, and was seen no more. But as in an unhealthy body one
   malady follows another, we very soon afterwards come upon mixed bodies
   of robbers and magicians, who openly urged the people to rebel against
   the Romans, threatening those who continued to obey them with death.
   Under this pretext they killed the rich, pillaged their goods, burned
   the villages, and filled all Jewry with marks of their fury. A
   frightful war announced itself. A general spirit of confusion
   prevailed, and men's minds were in a state not far removed from
   madness.

   It is not impossible that Theudas had a certain after-thought of
   imitation, as regards Jesus and John the. Baptist. This imitation, at
   least, is evidently betrayed in Simon of Gitton, if the Christian
   traditions as to this personage are in any way worthy of credence. We
   have already met him in connexion with the Apostles apropos of the
   first mission of Philip to Samaria. It was under the reign of Claudius
   that he arrived at celebrity. His miracles passed as constant, and
   everybody in Samaria looked upon him as a supernatural personage.

   His miracles, however, were not the only foundation of his reputation.
   He added to them a doctrine which we can hardly judge of, since the
   work attributed to him, and entitled the Great Exposition, has reached
   us only by extracts, and is probably only a very modified expression of
   his ideas. Simon, during his stay in Alexandria, appears to have drawn
   from his studies of Greek philosophy, a system of syncretic philosophy,
   and of allegorical exegesis, resembling that of Philo. The system had
   its greatness. Sometimes it recalls the Jewish Cabala, sometimes the
   Pantheistic theories of Indian philosophy; looked at from a certain
   standpoint it appears to bear the impress of Buddhism and Parseeism. At
   the head of all things is "He who is, who has been, and who will be";
   that is to say, the Samaritan Jahveh, understood, according to the
   etymological value of his name. The Eternal Being, alone,
   self-engendered, increasing himself; magnifying himself, finding in
   himself father, mother, sister, wife, and son. In the breast of that
   infinite being, every power exists from and to eternity; all things
   pass into action and reality by the conscience of man, by reason,
   language, and science. The world explains itself, it may be by a
   hierarchy of abstract principles, analogous to the ons of gnosticism
   and the sephirotic tree of the Cabala, or by an angelic system, which
   appears to have been borrowed from the beliefs of Persia Sometimes
   these abstractions are presented as translations of physical and
   physiological facts. At other times the "Divine powers," considered as
   separate substances, are realized as successive incarnations, sometimes
   feminine, sometimes masculine, whose end is the deliverance of the
   persons concerned from the bondage of matter. The first of these powers
   is that which is called, by way of especial distinction, "the Great,"
   and which is the intelligence of this world, the universal Providence.
   It is masculine, and Simon passed as being its incarnation. By its side
   is the feminine Syzygy, "the Great Thought." Accustomed to clothe its
   theories with a strange symbolism, and to imagine allegorical
   interpretations for the ancient, sacred, and profane texts, Simon, or
   the author of the Great Exposition, gave to that Divine virtue the name
   of "Helen," signifying thereby that it was the object of universal
   pursuit, the eternal cause of dispute amongst men, she who avenges
   herself on her enemies by blinding them, just at the moment when they
   consent to sing the Palinode; a grotesque theme which, ill-understood
   or distorted by design, gave rise amongst the Fathers of the Church to
   the most puerile legends. The knowledge of Greek literature which the
   author of the Great Exposition possessed, is in any case very
   remarkable. He maintained that, when properly understood, the Pagan
   writings sufficed for the knowledge of all things. His large
   eclecticism embraced all the revelations, and sought to establish all
   truth in a single order.

   At the basis of his system there is much analogy with that of Valentin,
   and with the doctrines as to the Divine persons which are found in the
   fourth Gospel, in Philo and on the Targums. The "Metatrne," which the
   Jews placed by the side of the Divinity, and almost in its breast, has
   a strong resemblance to the "Great Power." In the theology of the
   Samaritans may be found a "Great Angel," chief of the others, and of
   the class of manifestations or "divine virtues," like those which the
   Jewish Cabala figures on its side. It appears certain then that Simon,
   of Gitton, was a kind of theosophist of the race of Philo and the
   Cabalists. It is possible that he approached Christianity for the
   moment, but he certainly did not definitely embrace it.

   Whether he really borrowed something from the disciples of Jesus is
   very difficult to decide. If the Great Exposition is his in any degree,
   it must be admitted that in many points he went beyond Christian ideas,
   and that upon others he adopted them very freely. It would seem that he
   attempted eclecticism like that which Mahomet practised later on, and
   that he endeavoured to found his religious character upon the
   preliminary acceptance of the divine mission of John and of Jesus. He
   wanted to be in a mystical communion with them. He maintained, it is
   said, that it was he, Simon, who appeared to the Samaritans as Father,
   to the Jews the visible crucifixion of the Son, to the Gentiles, by the
   infusion of the Holy Ghost. He thus prepared the way, it would seem,
   for the doctrines of the docetes. He said that it was he who had
   suffered in Judea in the person of Jesus, but that that suffering had
   only been apparent. His pretension to be the Divinity itself, and to
   cause himself to be adored as such had probably been exaggerated by the
   Christians who sought only to render him hateful.

   It will be seen besides that the doctrine of the Great Exposition is
   that of almost all the Gnostic writers; if Simon really professed the
   doctrines, it was with good reason that the fathers of the Church made
   him the founder of Gnosticism. We believe that the Great Exposition has
   only a relative authenticity, and that it really is to the doctrine of
   Simon--to compare small things with great--what the Fourth Gospel is to
   the mind of Jesus; that it goes back to the first years of the second
   century, that is to say, to the period when the theosophic ideas of the
   Logos definitely gained the ascendency. These ideas, the germ of which
   we shall find in the Christian Church about the year 60, might however
   have been known to Simon, whose career we may reason-ably extend to the
   end of the century.

   The idea which we form to ourselves of this enigmatical personage is
   then that of a kind of plagiarist of Christianity. Counterfeiting
   appears to have been a constant habit amongst the Samaritans. Just as
   they had always imitated the Judaism of Jerusalem, their sectaries had
   also copied Christianity in their ways, their gnoxis, their theosophic
   speculations, their Cabala. But was Simon a respectable imitator, who
   only failed of success, or an immoral and profligate conjuror using for
   his own advantage a doctrine of shreds and patches picked up here and
   there? This is a question which will probably never be answered. Simon
   thus maintains in history an utterly false position; he walks upon a
   light rope where hesitation is impossible; in this order, there is no
   middle path between a ridiculous fall and the most miraculous success.

   We shall again have to occupy ourselves with Simon, and to enquire if
   the legends as to his stay in Rome are in any way founded on truth. It
   is certain that the Samarian sect lasted until the third century; that
   it had churches at Antioch, perhaps even at Rome, that Menanda, and
   Capharatea, and Cleobius, continued the doctrine of Simon, or rather
   imitated his part of theurgist with a more or less present remembrance
   of Jesus and of his apostles. Simon and his disciples were greatly
   esteemed amongst their co-religionists. Sects of the same time,
   parallel to Christianity and more or less borrowed from Gnosticism, did
   not cease to spring up amongst the Samaritans until their quasi
   destruction by Justinian. The fate of that sort of little religion was
   to receive the rebound of everything that went on around it, without
   producing anything at all original.

   Amongst the Christians, the memory of Simon of Gitton was an
   abomination. These illusions, which were so much like their own,
   irritated them. To have successfully rivalled the apostles was
   unpardonable. It was asserted that the miracles of Simon and of his
   disciples were the work of the devil, and they applied to the Samaritan
   theosophist the title of the "Magician," which the faithful took in
   very bad part. All the Christian legends of Simon bear the marks of a
   concentrated wrath. He was credited with the maxims of quietisms, and
   with the excess which are usually supposed to be its consequence. He
   was considered to be the father of every error, the first heresiarch.
   Christians amused themselves by telling laughable stories of him and of
   his defeats by the apostle Peter. They attributed his approach towards
   Christianity to the vilest of motives. They were so preoccupied with
   his name that they fancied they read It in inscriptions which he had
   not written. The symbolism in which he had enveloped his ideas was
   interpreted in the most grotesque fashion. The "Helen," whom he
   identified with the "Highest Intelligence," became a prostitute whom he
   had bought in the market at Tyre. His very name was hated almost as
   much as that of Judas, and, taken as synonym of "anti-apostle," became
   the last insult and as it were a proverbial word to describe a
   professional impostor, an adversary of the the truth whom it was
   desirable to indicate with mystery. He was the first enemy of
   Christianity, or rather the first personage whom Christianity treated
   as such. It is enough to say that neither pious frauds nor calumnies
   were spared to defame it. Criticism in such a case will hardly attempt
   a rehabilitation, the contradictory documents are wanting. All that can
   be done is to point out the similarity of the traditions, and the
   determined disparagement which is to be remarked in them.

   But criticism, at least, should not forget to mention in connexion with
   the Samaritan theurgist a coincidence which is perhaps not altogether
   fortuitous. In a story of the historian Josephus, a Jewish magician
   named Simon, born in Cyprus, plays the part of pander to Felix. The
   circumstances of this tale do not fit in with those of Simon of Gitton
   well enough for him to be made responsible for the acts of a person who
   could have nothing in common with him, but a name then borne by
   thousands of men, and a pretension to supernatural powers, which he
   unhappily shared with a host of his contemporaries.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVI.

  GENERAL PROGRESS OF CHRISTIAN MISSIONS.

   We have seen Barnabas depart from Antioch to carry to the faithful of
   Jerusalem the alms of their brethren in Syria. We have seen him share
   in some of the emotions which the persecutions of Herod Agrippa I.
   caused the Church at Jerusalem. Let us return with him to Antioch where
   all the creative activity of the sect appears at that moment to have
   been concentrated.

   Barnabas brought with him a zealous collaborator, his cousin John-Mark,
   the favourite disciple of Peter, and the son of that Mary with whom the
   first of the apostles loved to dwell. Without doubt in taking with him
   this new co-operator, he was already thinking of the new enterprise
   with which he intended to associate him. Perhaps he even foresaw the
   divisions which that new enterprise would raise up, and was by no means
   unwilling to mix up with them a man whom he knew to be Peters right
   hand, that is to say, the right hand of that one of the apostles who
   had the greatest authority in general matters.

   This enterprise was nothing less than a series of great missions,
   starting from Antioch and having for programme the conversion of the
   whole world. Like all resolutions taken by the Church, this was
   attributed to the direct inspiration of the Holy Ghost. A special
   vocation, a supernatural choice, was believed to have been communicated
   to the Church of Antioch whilst she was fasting and praying. Perhaps
   one of the prophets of the Church, Menaham or Lucius, in one of his
   fits of speaking with tongues, uttered words from which it was
   concluded that Paul and Barnabas had been selected for this mission.
   Paul himself was convinced that God had chosen him from his mother's
   womb for the work to which he was henceforward wholly to devote
   himself.

   The two apostles took as coadjutor, under the name of subordinate, to
   attend to the material cares of their enterprise, this John-Mark, whom
   Barnabas had brought with him from Jerusalem. When the preparations
   were finished there were fastings and prayer; it is said that hands
   were laid upon the apostles, in sign of a mission conferred by the
   Church herself; they were commended to the grace of God and they
   departed. Whither would they go? What world would they evangelize? That
   is what we have now to inquire.

   All the great primitive Christian missions turned towards the West, or
   in other words, took the Roman Empire for their stage and framework. If
   we except some small portions of territory tributary to the Arsacides,
   comprehended between the Tigris and the Euphrates, the Empire of the
   Parthians received no Christian missions in the first century. The
   Tigris was on the Eastern side, a boundary which Christianity did not
   overpass until under the Sapanides. Two great causes, the Mediterranean
   and the Roman Empire, decided this cardinal fact.

   The Mediterranean had been for a thousand years the great route where
   all civilization and all ideas intermingled. The Romans, having
   delivered it from piracy, had made it an unequalled means of
   communication. A numerous fleet of coasters made travelling on the
   shores of this great lake very easy. The relative security which the
   routes of the Empire afforded, the guarantees which were found in the
   public powers, the diffusions of the Jews on all the coasts of the
   Mediterranean, the use of the Greek language in the Eastern part of
   that sea, the unity of civilization which the Greeks first, and then
   the Romans had created there, made the map of the Empire the very map
   of the countries reserved for Christian missions, and destined to
   become Christian. The Roman orbis became the Christian orbis, and in
   this sense it may be said that the founders of the Empire were the
   founders of the Christian monarchy, or at least, that they sketched its
   outlines. Every province conquered by the Roman Empire has been a
   province conquered by Christianity. If we figure to ourselves the
   apostles in the presence of an Asia Minor, of a Greece, of an Italy
   divided into a hundred petty republics, of a Spain, an Africa, an Egypt
   in possession of ancient national institutions, we cannot imagine them
   as successful, or rather we cannot imagine how the project of them
   could ever have been conceived. The unity of the Empire was the
   preliminary condition of every great scheme of religious proselytism
   setting itself above nationalities. The Empire felt it strongly in the
   fourth century. It became Christian; it saw that Christianity was the
   religion which it had made without knowing it, the religion bounded by
   its frontiers, identified with it, and capable of securing for it a
   second term of life. The Church on her side made herself altogether
   Roman, and has remained to our days as a relic of the Empire. Paul
   might have been told that Claudius was his first coadjutor; Claudius
   might have been told that this Jew, who set out from Antioch, was about
   to found the most solid part of the Imperial edifice. Both would no
   doubt have been infinitely astonished, but the saying would have been
   true all the same.

   Of all the countries outside Judea, the first in which Christianity
   established itself was naturally Syria. The neighbourhood of Palestine
   and the great number of Jews established in that country rendered such
   a thing inevitable. Cyprus, Asia Minor, Macedonia, Greece, and Italy,
   were visited by the apostolic messengers after some years. The south of
   Gaul, Spain, the coast of Africa, though they may have been evangelized
   sufficiently early, may be considered as forming a more recent course
   in the substructure of Christianity.

   It was the same in Egypt. Egypt plays scarcely any part in apostolic
   history. Christian missionaries appear to have systematically turned
   their backs upon it. This country, which from the beginning of the
   third century became the scene of such important events in the history
   of religion, was at first greatly behind hand in its Christianity.
   Apollos is the only Christian doctor produced by the school of
   Alexandria, and even he learned Christianity in his travels. The cause
   of this remarkable phenomenon must be sought in the little
   communication which then existed between the Jews of Egypt and those of
   Palestine, and above all, in the fact that Jewish Egypt had in some
   sort its separate religious development. Egypt had Philo and the
   Therapeutics; that was its Christianity which deterred it from lending
   an attentive ear to the other. Pagan Egypt possessed religious
   institutions much more definite than those of Grco-Roman Paganism the
   Egyptian religion was still in all its strength; it was almost at this
   very time that the great temples of Enoch and of Ombos were built, and
   that the hope of having in the little Csarion a last king Ptolemy, a
   national Messiah, raised from the earth those sanctuaries of Dendereh,
   of Hermonthis, comparable to the finest Pharaohnic work. Christianity
   seated itself everywhere on the ruins of national sentiment and local
   religions. The spiritual degradation of Egypt besides caused there a
   variety of aspirations which elsewhere opened an easy way to
   Christianity.

   A rapid flash, coming out of Syria, illuminating almost simultaneously
   the three great peninsulas of Asia Minor, Greece, and Italy, and soon
   followed by a second reflection which embraced almost all the coasts of
   the Mediterranean, such was the first apparition of Christianity. The
   journey of the apostolic ship is almost always the same. Christian
   preaching appears to follow almost invariably in the wake of the Jewish
   emigration. As an infection which, taking its point of departure from
   the bottom of the Mediterranean, appears at the same moment at a
   certain number of points on the littoral by a secret correspondence, so
   Christianity had its ports of arrival as it were settled beforehand.
   These ports were almost all marked by Jewish colonies. A synagogue
   preceded in general the establishment of the Church. One might say a
   train of powder, or better still a sort of electric chain along which
   the new idea ran in an almost instantaneous fashion.

   For five hundred years, in effect, Judaism, until then confined to the
   East and to Egypt, had taken its flight towards the West. Cyrene,
   Cyprus, Asia Minor, certain cities of Macedonia and of Greece and
   Italy, had important Jewries. The Jews gave the first example of that
   species of patriotism, that the Parsees, the Armenians, and up to a
   certain point the modern Greeks were to exhibit later: a patriotism
   which was extremely energetic although not attached to a definite soil;
   a patriotism of merchants scattered everywhere; recognizing one another
   as brothers everywhere; a patriotism aiming at the formation not of
   great compact states but of little autonomous communities in the bosoms
   of other states. Strongly associated together, the Jews of the
   dispersion constituted in the cities, congregations almost independent
   having their own magistrates and their own council. In certain cities
   they had an ethnarch or alabarch, invested with almost sovereign
   rights. They inhabited separate districts, withdrawn from the ordinary
   jurisdiction, much despised by the rest of the world, but very happy in
   themselves. They were rather poor than rich. The time of the great
   Jewish fortunes had not yet come; they began in Spain under the
   Visigoths. The monopoly of finance by the Jews was the effect of the
   administrative incapacity of the barbarians, of the hatred which the
   Church conceived for monetary science, and its superficial ideas on the
   subject of usury. Under the Roman Empire there was nothing of this
   kind. Now when the Jew is not rich his pour, easy middleclass life is
   not to his taste. In any case he well knows how to support poverty.
   What he knows even better is how to ally religious preoccupation of the
   most exalted kind with the rarest commercial ability. Theological
   eccentricites by no means exclude good sense in business. In England,
   in America, in Russia, the most eccentric sectaries (Irvingites,
   Latter-day Saints, Raskolniks) are exceedingly good merchants.

   It has always been the peculiarity of the Jewish life, piously
   practiced, to produce great gaiety and cordiality. There was love in
   that little world; they love a past, and the same past; the religious
   ceremonies surrounded life very gently. Something analogous to these
   communities exist to this day in every great Turkish city; for example
   Greek, Armenian, Jewish, Smyrniots, communities, close brotherhoods in
   which every member knows every other, live together and--intrigue
   together. In these little republics, religious questions always prevail
   over questions of politics, or rather make up for the want of them. A
   heresy is there an affair of the State; a schism is always a personal
   question at bottom. The Romans, with but few exceptions, never
   penetrated these reserved quarters. The synagogues promulgated their
   decrees, decreed honours, and acted like living municipalities. The
   influence of the corporations was very great. At Alexandria it was of
   the first order and governed the whole internal history of the city. At
   Rome the Jews were numerous and formed an element which was not to be
   despised. Cicero represents having dared to resist them as an act of
   courage. Csar favoured them, and found them faithful. Tiberius, in
   order to restrain them, resorted to the severest measures. Caligula,
   whose reign was a mournful one for them in the East, gave them their
   liberty of association in Rome. Claudius, who favoured them in Judea,
   found himself obliged to drive them out of the city. They were to be
   met with everywhere, and it was openly said of them, as of the Greeks,
   that though conquered they had imposed their laws upon their
   conquerors.

   The disposition of the native populations towards these strangers
   varied greatly. On the one hand the sentiment of revulsion and of
   antipathy, that the Jews by their spirit of jealous isolation, their
   rancorous temper and unsociable habits, produced around them everywhere
   where they were numerous and organised, manifested itself most
   strongly. When they were free, they were in reality privileged; since
   they enjoyed the advantages of society without bearing its cost.
   Impostors profited by the movement of curiosity which their worship
   excited, and under the pretence of exposing its secrets delivered
   themselves to friends of every kind. Violent and half-burlesque
   pamphlets like that of Apion, pamphlets from which profane writers have
   too often drawn their inspiration, were circulated and served as food
   for the wrath of the Pagan public. The Jews seem to have been generally
   niggardly and given to complaining. They were believed to be a secret
   society, bearing no good will to the rest of the world, whose members
   advanced themselves at any cost to the injury of others. Their strange
   customs, their aversion to certain meats, their dirtiness, their want
   of distinction, the fetid odour which they exhaled, their religious
   scruples, their minuteness in the observance of the Sabbath, were found
   ridiculous. Placed under the ban of society, the Jews by a natural
   consequence, took no pains to figure as gentle people. They were met
   everywhere travelling in clothes shining with filth, an awkward air, a
   fatigued demeanour, a pale complexion, large diseased eyes, a
   sanctimonious expression, shutting themselves apart with their wives,
   their children, their bundles of bedding, and the basket which
   contained all their goods. In the cities they carried on the meanest
   trades; they were beggars, rag-pickers, dealers in second-hand goods,
   sellers of tinder boxes. Their law and their history were unjustly
   depreciated. At one time they were found to be superstitious and cruel;
   at another, atheists and despisers of the gods. Their aversion to
   images was looked upon as sheer impiety. Circumcision especially
   furnished the theme for interminable raillery.

   But those superficial judgments were not those of all. The Jews had as
   many friends as detractors. Their gravity, their good morals, the
   simplicity of their worship, charmed a crowd of people. Something
   superior was felt in them. A vast monotheistic and Mosaic propaganda
   was organised; a sort of singular whirlwind formed itself around this
   singular little people. The poor Jewish pedlar of the Transtevere,
   going out in the morning with his flat basket of haberdashery, often
   returned in the evening rich with the alms of a pious brother. Women
   were especially attracted by these missionaries in tatters. Juvenal
   reckons this love for the Jewish religion amongst the vices with which
   he reproaches the women of his time. Those who were converted boasted
   of the treasure which they had found, and the happiness which they
   enjoyed. Only the Greek and the Roman spirit resisted energetically;
   contempt and hatred of the Jews are the sign of all cultivated minds:
   Cicero, Horace, Seneca, Juvenal, Tacitus, Quintilian, Suetonius. On the
   contrary that enormous mass of mixed populations which the empire had
   subjugated, populations to which the Roman spirit and the Greek wisdom
   were foreign or indifferent, attached themselves in crowds to a society
   in which they found touching examples of concord, of charity, of mutual
   help, of clannish attachment, of a taste for work, of a proud poverty.
   Mendicity, which was at a late date an exclusively Christian business,
   was then a Jewish trade. The beggar by trade, "born to it," presented
   himself to the poets of the time as a Jew.

   The exemption from certain civil charges, particularly the military,
   helped also to cause the fate of the Jews to be regarded as enviable.
   The State then demanded many sacrifices and gave little moral
   satisfaction. Everything was icily cold as on a flat plain without
   shelter. Life, so sad in the midst of Paganism regained its charm and
   its value in the warm atmosphere of synagogue and church. It was not
   liberty which was to be found there. The brethren spied much upon each
   other, everyone worrying himself about the affairs of everyone else.
   But although the interior life of these little communities was greatly
   agitated, they were happy enough; no one quitted them; there were no
   apostasies. The poor were content in them; they regarded the rich
   without envy, with the tranquility of a good conscience. The really
   democratic sentiment of the folly of the world, of the vanity of riches
   and of earthly grandeur finely expressed itself there. Little was known
   about the Pagan world and it was judged with an outrageous severity;
   Roman civilization was regarded as a mass of impurities and of odious
   vices, just as the honest workman of our own days, saturated with
   socialistic declamations, pictures the "aristocrats" to himself in the
   darkest colours. But there was then life, gaiety and interest just as
   there is to-day in the poorest synagogues of Poland and Galicia. The
   want of delicacy and of elegance in the habits of the people was atoned
   for by the family spirit and patriarchal good feeling. In high society,
   on the contrary, egotism and isolation of soul had borne their last
   fruits.

   The word of Zachariah was verified: that men "shall take hold of the
   skirt of him that is a Jew, saying we will go with you, for we perceive
   that God is with you." There was no great town where the Sabbath fasts
   and other ceremonies of Judaism were not observed. Josephus dares to
   provoke those who doubted it, to consider their country and even their
   own house to see if there were not confirmation of what he said. The
   presence in Rome and near the Emperor of many members of the family of
   the Herods, who practised their worship ostentatiously in the face of
   all, contributed much to this publicity. The Sabbath besides imposed
   itself by a sort of necessity in the quarters where there were Jews.
   Their obstinate determination not to open their shops on that day
   forced their neighbours to modify their habits. It is thus that at
   Salonica one might say that the Sabbath is still observed, the Jewish
   population there being rich enough and numerous enough to make the law
   and to order the day of rest by closing its places of business. Almost
   the equal of the Jew, often in company with him, the Syrian was an
   active instrument in the conquest of the West by the East. They were
   confounded occasionally, and Cicero thought he had found the common
   feature which united them, when he called them "the nations born for
   servitude." It was by that, that their future was assured, for the
   future was then for the slaves. A not less essential characteristic of
   the Syrian was his facility, his suppleness, the superficial clearness
   of his mind. The Syrian nature is like a fugitive image in the clouds
   of Heaven. From time to time we see certain lines traced there with
   grace, but those lines never form a complete design. In the shade, by
   the undecided light of a lamp, the Syrian woman under her veil, with
   her vague eyes and her infinite softness, produces some instants of
   illusion. But when we wish to analyse that beauty it vanishes; it will
   not bear examination. All that besides lasts but three or four years.
   That which is charming in the Syrian race is the child of five or six
   years of age; the universe of Greece where the child is nothing, the
   young man inferior to the mature man, the mature man to the old. Syrian
   intelligence attracts by an air of promptitude and lightness, but it
   wants firmness and solidity; something like the golden wine of the
   Lebanon which is very pleasant at first but of which one tires very
   soon. The true gifts of God have in them something at once fine and
   strong, something intoxicating, yet lasting. Greece is more appreciated
   to-day than she has ever been and she will be appreciated more and
   more.

   Many of the Syrian emigrants whom the desire of making their fortunes
   had drawn westwards, were more or less attached to Judaism. Those who
   were not, remained faithful to the worship of their villages; that is
   to say to the memory of some temple dedicated to a local "Jupiter," who
   was usually simply the supreme being, differentiated by a particular
   title. It was at bottom a species of monotheism, which these Syrians
   brought under cover of their strange gods. Compared at least with the
   profoundly distinct divine personalities, which Greek and Roman
   polytheism offered, the gods whom they worshipped, for the most part
   synonyms of the Sun, were almost the brothers of the One God. Like long
   enervating chants these Syrian rites, might appear less dry than the
   Latin worship, less empty than the Greek. The Syrian women found in
   them something at once voluptuous and exalted. These women were at all
   times eccentric beings, disputing between the devil and God, floating
   between saintliness and demoniacal possession. The saint of serious
   virtues, of heroic renunciations, of steadfast resolutions, belongs to
   other races, and other climates: the saint of strong imagination,
   absolute enthusiasm, of ready love, is the saint of Syria. The witch of
   our middle ages is the slave of Satan by vulgarity or by sin; the
   "possessed" of Syria, is the mad-woman of the ideal world, the woman
   whose sentiment has been wounded, who avenges herself by frenzy or
   shuts herself up in silence, who only needs a gentle word or a
   benignant look to cure her. Transported to the Western World, these
   Syrians acquired influence, sometimes by the evil arts of woman, more
   often by a certain moral superiority and a real capacity. Fifty years
   later this will be specially seen, when the most important persons in
   Rome married Syrian women, who immediately acquired a great ascendency
   in affairs. The Mussulman woman of our days, a clamorous, Megra,
   stupidly fanatical, scarcely existing save for evil, almost incapable
   of virtue, ought not to make us forget the Julia Domna, the Julia Msa,
   the Julia Mamsa, the Julia Soemia, who upheld in Rome in the matter of
   religion mystical instincts, and a tolerance, hitherto unknown. What is
   very remark-able, also, is that the Syrian dynasty, conducted by fate,
   showed itself favourable to Christianity, that Mamacus, and later, the
   Emperor Philippus, the Arabian, passed for Christians. Christianity in
   the third and fourth centuries was especially the religion of Syria.
   After Palestine, Syria had the greatest share in its foundation.

   It was especially at Rome that the Syrian in the first century
   exercised his penetrating activity. Charged with almost all the minor
   trades, guide, messenger; letterbearer, the Syrus entered everywhere,
   introducing with himself the language and the manners of his country.
   He had neither the pride nor the philosophical hauteur of the European.
   Still less their bodily strength: weak of body, pale, often nervous,
   not knowing how to eat or to sleep at regular hours after the fashion
   of our heavy and solid races, eating little meat, living upon onions
   and pumpkins, sleeping but little and lightly, the Syrian died young,
   and was habitually ill. What were peculiar to him, were his humility,
   his gentleness, his affability, and a certain goodness; no solidity of
   mind, but an infinite charm; little good sense, except in matters of
   business, but an astonishing ardour, and a seductiveness altogether
   feminine. The Syrian, having never had any political life, has an
   altogether special aptitude for religious movements. This poor
   Maronite, humble, ragged as he is, has made the greatest of
   revolutions. His ancestor, the Syrus of Rome, was the most zealous
   bearer of the good news to all the afflicted. Every year brought to
   Greece, to Italy, to Gaul, colonies of these Syrians, urged by the
   natural taste which they had for small business. They were recognized
   on the ships by their numerous families, by their troops of pretty
   children almost of the same age, who followed them: the mother, with
   the childish air of a little girl of fourteen, holding herself by the
   side of her husband, submissive, gently smiling, scarcely bigger than
   her elder sons. The heads in these little groups are not strikingly
   marked; there is certainly no Archimedes, Plato or Phidias amongst
   them. But the Syrian merchant arrived in Rome, will be a man, good and
   pitiful, charitable to his fellow countrymen, loving the poor. He will
   talk with the slaves, revealing to them an asylum, where those unhappy
   wretches, reduced by Roman harshness to the most desolating solitude
   may find a little consolation. The Greek and Latin races of masters did
   not know how to profit by a humble position. The slave of these races
   passed his life in rebellion, and the desire of evil. The ideal slave
   of antiquity has all the defects; he is gluttonous, a liar, malicious,
   the natural enemy of his master. In this way he proved his nobility in
   a sort of way; he protested against an unnatural position. The good
   Syrian did not protest; he accepted his ignominy and sought to profit
   by it as much as possible. He conciliated the good-will of his master,
   dared to speak to him; knew how to please his mistress. This great
   agent of democracy went thus unpicking, stitch by stitch, the knot of
   antique civilization. The old societies founded upon disdain, upon the
   inequality of races, upon military courage, were lost. Weakness and
   humility were now to become an advantage for the perfecting of virtue.
   Roman aristocracy and Greek wisdom, will keep up the struggle for three
   centuries. Tacitus will find it good that thousands of these
   unfortunates should be transported: Si interissent, vile damnum. The
   Roman aristocracy will grow angry, will find it bad that such scum
   should have their gods, their institutions. But the victory is written
   beforehand. The Syrian, the poor man who loves his kind, who shares
   with them, who associates with them, will win the day. The Roman
   aristocracy will perish for want of mercy.

   To explain the revolution which is about to be accomplished, we must
   take into account the political, social, moral, intellectual, and
   religious state of the countries, where Jewish proselytism had opened
   the soil for Christian preaching to fertilize. That study will show, I
   hope, convincingly that the conversion of the world to Jewish and
   Christian ideas was inevitable, and will leave room for astonishment,
   only upon one point, which is, that conversion should be effected so
   slowly and so late.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVII.

  STATE OF THE WORLD AT THE MIDDLE OF THE FIRST CENTURY.

   The political state of the world was of the saddest kind. All authority
   was concentrated at Rome and in the legions. There occurred the most
   shameful and degrading scenes. The Roman aristocracy, which had
   conquered the world, and which, in short, had alone governed under the
   Csars, delivered itself up to the most frightful Saturnalia of grime
   which the world has ever seen. Csar and Augustus, in establishing the
   aristocracy, had seen with perfect accuracy the necessities of their
   times. The world was so low in the political sense that no other
   government was possible. Since Rome had conquered provinces
   innumerable, the ancient constitution, founded on the privileges of
   patrician families, a species of obstinate and malevolent Tories, could
   not subsist. But Augustus had failed in all the duties of true policy
   in that he left the future to chance. Without regular hereditary
   succession, without fixed rules of adoption, without electoral laws,
   without constitutional limitations, Csarism was like a colossal weight
   on the deck of a ship without ballast. The most terrible shocks were
   inevitable. Thrice in a century, under Caligula, under Nero, and under
   Domitian, the greatest power which had ever existed fell into the hands
   of execrable or extravagant men. Hence, horrors, which have scarcely
   been exceeded by the monsters of the Mongal dynasties. In that fatal
   series of sovereigns we are reduced almost to excusing a Tiberius, who
   was absolutely wicked only towards the close of his life! a Claudius,
   who was simply eccentric, awkward and surrounded by evil advisers. Rome
   became a school of vice and cruelty. It must be added that the evil
   came especially from the East, from those flatterers of low rank, from
   these infamous men whom Egypt and Syria sent to Rome, where profiting
   by the oppression of the true Romans, they felt themselves all powerful
   with the scoundrels who governed them. The most shocking ignominies of
   the Empire, such as the apotheosis of the Emperor, his deification,
   when alive, came from the East, and especially from Egypt which was
   then one of the most corrupt countries in the universe.

   The true Roman spirit, in effect, still survived. Human nobility was
   far from being extinct. A great tradition of pride and of virtue was
   kept up in some families, which came to power with Nerva, and made the
   splendour of the century of the Antonines of which Tacitus has been the
   eloquent interpreter. A time, which was that of minds so profoundly
   honest as Quintilian, Pliny the younger and Tacitus, is not a time of
   which we need despair. The disturbance of the surface did not affect
   the great basis of honesty and of seriousness which underlay good
   society in Rome; some families still afforded models of valour, of
   devotion to duty, of concord, of solid virtue. There were in the noble
   houses admirable wives, admirable sisters. Was there ever a more
   touching fate than that of the young and chaste Octavia, daughter of
   Claudius, and wife of Nero, pure amidst so many infamies, killed at
   twenty-two years of age, before she had had time to enjoy her life? The
   women described in the inscriptions as Castissim, univir are not
   rare. Wives accompanied their husbands in exile; others shared their
   noble deaths. The old Roman simplicity was not lost; the education of
   children was grave and careful. The noblest women laboured with their
   hands at woolwork; the cares of the toilette were almost unknown in
   good families.

   The excellent statesmen who sprang up under Trajan were not improvised.
   They had served under preceding reigns; only they had had little
   influence, cast into the shade as they were by the freedmen and the
   basest favourites of the Emperor. Men of the highest character thus
   occupied exalted positions under Nero. The skeleton was good, the
   accession of the bad Emperors to power, disastrous though it was, did
   not suffice to change the general course of affairs and the principles
   of the State. The Empire, far from being in decadence, was in all the
   force of the most robust youth. The decadence was coming, but that
   would be two centuries later, and, strange to say, under the least evil
   of the sovereigns. Looked at from the political point of view, the
   situation was analogous to that of France, which, for want of an
   invariable rule since the Revolution as to the succession of powers,
   has gone through the most perilous adventures, without its internal
   organisation and national force suffering too much. From the moral
   point of view we may compare the time of which we speak with the
   eighteenth century, an epoch which we might fancy to be altogether
   corrupt, if we judged by the memories, the manuscript literature, the
   collection of anecdotes of the times, yet, in which houses maintained a
   great severity of morals.

   Philosophy had allied itself with the honest Roman families, and
   resisted nobly. The Stoic school produced the great characters of
   Cremastius Cordus, of Thraseas, of Arria, of Helvidius Priscus, of
   Annus Cornelius, of Musonius Rufus--admirable masters of aristocratic
   virtue. The stiffness and the exaggerations of this school, arose from
   the horrible cruelty of the government of the Csars. The perpetual
   thought of the good man was how he might best endure tortures and
   prepare for death. Lucan, with bad taste, Persius, with greater
   talents, expressed the highest sentiments of a great soul. Seneca the
   philosopher, Pliny the elder, Papirius Fabianus, maintained an elevated
   tradition of science and philosophy. Everyone did not yield, there were
   still wise men. But, too often, they had no other resource than death.
   The ignoble parts of humanity were at times in the ascendent. The
   spirit of vertigo and cruelty then overflowed and turned Rome into a
   veritable hell.

   This government, so frightfully unequal at Rome, was much better in the
   provinces. Few of the disorders which shocked the capital were felt
   there. In spite of its defects the Roman administration was much better
   than the royalties and republics which the conquest had suppressed. The
   time of the sovereign municipalities had gone by for centuries. These
   little states had destroyed themselves by their egotism, their jealous
   spirit, their ignorance, or their little care for private liberties.
   The ancient Greek life, all struggles, all exterior, satisfied no one.
   It had been charming in its day, but this brilliant Olympus of a
   democracy of demi-gods having lost its freshness, had become something
   dry, cold, insignificant, vain, superficial, for want of goodness and
   of solid honesty. This, it was, which constituted the legitimacy of the
   Macedonian domination, then of the Roman administration. The Empire did
   not yet know the excess of centralization. Until the time of
   Diocletian, it left much liberty to the provinces and cities. Kingdoms,
   almost independent, existed in Palestine, in Syria, in Asia Minor, in
   little Armenia, in Thrace under the protection of Rome. These kingdoms
   became dangers only in the days of Caligula, because the rules of the
   great and profound political policy of Augustus were neglected. The
   free cities, and they were numerous, governed themselves according to
   their own laws; they had the legislative power and all the magistracy
   of an autonomous state, until the third century, municipal decrees
   began with the formula, "The senate and the people . . ." The theatres
   served, not only for the pleasures of the stage, they were the centres
   of opinion and of movement. The majority of the towns were under
   various names, little republics. The municipal spirit was very strong
   in them; they had not lost the right of declaring war--a melancholy
   right which had turned the world into a field of carnage. "The benefits
   conferred by the Roman people on the human race," were the theme of
   declamations which were sometimes adulatory, but the sincerity of which
   cannot always be denied with justice. The worship of the "Roman peace,"
   the idea of a great democracy organised under the protection of Rome
   was at the bottom of all thoughts. A Greek orator exhibited vast
   erudition in proving that the glory of Rome ought to be gathered
   amongst all the branches of the Hellenic race as a sort of common
   patrimony. In what concerned Syria, Asia Minor, Egypt, it may be said
   that the Roman conquest destroyed no liberty. These countries had long
   been dead to the political life which they had never had.

   In short, notwithstanding the exactions of the governors, and the
   violence, inseparable from an absolute government the world in many
   respects had never yet been so happy. An administration coming from a
   distant centre was so great an advantage that even the plunderings of
   the Prtors in the last days of the Republic had not been sufficient to
   make it odious. The Julian law, besides, had greatly narrowed the field
   of abuse and of collusions. The follies or the cruelties of the
   Emperor, except under Nero, affected only the Roman aristocracy and the
   immediate surroundings of the Prince. There never was a time when a man
   who did not meddle in politics could live more comfortably. The
   republics of antiquity, in which everyone was forced to occupy himself
   with the quarrels of parties, were exceedingly uncomfortable places of
   abode. People were incessantly upset or proscribed. Now the time seemed
   expressly fitted for large proselytisms above the quarrels of the
   little towns and the rivalries of dynasties. Such attempts against
   liberty as there were, arose out of what was still left of independence
   in provinces or communities much more than from the Roman
   administration. We have had, and we shall still have, numerous
   instances of this kind of thing to remark.

   In those of the conquered countries in which political necessities had
   not existed for centuries, and where the people were deprived only of
   the right to tear each other to pieces by continual wars, the Empire
   was a period of prosperity and of well-being, such as had never been
   known, we may even add without paradox, of liberty, On the one hand,
   freedom of trade and of industry, of which the Greek Republics had no
   idea, became possible. On the other, liberty of thought could only gain
   by the new system. That liberty is always stronger when it has to deal
   with a king or a prince, than when it has to negotiate with a narrow
   and jealous citizen. The ancient republics did not possess it. The
   Greeks did without it in great things, thanks to the incomparable
   strength of their genius, but it ought not to be forgotten that Athens
   had her inquisition. The inquisition was the archon king; the holy
   office was the Royal Porch, whither were taken accusations of
   "impiety." Accusations of that kind were very numerous; it is
   concerning cases of this description that most of the great Attic
   orations were delivered. Not merely philosophical crimes, such as
   denying God or providence, but the slightest blow struck at the
   municipal worship, the preaching of foreign religions, the most
   childish infractions of the scrupulous legislation of the mysteries,
   were crimes which might be punished with death. The gods whom
   Aristophanes mocked at on the stage, killed sometimes. They killed
   Socrates, they wanted to kill Alcibiades. Anaxagoras, Protagoras,
   Theodorus the Atheist, Diagoras of Melos, Prodicus of Ceos, Stilpo,
   Aristotle, Theophrastus, Aspasia, Euripides, were more or less
   seriously disquieted. Liberty of thought was, in short, the fruit of
   the royalties which sprang out of the Macedonian conquest. It was the
   Attali, the Ptolemies, who first gave to thinkers the facilities that
   none of the old republics had ever offered to them. The Roman Empire
   continued the same tradition. There was, under the empire, more than
   one arbitrary act against the philosophers, but they arose always,
   through their interfering with politics. We may seek in vain in the
   list of Roman laws before Constantine for a text against the liberty of
   thought, in the history of the emperors for a process against abstract
   doctrine. Not one scholar was disturbed. Men who would have been burned
   in the middle ages, such as Galen, Lucian, Plotinus, lived on in peace,
   protected by the law. The empire inaugurated a period of liberty,
   inasmuch as it extinguished the absolute sovereignty of the family, of
   the city, of the tribe, and replaced or tempered these sovereignties by
   that of the state. Now an absolute power becomes more vexatious in
   proportion to the narrowness of the limits within which it is
   exercised. The ancient republics, feudality, tyrannized over the
   individual much more than the State did. We must admit that the Roman
   Empire at certain periods persecuted Christianity cruelly, but, at
   least, it did not stop it. Now the republics would have rendered it
   impossible; Judaism, if it had not submitted to the pressure of Roman
   authority, would have been sufficient to stifle it. The Pharisees were
   prevented from crushing out Christianity only by the Roman magistrates.

   Large ideas of universal brotherhood springing for the most part out of
   stoicism, a sort of general sentiment of humanity, were the fruits of
   the less narrow system and of the less exclusive education to which the
   individual was subjected. There were dreams of a new era and of new
   worlds. The public wealth was great, and, notwithstanding the
   imperfection of the economic doctrines of the times, wealth was widely
   spread. Morals were not what they have often been imagined to be. At
   Rome, it is true, all the vices were displayed with a revolting
   cynicism; the spectacles, especially, had introduced a frightful
   corruption. Certain countries, like Egypt, have thus sunk into the
   lowest depths. But there was, in most of the provinces, a middle class,
   where goodness, conjugal faith, the domestic virtues, probity, were
   sufficiently spread out. Is there anywhere an idea of family life in a
   world of honest citizens of small towns, more charming than that which
   Plutarch has left us? What bonhomie! What gentleness of manners! What
   chaste and amiable simplicity! Chronea was evidently not the only
   place where life was so pure and so innocent.

   Customs even outside Rome were still to a certain ex-tent cruel, it may
   be through the memory of antique manners, everywhere rather sanguinary,
   it may be through the special influence of Roman hardness. But there
   was progress even in this respect. What soft and pure sentiment, what
   impression of tender melancholy had not found its tenderest expression
   by the pen of Virgil or Tibullus? The world grew more yielding, lost
   its antique rigour, acquired gentleness and susceptibility. Maxims of
   humanity grew common; equality, the abstract idea of the rights of man,
   were loudly preached by stoicism. Woman, thanks to the dowry system of
   the Roman law, became more and more her own mistress; precepts on the
   manner of treating slaves improved; Seneca ate with his. The slave was
   no longer of necessity that grotesque and malicious being, whom Latin
   comedy introduced to provoke outbursts of laughter, and whom Cato
   recommended to be treated as a beast of burden. The times have now
   greatly changed. The slave is morally the equal of his master; it is
   admitted that he is capable of virtue, of fidelity, of devotion, and he
   has given proofs that he is so. Prejudices as to nobility of birth are
   dying out. Many very humane and very just laws are enacted even under
   the worst of the Emperors. Tiberius was an able financier; he founded
   upon an excellent basis an establishment of the nature of a land-bank.
   Nero brought to the system of taxation, until then iniquitous and
   barbarous, improvements which put our own times to the blush. The
   progress of legislation was considerable, though the punishment of
   death was stupidly frequent. Love of the poor, sympathy for all,
   alms-giving, became virtues.

   The theatre was one of the most insupportable scandals to honest
   people, and was one of the first causes of the antipathy of Jews and
   Judaizers of every class against the profane civilization of the time.
   These gigantic circles appeared to them the sewer in which all the
   vices festered. Whilst the front ranks applauded, repulsion and horror
   alone were produced on the upper benches. The spectacles of gladiators
   were established in the provinces only with difficulty. The Greek
   countries at least objected to them, and clung more often to their
   ancient Greek exercises. The sanguinary games preserved always in the
   East a very pronounced mark of their Roman origin. The Athenians in
   emulation of the Corinthians having, one day deliberated as to
   imitating these barbarous games, a philosopher is said to have risen
   and moved that before this was done, the altar of Pity should be
   overthrown. The horror of the theatre, of the stadium, of the
   gymnasium, that is to say, of the public places, and of what
   constituted essentially a Greek or a Roman city, was thus one of the
   deepest sentiments of the Christian, and one of those which produced
   the greatest results. Ancient civilization was a public civilization;
   everything was done in the open air, before the assembled citizens. It
   was the reverse of our societies, where life is altogether private and
   closed within the compass of the house. The theatre was the heir of the
   agora and of the forum. The anathema uttered against the theatre
   rebounded upon all society. A profound rivalry was established between
   the Church on the one hand, the public games on the other. The slave,
   driven from the games, betook himself to the Church. I never sit down
   in these mournful arenas, which are always the best preserved ruins of
   an ancient city, without seeing there in the spirit the struggle of the
   two worlds--here the honest poor man, already half a Christian, sitting
   in the last rank, veiling his face, and going out indignant--there a
   philosopher rising suddenly and reproaching the crowd with its
   baseness. These examples were rare in the first century, but the
   protest began to make itself heard. The theatre began to fall into evil
   repute.

   Legislation and the administrative rules of the Empire were still a
   veritable chaos. The central despotism, the municipal and provincial
   franchises, the caprice of the governors, the violences of the
   independent communities clashed in the strangest manner. But religious
   liberty gained by these conflicts. The splendid unitary administration
   of Trajan will be more fatal to the rising worship than the irregular
   state, full of the unforeseen, without rigorous police of the time of
   the Csars.

   The institutions of public assistance, founded on the principle that
   the State has paternal duties towards its members, developed themselves
   extensively only after the period of Nerva and Trajan. Some traces of
   them are, however, found in the first century. There were already
   charities for children, distributions of food to the poor, an assize of
   bread, with indemnities to the corn merchants, precautions about
   provisions, premiums and assurances for ship owners, bread bonds, which
   permitted corn to be bought at a reduced price. All the emperors,
   without exception, showed the greatest solicitude about these
   questions, minor ones, if you like, but on certain occasions of primary
   importance. In the earliest ages it is possible that the world had no
   need of charity. The world was young and valiant, the hospital was
   useless. The good and simple Homeric moral, according to which the host
   and the beggar alike come from Jupiter, is the moral of robust and
   cheerful youth. Greece, in her classic age, enunciated the most
   exquisite maxims of pity, of benevolence, of humanity, without mixing
   up with them any after-thought of social inquietude, or of melancholy.
   Man, at this time, was still healthy and happy; he could not take evil
   into account. In connection with institutions of mutual succour, the
   Greeks had besides, a great priority over the Romans. Never did a
   liberal or benevolent disposition spring from that cruel nobility, who
   exercised during the period of the Republic, so oppressive a power. At
   the time of which we speak, the colossal fortunes of the aristocracy,
   luxury, the great agglomerations of men at certain points, and above
   all, the hard-heartedness peculiar to the Romans, their aversion to
   pity had given birth to pauperism. The civilities of certain Emperors
   to the Roman canaille had only served to aggravate the evil. The
   sportula, the tesser frumentari encouraged vice and idleness, but
   brought no remedy to misery. Here, as in many other matters, the East
   had a great superiority over the Western world. The Jews possessed real
   charitable institutions. The temples of Egypt appear sometimes to have
   had a poor box. The college of recluses, male and female, in the
   Serapeum, at Memphis, was also in a way, a charitable establishment.
   The terrible crisis, through which humanity passed in the capital of
   the Empire, was but little felt in distant countries, where life
   remained more simple. The reproach of having poisoned the earth, the
   comparison of Rome with a courtezan, who has poured forth upon the
   world the dregs of her immorality, was just in many ways. The provinces
   were better than Rome, or rather the impure elements from all parts,
   which were collected at Rome, as in a sewer, had formed there a centre
   of infection where the old Roman virtues were stifled, and where the
   good seed from elsewhere developed itself but slowly.

   The intellectual state of various parts of the Empire was not very
   satisfactory. In this respect there was a real falling off. The higher
   culture of the mind is not as independent of political circumstances as
   is private morality, though the progress of the two may be on parallel
   lines. Marcus Aurelius was certainly a more honest man than all the old
   Greek philosophers, yet his positive notions of the realities of the
   universe are inferior to those of Aristotle or of Epicurus; for he
   believed at times in the gods as finished and distinct personages, in
   dreams and in omens. The world at the Roman period made progress in
   morality, and suffered a scientific decline. From Tiberius to Nerva,
   the decline is altogether sensible. The Greek genius, with an
   originality, a force, a richness, which have never been equalled, had
   created in the course of centuries, the national encyclopdia, the
   normal discipline of the mind. This marvellous movement dating from
   Thales, and from the first schools of Ionia (six hundred years before
   Jesus Christ) had almost stopped about the year 120 B.C. The last
   survivors of these five centuries of genius, Apollonius of Perga,
   Eratosthenes, Aristarchus, Hero, Archimedes, Hipparchus, Chrysippus,
   Carneades, Panetius, had died without leaving successors. I see only
   Posidonius and some astronomers who continued still the old traditions
   of Alexandria, of Rhodes, of Pergamus. Greece, so able in creating, had
   not known how to extract from her science, or her philosophy, a popular
   teaching, a remedy against superstition. Whilst possessing in their
   bosom admirable scientific institutions, Egypt, Asia Minor, Greece
   itself, were given over to the most foolish beliefs. Now, when science
   cannot control superstition, superstition chokes science. Between these
   two opposed forces, the duel is to the death.

   Italy, in adopting Greek science, had learned for a moment to animate
   it with a new sentiment. Lucretius had furnished the model of the great
   philosophical poem, at once hymn and blasphemy, inspiring in turn,
   serenity and despair, penetrated with that profound sentiment of human
   destiny, which was always wanting to the Greeks. They, like true
   children, as they were, took life in so gay a fashion, that they never
   dreamed of cursing the gods, or of finding nature unjust or perfidious
   towards man. Graver thoughts arose amongst the Latin philosophers. But
   Rome knew no better than Greece how to make science the basis of
   popular education. Whilst Cicero gave with an exquisite tact, a
   finished form to the ideas which he borrowed from the Greeks; whilst
   Lucretius wrote his astonishing poem; whilst Horace avowed to Augustus,
   who was in no way moved by it, his frank incredulity; whilst Ovid, one
   of the most charming poets of the time, treated the most respectable
   fables like an elegant literature; whilst the great Stoics drew
   practical consequences from the Greek philosophy, the maddest chimeras
   found believers, the faith in the marvellous was unbounded. Never was
   the world more occupied with prophecies and prodigies. The fine
   eclectic deism of Cicero, continued and perfected still more by Seneca,
   remained the belief of a small number of lofty minds exercising no
   influence whatever upon their age.

   The Empire until the time of Vespasian had nothing which could be
   called public instruction. What there was of this kind at a later date
   was confined almost exclusively to the insipid exercises of the
   grammarians; the general decadence was rather pressed on than delayed.
   The last days of the republican government, and the reign of Augustus,
   were witnesses to one of the finest literary movements that ever took
   place. But after the death of the great Emperor the decadence is rapid,
   or, more correctly, altogether sudden. The intelligent and cultivated
   society of Cicero, Atticus, Car, Mcenas, Agrippa, Pollio, had
   disappeared like a dream. Without doubt there were still enlightened
   men, men abreast of the science of their time, occupying high social
   positions, such as Seneca and the literary society of which he was the
   centre, Lucilius, Gallio, Pliny. The body of Roman law, which is
   philosophy itself in the form of a code, the putting in practice of
   Greek rationalism, continued its majestic growth. The great Roman
   families had preserved a bottom of elevated religion, and a great
   horror of superstition. The geographers, Strabo and Pomponius Mela, the
   doctor and encyclopdist, Celsus, the botanist, Dioscorides, the
   jurisconsult Sempronius Proculus, were very able men. But they were the
   exceptions. Except for some thousands of enlightened men, the world was
   plunged into the most complete ignorance of the laws of nature.
   Credulity was a general disease. Literary culture was reduced to hollow
   rhetoric, which taught nothing. The essentially moral and practical
   direction which philosophy has taken banished grand speculations. Human
   knowledge, if we except geography, made no progress. The instructed and
   well-read amateur replaced the creative scholar. The supreme defect of
   the Romans here made its fatal influence felt. This people so great for
   empire were second-rate in mind. The best educated Romans, Lucretius,
   Vitruvius, Celsus, Pliny, Seneca, were in positive knowledge the pupils
   of the Greeks. Too often even it was the most mediocre Greek science
   that they copied indifferently. The city of Rome had never had a great
   scientific school. Charlatanism reigned there almost without control.
   In short, the Latin literature which certainly had admirable parts,
   flourished but a short time and did not go out of the Western world.

   Greece happily remained faithful to her genius. The prodigious blaze of
   the Roman power had dazzled her, crushed her down, but had not
   destroyed her. In fifty years she will have reconquered the world, she
   will again be the mistress of all who think, she will sit on the throne
   with the Antonines. But now Greece herself is in one of her hours of
   lassitude. Genius is rare there; original science inferior to what it
   had been in the six preceding centuries and to what it will be in the
   pet, The school of Alexandria, decaying for nearly two centuries but
   which however in the time of Csar still possessed Sosigenes, is now
   mute.

   From the death of Augustus to the accession of Trajan must be reckoned
   as a period of momentary abasement of the human mind. The antique world
   was far from having said its last word; but the cruel trial through
   which it had passed, had robbed it of voice and heart. Better days are
   dawning, and the mind relieved from the desolating rule of the Csars
   will appear to revive. Epictetus, Plutarch, Dionysius, the
   golden-mouthed, Chrysostom, Tacitus, Quintilian, Pliny, the younger,
   Juvenal, Rufus of Ephesus, Aretus, Galen, Ptolemy, Hypsicles, Theon,
   Lucian, will recall the best days of Greece, not of that inimitable
   Greece which existed but once for the despair and the charm of those
   who love the beautiful, but a Greece rich and flourishing yet, which
   whilst confounding her gifts with those of the Roman spirit will
   produce new fruits full of originality.

   The general taste was very bad. There are no great Greek writers. The
   Latin authors whom we know, with the exception of the satirist Persius,
   are mediocre and without genius. Declamation spoiled everything. The
   principle by which the public judged the works of the mind was pretty
   much the same as in our own day. They only looked for the brilliant
   strokes. The word was no longer the simple vesture of the thought,
   drawing all its elegance from its perfect proportion to the idea it
   expressed. Words were cultivated for their own sake. The object of an
   author in writing was to show his talent. The excellence of a
   recitation or public lecture was measured by the number of applauded
   words with which it was sown. The great principle that in matters of
   art everything ought to serve for ornament, but that all that is put in
   expressly as ornament is bad, this principle, I say, was profoundly
   forgotten. The time was if you will, very literary. They only spoke of
   eloquence, of good style, and at bottom almost all the world wrote ill;
   there was not a single orator, for the good orator, and the good writer
   are men who make a trade of neither one nor the other. At the theatre
   the principal actor absorbed attention; plays were suppressed that
   showy pieces might be recited--the cantica. The spirit of literature
   was a silly dilettantism which seized even upon the Emperors, a foolish
   vanity which led everybody to try to prove that he had wit. Hence an
   extreme insipidity, interminable "Theseids," dramas written to be read
   in society, a whole poetic banality which can only be compared to the
   classic tragedies and epics of sixty years ago.

   Stoicism itself could not escape this defect, or at least did not know
   before Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius, how to find a graceful form to
   envelope its doctrines. The tragedies of Seneca are really
   extraordinary monuments where the loftiest sentiments are expressed in
   the tone of a literary charlatanism, wholly fatiguing and indicative at
   once of moral progress and an irredeemable decadence of taste. The same
   maybe said of Lucan. The tension of soul, the natural effect of the
   eminently tragic character of the situation gave birth to an inflated
   style, where the only care was to shine by fine sentences. Something of
   the same kind happened amongst us under the Revolution; the severest
   crisis that had ever been known produced scarcely anything but a
   literature of rhetoricians, full of declamation. We must not stop at
   that. The new thoughts were sometimes expressed with a great deal of
   pretension. The style of Seneca is sober, simple, and pure compared
   with that of S. Augustine. But we forgive S. Augustine his, detestable
   though it often is, and his insipid concetti, for the sake of his fine
   sentiments.

   In any case that education, noble and distinguished as it was in many
   ways, never reached the people. That would have been a comparatively
   slight inconvenience, if the people had had at least a religious
   training analogous in some sort to that which the most disinherited
   portions of our societies receive in the Church. But religion in all
   parts of the Empire was at the lowest ebb. Rome with good reason had
   left the ancient worships undisturbed, cutting away only those things
   which were inhuman, seditious, or injurious to others. She had extended
   over all a sort of official varnish which made them all very much
   alike, and after a fashion melted them down together. Unfortunately
   these old worships, of very diverse origin, had one feature in common;
   it was equally impossible to arrive at theological instruction; at an
   applied morality; at an edifying preaching; at a pastoral ministry
   really fruitful for the people. The Pagan temple was in no way what the
   synagogue and the church were in their palmy days. I mean that common
   house, school, hostelry, hospital, shelter, where the poor may find an
   asylum. It was a cold cella, where one scarcely entered, and where one
   learned nothing. The Roman worship was perhaps the least bad of those
   which were still practised. Purity of heart and of body were there
   considered as making part of real religion. By its gravity, its
   decency, its austerity, this worship, but for some farces like those of
   our carnival, was superior to the bizarre and often ridiculous
   ceremonies which persons afflicted with Oriental notions secretly
   introduced. The affectation which led the Roman patricians to
   distinguish "religion" --that is to say their own worship, from
   "superstition," that is to say foreign modes of worship, appears to us
   sufficiently puerile. All Pagan worship was essentially superstitious.
   The peasant who in our days puts a halfpenny into the box of some
   miracle-chapel, who invokes such a saint for his oxen or his horses,
   who drinks a certain water for certain diseases, is in those matters
   distinctly Pagan. Almost all our superstitions are the relics of a
   religion anterior to Christianity, which the latter has not been able
   entirely to root out. If one desired to find in our days the image of
   Paganism, it is in some secluded village at the bottom of the most
   backward country, that it is to be looked for.

   Having for guardians only a vacillating popular tradition and
   interested sacristan, the worship could not but fall back into
   adulation. Augustus, although with hesitation, suffered himself to be
   worshipped in the provinces while yet alive. Tiberius allowed that
   ignoble meeting of the Asiatic townsmen, who disputed the honour of
   erecting a temple to him, to be held under his eyes. The extravagant
   impieties of Caligula produced no re-action; outside Judaism there was
   not a single priest to resist such follies, Sprung for the most part
   from a primitive worship of natural forces, ten times transformed by
   mixtures of all kinds, and by the imagination of the people, Pagan
   worship was limited by its past. It was impossible to extract from them
   what they did not contain--deism, edification. The Fathers of the
   Church make us smile when they talk of the misdeeds of Saturn as of
   those of the father of a family, and Jupiter as a husband. And surely
   it was much more ridiculous still to erect Jupiter (that is to say the
   atmosphere) into a moral god who commands, forbids, rewards, punishes.
   In a world which aspired to possess a catechism, which can be done with
   a worship like that of Venus, which arose out of an old social
   necessity of the first Phoenecian navigators in the Mediterranean, but
   became with time an outrage to those who looked up to it more and more
   as the essence of religion?

   In all quarters, in short, the need of a monotheistic religion, having
   the morality of the divine prescriptions for its basis, was felt more
   and more. There thus came a time when natural religion, reduced to pure
   childishness, to the grimaces of sorcerers, would not suffice for
   society where humanity wanted a moral and philosophical religion.
   Buddhism, Zoroasterism answered to that need in India, in Persia.
   Orpheism and the Mysteries had attempted the same thing in the Greek
   world, with-out succeeding in a durable manner. At this epoch the
   problem presented itself to the whole of the world with a sort of
   solemn unanimity and imperious grandeur.

   Greece, it is true, formed an exception in this respect. Hellenism was
   much less used than other religions of the empire. Plutarch in his
   little Boeotian town lived by Hellenism, tranquil, happy, contented as
   a child with the calmest religious conscience. With him, not a trace of
   crisis, of rending, of disquiet, of imminent revolution. But it was
   only the Greek spirit which was capable of so infantine a serenity.
   Always satisfied with herself; proud of her past and of that brilliant
   mythology of which she possessed all the holy places, Greece did not
   share all the internal torments, which worried the rest of the world.
   Only she did not call for Christianity; only she wished to pass it by;
   only she thought to do better. She held to that eternal youth, to that
   patriotism, to that gaiety which have always characterised the
   veritable Hellene, and which to-day cause the Greek to be a stranger to
   the profound cares which eat us up. Hellenism thus found itself in a
   position to attempt a renaissance which no other of the religions of
   the empire would have been able to attempt. In the second, third, and
   fourth centuries of our era, Hellenism will constitute itself an
   organised religion by a sort of fusion of the Greek mythology and
   philosophy, and with its wonder-working philosophers, its ancient sages
   promoted to the rank of prophets, its legends of Pythagoras and of
   Apollonius, will enter into a rivalry with Christianity, which, though
   it remained powerless, was none the less the most dangerous obstacle
   which the religion of Jesus found in its path.

   That attempt was not made so early as the time of the Csars. The first
   philosophers who attempted a species of alliance between philosophy and
   Paganism--Euphrates of Tyre, Apollonius of Tyana, and Plutarch, are of
   the end of the century. Euphrates of Tyre is but little known to us.
   Legend has so covered up the warp and woof of the real biography of
   Apollonius that it is difficult to say, whether he is to be reckoned
   amongst the sages, amongst the founders of religions, or amongst the
   charlatans. Plutarch is less a thinker, an innovator than a man of
   moderate mind who wishes to make all the world agree by rendering
   philosophy timid and religion half reasonable. There is nothing in him
   of Porphyry or of Julian. The attempts at allegorical exegesis by the
   Stoics are very weak. The mysteries like those of Bacchus, where the
   immortality of the soul was taught by graceful symbols, were limited to
   certain countries and had no extended influence. The unbelief in the
   official religion was general in the enlightened class. The politicians
   who most affected to sustain the worship of the State made a jest of it
   with much wit. They openly put forward the immoral system that
   religious fables are good only for the people and ought to be
   maintained for them. The precaution was wholly useless, for the faith
   of the people was itself profoundly shattered.

   After the accession of Tiberius, it is true, a religious reaction made
   itself felt. It appears that the world was frightened by the avowed
   incredulity of the times of Csar and Augustus; the unlucky attempt of
   Julian was anticipated; all the superstitions found themselves
   revivified for reasons of State. Valerius Maximus gives us the first
   example of a writer of the lower class, making himself the auxiliary of
   the theologians at bay; of a venal or prostituted pen put at the
   service of religion. But it is the foreign religions which profit most
   by this return. The serious reaction in favour of the Grco-Roman cult
   will only be produced in the second century. Now the classes which have
   been seized with religious disquiet turn towards the religions, come
   from the East. Isis and Serapis find more favour than ever. Importers
   of every species, miracle-mongers, magicians, profit by the demand, and
   as usually happens at periods when and in countries where the religion
   of the State is weak, increased on every side, recalling the real or
   fictitious types of Apollonius of Tyana, Alexander of Abonoticus, of
   Peregrinus, of Simon of Gitton. These very errors and chimeras were as
   a prayer of the travailing earth, like the unfruitful efforts of a
   world seeking its rule and arriving sometimes in its convulsive efforts
   at monstrous creations destined to oblivion.

   To sum up:--the middle of the first century is one of the worst epochs
   of ancient history. Greek and Roman society show themselves in
   decadence after what has gone before, and much behind hand with respect
   to what is to follow But the grandeur of the crisis revealed clearly
   some strange and sacred formation. Life appeared to have lost its
   motive: suicides were multiplied. Never had a century presented such a
   struggle between good and evil. The evil was a powerful despotism,
   which put the world into the hands of men, who were either criminals or
   lunatics; it was the corruption of morals, the result of introducing
   into Rome the vices of the East; it was the absence of a good religion,
   and of a serious public instruction. The good was on one side,
   philosophy fighting with uncovered breast, against the tyrants, defying
   the monsters, three or four times proscribed in in half a century
   (under Nero, Vespasian and Domitian) it was on another side the efforts
   after popular virtue these legitimate aspirations after a better
   religious state, this tendency towards confraternities, towards
   mono-theistic worship; this rehabilitation of the poor, which was
   principally produced under cover of Judaism, or Christianity. These two
   great protestations were far from being in agreement. The philosophical
   party and the Christian party did not know each other, and they had so
   little idea of the community of their efforts, that the philosophical
   party, having come to power by the advent of Nerva, was far from being
   favourable to Christianity Truth to tell, the design of the Christian
   was much more radical. The stoic masters of the Empire, reformed it and
   presided over it during the hundred best years in the history of
   humanity The Christian Masters of the Empire, after Constantine,
   succeeded in ruining it. The heroism of some ought not to make us
   forget that of others. Christianity, so unjust to Pagan virtues, took
   up the task of depreciating those who had fought against the same
   enemies that it had. There was in the resistance of philosophy as much
   grandeur as in that of Christianity, but the rewards have been unequal.
   The martyr who turned away from the feet of the idols has his legend:
   why should not Annus Cornutus, who declared before Nero, that his
   books would never be worth those of Chrysippus; why should not
   Helvidius Priscus, who told Vespasian to his face, It is for you to
   kill, and for me to die"; why should not Demetrius, the cynic, who
   answered the angry Nero "You threaten me with death but nature
   threatens you,"--why should not these men have their place amongst the
   popular heroes whom all men love and salute? Does humanity dispose of
   so many forces against vice and baseness, that every school of virtue
   should be allowed to reject the aid of others, and to maintain that it
   only has the right to be courageous, proud, resigned?
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XVIII.

  RELIGIOUS LEGISLATION AT THIS PERIOD.

   The Empire in the first century, even whilst showing itself hostile to
   the religious innovations which came from the East, did not offer a
   constant resistance to them. The principle of the religion of the State
   was but moderately maintained. Under the Republic at various intervals,
   foreign religions had been forbidden, in particular the worship of
   Sabazius, of Isis, of Serapis. The people were impelled towards these
   religions by an irresistible force. When the demolition of the temple
   of Isis and Serapis, was decreed at Rome, in the year 535, not a
   workman was found who would put a hand to the work, and the Consul
   himself was obliged to break in the door with the blows of an axe It is
   clear that the Latin rite was not sufficient for the mob. Not
   unreasonably it has been supposed, that it was to gratify the popular
   instinct that Csar re-established the worship of Isis and Serapis.

   With the profound and liberal intention characteristic of him, this
   great man showed himself favourable to a complete liberty of
   conscience. Augustus was more attached to the national religion. He had
   antipathy for the Oriental religions; he forbade even the propagation
   of Egyptian ceremonies in Italy; but he wished that every religion,
   that of the Jews especially, should be supreme at home. He exempted the
   Jews from every-thing that might distress their consciences, especially
   from secular work on the Sabbath. Some persons of his court were less
   tolerant, and would willingly have made him a persecutor for the
   benefit of the Latin religion. He does not appear to have yielded to
   these wretched counsels. Josephus, who is suspected of exaggeration in
   this matter, will even have it that he made gifts of sacred vessels to
   the temple at Jerusalem.

   It was Tiberius who first laid down the principle of the religion of
   the State, with clearness, and took serious precautions against the
   Jewish and Oriental propaganda. It must be remembered that the Emperor
   was "Grand Pontiff," that in protecting the old Roman religion he did
   but execute a duty laid upon him. Caligula withdrew the edicts of
   Tiberius, but his madness prevented anything further from being done.
   Claudius appears to have imitated the policy of Augustus. At Rome he
   strengthened the Latin religion, showed himself interested in the
   progress made by foreign religion, displayed harshness to the Jews, and
   pursued the confraternities with fury. In Judea, on the contrary, he
   showed himself well disposed towards the natives. The favour which the
   Agrippas displayed at Rome under these two last reigns, assured to
   their co-religionists a powerful protection, except in those cases when
   the police of Rome required measures of safety.

   Nero concerned himself but little with religion. His odious treatment
   of the Christians came from native ferocity and not from legislative
   disposition. The examples of persecution which were quoted in Roman
   society at this time sprang rather from family than public authority.
   Such things still happened only in the noble houses of Rome, which
   preserved the old traditions. The provinces were perfectly free to
   follow their own religions on the single condition that they did not
   insult the religions of other countries. The provincials of Rome had
   the same right, provided they made no scandal. The only two religions
   against which the Empire made war in the first century, Druidism and
   Judaism, were fortresses where nationalities defended themselves. All
   the world was convinced that the profession of Judaism implied contempt
   for the civil law, and indifference to the prosperity of the State.
   When Judaism was content to be a simple personal religion, it was not
   persecuted. The severities against the worship of Serapis, arose
   perhaps from the mono-theistic character which it presented, and which
   already caused it to be confounded with the Jewish and the Christian
   religion.

   No fixed law then forbade in the time of the apostles the profession of
   monotheistic religion. These religions, until the accession of the
   Syrian Emperors, were always watched, but it was not until the time of
   Trajan that the Empire began to prosecute them systematically as
   hostile to others, as intolerant, and as implying the negation of the
   State. In short, the only thing against which the Roman Empire declared
   war in the matter of religion was theocracy. Its principle was that of
   the lay state; it did not admit that a religion had civil or political
   consequence in any degree; above all it did not allow of any
   association within the State for objects outside of it. This last point
   is essential, seeing that it really was at the root of all the
   persecutions. The law upon confraternities, much more than religious
   intolerance, was the fatal cause of the violences which dishonoured the
   reigns of the best sovereigns.

   The Greek countries, associated as they were with all things good and
   delicate, had had the priority over the Romans. The Greek Eranes or
   Thiases of Athens, Rhodes, of the inlands of the Archipelago, had been
   excellent societies for mutual help, credit, assurance in case of fire,
   piety, honest pleasures. Every Erane had its decisions engraved upon
   the arches (stelos), its archives, its common chest, fed by voluntary
   gifts and assessments. The Eranites or Thiastes celebrated together
   certain festivals and met for banquets, where cordiality reigned. A
   member, embarassed for money, might borrow from the chest on condition
   of repayment. Women formed part of these Eranes, and had their separate
   President (proranistria). The meetings were absolutely secret; a rigid
   order was maintained in them; they took place, it would seem, in closed
   gardens, surrounded by porches or small buildings, in the midst of
   which rose the altar of sacrifice. Finally, every congregation had a
   body of dignitaries, drawn by lot for a year (Clerotes), according to
   the custom of ancient Greek democracies, from whom the Christian
   "clergy" may have taken their name. The president alone was elected.
   These officers caused the new members to submit to a species of
   examination, and were bound to certify that he was "holy, pious and
   good." There was in these little confraternities, during the two or
   three centuries which preceded our era, a movement almost as varied as
   that which in the middle ages produced so many religious orders and
   subdivisions of these orders. In the single island of Rhodes there were
   computed to be as many as nineteen, many of which bore the names of
   their founders or their reformers. Some of these Thiastes, especially
   those of Bacchus, held elevated doctrines, and sought to give some
   consolation to men of good will. If there still remained in the Greek
   world a little love, pity, religious morality, it was due to the
   liberty of such private religions. These religions were in a sort of
   way associated with the official religion, the abandonment of which
   became every day more and more marked.

   At Rome association of the same kind encountered greater difficulties
   and not less favour amongst the proscribed classes. The principles of
   the Roman policy concerning confraternities had been promulgated for
   the first time under the Republic (186 B.C.) apropos of the Bacchanals.
   The Romans by their natural taste were greatly inclined to
   associations, especially to religious associations; but permanent
   congregations of this kind displeased the patricians, guardians of
   public powers, who, in their narrow and dry conception of life,
   admitted only the Family of the State as the social group. The most
   minute precautions were taken; a preliminary authorization was made a
   necessity, the number of members was limited; it was forbidden to have
   a permanent magister sacrorum, and to create a common fund by means of
   subscriptions. The same solicitude was manifested on various occasions
   in the history of the empire. The laws contained texts for repressions
   of every kind. But it was for the authorities to say, if they should or
   should not be used. The proscribed religions often appeared a very few
   years after their proscription. The foreign emigration, besides,
   especially that of the Syrians, perpetually renewed the funds from
   which the beliefs were nourished, which it was vainly sought to
   extirpate.

   It is remarkable to note, to how great a degree a subject in appearance
   so wholly secondary occupied the strongest heads. One of the principal
   cares of Csar and of Augustus was to prevent the formation of new
   societies and to destroy those which had already been established. It
   appears that a decree was issued under Augustus, in which an attempt
   was made to define with clearness the limits of the law of union and
   association. These limits were extremely narrow. The societies were to
   be exclusively burial clubs. They were not permitted to meet more often
   than once a month; they might occupy themselves only with the funerals
   of deceased members; under no pretext might they extend their powers.
   The Emperor strove after the impossible. He wished out of his
   exaggerated idea of the state to isolate the individual, to destroy
   every moral tie between man, to repress a legitimate desire of the
   poor, that of crowding together in a small space to keep each other
   warm. In ancient Greece the city was very tyrannical, but it gave in
   exchange for its vexations so much pleasure, so much light, so much
   glory, that no one dreamed of complaining. Men would have died for her
   with joy; her most unjust caprices were submitted to without murmuring.
   The Roman Empire was too large for patriotism. It offered to all
   immense material advantages; it gave nothing to love. The insupportable
   sadness inseparable from such a life appeared worse than death.

   Thus, notwithstanding all the efforts of the politicians, the
   confraternities developed themselves enormously. They were exactly
   analogous to our middle age confraternities with their patron saints
   and their corporation meals. The great families were careful of their
   name, of their country, of their tradition; the humble, the small, had
   only their collegium. There they found all their pleasures. All the
   texts show us collegia or coetus, as formed of slaves, of veterans, of
   small people (tenuiores). Equality reigned there among the freemen,
   emancipated slaves and servile persons. The women in them were
   numerous. At the risk of a thousand cavils, sometimes of the most
   severe punishments, men became members of these collegia, where they
   lived in the bonds of an agreeable confraternity, where they found
   mutual help, where they contracted relations which lasted after death.
   The place of meeting, or schola collegii, had usually a tetrastyle (a
   four sided porch), where was put up the rules of the college, by the
   side of the altar of the tutelary deity and a triclinium for meals. The
   meals were, in fact, impatiently expected; they took place on the feast
   days of the patron (God), and on the anniversaries of certain brethren
   who had founded benefactions. Every one carried thither his little
   basket (sportula); one of the brethren in turn furnished the
   accessories of the feast, the beds, the plate, bread, wine, sardines
   and hot water. The slave, who had been enfranchised gave his comrades
   an amphora of good wine. A gentle joy animated the festival; it was
   expressly stipulated that there should be no discussion of the business
   of the college, so that nothing should trouble the quarter of an hour
   of joy and rest which these poor people reserved to themselves. Every
   act of turbulence and every ill-natured word was punished with a fine.

   To all appearance, these colleges were only burial societies, to use
   the modern phrase. But that alone would not have sufficed to give them
   a moral character. In the Roman period, as in our time, and at all
   periods when religion is weakened, the piety of the tombs was almost
   the only one which the people retained. They liked to believe that they
   would not be thrown into the horrible common trench, that the college
   would provide for their funerals, that the brethren would come on foot
   to the funeral pile to receive a little honorarium of twenty centimes.
   Slaves especially wished to hope that if their masters caused their
   bodies to be thrown into the sewers, there would be some friends to
   make for them "imaginary funerals." The poor man put his half-penny per
   month into the common fund, to provide for himself, after his death, a
   little urn in a Columbarium, with a slab of marble, on which his name
   might be engraved. Sepulture amongst the Romans being intimately bound
   up with the sacra gentilitia, or family rites, had an extreme
   importance. The persons, intending to be buried together, contracted a
   species of intimate brotherhood and relationship.

   It thus came about that Christianity presented itself for a long time
   in Rome as a kind of funeral collegium, and that the first Christian
   sanctuaries were the tombs of the martyrs. If Christianity had been
   that one, however, it would not have provoked so many severities; but
   it was besides quite another thing; it had common treasuries; it
   boasted of being a complete city; it believed itself assured of the
   future. When, on a Saturday evening, one enters the limits of a Greek
   Church in Turkey, for example that of S. Photinus in Smyrna, he is
   struck with the strength of these associated religions, in the midst of
   a persecuting and malevolent society. This irregular accumulation of
   buildings (church, presbytery, schools, prison), those faithful ones
   coming and going in their enclosed city, those lately opened tombs, on
   each of which a lamp is burning, the corpse-like odour, the impression
   of damp mustiness, the murmur of prayers, the appeals for charity, from
   a soft and warm atmosphere, that a stranger at times must find
   sufficiently sickening, but that is to the initiated eminently
   grateful.

   These societies, once provided with a special authorization, had in
   Rome all the rights of civil persons; but such an authorization was
   granted only with infinite reserves, as soon as the societies had funds
   in hand, and other matters than funerals might occupy them. The pretext
   of religion, or of the accomplishment of vows in common is foreseen,
   and formally pointed out as being amongst the circumstances, which give
   to a meeting the character of au offence; and this offence was no other
   than that of treason, at least for the person who hail called the
   assembly together. Claudius went so far as to close the inns where the
   confraternities met, and even to interdict the little eating-houses,
   where these poor people could get soup and hot water cheaply. Trajan
   and the best Emperors defied all the associations. The extreme humility
   of the persons was an essential condition that the right of religious
   meeting should be accorded, and even then, only with many restrictions.
   The legists, who put together the Roman law, eminent though they were
   as jurisconsults, afforded a measure of their ignorance of human nature
   by pursuing in every way, even by threats of capital punishment, in
   restraining by every kind of odious and puerile precaution, an eternal
   need of the soul. Like the authors of our Civil Code, they figured life
   to themselves with a mortal coldness. If life consisted in amusing
   oneself by superior orders, in eating a morsel of bread, in tasting
   pleasure in one's rank and under the eye of a chief, everything would
   be well imagined. But the punishment of societies which abandoned that
   false and limited direction, is first weariness, then the violent
   triumph of religious parties. Never will man consent to breathe that
   glacial air; he wants the little enclosure, the confraternity in which
   men live and die together. Our great abstract societies are not
   sufficient to answer to all the instincts of sociability which are in
   man. Let him put his heart into anything, seek consolation where it may
   be found, create brethren for himself, contract ties of the heart. Let
   not the cold hand of the State interfere in this kingdom of the soul,
   which is the kingdom of liberty. Life and joy will not re-enter the
   world until our defiance of the collegia, that sad inheritance from the
   Roman law, shall have disappeared. Association outside the State,
   without destroying the State, is the capital question of the future.
   The future law as to associations will decide if modern society shall
   or shall not share the fate of ancient society. One example may
   suffice: the Roman Empire had bound up its destiny with the law upon
   the coetus illiciti, the illicita collegia. Christians and barbarians
   accomplishing in this the work of the human conscience, have broken the
   law; the empire to which that law was attached has foundered with it.

   The Greek and Roman world; the lay world; the profane world, which did
   not know what a priest is, which had neither divine law nor revealed
   book, touched here upon problems which it could not solve. We may add
   that if there had been priests, a severe theology, a strongly organized
   religion, it would not have created the lay State, inaugurated the idea
   of a rational society, of a society founded upon simple human
   necessities, and upon the natural relations of individuals. The
   religious inferiority of the Greeks and Romans was the consequence of
   their political and intellectual superiority. The religious superiority
   of the Jewish people, on the contrary, was the cause of their political
   and philosophical inferiority. Judaism and primitive Christianity
   embodied the negation, or rather the subjection of the civil State.
   Like Islamism, they established society upon religion. When human
   affairs are taken up in this way, great universal proselytisms are
   founded, apostles run about from one end of the world to another
   converting it; but political institutions, national independence, a
   dynasty, a code, a people--none of these are founded.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER XIX.

  THE FUTURE OF MISSIONS.

   Such was the world which Christian missionaries undertook to convert.
   It appears to me, however, that we may here see that such an enterprise
   was not a madness, and that no miracle was required to insure its
   success. The world was troubled with moral necessities, to which the
   new religion answered admirably. Manners were growing softer; a purer
   worship was required; the notion of the rights of man, the ideas of
   social ameliorations were everywhere gaining ground. On the other hand
   there was extreme credulity; the number of educated persons
   inconsiderable. Let ardent apostles, Jews, that is to say, monotheists,
   disciples of Jesus, that is to say, men penetrated with the sweetest
   moral teaching that the ears of man have yet heard, present themselves
   to such a world, and they will assuredly be listened to. The dreams,
   which mingle with their teaching, will not be an obstacle to their
   success; the number of those who do not believe in the supernatural, in
   miracles, is very small If they are humble and poor, so much the
   better. Humanity, at its present point, can be saved only by an effort
   coming from the people. The ancient Pagan religions cannot be reformed;
   the Roman State is what the State always will be, harsh, dry, just, and
   hard. In this world, which is perishing for want of love, the future
   belongs to him, who will touch the living source of popular piety.
   Greek liberalism, the old Roman gravity, are altogether impotent for
   that.

   The foundation of Christianity, from this point of view, is the
   greatest work that the men of the people have ever achieved. Very
   quickly, without doubt, men and women of the high Roman nobility joined
   themselves to the Church. At the end of the first century, Flavius
   Clemens and Flavia Domitilla, show us Christianity penetrating almost
   into the palace of the Csars. In the time of the first Antonines,
   there are rich people in the community. Towards the end of the second
   century, it embraces some of the most considerable persons in the
   Empire. But in the beginning all, or almost all, were humble. In the
   most ancient churches, nobles and powerful men were no more to be found
   than in Galilee about Jesus. Now, in these great creations, it is the
   first hour which is decisive. The glory of religions belongs wholly to
   their founders. Religion is, in fact, a matter of faith. To believe is
   something vulgar; the great thing to do is to inspire faith.

   When we attempt to delineate these marvellous beginnings, we usually
   represent things on the model of our own times, and are thus brought to
   grave errors. The man of the people in the first century of our era,
   especially in Greek and Oriental countries, in no way resembled what he
   is to-day. Education did not then mark out between the classes a
   barrier as strong as now. These races of the Mediterranean, if we
   except the population of Latium, which had disappeared, or had lost all
   their importance since the Roman Empire, in conquering the world, had
   become the heritage of the conquered peoples--these races, I say, were
   less solid than ours, but lighter, more lively, more spiritual, more
   idealistic. The heavy materialism of our disinherited classes, that
   something mournful and burnt out, the effect of our climate, and the
   fatal legacy of the middle ages, which gives to our poor so wretched a
   countenance, was not the defect of the poor of those earlier days.
   Though very ignorant and very credulous, they were scarcely more so
   than rich and powerful men. We ought therefore not to represent the
   establishment of Christianity as analogous in any way to a movement
   amongst ourselves, starting from the lower classes (a thing in our eyes
   impossible) by obtaining the assent of educated men. The founders of
   Christianity were men of the people, in the sense that they were
   dressed in a common fashion, that they lived simply, that they spoke
   ill, or rather sought in speaking only to express their ideas with
   vivacity. But they were inferior in intelligence to only a very small
   number of men, the survivors who were becoming every day more rare,
   from the great world of Csar and of Augustus. Compared with the elite
   of the philosophers, who formed the bond between the century of
   Augustus and that of the Antonines the first Christians were feeble.
   Compared with the mass of the subjects of the Empire, they were
   enlightened. Sometimes they were treated as freethinkers; the cry of
   the populace against them was, "Death to the atheists!" And this is not
   surprising. The world was making frightful progress in superstition.
   The two first capitals of the Christianity of the Gentiles, Antioch and
   Ephesus, were the two cities of the Empire, the most addicted to
   supernatural beliefs. The second and third centuries pushed even to
   insanity, credulity, and the thirst for the marvellous.

   Christianity was born outside the official world, but not precisely
   below it. It is in appearance, and according to earthly prejudices that
   the disciples of Jesus were unimportant persons. The worldly man loves
   what is proud and strong; he speaks without affability to the humble
   man; honour as he understands it, consists in not allowing himself to
   be insulted; he despises those who avow themselves weak, who suffer
   everything, yield to everything, who give up their coat to him who
   would take their cloak, who turn their cheeks to the smiters. There
   lies his error, for the weak, whom he despises, are usually superior to
   him; the highest virtue is amongst those who obey (servants,
   work-people, soldiers, sailors, etc.)--higher than amongst those who
   command and enjoy. And that is almost in order, since to command and to
   enjoy, far from aiding virtue, make virtue difficult.

   Jesus marvellously comprehended that the people carry in their bosoms
   the great reserve of devotion and of resignation which will save the
   world. This is why he proclaimed the blessedness of the poor, judging
   that they find it more easy than other people to be good. The primitive
   Christians were essentially poor. "Poor" (Ebionim) was their name. Even
   when the Christian was rich, in the second and third centuries, he was
   in spirit a tenuior; he escaped, thanks to the law of the Collegia
   tenuiorum. Christians were certainly not all slaves and people of low
   condition; but the social equivalent of a Christian was a slave; what
   was said of a slave was said of a Christian also. On both sides they
   honoured the same virtues, goodness, humility, resignation, sweetness.
   The judgment of Pagan authors is unanimous on that point. All, without
   exception, recognize in the Christian, the features of the servile
   character; indifference to great affairs, a sad and contrite air,
   morose judgments upon the age, aversion to games, theatres, gymnasia,
   baths.

   In a word, the Pagans were the world; Christians were not of the world.
   They were a little flock apart, hated by the world, finding the world
   evil, seeking "to keep themselves unspotted from the world." The ideal
   of Christianity will be the reverse of that of the worldly man. The
   perfect Christian will love abjection; he will have the virtues of the
   poor and the simple, of him who does not seek to exalt himself. But he
   will also have the defect of his virtues; he will declare many things
   to be vain and frivolous, which are not so at all; he will depreciate
   the universe; he will be the enemy of the admirer of beauty. A system
   where the Venus of Milo is but an idol is a system, partial, it not
   false for beauty, is almost as valuable as the good and the true. A
   decadence of art is in any case inevitable with such ideas. The
   Christian will not care to build well, nor to sculpture well, nor to
   design well; he is too idealistic. He will care little for knowledge;
   curiosity seems a vain thing to him. Confounding the great
   voluptuousness of the soul, which is one of the methods of reaching the
   infinite, with vulgar pleasure, he will for-bid himself to enjoy it. He
   is too virtuous.

   Another law shows itself as dominating this history. The establishment
   of Christianity corresponds to the suppression of political life in the
   world of the Mediterranean. Christianity was born and expanded itself
   at a period when there was no such thing as patriotism. If anything is
   wholly wanting to the founders of the Church it is that quality. They
   are not Cosmopolitan; for, the whole planet is for them, but a place of
   exile, they are idealistic in the most absolute sense. Our country is
   composed of body and soul. The soul: its memories, images, legends,
   misfortunes, hopes, common regrets; the body: the soil, race, language,
   mountains, rivers, characteristic products. Now, never were people more
   detached from all that than the primitive Christians. They did not hold
   to Judea; at the end of a few years they had forgotten Galilee; the
   glory of Greece and Rome was indifferent to them. The countries where
   Christianity first established itself, Syria, Cyprus, Asia Minor, no
   longer remembered the time when they had been free; Greece and Rome had
   still a great national sentiment. But in Rome patriotism was confined
   to the army and to some families; in Greece, Christianity fructified
   only in Corinth, a city, which since its destruction by Mummius and its
   reconstruction by Csar, was a collection of people of all sorts. The
   true Greek countries then, as now, very jealous, much absorbed by the
   memory of their past, paid little attention to the new preaching; they
   were always indifferently Christian. On the contrary, those soft, gay,
   voluptuous countries of Asia, countries of pleasure, of free manners,
   of easy indifference, habituated to take life and government from
   others, had nothing to abdicate in the matter of pride and of
   traditions. The ancient metropolitan cities of Christianity, Antioch,
   Ephesus, Thessalonica, Corinth, Rome, were common cities, if I may dare
   to say so, cities after the fashion of modern Alexandria, into which
   poured men of all races, and in which the marriage between man and the
   soil, which constitutes a nation, was absolutely broken through.

   The importance given to social questions is always in an inverse ratio
   to political pre-occupations. Socialism rises when patriotism grows
   weak. Christianity was the explosion of social and religious ideas for
   which the world had been waiting, since Augustus put an end to
   political conflicts. As with Islamism, Christianity being a universal
   religion, will be at bottom the enemy of nationalities. It will require
   many centuries and many schisms before the idea takes root of forming
   national churches with a religion, which was at first the negation of
   all earthly countries, which was born at a period when there were no
   cities and citizens in the world, and when the old rough and strong
   republics of Italy and of Greece would surely have been expelled from
   the State as a mortal poison.

   And this was one of the causes of the greatness of the new religion.
   Humanity is a varying, changeable thing at the mercy of contradictory
   desires. Great is the country; its saints are the heroes of Marathon,
   of Thermopyl, of Valmy, and of Fleurus. Country, however, is not
   everything here below. One is man and Son of God before being Frenchman
   or German. The Kingdom of God, eternal dream which will never be torn
   from the heart of man, is a protest against a too exclusive patriotism.
   The thought of an organization of humanity in view of its greatest
   happiness and its moral amelioration is Christian and legitimate. The
   State knows but one thing--how to organise egotism. That is not
   indifferent, for egotism is the most powerful and the most assailable
   of human motives. But that is not sufficient. Governments which have
   started with the belief that man is swayed only by his instincts of
   cupidity, are deceived. Devotion is as natural as egotism to the man of
   a noble race, and the organization of devotion, is religion. Let no one
   hope then to get away from religion or from religious associations.
   Every step in the progress of modern society has made the need for them
   more imperious.

   It is in this way that these accounts of strange events may be for us
   full of both teaching and of example. There is no need for delay over
   certain details which the difference of time renders strange and
   eccentric. When it is a question of popular beliefs there is always an
   immense disproportion between the grandeur of the idealism, which faith
   pursues, and the triviality of the material circumstances, which we are
   called upon to accept. Hence the particularity, with which in religious
   history shocking details and acts like those of madness may be mixed up
   with everything that is really sublime. The monk who invented the holy
   ampulla was one of the founders of the kingdom of France. Who would
   efface from the life of Jesus the episode of the demoniac in the
   country of the Gergesenes? Never has man in cold blood done the things
   that were done by Francis of Assisi, Joan of Arc, Peter the Hermit,
   Ignatius Loyola. Nothing is of more relative application than the word
   "madness" as applied to the past of the human mind. If we carried out
   the ideas which are current in our own times there is not a prophet,
   not an apostle, not a saint, who would not be locked up. The human
   conscience is very unstable at times when reflection has not advanced;
   in these conditions of the soul it is by insensible transitions that
   good becomes evil, that the beautiful borders upon the ugly, and that
   the ugly becomes the beautiful. There is no possible justice towards
   the past if so much is not admitted. A single divine breath penetrates
   all history, and makes an admirable whole of it; but the variety of the
   combinations which the human faculties may produce is infinite. The
   apostles differ less from us than the founders of Buddhism, who were,
   however, nearer to us by language. and perhaps by race. Our age has
   seen religious movements quite as extraordinary as those of old times,
   movements which have excited quite as much enthusiasm, which have had
   already--proportion being kept in view--more martyrs, and the future of
   which is still uncertain.

   I do not speak of the Mormons, a sect which is in some respects so
   silly and so abject that it is hard to speak of it seriously. It is,
   however, instructive to see in the middle of the nineteenth century,
   thousands of men living by miracle, believing with a blind faith in the
   marvels, which, they say, they have seen and handled. There is already
   a whole literature devoted to the agreement between Mormonism and
   science; what is better, that religion, founded as it is upon the most
   silly impostures, has been able to accomplish miracles of patience and
   self-abnegation? In five hundred years learned men will prove its
   divine origin by the miracles of its establishment. Babism, in Persia
   was a phenomenon otherwise considerable. A gentle and unpretentious
   man, a sort of modest and pious Spinoza, has found himself almost
   against his own will raised to the rank of miracle worker, of
   incarnation of the divine, and has become the leader of a numerous,
   ardent and fanatical sect, which has very nearly brought about a
   revolution comparable to that of Islam. Thousands of martyrs have run
   to him with joy before death. A day unequalled perhaps in the history
   of the world was that of the day of the great butchery which was made
   of the babis of Teheran. "On that day were seen in the streets and
   bazaars of Teheran," says a writer of undoubted authority, "a spectacle
   which it would seem as if the population were likely never to forget.
   When the conversation even yesterday turned upon that matter, you may
   judge of the admiration mixed with horror, which the crowd felt and
   which years have not diminished. We saw advancing amongst the
   executioners women and children, their flesh gashed all over their
   bodies, with lighted and flaming wicks fixed in their wounds. The
   victims were hauled along with cords and forced to walk by strokes of
   the whip. Children and women advanced singing a verse which said:--Of a
   truth we come from God and return to Him.' Their voices rose loudly
   above the profound silence of the crowd. When one of the victims fell
   and was forced to rise by blows from the whip or thrusts of the
   bayonet, though the loss of blood, which ran over all his limbs, left
   him yet a little strength, he began to dance and to cry with an
   increase of enthusiasm, Of a truth we come from God and we return to
   Him.' Some of the children died during the journey. The executioners
   cast their corpses under the feet of their fathers and their sisters,
   who walked proudly over them and did not glance twice at them. When
   they arrived at the place of execution, the victims were offered their
   lives on condition of abjuration. One executioner took the fancy of
   saying to a father that if he did not yield he would cut the throats of
   his two sons upon his breast. They were two little lads, the eldest of
   whom might have been about fourteen and who, red with their own blood
   and with calcined flesh, listened coolly to this dialogue. The father
   answered, crouching on the ground, that he was ready, and the elder of
   the boys, claiming with some importance his right of seniority,
   demanded to be slaughtered the first. At last all was finished; night
   fell upon a mass of mangled flesh; heads were hung in baskets to the
   scaffold of justice and the dogs of the suburbs met in troops on that
   side of the city."

   That happened in 1852. The sect of Mazdak under Chosroes Nouschirvan,
   was suffocated in a similar bath of blood. Absolute devotion is, for
   simple natures, the most exquisite of joys and a species of necessity.
   In the affair of the Bab, people who were hardly members of the sect,
   came forward to denounce themselves, so that they might be joined with
   the sufferers. It is so sweet for man to suffer for something, that in
   many cases the thirst for martydom causes men to believe. A disciple
   who was companion of Bab at his execution, hanged by his side on the
   ramparts of Tabriz and momentarily expecting death, had only one word
   in his mouth:--"Are you satisfied with me, master?"

   The persons who consider as miraculous or chimerical all that in
   history surpasses the calculations of ordinary good sense, find such
   things inexplicable. The fundamental condition of criticism is to know
   how to understand the varying conditions of the human mind. Absolute
   faith is for us wholly out of the question. Outside of the positive
   sciences, of a certainty in some degree material, every opinion is in
   our eyes only approximate, implying partial truth and partial error.
   The proportion of error may be as small as you will; it is never
   reduced to zero when morals implying a question of art, of language, of
   literary form, or of persons are concerned. Such is not the manner of
   seeing things which narrow and obstinate spirits adopt--Orientals for
   example. The eye of those people is not like ours; it is the glassy eye
   of men in mosaics--dull and fixed. They can see only only a single
   thing at a time; that thing besets them, takes possession of them; they
   are not then masters of their beliefs or their unbeliefs; there is no
   room for a reflective after-thought. For an opinion thus embraced a man
   will allow himself to be killed. The martyrs in religion are what the
   party man is in politics. Not many very intelligent men have been made
   martyrs. The confessors of the time of Diocletian would have been,
   after the peace of the Church, wearisome and imperious personages. Men
   are never very tolerant when they believe that they are altogether
   right and the rest of the world altogether wrong.

   The great conflagrations of religion, being the results of a too
   definite manner of seeing things, thus became enigmas for an age like
   ours, when the rigour of conviction is weakened. With us the sincere
   man constantly modifies his opinions; in the first place, because the
   world changes, in the second, because the observer changes also. We
   believe more things at the same time. We love justice and truth; for
   them we would risk our lives; but we do not admit that justice and
   truth belong to a sect or a party. We are good French-men, but we admit
   that the Germans and the English are superior to us in many ways. It is
   not thus at the periods and in the countries where everyone belongs
   with his whole nature to his communion, race, or political school; and
   this is why all great religious creations have taken place in
   societies, the general spirit of which was more or less analogous to
   that of the East. Until now, in short, absolute faith only has
   succeeded in imposing itself upon others. A good serving maid of Lyons,
   named Blandina, who caused herself to be killed for her faith at
   seventeen years of age, caused a brutal brigand chief, Clovis, who
   found her to his taste fourteen centuries ago, to embrace Catholicism,
   makes laws for us to this day.

   Who is there who has not, while passing through our ancient towns which
   have become modem, stopped at the feet of gigantic monuments of the
   faith of olden times? All is externally renewed; there is not a vestige
   of ancient habits; the cathedral remains, a little lowered in height
   may be by the hand of man, but profoundly rooted in the soil. Mole sua
   stat! Its massiveness is its law. It has resisted the deluge, which
   swept away everything else around it; not one of the men of old times
   returning to visit the places where he lived would find his home again;
   the crow alone, who has fixed his nest in the heights of the sacred
   edifice, has not seen the hammer threatening his dwelling. Strange
   prescription! These honest martyrs, these rude converts, these pirate
   church builders, rule us still. We are Christians because it pleased
   them to be so. As in politics it is the barbarous foundations only that
   live, so in religion there are only spontaneous, and, if I may dare to
   say so, fanatical affirmations that can be contagious. This is because
   religions are wholly popular works. Their success does not depend upon
   the more or less convincing proofs of their divinity which they bring
   forward; their success is in proportion to what they say to the heart
   of the people.

   Does it follow from thence that religion is destined to diminish little
   by little, and to disappear like popular errors concerning magic,
   sorcery, spirits? Certainly not. Religion is not a popular error; it is
   a great instinctive truth, imperfectly seen by the people, expressed by
   the people. All the symbols which serve to give a form to the religious
   sentiment are incomplete, and it is their fate to be rejected one after
   another. But nothing is more false than the dream of certain persons,
   who, seeking to conceive a perfect humanity, conceive it without
   religion. It is the very reverse which ought to be said. China is a
   very inferior species of humanity, and China has almost no religion. On
   the other hand, let us suppose a planet inhabited by a humanity whose
   intellectual, moral and physical power are double those of terrestrial
   humanity, that humanity would be, at least, twice as religious as ours.
   I say, at least, for it is probable that the augmentation of the
   religious faculties would take place in a more rapid progression than
   the augmentation of the intellectual capacity, and would not be done in
   a simple direct proportion. Let us so suppose a humanity ten times as
   strong as ours, that humanity would be infinitely more religious. It is
   even probable, that in that degree of sublimity, disengaged from all
   material cares and from all egotism, gifted with perfect tact, and a
   divinely delicate taste, seeing the baseness and the nothingness of all
   that is not true, good, or beautiful, man would be exclusively
   religious, plunged in a perpetual adoration, rolling from ecstasies to
   ecstasies, being born, living and dying, in a torrent of bliss.
   Egotism, in short, which gives a measure of the inferiority of being,
   diminishes in proportion, as the animal is got rid of. A perfect being
   would be no longer an egotist; he would be altogether religious.
   Progress then will have for its effect the increase of religion and
   neither its destruction nor its diminution.

   But it is time to return to our three missionaries, Paul, Barnabas and
   John--Mark, whom we left at the moment when they went out of Antioch by
   the gate, which led to Seleucia. In my third volume I will endeavour to
   trace these messages of good news by land and by sea, through calm and
   tempest, through good and evils days. I am in haste to retell that
   unequalled epic, to describe those infinite routes of Asia and of
   Europe by the side of which the seed of the gospel was sown, those seas
   which they traversed so many times under circumstances so diverse. The
   great Christian Odyssey is about to commence. Already the apostolic
   barque has spread its sails; the wind sighs and aspires only to carry
   upon its wings the words of Jesus.

    THE END.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Deuteronomy

   [1]13:1-18

   Acts

   [2]2:44-47   [3]5:36   [4]9:19   [5]9:26   [6]9:26-15:2   [7]10:38
   [8]11:19   [9]11:30   [10]11:30   [11]11:30   [12]11:30   [13]12:1-25
   [14]12:25   [15]12:35   [16]15:1-41   [17]15:1-41   [18]15:2
   [19]16:10   [20]16:10   [21]17:14-16   [22]18:5   [23]20:5-6
   [24]21:20-21   [25]22:17

   1 Corinthians

   [26]5:5   [27]15:5-8

   Galatians

   [28]1:1-2:21   [29]1:11   [30]2:1-21

   Colossians

   [31]4:14

   1 Thessalonians

   [32]3:1-2

   2 Timothy

   [33]4:11

   Philemon

   [34]1:24

   James

   [35]5:13
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Castissim, univir: [36]1
     * Collegia tenuiorum: [37]1
     * Corso: [38]1 [39]2
     * Italic: [40]1
     * Mole sua stat!: [41]1
     * Noli, me tangere: [42]1
     * Reliqua ut de monstro narranda sunt.: [43]1
     * Si interissent, vile damnum.: [44]1
     * ad narrandum: [45]1
     * ampulla: [46]1
     * canaille: [47]1
     * cantica: [48]1
     * cella: [49]1
     * cohors prima Augustus Italica civium Romamorum: [50]1
     * collegia: [51]1 [52]2 [53]3
     * collegium: [54]1 [55]2
     * concetti: [56]1
     * credo quia absurdum: [57]1
     * coetus: [58]1
     * coetus illiciti: [59]1
     * familia: [60]1
     * forum: [61]1
     * fraticelli: [62]1
     * illicita collegia: [63]1
     * magister sacrorum: [64]1
     * orbis: [65]1
     * sacra gentilitia: [66]1
     * sancta simplicitas: [67]1
     * schola collegii: [68]1
     * sportula: [69]1 [70]2
     * tenuior: [71]1
     * tenuiores: [72]1
     * tesser frumentari: [73]1
     * triclinium: [74]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [75]i  [76]ii  [77]iii  [78]iv  [79]v  [80]vi  [81]vii  [82]viii
   [83]ix  [84]x  [85]xi  [86]xii  [87]xiii  [88]xiv  [89]xv  [90]xvi
   [91]xvii  [92]xviii  [93]xix  [94]xx  [95]xxi  [96]xxii  [97]xxiii
   [98]xix  [99]xxv  [100]xxvi  [101]xxvii  [102]xxviii  [103]xxix
   [104]xxx  [105]xxxi  [106]xxxii  [107]xxxiii  [108]xxxiv  [109]1
   [110]2  [111]3  [112]4  [113]5  [114]6  [115]7  [116]8  [117]9
   [118]10  [119]11  [120]12  [121]13  [122]14  [123]15  [124]16  [125]17
   [126]18  [127]19  [128]20  [129]21  [130]22  [131]23  [132]24  [133]25
   [134]26  [135]27  [136]28  [137]29  [138]30  [139]31  [140]32  [141]33
   [142]34  [143]35  [144]36  [145]37  [146]38  [147]39  [148]40  [149]41
   [150]42  [151]43  [152]44  [153]45  [154]46  [155]47  [156]48  [157]49
   [158]50  [159]51  [160]52  [161]53  [162]54  [163]55  [164]56  [165]57
   [166]58  [167]59  [168]60  [169]61  [170]62  [171]63  [172]64  [173]65
   [174]66  [175]67  [176]68  [177]69  [178]70  [179]71  [180]72  [181]73
   [182]74  [183]75  [184]76  [185]77  [186]78  [187]79  [188]80  [189]81
   [190]82  [191]83  [192]84  [193]85  [194]86  [195]87  [196]88  [197]89
   [198]90  [199]91  [200]92  [201]93  [202]94  [203]95  [204]96  [205]97
   [206]98  [207]99  [208]100  [209]101  [210]102  [211]103  [212]104
   [213]105  [214]106  [215]107  [216]108  [217]109  [218]110  [219]111
   [220]112  [221]113  [222]114  [223]115  [224]116  [225]117  [226]118
   [227]119  [228]120  [229]121  [230]122  [231]123  [232]124  [233]125
   [234]126  [235]127  [236]128  [237]129  [238]130  [239]131  [240]132
   [241]133  [242]134  [243]135  [244]136  [245]137  [246]138  [247]139
   [248]140  [249]141  [250]142  [251]143  [252]144  [253]145  [254]146
   [255]147  [256]148  [257]149  [258]150  [259]151  [260]152  [261]153
   [262]154  [263]155  [264]156  [265]157  [266]158  [267]159  [268]160
   [269]161  [270]162  [271]163  [272]164  [273]165  [274]166  [275]167
   [276]168  [277]169  [278]170  [279]171  [280]172  [281]173  [282]174
   [283]175  [284]176  [285]177  [286]178  [287]179  [288]180  [289]181
   [290]182  [291]183  [292]184  [293]185  [294]186  [295]187  [296]188
   [297]189  [298]190  [299]191  [300]192  [301]193  [302]194  [303]195
   [304]196  [305]197  [306]198  [307]199  [308]200  [309]201  [310]202
   [311]203  [312]204  [313]205  [314]206
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=1#xi-p4.1
   2. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=44#x-p16.1
   3. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=36#xviii-p2.1
   4. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=19#iii-p21.1
   5. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=26#iii-p22.6
   6. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=26#iii-p22.4
   7. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=38#viii-p14.1
   8. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=19#iii-p26.2
   9. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii-p22.1
  10. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii-p22.7
  11. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii-p22.8
  12. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii-p22.9
  13. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii-p27.1
  14. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=25#iii-p22.2
  15. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=35#iii-p22.10
  16. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii-p24.1
  17. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii-p26.1
  18. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=2#iii-p22.5
  19. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii-p8.1
  20. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii-p9.1
  21. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=14#iii-p23.1
  22. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=5#iii-p23.2
  23. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=5#iii-p9.2
  24. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=20#iii-p26.3
  25. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=17#iii-p21.2
  26. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=5#viii-p11.1
  27. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii-p5.1
  28. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p22.3
  29. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii-p21.3
  30. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii-p24.2
  31. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii-p12.1
  32. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii-p23.3
  33. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii-p12.3
  34. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii-p12.2
  35. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=13#viii-p19.1
  36. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-p2.1
  37. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-p5.2
  38. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-p2.1
  39. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-p3.1
  40. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-p11.1
  41. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-p15.1
  42. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-p18.1
  43. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-p2.1
  44. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-p17.1
  45. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-p19.1
  46. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-p10.1
  47. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-p12.1
  48. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-p18.1
  49. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-p20.1
  50. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-p11.2
  51. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p9.2
  52. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p9.5
  53. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p12.1
  54. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p9.1
  55. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p11.1
  56. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-p19.1
  57. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-p18.2
  58. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p9.3
  59. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p12.2
  60. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-p16.1
  61. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-p10.1
  62. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-p8.1
  63. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p12.3
  64. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p7.2
  65. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-p6.1
  66. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p10.1
  67. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-p35.1
  68. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p9.6
  69. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-p12.2
  70. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p9.8
  71. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-p5.1
  72. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p9.4
  73. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-p12.3
  74. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-p9.7
  75. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#ii-Page_i
  76. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_ii
  77. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_iii
  78. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_iv
  79. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_v
  80. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_vi
  81. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_vii
  82. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_viii
  83. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_ix
  84. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_x
  85. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xi
  86. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xii
  87. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xiii
  88. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xiv
  89. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xv
  90. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xvi
  91. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xvii
  92. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xviii
  93. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xix
  94. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xx
  95. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxi
  96. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxii
  97. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxiii
  98. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xix_1
  99. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxv
 100. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxvi
 101. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxvii
 102. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxviii
 103. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxix
 104. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxx
 105. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxxi
 106. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxxii
 107. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxxiii
 108. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_xxxiv
 109. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iii-Page_1
 110. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_2
 111. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_3
 112. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_4
 113. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_5
 114. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_6
 115. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_7
 116. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_8
 117. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_9
 118. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_10
 119. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_11
 120. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_12
 121. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_13
 122. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_14
 123. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#iv-Page_15
 124. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_16
 125. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_17
 126. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_18
 127. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_19
 128. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_20
 129. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_21
 130. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_22
 131. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_23
 132. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_24
 133. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#v-Page_25
 134. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vi-Page_26
 135. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vi-Page_27
 136. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vi-Page_28
 137. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vi-Page_29
 138. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vi-Page_30
 139. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vi-Page_31
 140. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_32
 141. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_33
 142. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_34
 143. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_35
 144. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_36
 145. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_37
 146. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_38
 147. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_39
 148. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_40
 149. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#vii-Page_41
 150. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_42
 151. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_43
 152. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_44
 153. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_45
 154. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_46
 155. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_47
 156. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_48
 157. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_49
 158. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_50
 159. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_51
 160. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_52
 161. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_53
 162. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_54
 163. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#viii-Page_55
 164. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#ix-Page_56
 165. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#ix-Page_57
 166. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#ix-Page_58
 167. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#ix-Page_59
 168. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#ix-Page_60
 169. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#ix-Page_61
 170. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#ix-Page_62
 171. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_63
 172. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_64
 173. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_65
 174. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_66
 175. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_67
 176. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_68
 177. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_69
 178. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_70
 179. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_71
 180. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_72
 181. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_73
 182. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#x-Page_74
 183. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xi-Page_75
 184. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xi-Page_76
 185. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xi-Page_77
 186. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xi-Page_78
 187. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xi-Page_79
 188. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xi-Page_80
 189. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xi-Page_81
 190. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xi-Page_82
 191. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xii-Page_83
 192. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xii-Page_84
 193. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xii-Page_85
 194. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xii-Page_86
 195. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xii-Page_87
 196. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xii-Page_88
 197. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xii-Page_89
 198. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_90
 199. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_91
 200. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_92
 201. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_93
 202. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_94
 203. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_95
 204. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_96
 205. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_97
 206. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_98
 207. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_99
 208. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_100
 209. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_101
 210. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_102
 211. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiii-Page_103
 212. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_104
 213. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_105
 214. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_106
 215. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_107
 216. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_108
 217. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_109
 218. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_110
 219. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_111
 220. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_112
 221. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_113
 222. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_114
 223. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_115
 224. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_116
 225. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xiv-Page_117
 226. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-Page_118
 227. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-Page_119
 228. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-Page_120
 229. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-Page_121
 230. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-Page_122
 231. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-Page_123
 232. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xv-Page_124
 233. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvi-Page_125
 234. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvi-Page_126
 235. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvi-Page_127
 236. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvi-Page_128
 237. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvi-Page_129
 238. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvi-Page_130
 239. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvi-Page_131
 240. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_132
 241. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_133
 242. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_134
 243. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_135
 244. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_136
 245. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_137
 246. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_138
 247. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_139
 248. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_140
 249. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xvii-Page_141
 250. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xviii-Page_142
 251. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xviii-Page_143
 252. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xviii-Page_144
 253. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xviii-Page_145
 254. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xviii-Page_146
 255. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xviii-Page_147
 256. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xviii-Page_148
 257. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xviii-Page_149
 258. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_150
 259. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_151
 260. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_152
 261. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_153
 262. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_154
 263. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_155
 264. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_156
 265. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_157
 266. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_158
 267. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_159
 268. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_160
 269. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_161
 270. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_162
 271. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xix-Page_163
 272. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_164
 273. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_165
 274. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_166
 275. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_167
 276. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_168
 277. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_169
 278. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_170
 279. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_171
 280. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_172
 281. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_173
 282. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_174
 283. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_175
 284. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_176
 285. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_177
 286. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_178
 287. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_179
 288. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_180
 289. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_181
 290. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_182
 291. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_183
 292. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xx-Page_184
 293. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_185
 294. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_186
 295. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_187
 296. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_188
 297. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_189
 298. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_190
 299. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_191
 300. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_192
 301. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxi-Page_193
 302. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_194
 303. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_195
 304. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_196
 305. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_197
 306. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_198
 307. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_199
 308. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_200
 309. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_201
 310. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_202
 311. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_203
 312. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_204
 313. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_205
 314. file:///ccel/r/renan/apostles/cache/apostles.html3#xxii-Page_206
