     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Was Christ Born in Bethlehem?
      Creator(s): Ramsay, William Mitchell, Sir (1851-1939)
     Print Basis: 1898
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BS2650
     LC Subjects:

                  The Bible

                  New Testament

                  Special parts of the New Testament

                  Pauline Epistles
     __________________________________________________________________

                               WAS CHRIST BORN IN
                                   BETHLEHEM?

    by

Sir William Ramsay
     __________________________________________________________________

PREFACE

   UNDERSTANDING that a certain criticism implied a sort of challenge to
   apply my theory of Luke's character as a historian to the Gospel, I
   took what is generally acknowledged to be the most doubtful passage,
   from the historian's view, in the New Testament, Luke 2:1-4. Many would
   not even call it doubtful. Strauss (in his New Life of Jesus) and Renan
   dismiss it in a short footnote as unworthy even of mention in the text.

   This passage, interpreted according to the view which I have maintained
   -- that Luke was a great historian, and that he appreciated the force
   of the Greek superlative (in spite of the contradiction of Professor
   Blass and others) -- gave the result that Luke was acquainted with a
   system of Periodic Enrollments in Syria, and probably in the East
   generally. I looked for evidence of such a system; and it was offered
   by recent discoveries in Egypt. The confirmation afforded to Luke was
   explained in the Expositor,

   April and June, 1897. Realizing better in subsequent thought the
   bearings of the Egyptian discovery, I have enlarged these two articles
   into an argument against the view that Luke sinks, in the accessories
   of his narrative, below the standard exacted from ordinary historians.
   At the risk of repeating views already stated in previous works, the
   second chapter attempts to put clearly the present state of the
   question as regards the two books of Luke, without expecting others to
   be familiar with my views already published.

   The names of those scholars whose views I contend against are hardly
   ever mentioned. The scholars of the "destructive" school seem to prefer
   not to be mentioned, when one differs from them. I have learned much
   from them; I was once guided by them; I believe that the right
   understanding of the New Testament has been very greatly advanced by
   their laudable determination to probe and to understand everything, as
   is stated on p. 33; but I think their conclusions are to a great extent
   erroneous. It might, however, be considered disingenuous if I concealed
   that the weighty authority of Gardthausen, the historian of Augustus,
   is dead against me, p. 102.

   My best thanks are due to Professor Paterson, who has discussed many
   points and cleared up my views in many ways; to Mr. B. P. Grenfell, who
   read the first proof of chapter 7, and enabled me to strengthen it;
   and, at last, to Mr. F. G. Kenyon; to Mr. A. C. Hunt; to Mr. Vernon
   Bartlett; and to Mr. A. Souter.

   The language of the book has profited much by my wife's care in
   revision.

   It would be impossible -- and only wearisome to the reader if it were
   possible -- to trace the origin of every thought expressed in the
   following pages. Where I was conscious, at the moment of writing, that
   I was using an idea suggested by another, I have said so; but as
   regards the New Testament, one learns in the course of years so much
   from so many sources that one knows not who is the teacher in each
   detail.

   The relation between the almost identical solutions of the Quirinius
   difficulty, proposed nearly simultaneously by M. R. S. Bour and myself,
   is explained in chapter 11.

   W. M. RAMSAY.

   POSTSCRIPT. -- I hear, Oct. 2, that Messrs. Grenfell and Hunt have
   found a household-enrollment paper a little older than AD. 50. The date
   is lost, but the same officials are mentioned in it as in a document of
   the 6th year of [Tiberius], where the names of Claudius and Caligula
   are impossible. Hence the paper belongs to the census of AD. 20, and
   proves conclusively my theory as to the origin of the Periodic
   Enrollments from Augustus. Much of the argument in chapter 7, printed
   when the Periodic Enrollments were traced with certainty only as far
   back as AD. 92, is now confirmed so completely, that part of it is
   hardly necessary.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                     PART 1
                           IMPORTANCE OF THE PROBLEM
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 1
  LUKE'S HISTORY: WHAT IT PROFESSES TO BE

   AMONG the writings which are collected in the New Testament, there is
   included a History of the life of Christ and of the first steps in the
   diffusion of his teaching through the Roman world, composed in two
   books. These two books have been separated from one another as if they
   were different works, and are ordinarily called "The Gospel according
   to Luke" and "The Acts of the Apostles". It is, however, certain from
   their language, and it is admitted by every scholar, that the two books
   were composed by a single author as parts of a single historical work
   on. a uniform plan. After a period of independent existence, this
   History in two books was incorporated in the Canon, and its unity was
   broken up: the first book was placed among the group of four Gospels,
   and the second was left apart.

   Professor Blass has pointed out a trace of this original independent
   existence in the famous manuscript which was presented by the Reformer
   Beza to the University of Cambridge. In that manuscript the name of
   John is spelt in two different ways, the form Joanes being almost
   invariably used in Luke and Acts, and Joannes in the Gospels of
   Matthew, Mark and John. [1] That slight difference in orthography leads
   us back to the time of some old copyist, who used as his authority a
   manuscript of the History of Luke, in which the spelling Joanes was
   employed, and different manuscripts of the other Gospels containing the
   spelling Joannes. Probably the spelling Joanes was that employed by the
   original author; and it is adopted in Westcott and Hort's edition
   throughout the New Testament, except in Acts 4:6 and Revelation 22:8.

   This historical work in two books is attributed by tradition to Luke,
   the companion and pupil of Paul. We are not here concerned with that
   tradition. Since all scholars are agreed that the same author wrote
   both books, we shall use the traditional name to indicate him merely
   for the sake of brevity, as it is necessary to have some name by which
   to designate the author; but we shall found no argument upon the
   authorship. Like Professor Blass, I see no reason to doubt the
   tradition; but those who do not accept the tradition may treat the name
   Luke in these pages as a mere sign to indicate the author, whoever he
   may be.

   The point with which we are here specially concerned is the
   trustworthiness of this author as a historian. Many facts are recorded
   by him alone, and it is a serious question whether or not they can be
   accepted on his sole authority.

   This is a subject on which there prevails a good deal of
   misapprehension and even confusion of thought. There are many who seem
   to think that they show fairness of mind by admitting that Luke has
   erred in this point or in that, while they still cling to their belief
   in other things, which he and he alone, records, on the ground that in
   those cases there is no clear evidence against him. But it must be said
   that this way of reasoning is really mistaken and unjustifiable: it
   refuses to make the inference that necessarily follows from the first
   admission.

   While human nature is fallible, and any man may make a slip in some
   unimportant detail, it is absolutely necessary to demand inexorably
   from a real historian accuracy in the essential and critical facts. We
   may pardon an occasional instance of bias or prejudice; for who is
   wholly free from it? But we cannot pardon any positive blunder in the
   really important points. If a historian is convicted of error in such a
   vital point, he ceases to be trustworthy on his own account; and every
   statement that he makes must gain credit from testimony external to
   him, or from general reasons and arguments, before we accept it.
   Especially must this be the case with the ancient historians, who as a
   rule hide their authorities and leave us in the dark as to the reasons
   and evidence that guided them to formulate their statements. There may
   be -- there always are -- many facts which the poorest chronicler
   records correctly; but we accept each of these, not because of the
   recorder's accurate and sound judgment in selecting his facts, but
   because of other reasons external to him. If there is in such a
   historian any statement that is neither supported nor contradicted by
   external evidence, it remains uncertain and is treated as possibly
   true, but it shares in the suspicion roused by the one serious blunder.

   If we claim -- and I have elsewhere in the most emphatic terms claimed
   -- a high rank for Luke as regards trustworthiness, we must look fairly
   and squarely at the serious errors that are charged against him. If the
   case is proved against him in any of these, we must fairly admit the
   inevitable inference. If, on the other hand, we hold that the case is
   not proved, it is quite justifiable and reasonable, in a period of
   history so obscure as the first century, to plead, as many have done,
   that, while we cannot in the present dearth of information solve the
   difficulty completely, we are obliged, in accordance with our
   perception of the high quality of the author's work as a whole, to
   accept his statement in certain cases where he is entirely
   uncorroborated. These must for the present rank among the difficulties
   of Luke. There are difficulties in every important Greek author, and
   each difficulty is the scholar's opportunity.

   But it must be the aim of those who believe in the high character of
   Luke's History, to discover new evidence which shall remove these
   difficulties and justify the controverted statements. The progress of
   discovery has recently placed in our hands the solution of one most
   serious difficulty and the justification of one much controverted
   statement; and the following pages are written with the intention of
   showing what is the bearing of this discovery on the general question
   as to the historical credibility of Luke.

   The whole spirit and tone of modern commentaries on Luke's writings
   depend on the view which the commentators take on this question. In
   some cases the commentator holds that no historical statement made by
   Luke is to be believed, unless it can be proved from authorities
   independent of him. The commentary on Luke then degenerates into a
   guerrilla warfare against him; the march of the narrative is
   interrupted at every step by a series of attacks in detail. Hardly any
   attempt is made to estimate as a whole, or to determine what is the
   most favourable interpretation that can be placed on any sentence in
   the work. There is a manifest predilection in favor of the
   interpretation which is discordant with external facts or with other
   statements in Luke. If it is possible to read into a sentence a meaning
   which contradicts another passage in the same author, that is at once
   assumed to be the one intended by him; and his incapacity and
   untrustworthiness are illustrated in the commentary.

   But no work of literature could stand being treated after this fashion.
   Imagine the greatest of pagan authors commented on in such a way; any
   slip of expression exaggerated or distorted; sentences strained into
   contradiction with other passages of the same or other authors; the
   commentary directed to magnify every fault, real or imaginary, but
   remaining silent about every excellence. There have occasionally been
   such commentaries written about great classical authors; and they have
   always been condemned by the general consent of scholars. Even where
   the bias of the commentator was due to a not altogether unhealthy
   revolt against general over-estimate of the author under discussion,
   the world of scholarship has always recognized that the criticism which
   looks only for faults is useless, misleading, unprogressive, and that.
   it defeats itself, when it tries to cure an evil by a much greater
   evil. Scholarship and learning sacrifice their vitality, and lose all
   that justifies their existence, when they cease to be fair and
   condescend to a policy of "malignity".

   In this discussion it is obviously necessary to conduct the
   investigation as one of pure history, to apply to it the same canons of
   criticism and interpretation that are employed in the study of the
   other ancient historians, and to regard as our subject, not "the Gospel
   according to Luke," but the History composed by Luke. The former name
   is apt to suggest prepossession and prejudice: the latter is purely
   critical and dispassionate.

   In estimating the character and qualities of an author we must look
   first of all to his opportunities. Had he good means of reaching the
   truth, or was his attempt to attain thorough knowledge of the facts
   made in the face of great difficulties? An historian ought to give us a
   statement of his own claims to be received as trustworthy, or an
   estimate of the character of the evidence which he had at his disposal.

   Luke has not failed to put clearly before his readers what character he
   claims for his history. He has given us, in the prefatory paragraph of
   his Gospel, a clear statement of the intention with which he wrote his
   history, and of the qualifications which give him the right to be
   accepted as an authority. He was not an eye-witness of the remarkable
   events which he is proceeding to record, but was one of the second
   generation to whom the information had been communicated by those "who
   were from the beginning eye-witnesses and ministers of the word". The
   simplest interpretation of his words is that he claims to have received
   much of his information from the mouths of eye-witnesses; and, on
   careful study of the preface as a whole, it seems impossible to avoid
   the conclusion that he deliberately makes this claim. Any other
   interpretation, though it might be placed on one clause by itself, is
   negatived by the drift of the paragraph as a whole.

   Thus Luke claims to have had access to authorities of the first rank,
   persons who had seen and heard and acted in the events which he
   records. He makes no distinction as to parts of his narrative. He
   claims the very highest authority for it as a whole.

   In the second place, Luke claims to have studied and comprehended every
   event in its origin and development, (parekolouthekoti anothen pasin
   akribos) i. e., to have investigated the preliminary circumstances, the
   genesis and growth of what he writes about. Exactness and definiteness
   of detail in his narrative -- these are implied in the word anothen:
   investigation and personal study implied in the word parekolouthekoti:
   tracing of events from their causes and origin -- implied in anothen:
   such are the qualities which Luke declares to be his justification for
   writing a narrative, when many other narratives already were in
   existence; and he says emphatically that this applies to all that he
   narrates.

   The expression used clearly implies that Luke began to write his
   narrative, because he was already in possession of the knowledge gained
   by study and investigation; as he begins, he is in the position of one
   who already has acquired the information needed for his purpose. This
   is implied in the perfect parekolouthekoti. The rendering in the
   Authorized and the Revised Version does not bring this out quite
   clearly: from the English words -- "it seemed good to me also, having
   traced the course of all things accurately from the first, [2] to write
   unto thee in order" -- one might infer that the study and tracing of
   the course of events was resolved upon with the view of writing the
   history. But in the Greek that meaning would require the aorist
   participle. With the perfect participle the meaning must be "as I
   already possess the knowledge, it seemed good to me, like the others,
   to write a formal narrative for your use."

   On this point, I am glad to find myself in agreement with Professor
   Sanday, who refuses to assume that Luke "began with the intention of
   writing a history, and accumulated materials deliberately in view of
   this intention all through his career". We cannot assume that, for the
   author, by implication, denies it. But we may safely assume that he had
   both the intelligent curiosity of an educated [3] Greek, and the eager
   desire for knowledge about the facts of the Saviour's life, natural in
   a believer who rested his faith and his hopes on the life and death of
   Christ.

   Possibly some one may say that it is assuming too much when I speak of
   the author as an "educated" Greek. But any one who knows Greek can
   gather that from the preface alone. No one who had not real education
   and feeling for style could have written that sentence, so well
   balanced, expressed in such delicately chosen terms, so concise, and so
   full of meaning.

   In the third place, Luke declares his intention to give a comprehensive
   narrative of the events in order from first to last (kathexes soi
   grapsai). This does not necessarily imply a chronological order but a
   rational order, making things comprehensible, omitting nothing that is
   essential for full and proper understanding. In a narrative so arranged
   it stands to reason that, in general, the order will be chronological,
   though of course the order of logical exposition sometimes overrides
   simple chronological sequence (see chapter 10). Further, it is involved
   in the idea of a well-arranged History that the scale on which each
   event is narrated should be according to its importance in the general
   plan.

   Finally the account which Luke gives is, as he emphatically declares,
   trustworthy and certain (hina epignos . . . ten asphaleian). His
   expression indubitably implies that he was not entirely satisfied with
   the existing narratives. He does not, it is true, say that explicitly;
   he utters no word of criticism on his predecessors, and he declares
   that they got their information from eye-witnesses. But his expression
   distinctly implies that he considered that some advance was still to be
   made, either as regards completeness, or as regards orderly exposition
   of the facts, or as regards accuracy. In all probability the fault in
   the existing narratives which Luke had especially in mind was their
   incompleteness. They embodied the tradition of eye-witnesses and
   ministers of the Word "from the beginning" (ap' arches), which seems to
   imply "the beginning of the preaching of the Word". We have to think of
   narratives in the form of the Gospel of Mark, with the opening: "the
   beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ" -- narratives that commence
   with some such stage as the baptism. In contrast to these narratives
   Luke claims to trace the whole series of events from their origin, i.
   e., from the higher or preliminary stage out of which they were derived
   anothen).

   It seems beyond doubt that, in speaking of the origin, Luke has in view
   the narrative which he proceeds to give of the birth and early days of
   the Savior. Therein lay the most serious addition that he made to the
   narratives of his predecessors; and for that addition in particular he
   claims the same high character as for the narrative as a whole: he has
   it from firstclass authorities -- exact, complete and trustworthy (see
   chapter 4).

   In view of the emphatic claim which Luke makes, that his whole
   narrative rests on the highest authority and is accurate and certain,
   it is obvious that we cannot agree with the attitude of those scholars,
   who, while accepting this whole History as the work of the real Luke,
   the follower and disciple and physician and intimate friend of Paul,
   are wont to write about the inadequacy of his authorities, the
   incompleteness of his information, the puzzling variation in the scale
   and character of his narrative according as he had good or inferior
   authorities to trust to. The writer of the preface would not admit that
   view: he claims to state throughout what is perfectly trustworthy.

   It may be allowed, consistently with his own claim, that his
   information was not everywhere equally good and complete. Thus, for
   example, he would naturally have heard much more about the facts of the
   Savior's life, than about the events of the few years that followed
   upon his death: attention would be concentrated on the former, and the
   latter would be much less thought about or inquired into. But this view
   cannot be carried far without coming into contradiction with the
   profession of the preface. And, above all, those who admit that the
   Luke of the Epistles, the friend and companion of Paul, was the author
   of this History must not attempt to explain the account given by Luke
   of important events in Paul's life, such as the Apostolic Council (Acts
   15, by the supposition that the author was not acquainted with Paul's
   account of the facts and character of that most critical event. He who
   had been Paul's companion during the stormy years following that
   Council, when its decision was the subject of keen debate and rival
   interpretations, must have known what were Paul's views on the subject.

   It is important to note that Luke in this preface distinguishes between
   the written accounts and the tradition of the eye-witnesses (kathos
   paredosan hoi autoptai). So far as the actual word tradition, or
   Paradosis, goes, it might, and in many cases does, refer to written
   narrative; but in the present case the logic of the passage clearly
   implies a pointed distinction between tradition and written narrative.
   There existed when Luke wrote, on the one hand, oral tradition from
   eye-witnesses, and, on the other hand, many narratives written by those
   who learned from the eye-witnesses and put the tradition in literary
   form; but there were as yet no written narratives composed by
   eye-witnesses. This inference is drawn by Professor Blass, and is
   distinctly implied in Luke's preface. Luke may have known Mark's
   Gospel, and probably used it; but he did not know the other two
   Gospels.

   There can only be one conclusion, when the terms of Luke's preface are
   duly weighed. Either an author who begins with a declaration such as
   that had mixed freely with many of the eye-witnesses and actors in the
   events which he proceeds to record, or he is a thorough impostor, who
   consciously and deliberately aims at producing belief in his
   exceptional qualifications in order to gain credit for his History. The
   motive for such an imposture could hardly be mere empty desire to be
   considered a true narrator. The man of that age, who was deliberately
   outraging truth, felt no such overpowering passion for the distinction
   of having attained abstract truth in history. He must have sought to
   put on the semblance of truth and authority in order to gain some end
   by conciliating belief in his narrative; he must have desired to gain
   credit in order that his party or his opinions might triumph. They who
   declare that the author belonged to a later age are bound to prove that
   there was some such intention in his mind.

   Hitherto every attempt to show that the historian had such an aim in
   view has ended in complete failure. With regard to Book I., the Gospel,
   the attempt is ludicrous; the narrative is so transparently simple and
   natural that hardly any amount of prepossession could read into it such
   aims. With Book II., the Acts, we are not here concerned. Elsewhere I
   have tried to show what a single eye the author has in that book to the
   simple statement of facts as they actually happened; it seems to me to
   be almost as transparently simple and natural as the Gospel.

   No rational theory, such as would for a moment be admitted in regard to
   an ordinary classical author, has ever been advanced to account for the
   supposition of deliberate imposture in the claims to credit advanced by
   Luke. If the author was an impostor, his work remains one of the most
   incomprehensible and unintelligible facts in literary history. One can
   imagine, for example, that Peter was written by a person who was so
   filled with the conviction that he was giving the views of his master,
   Peter the Apostle, as to express the letter in Peter's name; the case
   might seem to him (from a mistaken point of view) to be not wholly
   unlike the expression of the old prophets, "thus saith the Lord". That
   is a conceivable and rational hypothesis, though whether it be true or
   false we cannot say, and need not now inquire. No such rational
   hypothesis has yet been advanced to account for Luke's far more
   elaborate, and therefore more deliberate, imposture.

   But this abstract and rather intangible argument must yield to the
   demonstration of hard facts. So much we freely grant. Now it is
   asserted that the historian whom we are studying has been guilty of
   such serious and gross blunders, when he touches on matters of general
   history, that his information cannot have been so good as he pretends,
   and therefore he must be claiming too much when he arrogates such an
   authoritative character for his History. We shall feel bound to accept
   that argument; and, if the blunders are demonstrated, we must accept
   the necessary inferences and abandon our championship of his accuracy
   and trustworthiness. But let us first examine the demonstration.

   We cannot investigate in this volume every "blunder" that is charged
   against Luke; but we shall treat one rather fully. If I may judge both
   from personal feeling, from conversation, and from many books, the
   "blunder" which most contributes to rouse prejudice against him as an
   historian, occurs at the very beginning, in that same episode on which
   he evidently lays such stress in his preface -- the story of the Birth
   of Christ. In this story the enrollment or census of Palestine in the
   time of Quirinius is a critical point; and the doubt whether any such
   census as Luke describes was made, is the cause of important and
   far-reaching results. It is declared to be a blunder, or rather a
   complication of blunders; and if that be so, the entire story must be
   relegated to the realm of mythology, and the writer who mistakes fable
   for fact, and tries to prop up his mistake by an error of the grossest
   kind, can retain no credit as an historical authority.

   In conclusion, we shall briefly refer to one or two other typical
   so-called "errors" in Luke.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Exceptions -- one in Luke, two each in Matthew, Mark and Acts,
   seven in John.

   [2] Better "from their origin".

   [3] Expositor, Feb., 1896, p. 90.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 2
  THE DESIGN AND UNITY OF LUKE'S HISTORY

   AS has been stated, a historian may make a slip in some detail without
   losing claim to be trustworthy: no man and no historian is perfect. But
   he must not found his reasoning upon the error. Facts that are
   fundamental in his argument must be free from slip or fault. There must
   be no mistake on a critical point.

   If we consider Luke's design, we shall see that the "error" which forms
   our subject affects the very life-blood of the work and the atmosphere
   in which the story moves. But every great work of literature like
   Luke's History must be reinterpreted by each new age for itself; and it
   is more useful to describe what views are now held as to the plan and
   design of that History, than to sketch the design.

   The consummate literary skill shown in Luke's work must impress every
   reader, who allows free play to his sense of literary effect. We feel
   that in this work we have to deal with an author who handles his
   materials freely and with perfect mastery. The unity of style and
   treatment in the narrative, its dramatic character, varying according
   to the country and the action and the character of every speaker, so
   Greek in Athens, so "provincial" in the Roman colonies Lystra and
   Philippi, so Hebraic in Galilee or by the Jordan, and so Lukan
   everywhere -- this character and individuality, shown in numberless
   ways, make it clear that the author was no clipper-up of fragments from
   other writers, no mere scissors-and-paste editor of scraps, no mere
   second-hand composer, dependent on the accidental character of his
   "sources," according to the elaborate and somewhat pedantic theories
   that have been fashionable recently in Germany, but are already
   becoming discredited there. Only a person who has blinded himself to
   literary feeling by the strength of a fixed prejudice, could fail to
   perceive the literary quality of this History, and to infer from it the
   real unity of the work.

   When a commentator on the text of Luke, observing that Luke "can be as
   Hebraistic as the Septuagint and as free from Hebraisms as Plutarch,"
   and that "he is Hebraistic in describing Hebrew society," and Greek in
   describing Greek society, refrains from expressing any opinion as to
   whether this result is attained "intentionally or not," that is a very
   proper reserve for a commentator to maintain. He is not called upon to
   determine in the preface to a commentary whether this varying character
   has been given intentionally to the work by its author, or has remained
   attached to it by chance, according as the character of the different
   documents on which Luke depended continued to exist in his completed
   work. But the literary judgment will not hesitate. Luke is so
   completely master of his materials, and handles the Greek language with
   such ease and power, that he must have intended to give his work the
   literary qualities which are observable in it. A rational criticism
   must always assume that an author intended to attain that delicately
   graduated effect which in fact he has attained.

   But the interval which separated the historian from the events which he
   records is an important element in estimating his design. Great
   literary power may tell against his trustworthiness, by helping him to
   hide the poverty of his materials; and that view has been maintained as
   regards Luke by writers of the type of Baur, Zeller and Renan. They
   argued that Luke was an able and beautiful but not very well-informed
   author, who lived long after the events which he records, at a time
   when all actors in those events had died, and when accurate knowledge
   of facts was difficult to acquire. In addition to the skillful
   arguments by which they showed up a series of internal discrepancies
   and improbabilities, the apparent discordance between the narrative
   (especially in the second book) and the general scheme and character of
   Roman Imperial administration in the Eastern provinces, seemed to many
   to weigh heavily against the idea that the book embodied a really
   trustworthy account of events.

   In the picture of Christian history during the first century, according
   to the accepted interpretation of Luke's History, there was no apparent
   relation between the development of Christian influence and the
   existing facts of the Roman empire. The modern writers who professed to
   found their views upon Luke, after a few picturesque paragraphs about
   Roman proconsuls and armies and the march of the Roman eagles, plunged
   into Christian history, and the reader saw nothing more of Rome except
   when a Gallio or a Sergius Paullus obtruded himself on the scene with
   something of the air of a bad actor equipped in ill-fitting Roman
   dress. The life of the empire was wanting: that consisted, not in
   eagles and proconsuls, but in order and organization, and in the
   development and Romanisation of society.

   Those who studied Roman history first of all, and Christian history
   only in a secondary degree, were inevitably driven to the conclusion
   that a work, upon which was founded such a lifeless and spiritless
   picture of part of the Roman world in the first century, could not be a
   product of that century, but must have originated at a later date, when
   the life of the time described was no longer understood.

   But a most important part of Luke's Second Book is concerned with Asia
   Minor and Greece; and any one who has gone through the long, slow
   process by which in recent years the lost history of Asia Minor has
   been in some degree recreated by the work of a number of scholars, and
   their studies Luke without prepossession, must observe, that his
   references to those lands have a marked and peculiar individuality -- a
   certain matter-of-fact tone -- which is utterly unlike the vague style
   of a later author, narrating the events of a past age with the purpose
   of showing their bearing on the questions of his own day. One feels
   that, in all that concerns Asia Minor, Luke is treating real facts with
   thorough knowledge.

   As knowledge of Asia Minor grew, one perceived that Luke's statements
   explained some most obscure problems by setting in a new light the
   evidence that had long seemed unintelligible. Luke takes us right into
   the midst of the political development of central Asia Minor, when
   Roman organizing skill was treating one by one the successive problems
   of government amid a semi-Oriental population, regarding some districts
   as still too rude to be Romanised, and placing them under the educative
   care of dependent kings, treating others as already worthy of the honor
   of being incorporated in the Roman empire as fractions of a great
   province, and fostering among them a spirit of pride in the Imperial
   connection and contempt for the extra-provincial barbarians.

   It is a difficult thing to revivify and rearrange the details of that
   magnificent political work; and in some respects I erred in my first
   attempt [4] to recreate the picture of the Imperial scheme for
   Romanising the inner lands by gradually building them up into a great
   Roman province called Galatia. But the errors (though vexatious to
   myself as I gradually came to see more clearly) were not so important
   as to disturb materially the truth of the picture in its general
   effect. It had been given me, through intense longing after truth, to
   catch the main outlines correctly, and to understand that Luke's brief
   references to the state of central Asia Minor plunged the reader into
   the heart of the conflict between Graeco-Roman forms of life and the
   amorphous barbarism of a Phrygian and Lycaonian population. In that
   state of the land, to be Phrygian or Lycaonian was to be unenlightened
   and non-Roman, to be Roman was to be a loyal member of the province
   Galatia. Such a state of things could not have been conceived or
   understood by a writer of the second century, when Rome had long been
   supreme over the whole of Asia Minor, and when the opposition between
   the contending ideas, Roman or Galatic on the one hand, native (i.e.,
   Phrygian, Pisidian, etc.) and non-Roman on the other, had ceased to be
   a real force in the country.

   But if this view which opened gradually before us was correct, then we
   had to abandon the current, generally accepted opinion, which. admitted
   no Roman conceptions in the terms relating to geography and political
   classification in Acts, which saw, for example, in the "Galatic
   Territory," not a Roman province, but the country where Attalus, King
   of Pergamos, had confined the Galatae or Galli about 230 BC. We must
   regard Paul as a Roman, using Roman terms and forms, just as he
   accepted the Roman classification and system of administration.

   As it happened, this implied and necessitated a radical revolution in
   the interpretation of the book of Acts and of early Christian history
   as a whole. It meant that the connection and the conflict between
   Christianity and the Roman State did not begin in the second century,
   as was the almost unanimous opinion of the greatest authorities during
   the halfcentury preceding 1890 (when Neumann's book carried back the
   beginning to the reign of Domitian, AD. 81-96). It meant that the
   conscious and recognized relations between the New Religion and the
   Roman Administration began when Barnabas and Saul stood before the
   Roman proconsul of Cyprus, when the latter, hitherto junior and
   subordinate to Barnabas, took the lead, and the supposed Hebrew wise
   man named Saul stood forth as the Greek Paul and impressed the Roman
   governor by declaring the principles of the new Catholic, world-wide
   religion. It meant that the first important step in the spreading of
   this Catholic religion was made, when Paul and Barnabas crossed Taurus
   from the secluded and unimportant Province Pamphylia, into the
   important Province Galatia -- the province which embodied all that was
   Roman in Central Asia Minor, the province in which the Roman element
   was involved in the sharpest antagonism to the rude ignorance of an
   Oriental, priest-guided, ritual-loving native population -- and planted
   their feet on the great highway of intercourse between the East and the
   West.

   Further, it now began to grow clear that some of the discrepancies
   which had been the mainstay of Baur's and Zeller's argument, were due
   to the stereotyped misunderstanding of the Roman side of early
   Christian history, Both the general character and many details of that
   history were distorted, when contemplated through the medium of the
   dominant theory.

   The life of the early Church lay in constant intercommunication between
   all its parts; its health and growth were dependent on the free
   circulation of the life-blood of common thought and feeling. Hence it
   was first firmly seated on the great lines of communication across the
   empire, leading from its origin in Jerusalem to its imperial center in
   Rome. It had already struck root in Rome within little more than twenty
   years after the crucifixion, and it had become really strong in the
   great city about thirty years after the apostles began to look round
   and out from Jerusalem. This marvelous development was possible only
   because the seed of the new thought floated free on the main currents
   of communication, which were ever sweeping back and forward between the
   heart of the empire and its outlying members. Paul, who mainly directed
   the great movement, threw himself boldly and confidently into the life
   of the time; he took the empire as it was, accepted its political
   conformation and arrangement, and sought only to touch the spiritual
   and moral life of the people, while he always advised them to obey the
   existing Government and conform to the existing laws of the State and
   of society, so far as they did not lead into direct conflict with
   Christian principles.

   But the formerly accepted interpretation of the Second Book of Luke's
   History carried Christianity away into eddies and backwaters of the
   ocean of Roman Imperial development, and placed there the scene of the
   first great conflict between Judaistic provincialism and the world-wide
   Pauline conception of Christianity. It was blind to the true character
   of Paul's work, which sought to spiritualize the life and educative
   development of the empire by affecting the main currents of its
   circulation and intercommunication; and it tried to distinguish the
   lines along which the new thought spread from the lines along which the
   life of the world was throbbing.

   The dominance of that interpretation produced a position, the analogue
   of which still exists in respect of some other questions. That theory
   led straight into a series of difficulties, for which no rationally
   satisfying solution could be found; and the scholars who treated Luke's
   History were divided broadly into two classes. Some saw so clearly the
   unity, the power and the personal quality in the work, that they
   refused to be led astray by the serious difficulties in which they were
   involved on certain points. Others realized so strongly the
   difficulties, that they formed their judgment from them alone and
   ignored the quality of the History as a whole.

   The progress of discovery is indubitably tending to show that the
   scholars of the former class were, on the whole, in the right; but this
   should not blind us to the immense service rendered by those of the
   other class, who kept the difficulties clear before the world's
   consciousness.

   Moreover, it must be admitted that the scholars who judged by literary
   feeling and the general quality of Luke's History, were not always wise
   in their treatment of the difficulties. Instead of frankly
   acknowledging that the difficulties were inexplicable in our present
   state of knowledge, they sometimes attempted by ingenious special
   pleading to minimize them, and then claimed that the difficulties were
   solved. Their vigorous perception of the central and most important
   fact, viz., the first-hand directness of Luke's style, made them so
   thoroughly convinced that the difficulties must be explicable, that
   they were almost blinded to the strength of the arguments against them,
   and sometimes thought they had explained difficulties, when they had
   merely shut their eyes to them.

   The result was that those who, like myself, had been accustomed only to
   classical Greek, and were too young to appreciate fully the literary
   quality of a writer in such an unfamiliar form of Greek, and who were
   determined to understand clearly and precisely every step in reasoning,
   were repelled by what seemed to us to be pure prejudice and
   unwillingness to admit reason, and were driven violently over to the
   opposite side; and it was a long and slow process to work back again to
   the side against which we had acquired such a strong prepossession.

   In such a state of mind it was natural to rest for a time in a theory
   of double authorship, that Luke's History was partly excellent and
   partly second-rate (as I was almost inclined to do while writing The
   Church in the Roman Empire). One could feel that Luke's Second Book was
   characterized by such singular accuracy in all details bearing on the
   society and the political organization of the Eastern provinces, that
   the author's expression in many places could not have been framed
   without first-hand knowledge, and that his point of view was distinctly
   of the first century, or rather the pre-Domitianic type, as
   distinguished from that which was produced by the persecution of
   Domitian.

   But, on the other hand, parts of the History seemed to involve
   insoluble difficulties and discrepancies.

   Hence, while no distinct theory was stated in my treatise, yet the
   language used in it sometimes pointed towards a theory of dual
   authorship.

   But such ideas were utterly inconsistent with the unity of plan, the
   vigorous controlling intellect which revealed itself throughout Luke's
   work; and the impossibility to stand still in such a halfway position,
   clinging to rival and inconsistent views, became rapidly manifest. It
   was not possible to introduce maturer views into the book already
   published, even in a new edition; for the sole merit that it possessed
   lay in its being perfectly unprejudiced and unfettered by any theory as
   to the composition of Luke's History. After forming a definite opinion
   about that History as a whole, it was no longer possible to write as if
   one had no opinion. Therefore, the book had to remain as it was, with
   its defect of being not self-consistent in respect of Luke, since the
   want of systematic unity was the guarantee of its being the
   unprejudiced effort of a mind groping for truth.

   It became more and more clear that it is impossible to divide Luke's
   History into parts, attributing to one portion the highest authority as
   the first-hand narrative of a competent and original authority, while
   regarding the rest as of quite inferior mold. If the author of one part
   is the real Luke, or any other person standing in similar close
   relations with the circle surrounding the apostles (particularly Paul),
   then that same person must be the author of the whole, and must have
   brought to bear on his whole work the same qualities which made one
   part so excellent. It may be that he found it more difficult to feel
   perfectly at home in the Palestinian part of his narrative than where
   the scene lies in the Aegean lands. It may be that in the parts
   intervening between the Resurrection or the Ascension (with which many,
   probably all, of his written authorities ended) and the beginning of
   Paul's personal recollections, he found it harder to obtain perfectly
   satisfactory knowledge. But we cannot lay much stress on these causes
   of diversity in character. The History must stand as a whole, and be
   judged as a whole. If one part shows striking historical excellence, so
   must all; if any part shows a conspicuous historical blunder, we must
   be very suspicious of a theory which attributes surpassing qualities to
   another part.

   In regard to the Second Book of Luke, my arguments are set forth
   elsewhere, [5] and, while I feel conscious how imperfectly they have
   been stated, and how much better the work ought to have been done, I
   have nothing of consequence either to retract or to modify, though much
   might be added. After three years more of study, Luke appears more
   clearly than ever to me as one of the great historians.

   Such a view is unfashionable; and there is in some quarters a
   disposition to regard it even as a crime and a personal affront to the
   distinguished scholars who have thought differently. It is true that I
   have advocated a view diametrically opposed to their judgment, and
   that, if I be right, they have erred in a critical question of the
   utmost importance and interest. But I have not sought to give the
   discussion this personal application. It is not a crime to differ from
   another scholar as to the date and quality of any of the disputed
   classical works; and my desire has been to proceed in regard to Luke on
   the same lines as in the questions of extra-Biblical scholarship. One
   of the scholars whom I reverence most deeply in all Europe differs very
   strongly from my judgment as to the authority of the Peutinger Table,
   but the difference makes no change in my profound respect and
   admiration for him, and none in the great kindness which he has always
   shown to a beginner like me. Similarly there is no reason why Luke's
   authority as a historian should not be treated as a justifiable subject
   for discussion. I entertain, and have always professed, great
   admiration for many scholars whose opinions I dispute on some points of
   Christian history, and from their learning I have gained much.

   It is a more serious evil that a disposition is sometimes shown to
   terrorize the investigator by the array of learned opinion on the
   opposite side, and to treat it as the necessary mark of a reasonable
   scholar in this subject, that he should be always searching for and
   finding proofs of the late date, and inaccuracy, and composite
   character of Luke's History. It is comforting to certain minds to have
   some one whose opinions they can accept implicitly; and it would almost
   appear that a few of our English scholars attribute to the German
   commentators on the Bible that inerrancy which our parents or
   grandparents attributed to the text. They set up an idol, and condemn
   as an impious iconoclast him that sees the idol's feet of clay, even
   while he reverences the image.

   But in matters of scholarship it is not safe to follow implicitly any
   scholar, however great he may be; and we appeal to fact and reason
   against the dogmatism which seeks to close the case, refuses to admit
   further argument, and brands as an "apologist" any defender of Luke's
   character as a historian.

   Not long ago it was reckoned by many as essential to a respectable
   scholar that he should pooh-pooh Luke as a second-century writer. Now
   we are permitted, on the highest German authority, to date him in the
   first century. We are permitted also to speak of certain parts and
   scenes in the Second Book of his History as showing marvelous accuracy
   and great power of conceiving and setting before the reader a life-like
   picture of what actually occurred. But we are not permitted to infer
   that he is a trustworthy historian, and that the presumption is in
   favor of his accuracy, even in cases, where no clear external evidence
   corroborates his statements.

   We might ask whether it is a probable or possible view that the author
   can be so unequal to himself, that in one place he can show very high
   qualities as an accurate historian, and that in another place, when
   dealing with events equally within the range of his opportunities for
   acquiring knowledge, he can prove himself incompetent to distinguish
   between good and bad, true and false. He that shows the historic
   faculty in part of his work has it as a permanent possession.

   The power of vivid conception and accurate description in concise,
   wellchosen, pregnant language, which Luke admittedly shows in some
   passages, proves that he could estimate correctly the comparative
   importance of details, select the essential points, and skillfully
   group them. An author fixes a standard for himself at his best, and is
   most unlikely to sink below it. The true critic will recognize this,
   and will not rest satisfied till he has traced the same qualities
   throughout the work. That method of studying Luke has not yet been
   consistently employed in the light of modern historical, geographical
   and antiquarian knowledge. The attempt to carry it out consistently
   will be stigmatized by those who dislike its results as pedantic
   insistence on minute points of language and mere "Mikrologie"; but it
   must be made in the face of such prohibition.

   On this subject there are only two alternatives. It grows more and more
   clear that compromise -- such as is common among those by whom it is
   esteemed fair-minded to accept as much as possible from the results of
   the destructive school -- is impossible. The mind that is really
   logical and self-consistent cannot admit part of the so-called
   "critical" view -- what ought to be called the uncritical view -- and
   yet on the whole cling to the belief in real Lukan authorship. Luke's
   History is of such a strongly marked character what are called the
   "gaps" or omissions in it are so distinct, or, in other words, the
   proportion of the parts in it is so peculiars -- the insistence upon
   some facts and the summary dismissal of others with a bare word forms
   so prominent a feature of the work -- that either the author had a
   distinct idea of plan and purpose and comparative importance, according
   to which his whole narrative was ordered and guided, or he was not the
   real Luke.

   Occasionally it is possible, with some plausible and deceptive show of
   reason, to maintain that the length at which some incident is narrated
   is due merely to the author's possessing exceptionally good sources of
   information about it. Take for example, the long description of the
   voyage From Philippi to Caesarea. That description is given in the
   words of one who was present on the ships. It therefore rests on
   authority of the highest character; and it might plausibly be
   maintained that the exceptionally excellent nature of the information
   led the author to devote an exceptional amount of space to it.

   But if a believer in the Lukan authorship of the History attempts in a
   consistent way to carry out that theory, he is led into hopeless
   contradiction. Situations at which the real Luke must have been present
   are dismissed in the curtest way or omitted altogether, while others in
   which he was not present are described at great length. If the author
   so carefully chronicles the progress past Chios, and Samos, and Cos,
   and Rhodes, and Myra, and Cyprus, for the sole reason that he was
   present and knew what happened, why should he, after describing so
   carefully and minutely the progress of the Gospel in Corinth and
   Ephesus, or its comparative failure in Athens, which he had not seen,
   sum up in a word the two years in Rome, where he was present -- years
   which must have been so full of important events and impressive
   preaching? Why should he omit the two years' residence in Caesarea,
   except as regards two isolated scenes, and describe so much more fully
   the previous twelve days' residence there? Why should events in which
   Paul and Luke were both keenly interested, and as to which they must
   have known each other's views -- why should such events be narrated at
   great length by Luke, and in a way which shows, on the accepted
   interpretation, utter ignorance of Paul's views?

   No answer has ever been given to these questions. In truth, he who
   admits that theory must., if he is logical, go on, like Professor
   Harnack and Professor McGiffert, to deny that the real Luke was the
   author.

   But it is at once the special strength and the peculiar weakness of
   English scholarship that, even when it makes a mistake, it shrinks with
   a healthy and saving instinct from carrying out the mistake to
   extremes; it is not consistent with itself where to be consistent means
   to go further astray. With its practical sense it gains the chief
   result -- truth in the main. It returns to the right path when its
   course is becoming clearly divergent; and often it returns before it
   has erred so far from the true path as to become completely conscious
   of its wandering. Hence, it disapprovingly regards him that
   remonstrates with it for its want of consistency, on the ground that
   "he hunts down the statements of his opponents into what seem to him to
   be their consequences". In this country we are, perhaps, too apt to
   think that a scholar is responsible only for what he has explicitly
   stated, and not for the logical consequences of his views.

   On the other hand, it is at once the strength and the weakness of
   German scholarship that it is thoroughly and remorselessly logical,
   that it carries out its views with steadfast and unwavering
   consistency, that it works out every theory to its consequences, that
   it is always conscious where it has gone, and is never untrue to
   itself, even though it thereby sacrifices the real object of its
   pursuit. When it goes wrong it demonstrates its own error with absolute
   conclusiveness, for it never works round out of the straight line back
   towards the true path.

   A good example of the attempt at compromise and of the illogicality of
   such an attempt, is found in the main subject of our investigation --
   Luke's story of the birth of Christ and the first enrollment of
   Palestine.

   The attack directed against the credibility of that episode has been
   strong, confident, almost triumphant in its tone. [6] The defense has
   been rather timid and hesitating; the introduction of Quirinius's name
   has been abandoned almost universally as a demonstrated blunder; and
   even the reality of the "First Enrollment" has been championed by
   Luke's advocates in a very reluctant and half-hearted way.

   But to make even one of these concessions is practically and logically
   to abandon the case, so far as Luke's character as a historian is
   concerned. He who says that "Luke is in error in the name of
   Quirinius," admits that, even when Luke had learned a fact from some
   authority, he could not keep himself free from a huge blunder in
   stating it.

   Beyond all doubt, the suspicion entertained about Luke's History is due
   to the belief that, when he touches on general history, his references
   are usually demonstrably false, as contrary to historical record, and
   are rarely or never conclusively supported by other historians. He is
   the only Evangelist who has attempted to place his narrative in its
   proper relation to contemporary history; and when he tries to do so,
   almost every one, even most of his defenders, admit that he cannot do
   it without making errors.

   It is generally admitted that (as Canon Gore puts it) "the
   chronological data in Luke 2 and 3 were supplied by himself and not by
   his sources". Luke gives us the result of his own investigations into
   the historical surroundings of the life of Christ. But if his
   investigations were of such a character that he confused the census of
   8 BC. with that of 6-7 AD., and imagined that Christ was born "in the
   days of Herod the King," during a census held about ten or eleven years
   after the death of Herod -- when Herod was king, and yet when a Roman
   viceroy was organizing the new province of Palestine -- of what value
   were his investigations, or his ideas about past history, or his
   evidence? [7] What should we think of the historical qualities of a
   modern author who began an account of the life of Hereward the Wake by
   confusing between Edward the Confessor and William the Conqueror? The
   one case would be no worse than the other. The first attempt that the
   author makes to connect his subject with contemporary history shows
   hopeless ignorance of that history.

   It is no wonder in these circumstances that Luke's History has fallen
   under suspicion so strong that the case in its favor has been generally
   considered weaker than that in favor of any other important book in the
   New Testament. When I ventured, in defiance of the general verdict, to
   argue that Luke is a real historian -- and "the first and the essential
   quality of the great historian is truth" -- even so conservative and so
   friendly a scholar as Professor Sanday found that my "treatment of Luke
   as a historian seems too optimistic".

   But it is an essentially inconsistent position to fancy that we can
   accept three-fourths or nine-tenths of what Luke says as true, and
   reject the rest. Destroy a historian's credit in one critical point,
   and there remains naught.

   The confounding of one census with another in this case would be one of
   the serious things, which condemn the would-be historian as hopelessly
   incapable of accuracy or sound historical judgment. His statements
   cease to have any value in themselves; we can in each case only seek
   for a source, and estimate the probability of the statement by the
   authority of the source, after subtracting the likelihood of some other
   blunder having been made by Luke in using his source.

   To judge how seriously this blunder affects the author's character, how
   inevitable are the inferences which the logical mind must deduce from
   the blunder, we must glance at two preliminary points which will form
   the subject of chapters 3. and 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4] The Church in the Roman Empire, Pt. 1.

   [5] Both in the pages of the Expositor in many separate articles, and
   in St.Paul the Traveler and the Roman Citizen.

   [6] See chapter 5.

   [7] There are other impossibilities upon impossibilities which have
   often been stated, and are repeated in chapter 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 3
  LUKE'S ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE ROMAN WORLD

   The reign of Augustus, as is well known, is enveloped in the deepest
   obscurity. While we are unusually well informed about the immediately
   preceding period of Roman history, and for part of the reign of his
   successor, Tiberius, we possess the elaborate and accurate, though in
   some respects strongly prejudiced account of Tacitus, the facts of
   Augustus's reign have to be pieced together from scanty, incomplete and
   disjointed authorities.

   Moreover, obscure events in a remote corner of the Roman world can
   never even in the best attested periods be expected to come within the
   purview of Roman history. Such events are preserved to us only by some
   accidental reference or some local authority; and it is unreasonable to
   cast doubt on the local authority, either because he relates what is
   not related by the Roman historians, or because he regards things from
   a different point of view, and sees them in different perspective, and
   applies to them a very different scale of importance.

   The real value of these accidentally preserved local authorities is
   that they do not give the Roman point of view, but enable us to
   contemplate part of the Roman world, as it was seen by non-Roman eyes.
   What would we not give for a review of Caesar's Gallic campaigns by a
   leading Gaulish Druid or chief, or for a criticism of Agricola by the
   chief bard of Boadicea or of Galgacus? Tacitus, indeed, has expressed
   the views of Galgacus, but we feel that it is Tacitus, not the British
   chief, that speaks.

   We should, undoubtedly, find in the words of the Gaul or the Briton a
   very different view from the official justification and. Apologia for
   his career published by Caesar, or the panegyric composed by Tacitus.
   We should certainly have considerable difficulty in reconciling the
   opposing authorities, and in striking a balance between the discrepant
   judgments and statements as to facts. But it would be sheer unreason to
   set aside as mere invention every assertion of the Gallic or British
   authority, which could not be established on Roman authority.
   Reasonable and sound criticism will apply the same standard to Luke's
   history. It will not demand that he, a Greek of the wider Greek world,
   as distinguished from the narrower country of Greece proper, should
   look at everything through Roman spectacles, and express everything
   precisely as a Roman would do. It will rate his value all the higher,
   because he has not done that -- because he shows us how Roman things
   were looked at by one who was not a Roman. It will be prepared to find
   differences of expression and description, even when the Greek and the
   Roman are looking at the same historical fact. To estimate Luke fairly,
   it will ask what was his attitude towards the Roman world. In answer to
   this question, one might say much; but even a brief chapter may be of
   some use.

   On the whole, Luke's view has in essentials a strong Paulinistic
   character. He was disposed towards the Imperial government and
   political institutions very much as Paul was, and as the wider Greek
   world in general was. He accepted unreservedly the existing facts of
   society and organization. But there was a difference between them.

   Paul, as a Roman himself, spoke from the Roman point of view. Though he
   was a citizen of Tarsus and from that point of view a member of the
   Greek world, his Roman citizenship overrode his Greek citizenship, and
   he had beyond all doubt been educated from infancy to understand his
   position as a Roman. [8] His point of view is clearly and emphatically
   Roman. Those who talk of Paul as a mere Jew are blinding themselves to
   his real position and to the character of the Graeco-Roman world in his
   time.

   But Luke's point of view was not the same. Luke is throughout his work
   a Greek, never a Roman; and his statements must be estimated
   accordingly. Before criticizing, we must make sure that we understand
   rightly; and we shall never understand rightly, unless we begin by
   sympathizing with the writer and the tone of his work.

   Luke then speaks of things Roman as they appeared to a Greek. The
   Greeks never could quite understand Roman matters; even the mysteries
   of the Roman system of personal names were as puzzling to almost all
   Greeks as they are to a modern school boy or college student. [9]
   Hence, for example, in the remarkable scene at Paphos (Acts 13:9), it
   is difficult to feel any confidence whether or not Paul disclosed
   himself to Sergius Paullus in his Roman character. If he did so, it is
   clear that his Roman name ought to be given. Strictly taken, Luke's
   language at this point implies that Paul showed himself only as a Greek
   traveler and philosopher to the Roman proconsul; and, on the whole,
   this seems perhaps most probable. But that must be gathered from the
   career of Paul as a whole; and it would not be safe to infer it from
   the fact that Luke gives the alternative name in its Greeks not in its
   Roman form. Paul did not, perhaps, develop his idea of Christianity for
   the Roman empire quite so early.

   Luke, indeed, does not distinctly mark any further stage of
   development; but to Luke the great antithesis -- Gentile and Jew --
   quite obliterated the lesser distinction between Roman citizen and
   Roman provincial, when the provincial was a Greek. What power lay in
   the Roman name, the thorough Greek never comprehended; and hence Luke
   has never disclosed to us the fact -- which is beyond all doubt -- that
   Paul had a Roman name. Had it been clearly present in the consciousness
   of all modern scholars that Paul must have been either Gaius Julius
   Paullus or something of that style, many things that have been said
   would have been better said, or left unsaid. Yet it is as certain as
   anything can be, that a Roman citizen necessarily had a Roman name,
   that Paul could not have revealed himself to the magistrates at
   Philippi or to Claudius Lysias, and that he could not have appealed to
   the emperor, except by virtue of his Roman name, which he must have
   stated openly.

   Owing to the failure of a Greek to comprehend Roman names and their
   importance, we have no clear record about this important side of Paul's
   career. Luke sees him only in two aspects, as "Hebrew or Graeco Roman":
   he never sees him as "Greek or Roman". [10]

   As a preparation for the study of Luke's History, one ought to become
   familiar with the remains of the Greek used in the cities of the wider
   Greece, [11] to understand as far as possible the ideas of the people
   among whom Luke grew up, and to appreciate the way in which they
   rendered or misrendered Roman things. We shall then begin to appreciate
   better Luke's meaning and his standard as a historian. It is true that
   he regularly uses the popular phraseology, and not the strictly and
   technically accurate terms for Roman things; [12] but he is decidedly
   more accurate in essentials than the ordinary Greek, even the official
   Greek, of the Eastern cities. He never is guilty of the blunders that
   puzzle the epigraphist in Asian or Galatian inscriptions.

   It has often been remarked that Luke wrote for a public ignorant of
   Palestine, its customs and its language, and familiar with the
   surroundings of Graeco-Roman life in the great cities of the empire. He
   explains to his readers Semitic names and terms; he describes the
   situation of Nazareth and Capernaum as cities of Galilee, of Arimathea
   as a city of the Jews, of the country of the Gadarenes as over against
   Galilee, and he even tells the distance of the Mount of Olives and of
   Emmaus from Jerusalem.

   Now contrast with these explanations the allusions to the cities of the
   Greek and Italian lands. The fact that Syracuse and Puteoli and Rhegium
   are named without any geographical explanation might perhaps be
   explained from their fame and importance. Syracuse was one of the
   greatest Greek cities; Puteoli was the great harbor for passengers by
   the sea voyage to Rome from the East; and Rhegium was situated at a
   very striking point on the voyage. Similarly, while he explains the
   position of Philippi and Perga, Myra and Lystra, he assumes that the
   situation of Athens, of Corinth, and of Ephesus is familiar to his
   readers. He thinks that the coasts of the Aegean Sea need no
   explanation, or that the general character of the voyage sufficiently
   explains the position of Troas, Cos, Miletus, Caesarea and Ptolemais.
   The relation of Cenchreae to Corinth (Acts 18:18) is also taken as
   familiar. But the most striking case occurs as the travelers approach
   Rome. The author assumes that the Market of Appius and the Three
   Taverns are familiar points on the road, which Paul must traverse
   between Puteoli and Rome. Instead of telling their distance from Rome,
   he uses them as actual measures of distance to show how far the
   brethren came forth from Rome to welcome Paul.

   Too much stress should not be laid on reasoning so slight as this.
   There is not enough of evidence to justify full confidence. But, so far
   as it goes, it suggests that Luke wrote for an audience which knew the
   environs of Rome and Corinth far more intimately than the country round
   Jerusalem and the Sea of Galilee. And, on the whole, it is on the great
   lines of communication leading from Syria and Asia to Rome that most
   knowledge is assumed.

   Further, Luke sometimes adapts incidents to the comprehension of his
   readers by expressing them in terms which, though not a literal
   description of the original facts, approximate to the general sense and
   are more readily intelligible to the Western reader. An excellent
   example of this is found in Luke 5:17-20, as compared with Mark 2:1-4.

   MARK 2:1-4

   And when he entered again into Capernaum after some days, it was noised
   that he was in the house. And many were gathered together, so that
   there was no longer room for them, no, not even about the door  and he
   spake the word unto them. And they come, bringing unto him a man sick
   of the palsy, borne of four. And when they could not come nigh unto him
   for the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was [13] and when they
   had broken it up, they let down the bed whereon the sick of the palsy
   lay.

   LUKE 5:17-20

   And it came to pass on one of those days, that he was teaching; and
   there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were come
   out of every village of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem: and the power
   of the Lord was with him to heal. And behold, men bring on a bed a man
   that was palsied' and they sought to bring him in, and to lay him
   before him. And not finding by what way they might bring him in because
   of the multitude, they went up to the house-top, and let him down
   through the tiles with his couch into the midst before Jesus.

   Here it is obvious that Mark gives the incident in the more exact way.
   The house was a humble erection, with a flat roof of earth or other
   material, which was easily destroyed and as easily replaced. The
   bearers took advantage of this; mounting on the roof, they broke it up,
   and let down the couch through the hole which they thus made.

   A modern writer might have explained all this to his readers. But Luke,
   although he interprets a single Semitic word occasionally, would not
   spare time and space enough for a more elaborate description of
   details, which were, in his estimation, unimportant. His readers were
   familiar with a different kind of house, covered with tiles, and having
   a hole (impluvium) in the roof of the principal chamber (atrium), where
   the company would be assembled. To turn aside from his proper subject
   and describe differences of architecture would have distracted
   attention from the really important facts. As has been often pointed
   out, [14] Luke never describes such features, but leaves his readers to
   imagine for themselves from their own knowledge the surroundings amid
   which his story was enacted.

   Accordingly, he preserves all the essential features -- the dense crowd
   preventing access to the Master by the proper approach the taking of
   the bed with the sick man in it up on the roof the letting down of the
   bed through the roof before the Savior's eyes. But he does not tell
   that the bearers broke a hole through the roof. A tiled roof, such as
   his readers were accustomed to, is strong; a hole cannot easily be made
   through it; and when it is broken, it is a long and expensive operation
   to repair it. It would seem unnatural that a hole should be violently
   made in such a roof; and Luke leaves his readers to apply their own
   knowledge, and to understand that the bearers let the man on his couch
   down through (the opening in) the tiles.

   Matthew, again, regards all these details about the manner of bringing
   the man as unimportant, and omits them. Corresponding to Mark 2:2-4 and
   Luke 5:18, 19, he has only these words, 9:2:" And behold they brought
   him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed". It was only the words and
   acts of the Master that he considered worthy of space. Luke and Mark
   and Matthew all say that Jesus, "seeing their faith," told the man that
   his sins were forgiven. He saw that the man had the same "faith able to
   receive cure and salvation" as the lame man at Lystra, Acts 14. But
   Luke and Mark explain how the special circumstances made evident the
   faith of the bearers and the man, while Matthew leaves the reader to
   gather from Jesus' words, that he saw some special evidence of faith in
   the case before him, Matthew relates the story as one long familiar;
   and it would not be thoroughly intelligible to us without the proof of
   eager faith which Luke and Mark relate. The latter stand on an earlier
   stage than Matthew.

   We notice that Luke's account here is not suited to a Greek house, but
   only to a Roman house. The Greek house was of totally different
   construction from the Roman; and, if Luke had been writing primarily
   for a public resident in the great Greek cities of the Aegean lands, he
   would probably have either related the incident in its original
   Palestinian form, or imparted to it a turn that would suit the style of
   house usual in those cities. It happens, fortunately, that we can
   illustrate and prove this point by a series of analogous cases.

   The Roman comic dramatists, Plautus and Terence, adapted Greek plays to
   the Roman stage, modifying the plot and incidents in some respects to
   suit the tastes and the knowledge of a Roman audience. When some
   incident in the Greek play turned on a peculiarity in the structure of
   a Greek house, the Roman playwright often modified the facts, so as to
   suit the style of house that was familiar to his audience. Thus, a
   Greek dramatist wrote a play called "The Braggart," in which the
   relation between two lovers is discovered by a slave resident in the
   neighboring house. In adapting this play, Plautus describes this
   discovery in the form that the slave, pursuing an ape which had escaped
   from his master's house, clambered over the roof of the atrium of his
   neighbor's house, and in this way was able to look through the hole in
   the roof or impluvium into the atrium, and saw the lovers sitting side
   by side.

   As Lorenz has observed, [15] this could not have been the form which
   the incident had in the original Greek play. The Greek house had no
   atrium with its impluvium, nor anything corresponding to it. The
   ordinary house in the Greek cities contained an open court or aula, to
   which access was gained by a passage leading from the front door. This
   court was surrounded, sometimes simply by the house walls, sometimes by
   a narrow stoa or portico, [16] resting on the house walls and supported
   inside by columns. The covered chambers of the house opened off the
   back of this court, and the part of the mansion which contained these
   chambers was usually of one or, at most, two stories and covered by a
   flat roof. As the houses in these Greek cities were usually built close
   together, divided from one another by the house wall (which was common
   to both), it was easy to look from the flat roof (or from the windows
   of the upper story) of one house into the court of the next; and thus
   the slave in the Greek play saw the lovers in the aula of the
   neighboring house. In this same way Thekla at Iconium sat at a window
   in the house of her mother Theokleia, and heard Paul preaching in the
   court of the house of Onesiphorus, her neighbor. See note 2 at the end
   of this chapter.

   Luke uses even the Roman form of expression. The regular term for "the
   roof" (regarded from the outside) was in Latin "the tiles"; [17] but in
   Greek the collective singular form "the tiling" was used. [18] Luke
   speaks after the Roman fashion, and says that they let the sick man
   down "through the tiles" (dia ton keramon). by which he implies the
   roof of Roman style. In a similar way, Terence in the Phormio, 707,
   speaks of a snake as having "fallen from the tiles (i.e., the roof)
   through the impluvium," expressing the same meaning in a fuller way.

   In a review in the Theologische Litteraturzeitung, 1897, p. 534, Dr.
   Johannes Weiss says: "When Mark writes they uncovered the roof, and
   when they had broken it up, they let down the bed, ' but Luke on the
   other hand says they let him down through the tiles, ' the former
   thinks of the Palestinian style of building, while the latter thinks of
   the roof of the Graeco-Roman house". This expresses practically the
   same view which has been advocated in the preceding pages, but the word
   Graeco-Roman seems to require modification. Luke writes with a view to
   the Roman house alone; and his language would not suit the Greek style
   of house.

   Luke must have adapted his expression to suit either a circle of
   readers, or more probably the single reader, Theophilus, for whose
   instruction he composed his History; and, in giving to his narrative
   the form seen in 5:20, he evidently felt that Theophilus was used to
   the Roman and not the Greek house architecture. Taking this in
   conjunction with the use made of the Market of Appius and the Three
   Taverns, we find a distinct probability that Theophilus was a citizen
   of Rome.

   Moreover, Theophilus is addressed by an epithet, [19] which, under the
   empire, was peculiarly appropriated to Romans of high rank, and which
   became during the second century a technical title indicating
   equestrian (as distinguished from senatorial) rank. Examples are
   numerous in the Imperial Greek inscriptions; and those who have made
   themselves familiar with the usages of Roman and provincial life under
   the empire, will recognize the high probability that Luke uses this
   adjective in 1:4, as in every other place (Acts 23:26, 24:3 and 26:25)
   [20] to indicate the official (probably equestrian) rank of the person
   to whom he applies it.

   Luke, then, was adapting the form of his narrative either to a single
   Roman or to a Roman circle of readers. The frequency and emphasis with
   which he mentions matters that are specifically Roman must impress
   every reader.

   In regard to Roman officials of high rank, the favorable judgment which
   they always pass on Christ and on his followers is so marked a feature
   of Luke's work, that it must have been prominent before his mind.

   Luke mentions formally the charge which the Jews vainly made, that
   Jesus had been guilty of disloyalty and treason against the Roman
   emperor, 23:2. John mentions it very informally (John 18:30). [21]
   Matthew and Mark are silent about the nature of the charge. Luke
   records the thrice repeated judgment of Pilate acquitting Jesus of all
   fault before the Roman law; John mentions the acquittal once in similar
   terms; Matthew represents Pilate as disclaiming all responsibility for
   his death, but not as formally pronouncing him innocent of all fault.

   In Luke's Second Book this feature is still more marked. The Imperial
   officers stand between Paul and the Jews to save him from them. The
   Proconsul of Cyprus was almost converted to Christianity. The Proconsul
   of Achaia dismissed the Jews' case against him as groundless before the
   law. Festus, the Procurator of Palestine, found in Paul nothing worthy
   of death -- he had difficulty in discovering any definite charge
   against him, which he could report in sending him up to the supreme
   court of the empire. Even Felix, another Procurator, one of the worst
   of Roman officials, was affected by Paul's teaching, and to some extent
   protected him, and did not condemn him, though to please the Jews he
   left him in prison.

   Among inferior Roman officials, Claudius Lysias, Julius, Cornelius,
   even the jailer in the colony of Philippi, were friendly to the
   Christians, or actually joined them. In the few cases in which the
   magistrates of a Roman colony took action against Paul, their action is
   shown to have been in error (as at Philippi), or is passed over in
   silence and the blame is laid on the jealousy and hatred of the Jews
   (as at Pisidian Antioch and Lystra). The praetors of Philippi scourged
   Paul, but they apologized, and confessed they had been in the wrong.
   The magistrates of the Greek cities, like Iconium, Thessalonica and
   Athens, were far more severe against Paul than those of Roman colonies.
   [22]

   Even the publicans, those hated instruments of a taxation after the
   Jewish and Romanising style, are far more kindly treated by Luke than
   by Matthew or Mark. Compare, for example, the "publicans and sinners"
   in the house of Levi or Matthew. Both Mark and Matthew designate the
   company by this name; but Luke calls them "publicans and others," and
   confines the more opprobrious phrase to the mouth of the scribes
   (Matthew 9:10; Mark 2:15; Luke 5:29, cp. 7:34). Luke alone sets the
   publican and the Pharisee over against one another as good and bad
   types, 18:10. It is true that several sayings of Christ in favor of
   publicans are given also by Matthew and Mark; they were too
   characteristic to be omitted; but Luke has more of them.

   It is not unconnected with this character in his work that Luke records
   with special interest the acts and words of Christ implying that the
   Gospel was as open to the Gentiles as to the Jews. Similar examples are
   found in all the Gospels, because no one who gave a fair account of the
   teaching of Christ could omit them; but in Luke they are more numerous
   and more emphatic. [23]

   It has been, however, pointed out, as a proof that such examples cannot
   be relied on, that Luke omits entirely the story of the Savior's visit
   to Phoenicia, including the case of the Syrophoenician woman whose
   great faith was commended. But in that story occurs the saying, "I was
   not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel," Matthew
   15:24; and in view of such sayings as Luke -- and Luke alone -- records
   in 4:25-27 (see Luke 24:47 paralleled by Matthew 28:19, and Mark
   16:15), the historian might doubt whether the incident was not likely
   to give a mistaken impression of the Savior's mission. As to the
   passing in silence over a visit to Phoenicia, it is pointed out below,
   [24] that Luke deliberately refrains from describing the journeys and
   movements of Christ.

   It is, therefore, plain on the face of Luke's History, that he has
   taken pains to connect his narrative with the general history of the
   empire, and that he has noted with special care the relations between
   the new religion and the Roman state or its officials. Elsewhere I have
   tried to show that Luke thought of his work, from one point of view, as
   "an appeal to the truth of history against the immoral and ruinous
   policy of the reigning emperor; a temperate and solemn record by one
   who had played a great part in them of the real facts regarding the
   formation of the Church, its steady and unswerving loyalty in the past,
   its firm resolve to accept the existing Imperial government, its
   friendly reception by many Romans, and its triumphant vindication in
   the first great trial at Rome. The book was the work of one who had
   been trained by Paul to look forward to Christianity becoming the
   religion of the empire and of the world, who regarded Christianity as
   destined not to destroy but to recreate the empire. [25]

   In such circumstances it is obvious that the historian was bound to be
   specially careful that his references to matters of Roman history, and
   especially his first reference -- the subject of this study -- were
   accurate. But the accusation which we have to meet is that it grossly
   misrepresented the character of Roman procedure, and was inaccurate in
   fact. If the accusation is right, any Roman citizen who possessed even
   a small knowledge of the facts of administration must have seen the
   gross inaccuracy at a glance. How, then, does it happen that, while the
   circumstances of the birth of Christ were closely scrutinized by the
   opponents of Christianity and subjected to much misrepresentation and
   many charges of falsification, no one in Roman times seems ever to have
   discovered the inaccuracies which many modern inquirers imagine to
   themselves?
     __________________________________________________________________

   NOTE 1

   Professor Blass in his welcome book, Philology of the Gospels, 1898, p.
   19, declares that the epithet kratistos in Luke's language, had no such
   force as we find in it, but was merely "the ordinary one in epistolary
   and oratorical style, when the person addressed was in a somewhat
   exalted position". As examples, he quotes Paul's address to Felix and
   Festus, who were both Roman officials of equestrian rank! These are two
   of the many instances on which the proof rests that the title was
   peculiarly appropriated at that period to Romans of rank. The same
   scholar refers, further, to the examples quoted by Otto in his edition
   of the Epistle to Diognetus, p. 79 ff. (53 ff.). I cannot consult this
   book, but Otto considers that Diognetus was the philosopher, the friend
   and teacher of Marcus Aurelius, and the emperor might well raise his
   teacher to equestrian rank, as Septimius Severus raised Antipater, the
   teacher of his sons, to the much higher dignity of the consulship; and,
   if Otto's identification be accepted, we may regard the epithet as a
   proof that Diognetus was honored by his imperial pupil Galen [26]
   addresses kratiste Basse, also a Roman of rank. Longinus addresses
   Postumius Terentianus, Plutarch speaks of Fundanus, and Artemidorus of
   Cassius Maximus by the same epithet, in all cases undoubtedly employing
   it in the technical imperial sense. Epaphroditus, to whom Josephus
   dedicated his Jewish Antiquities and Life, is a more doubtful case; but
   the dedication implies that he was a man of influence in Rome, and
   though obviously a freedman (on account of his name), he probably had
   been honored with equestrian rank by his imperial patron. The
   Aphrodisius whom Galen addresses as kratiste and philtate in his
   Prognost. (Kuhn, vol. 19), is also uncertain; Galen, however, lived
   amid high society in Rome.

   I have always conceded that Greeks were not invariably accurate in
   using Latin titles and technical terms, such as optimus (translated
   kratistos); but the above examples show how often the technical and
   accurate sense is found in Greek. But Professor Blass has his mind so
   fixed on Greek literature, of which he is one of the first exponents in
   Europe, that he sometimes omits to notice Roman facts.

   The usage in Theophrastus, of course, lies apart from our subject and
   belongs to an earlier period of society. Even Horace's optimus, used of
   Octavius and Quinctius, is pre-imperial, though both men were persons
   of rank in Rome, and therefore conform to our rule.

   NOTE 2

   In the Acts of Paul and Thekla Paul was preaching in the house of
   Onesiphorus en meso tes ekklesias (or without the last two words): is
   the last word a later alteration of the originalaules? In the Armenian
   version Paul preached in the house of Onesiphorus in a great assembly,
   and Thekla sat at a window which was close to their roof.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [8] Much might be said on this subject; but it belongs to a study of
   Paul's life, and the proofs are found at intervals throughout his
   career. The subject is touched upon several times in St. Paul the
   Traveller, e.g., pp. 30 f., 225, 315.

   [9] The difficulty of being accurate about Roman personal names might
   be illustrated plentifully even from the books of distinguished modern
   classical scholars, an unpleasant topic from which I refrain.

   [10] I should now be inclined to modify lines 6, 12, 16 of St. Paul the
   Traveller, p. 83, so as to eliminate the word "Roman". Except in those
   143 lines, the scene is there described on Paul's Greek side, as I
   think is right.

   [11] Canon Hicks in Classical Review, 1887, pp. 4, 42; Deissmann,
   Bibelstudien, 1895, and Neue Bibelstudien, 1897. See also Expository
   Times, Oct., 1898, p. 9.

   [12] St. Paul the Traveller, pp. 30 f., 111, 135, 255, etc.

   [13] Literally, "they unroofed the roof".

   [14] e.g., St. Paul the Traveller, p. 17.

   [15] See the introduction to his edition of Plautus, Miles Gloriosus,
   p. 11.

   [16] In that case the court was called peristylium.

   [17] Tegulae: see Brix's note on Plautus, Miles Gloriosus, 156.

   [18] keramos: see Pollux, 7., 162; Aristophanes, Clouds, 1127;
   Thucydides, 2., 4, etc.

   [19] kratistos See Note 1 at the end of chapter 3.

   [20] See Note l at end of chapter 3.

   [21] "If this man were not an evildoer, we should not have delivered
   him up unto thee".

   [22] The subject of this paragraph is more fully treated in St. Paul
   the Traveller, p. 304 ff.

   [23] Alford quotes 4:25-27, 9:52-56, 10:33, 15:11 ff., 17:16-18, 18:10
   ff., 19:5,9.

   [24] See Chapter 10 ff.

   [25] St. Paul the Traveller, p. 309 f.

   [26] De libr. suis (Kuhn, vol. 19.).
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 4
  IMPORTANCE IN LUKE'S HISTORY OF THE STORY OF THE BIRTH OF CHRIST

   IT needs no proof that Luke attached the highest importance to this
   part of his narrative. That Jesus was indicated from the beginning as
   the Messiah -- though not a necessary part of his life and work, and
   wholly omitted by Mark and only briefly indicated in mystical language
   by John -- was a highly interesting and important fact in itself, and
   could not fail to impress the historian. The elaboration and detail of
   the first two chapters of the Gospel form a sufficient proof that Luke
   recognized the importance of the central incident in them.

   Further, the author must have regarded this part of his work with
   special interest, and been impelled to work it up with peculiar care,
   on account of the authority on which it rested; and he takes some pains
   to show his reader what was the authority.

   The beautifully told story of Luke 1, 2, is an episode of family
   history of the most private character. The facts could be known only to
   a very small number of persons. If Luke had the slightest trace of
   historical instinct, he must have satisfied himself that the narrative
   which he gives rested on the evidence of one of the few persons to whom
   the facts could be known. It is not in keeping with the ancient style
   that he should formally name his authority; but he does not leave it
   doubtful whose authority he believed himself to have. "His mother kept
   all these sayings hid in her heart;" "Mary kept all these sayings,
   pondering them in her heart;" (Luke 2:19 and 51) those two sentences
   would be sufficient. The historian who wrote like that believed that he
   had the authority of the Mother herself.

   But those two sentences are not the only indications of the source
   whence Luke believed his information to come. Some facts intimately
   concerning Elizabeth are mentioned in 1:24 and 41; and the narrative
   carefully explains how these facts became known to Mary, 1:36 and 41
   she had been told. But it is never stated that facts intimately
   concerning Mary were mentioned by her to Elizabeth. The narrative has
   the form which is natural only if Mary is understood to be the
   authority throughout: she simply states what concerned herself, while,
   in what concerned Elizabeth, she not merely states the facts, but also
   explains that she has first-hand authority.

   Moreover, what concerned Mary is expressly said to have remained
   secret, known to herself alone and pondered over in her own heart. It
   would be a contradiction that this secret of her heart should be the
   property of others to tell about her. The historian, by emphasizing the
   silence and secrecy in which she treasured up the facts, gives the
   reader to understand that she is the authority.

   It is a different thing when we read, 1:65 f., "these sayings were
   noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judea. And all that
   heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, What then shall this
   child be?" There a subject of notoriety, which deeply impressed the
   whole district, is referred to. What is known to many is no secret, and
   in fact is expressly said to have been a topic of conversation through
   the country.

   The people in the hill country of Judea knew about the marvelous
   circumstances of John's birth, and talked about it, and wondered. But
   at Nazareth nothing was generally known. Jesus had been born far away.
   His parents brought him to Nazareth after some time had elapsed. Even
   after Herod's death his shadow lay heavy on the land; and the parents,
   being subjects of his son Antipas, were not likely to talk to their
   neighbors about the old king's relations to the child and about the
   prophecies of Simeon and Anna apart from the consideration that the
   whole subject must have seemed too sacred for gossip. Mary did not
   herself comprehend the things that had occurred. She kept them hid in
   her heart, and apparently did not even tell her husband what was in her
   mind. This child was not to be an unalloyed delight either to her
   country or herself; he was "set for the falling and rising up of many
   in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken against"; and for herself, "a
   sword should pierce through her own soul". It was a dread and vague
   future about which she pondered in the depths of her own mind, as "the
   child grew and waxed strong, filled with wisdom". In that marvelous
   picture, sketched in such simple and brief terms, only he that
   deliberately shuts his mind against all literary feeling can fail to
   catch the tone of a mother's heart.

   In the description of the early days of John and of Jesus the reader
   notices the woman's and the mother's feeling, watching the growth of
   the two children, to whom and through whom so much had been promised.
   As to John, "the child grew and waxed strong and was in the wilderness
   (of Judah, the remote country of his birth) till the day of his showing
   unto Israel". But about her own son there is an added touch of warmth,

   "the child grew and waxed strong, filled with wisdom; and the grace of
   God was upon him" (Luke 1:80, 2:40).

   No one who judges on the ordinary canons of criticism which govern the
   interpretation of ancient literature, can doubt that it is through
   design, and not by accident, that there occur in the opening chapters
   of Luke's History all these little touches, indicating so delicately
   and so skillfully what authority he had to depend upon in the beginning
   of his narrative. This is specially clear when we remember the
   declaration made by the author in his preface, that he had investigated
   from their origin the facts which he is going to narrate. After such a
   preface, and with all the indications in the narrative, it is plain
   that the historian either believed his statements to be based on the
   authority of the Virgin Mary herself, or has deliberately tried to
   create a false impression that such was the case. Is it a rational
   supposition, is it psychologically possible, that any man who was
   impressed with the sacredness of the subject which he is treating
   should intentionally found his narrative upon such a falsehood as this
   would be?

   Understanding that Mary herself is the authority to whom Luke appeals,
   we find that the passage becomes clearer, both as to what it states and
   what it omits.

   The origin of the narrative may possibly explain why Luke and Matthew
   give such different accounts of the circumstances of the birth of
   Christ. Matthew gives the public account, that which was generally
   known during the Savior's life and after his death; and popular belief
   has always some tendency to transform and adapt to moral purposes facts
   that are much talked about. Luke gives from knowledge gained within the
   family an account of facts known only to the family, and in part to the
   Mother alone.

   It is most probable that Luke had heard the story which Matthew gives,
   and it would have been easy to fit this into his own narrative without
   disturbing either account. But they did not rest on equal authority;
   and Luke would not mix the two. What he had got was an account of the
   miraculous birth and of the circumstances which had most deeply
   impressed the Mother's mind with regard to the origin and mission of
   her Child, while it was rather the relations of the Child to the old
   king that had impressed themselves on the imagination of his followers.
   In them Matthew read a fulfillment of prophecies about the Messiah. But
   they had not similarly affected Mary's mind, and they were not among
   the facts which she pondered over in her heart as pledges of the great
   future that lay before this little Child.

   Luke therefore confined himself to what he had on the highest
   authority. So much he states in full detail; and the rest of the first
   twelve years of Jesus' life he sums up in the brief expression, 2:40:
   "He was filled with wisdom and the grace of God was upon him". Then
   came a remarkable instance of the young Boy's awakening consciousness
   of his own mission. He had been brought up by his Mother to think of
   Joseph as his father; but suddenly he declared to her that his Father's
   business lay in a different direction. Here, again, there was something
   for the Mother's heart to ponder over, while her Son went on once more
   in the natural development of a boy, "increasing in wisdom and stature
   and in favor with God and man".

   We can argue, then, with perfect confidence that Luke did not take the
   narrative of the birth and childhood of Christ from mere current talk
   and general belief: he had it in a form for which Mary herself was in
   his opinion the responsible authority. What, then, was this form? It
   must have been either written narrative or oral communication.

   If it were written, the writer must have been either Mary herself or
   some one who recorded her story so carefully and faithfully as to leave
   full expression to Mary's own feelings.

   That Mary herself wrote it seems highly improbable. We should not
   expect that she had the literary interest or skill which might lead her
   to wish to perpetuate the facts in her own formal narrative: it is more
   probable, considering the circumstances of her position in youth, that
   she would lack the power of setting down a story in written expression
   with such rare art as to have the appearance of being perfectly
   natural, even though she would be able to tell it well orally in
   simple, natural, unstudied words. Moreover, it seems improbable that
   she should desire of her own self to make public the facts which she
   had kept so long hid in her heart. It is more natural to think that she
   hardly ever spoke of them, except to the rare individuals whose
   sympathy drew her on. The language, too, has a tone and character that
   do not suggest a formal autobiographical narrative. It seems, if I may
   venture to express my individual opinion, to be one of those which lose
   from being recited in public; it is one to be read alone or in the
   company of some perfectly sympathetic person, but which suffers from
   the presence of any one who is not in perfect sympathy. It expresses
   the heart of Mary; but in the form in which it was expressed to a
   sympathetic heart, and not as prepared for publication.

   It is more easily conceivable that some third person, intimate with
   Mary and recognizing the importance of having an authoritative
   narrative of these events, should have given literary form to an
   account coming direct from her own lips. But this account must have
   been either a part of a complete life of Christ one of those which Luke
   refers to in his preface, 1:1, "repeated [27] according as they who
   were from the beginning eyewitnesses or the word delivered the
   tradition" -- or an independent narrative, ranking with the authority
   of origin from Mary, and describing just so much as she was best able
   to tell.

   The existence of such an independent narrative, and the utter oblivion
   into which it fell, if it ever existed, seem alike most improbable.
   Moreover, suppose, for example, the author who gave it literary form to
   have been John, in whose house she lived from the crucifixion till her
   death, we must suppose that her words have passed through the modifying
   influence of John's mind; thereafter John's words have passed through
   the modifying influence of Luke's mind; and yet, after all this, they
   continue to show clear and fresh the marks of their origin. The
   narrative seems not to have passed through so many stages.

   Further, the earliest followers of Christ seem to have been so entirely
   occupied with his engrossing personality that they thought little or
   not at all about his Mother. She hardly appears in three of the four
   Gospels.

   Matthew tells the story of the birth of her son in such a way that
   Joseph is the prominent person, and Mary a mere adjunct. On the few
   occasions on which she appears directly or indirectly, in Matthew and
   in Mark "there is a sound of reproof in the words" which Christ uses to
   her or of her: Matthew 12:46, 13:56 f., Mark 3:31 ff., Matthew 6:3 f.
   They do not mention her among the women who watched in sorrow at the
   crucifixion. It has been suggested that they omitted her name in this
   scene, because it was obvious that she would be there; but no ordinary
   reader of these two Gospels would gather from them that this was
   obvious.

   The tone which John's references to her convey depends mainly on the
   interpretation of John 2:4. There the Savior says to her, according to
   the almost universal interpretation, "Woman, what have I to do with
   thee?" (ti emoi kai soi, gunai) in a tone of reproof and almost (it
   might appear) of dislike, as is seen in the illustrative cases which
   are usually quoted Matthew 17:19, 2 Samuel 16:10, 1 Kings 17:18, 2
   Chronicles 35:21 and Judges 11:12. Is this the tone of the only
   information that John gives about the woman who lived in his house from
   the day of the crucifixion till her death? The more one thinks of it,
   the more one hopes that Luther was right when he desired to take the
   meaning, "what is that to me and to thee?" [28] The old Egyptian poet
   of the fourth or fifth century, Nonnus, understood the words in that
   way, for he slightly varies them in his metrical paraphrase, reading ti
   emoi, gunai, ee soi aute; Professor Blass considers that Nonnus had
   before him a MS. of the fourth Gospel in which he was read where all
   now existing MSS. have kai, and argues that we should replace he in the
   text. We should rather suppose that Nonnus (and probably the whole
   Asian circle for whom the fourth Gospel was primarily intended)
   understood the accepted text in the same sense as Luther advocated.

   In all that part of Luke's History which is parallel with the common
   tradition in Matthew and Mark, he mentions Mary only in the same way as
   they do, and gives no more information about her than they have; and
   like them, he does not mention her presence at the crucifixion. The
   only additional allusion to her that he gives in the main body of his
   narrative, is contained in the words of an unnamed woman, blessing her
   who had given birth to such a son as Jesus (Luke 11:27) Accordingly,
   considering the interest which Luke shows in Mary in the beginning of
   the Gospel, and in Acts 1:14, where she is mentioned as being in
   steadfast companionship with the Apostles, it seems probable that the
   written authorities which he had before him told the story of the
   Savior without referring except in the most casual way to his Mother.

   It, therefore, seems unlikely that the first two chapters of Luke
   depend on an older written narrative. The quality in them is too simple
   and natural, they give too much of the nature of Mary expressed with
   the art of Luke, to have passed through the mind of an intermediate
   writer. And it is difficult to think that any such composition either
   could have existed in Luke's time, or would have disappeared without
   leaving a trace behind, if it had existed.

   This result is diametrically opposite to the prevailing opinion. It is
   generally assumed as specially clear, that we have in the narrative of
   the birth and childhood of Jesus a translation from an Aramaic
   narrative or from a series of Aramaic narratives. Instead of seeing
   evidence of Luke's literary power in the variations of style in
   different parts of his history, many scholars see only evidence of
   difference in documentary authority. As if the person who wrote the
   preface 1:1-4 could be blind to the complete change in style between
   1:4 and 1:5! Or as if he were unable to put the story into his own
   Greek, if he desired. It is clear as noon-day that the author
   deliberately aims at the contrast in style between 1:1-4 and the
   following verses.

   But that there must be a number of separate documents underlying the
   narrative of 1 and 2, which Luke translated, seems an even more
   objectionable idea. Because there are three distinct statements about
   the growth of John, of the infant Jesus, and of the boy Jesus, it is
   assumed by some writers that these form the conclusions of separate
   documents. The slight but significant differences between them, in
   which I see evidence at once of literary art and of the natural
   motherly feeling of Mary, are treated as being mere tag-ends of
   separate narratives, which the author of this History had not art
   enough to hide. He was so incapable of working separate authorities
   into a unity, that he comes to three separate ends, because he had
   three separate authorities before him.

   "And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts
   till the day of his showing unto Israel," 1:80.

   "And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom; and
   the grace of God was upon him," 2:40.

   "And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and
   man," 2:52.

   But, in truth, these three sentences mark three stages in a continuous,
   unified narrative, written with the finest feeling and art by a single
   author of the loftiest literary power. They are a quite sufficient
   proof to one who judges on literary grounds that this is not a
   composite narrative, but the work of the same writer throughout.

   If we are right in this view as to Luke's authority and as to the way
   in which that authority reached him, viz., by oral communication, it
   appears that either the Virgin was still living when Luke was in
   Palestine during the years 57 and 58 -- which is quite a possible
   supposition on the almost universally accepted assumption that she was
   quite young when Jesus was born -- or Luke had conversed with some one
   very intimate with her, who knew her heart and could give him what was
   almost as good as firsthand information. Beyond that we cannot safely
   go; but yet one may venture to state the impression -- though it may be
   generally considered merely fanciful -- that the in, termediary, if one
   existed, is more likely to have been a woman than a man. There is a
   womanly spirit in the whole narrative, which seems inconsistent with
   the transmission from man to man, [29] and which, moreover, is an
   indication of Luke's character: he had a, marked sympathy with women.

   Many other facts in his History show that character. Luke alone
   mentions the "women which had been healed of evil spirits and
   infirmities," who "ministered to him of their substance"; and he names
   them: he was interested in themselves, in their gratitude to Jesus, and
   in their reason for it (Luke 8:2).

   He alone tells of the woman who wet Jesus' feet with her tears, and
   wiped them with her hair, and kissed them, and anointed them -- her to
   whom her many sins were forgiven, because she loved much. He does not
   tell her name -- was it because she had been a sinner, and he would not
   chronicle that fact about a definite person? or was his information
   defective (Luke 7:36) [30] ?

   He alone tells about the different characters of Martha and Mary of
   Bethany, though he left much for John to add (Luke 10:38). Matthew and
   Mark do not mention their names, but allude to Mary in an obscure and
   almost inaccurate way.

   He alone tells of the women of Jerusalem who followed him to his death,
   bewailing and lamenting. All three synoptics mention the women who had
   followed Jesus from Galilee, and stood watching the crucifixion afar
   off, and how some of them watched where he was laid; but Luke alone
   tells how they went away and prepared spices and ointments (Luke 23:27,
   56).

   He alone tells of the nameless woman in the crowd who blessed the
   mother of such a Son as Jesus; possibly one of those to whom Jesus
   afterwards said: "Blessed are the childless women, in those days that
   are coming" (Luke 23:29 compare Luke 11:27).

   Thus time after time, Luke is our only authority for the service and
   ministration of women. He had the tender and sympathetic feeling for
   women which seems to be quite in keeping with his surroundings in
   Macedonia (where women occupied a place of so much more honor than in
   Greece proper), and which makes him record so often in his second book
   the part played by women in the diffusion of the new religion.

   In the texture of the two opening chapters we find full justification
   for the prominence that the preface lays upon this episode; and we
   conclude that both the personal character of the author and the high
   authority on which he claims to rest, would prompt him to lavish
   special loving care on this part of his narrative and to avoid defacing
   it by a serious blunder. If he made a blunder, as seems generally
   admitted, that would be a sufficient refutation of the view which I
   have maintained, that he was a great historian.

   NOTE

   Probably the most reasonable explanation of the remarkable
   discrepancies between the four passages -- Matthew 26:6-13, Mark
   14:3-9, Luke 7:36-50 and John 12:1-9 (cp. 11:2) -- is that there were
   two distinct incidents: one occurred in the house of Simon the
   Pharisee, and is described by Luke; the other occurred in the house of
   Martha and Mary at Bethany, and is correctly described by John. Mark,
   and following him Matthew, mix up the two and describe the incident as
   occurring at Bethany in the house of Simon the Leper. They, do not name
   the woman, and they merely say that she poured a box of ointment over
   the head of Jesus. The attempts to harmonize John with Mark and Matthew
   fail completely. John, who says that "they made him a supper there and
   Martha served," obviously places the meal in Martha's house: it seems
   quite absurd to suppose that she would be serving in the house of
   Simon. There is an obvious intention on John's part to correct the
   current account, as seen in Matthew and Mark, and at the same time to
   illustrate the character of Martha as described by Luke 10:38.
   Similarly, inasmuch as the current account placed the incident two days
   before the last supper, John pointedly says it occurred "six days
   before the Passover".

   Probably, Mark originally fell into error from treating two separate
   incidents, each perhaps only reported in part to him, or in part
   forgotten by him, as being one and the same incident. From one incident
   he caught that it had occurred in Bethany, and from another that it
   occurred in the house of Simon: accordingly he begins "while he was in
   Bethany in the house of Simon the Leper, as he sat at meat". It must
   remain uncertain whether Luke's Simon the Pharisee is the same person
   as Mark's Simon the Leper, or (as seems on the whole more probable) the
   incident narrated by Luke occurred in the north, near the Sea of
   Galilee, in the house of Simon the Pharisee, and Mark, connecting the
   incident at once with Bethany and with Simon, put it in the house of a
   Simon who lived in Bethany and was or had been a leper. It would be
   obviously impossible that the feast should be held in the house of one
   who was a leper; and it seems not very probable that it would be held
   in his house, if he had ever been a leper.

   It must be confessed that there is some temptation to follow the Roman
   tradition, and treat the Lukan incident as the same with the Johannine.
   Luke is vague as to the locality, though it is most natural to
   understand that it occurred in the north. But the decisive argument
   lies in the moral of the tale. The reason why any incident was
   remembered by the disciples lay in the lesson which the Master had
   deduced from it. The features which drew forth the lesson in Luke are
   precisely those which are most difficult to reconcile with John. To
   identify the two incidents, it becomes almost necessary to suppose that
   the features on which the moral hinges are errors on Luke's part. Now I
   should be quite ready to admit that Luke had made mistakes about
   various points, provided they were not essential to the moral; but
   those are precisely the points that are vital, and give vitality to the
   whole incident. Matthew and Mark are reconciled with John by assuming
   that they have erred in the accompaniments; but in the vital details
   they agree with him. To identify Luke and John requires that the vital
   details are false in one or the other.

   The considerations advanced (see chapter 11) ff., if correct, would
   entirely disprove the identity of the Lukan and the Johannine incident.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [27] On the sense of anataxasthai see Blass, Philology of the Gospels,
   1898, p. 14 f.

   [28] Dr. E. Nestle in the Expository Times, 1898, p. 332.

   [29] For Eastern feeling read Lady Duff Gordon's Letters from Egypt.

   [30] 7:36 ff.: See Note at end of chapter.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                     PART 2
                            SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 5
  THE QUESTION AT ISSUE

   NEITHER Mark nor John mentions where Jesus was born. Mark 1:9 says:
   "Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized of John in the
   Jordan". In John 1:45 Philip speaks of him as "Jesus of Nazareth, the
   son of Joseph"; and in Acts 10:38 Peter mentions "Jesus of Nazareth".

   These expressions obviously do not imply that Mark, or John, or the
   author of Acts considered Nazareth to be the place of Jesus' birth.
   They merely show that Nazareth was universally considered to be the
   abode of his parents, the place which had been his home, coming from
   which he had appeared before the world. Similarly the expression, "son
   of Joseph," used by Philip in John 1:45, cannot be taken as indicating
   John's own opinion, but merely as showing the current belief.

   Again, John 7:40, 41, quotes the opinions expressed in Jerusalem about
   Jesus: some of the multitude said: "This is of a truth the prophet":
   others said: "This is the Christ": but some said: "What, does the
   Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the scripture said that the Christ
   cometh of the seed of David and from Bethlehem?"

   These are the popular sayings, and it is obvious that they are arranged
   to form a climax; but the last, which is really the strongest
   recognition of Jesus as the Messiah, gains all the more emphasis
   because it has the form of an objection to him. He was the Prophet: He
   was the Christ: He fulfilled all the prophecies about the coming of the
   Christ. The irony, which makes the objectors unconsciously bear such
   emphatic witness in his favor, might have been expected to be clear and
   impressive to every rational mind. But there is no blindness so
   complete as that of the historical critic with a bad theory to
   maintain; and the critics of this class actually quote this passage as
   a proof that John did not believe that Jesus was born in Bethlehem.
   Would they be consistent, and maintain also that John did not believe
   him to be of the seed of David, though that was indubitably the
   accepted doctrine of the early Church, as is attested by Paul, Romans
   1:3 and 2 Timothy 2:8, as well as by the Synoptics?

   But the two points mentioned by the objectors must go together. They
   who quote 7:41 as a proof that John did not know the second point must
   infer also that John did not know the first. Every Christian reader of
   John's Gospel would recognize the irony involved in the first point,
   for he knew the doctrine set forth by Paul and the Synoptics. He would
   therefore necessarily recognize that the second point was also
   ironical.

   Accordingly, every scholar who judges literature on literary grounds
   will recognize that the writer of the fourth Gospel assumes such
   perfect familiarity in his readers with the story of the birth in
   Bethlehem, that not merely must he be ranked among the witnesses to it,
   but he must have written at a time when this belief was a part of
   recognized Christian teaching; and it is probable that this will be
   urged by some scholars as a proof that the fourth Gospel springs from a
   much later period, after the story as given by Matthew and Luke had had
   time to become a fundamental part of Church doctrine.

   But a remarkable feature in the Gospels, at least of Matthew, Luke and
   John, is that they assume in their readers such a background of
   knowledge about the life of the Savior. They are written for the use of
   persons who were already Christians, and who already had the life of
   Jesus in their minds as the foundation of their faith. None of the
   Gospels is intended to be a formal biography: their completeness is
   moral and spiritual and not historical:" [31] they are, in reality,
   Gospels. But the facts of the life of Jesus were fundamental in the
   Gospel, and from that point of view each Gospel had to present a record
   of facts, actions and words sufficient to bear the structure of faith
   which had to rest upon it. But John, in particular, assumes that his
   readers know the facts recorded in the Synoptic Gospels, and his work
   is an unintelligible phenomenon in literature unless this is
   recognized.

   Now Matthew and Luke agree that Jesus was born in Bethlehem. Matthew
   2:6 points out that this place of birth was the fulfillment of the
   prophecy that the Ruler of Israel was to be born there. Yet they are
   also fully aware that Jesus was considered by the world to be a native
   of Nazareth, and that he had been brought up from infancy in that city.
   Matthew 2:23 again sees in the up-bringing at Nazareth the fulfillment
   of another prophecy. How, then, do they account for the general
   oblivion of the real place of birth?

   Matthew begins with the birth of Jesus. He tells nothing about any
   previous connection of his parents with Nazareth; but says that they
   retired to Nazareth while the Child was still an infant, being in fear
   of the reigning King of Judea. If Luke's History had not been
   preserved, it would have been unhesitatingly concluded on the authority
   of Matthew that the parents of Jesus had never lived at Nazareth until
   after the birth of the Child. And though Matthew does not explicitly
   assert that, yet it is hard to think that he could have expressed
   himself as he has done, if he had known that the parents had their
   original home in Nazareth.

   Luke goes farther back, in accordance with his profession to have
   studied all things from their origin. He mentions that both Joseph and
   Mary resided at Nazareth. He tells that they made frequent visits to
   Jerusalem, and that the mother had relatives there or in the
   neighborhood; and he explains what was the cause that led them to make
   a brief visit to Bethlehem at such a moment that Jesus was born there.

   Luke does not indeed say explicitly in so many words that the visit was
   intended to be a mere temporary one; and this has led some commentators
   to suggest that there may have been an intent on the part of the
   parents to change their residence to Bethlehem. But the cause stated in
   John 2:4, 5, implies a mere temporary visit; and the language of Luke
   2:39 shows that after the brief visit they returned to their own city,
   Nazareth, and implies that this had always been their intention.

   The occasion of this short visit to Bethlehem is thus described by
   Luke. In accordance with the orders of the Roman Emperor, Augustus,
   there was made an enrollment, or numbering, of the population of
   Herod's kingdom; and this was made according to households and tribal
   descent and local tribal connection, so that those Hebrews who were not
   residing in the proper city of their tribe and family were obliged to
   go to their city in order to be enrolled there.

   Further, it seems to be implied that the wife, as well as the head of
   the house, had to go to the proper city (or for some reason felt it a
   duty to go), so that the household as a whole might be numbered in the
   tribal and family center.

   Joseph, then, with Mary, his wife, went to his proper city, Bethlehem,
   to be numbered there among his own people, "because he was of the house
   and family of David".

   It has been maintained by many scholars in modern times that the census
   is either a fiction or a blunder; that the circumstances connected with
   it, which Luke relates, are contrary to history; and, in short, that
   the story is unhistorical and impossible, not in one way merely, but in
   several. It is asserted as unquestionable that the sole germ out of
   which the story has developed is the fact, recorded by Josephus, that
   about AD. 6-7 there was made a census and valuation of Palestine, the
   first and the only one which the Romans held in that country; and that
   Luke has transferred this census, with the officer, Quirinius, who made
   it, to a different period about nine or twelve years earlier, when it
   was for various reasons impossible that any census could have occurred.

   It has been urged with triumphant certainty as established on
   incontrovertible evidence that the whole story of chapter 2, with all
   its pathetic and romantic incidents, is a mere fiction, destitute of
   even as much historical foundation as most historical novels possess.
   It is asserted as a demonstrated truth that the story contradicts the
   established facts of contemporary history; and that any one who accepts
   the ordinary canons of historical reasoning must relegate the whole
   talc of the birth of Christ to the realm of imaginative fiction. Nor is
   it only the extreme school of critics that reject the talc as an
   invention. Many of those scholars who thoroughly accept the
   trust-worthiness of the Gospel narrative as a whole abandon the attempt
   to defend this incident, and either pass by on the other side, or
   frankly admit that it is at least in part erroneous, a mixture of
   Dichtung und Wahrheit.

   Against the trustworthiness of this narrative the following are the
   main lines of argument: --

   1. It is declared to be a demonstrated fact that Augustus never ordered
   any general "Enrollment," or census, to be made of the whole Roman
   world. Gardthausen, the latest historian of Augustus, speaks most
   emphatically on this point. He goes even so far as to declare that it
   is inconsistent with Augustus's aims to attribute to him any such
   intention: he quotes the words of Luke, and then adds that, for the
   emperor's plans, a general census of the empire was neither necessary
   nor suitable. [32]

   The eminent German scholar here displays a familiarity with Augustus's
   intentions and the limits of his aims, which is quite unjustified by
   the scanty evidence accessible to us. Such assumption of the right to
   pronounce negative judgments is not the spirit in which the history of
   Augustus ought to be written, and such a wild statement as this shows a
   momentary loss of the historic instinct, which enables a writer to
   distinguish between legitimate inference and loose imagination. It is
   one of the places in Gardthausen's work where a regret rises strong in
   every reader's mind that Mommsen [33] has never found opportunity to
   write the history of that period.

   In truth, the distinguished historian of Augustus was not justified in
   asserting more than that no evidence was known to him corroborating
   Luke's statement as to Augustus's intentions. It will be my aim to show
   that evidence was in existence, apparently unknown to Gardthausen,
   which affords some confirmation of Luke's assertion; and establishes
   it, when Luke's words are properly translated, on a basis of high
   historical probability.

   2. Even if Augustus had ordered a census to be made of the whole
   empire, it is maintained that such a census would not have extended to
   Palestine, which was an independent kingdom and not subject to the
   orders of Augustus.

   There is a mixture of truth and error in this line of argument. It will
   be our aim to demonstrate that, while the application of the Roman
   census by Roman officials to Herod's kingdom could not be accepted as
   credible, yet Luke does not speak of any such application. The argument
   is founded on a false interpretation. Luke nowhere asserts or implies
   that the census was made by a Roman official. He states that the birth
   of Jesus occurred in the days of Herod the King of Judea, and in the
   country over which that king ruled: compare 1:5 and 2:4. He merely
   mentions the Roman officer, Quirinius, for purposes of dating according
   to the ancient style, employed generally before eras and numbering of
   years had come into literary use, just as he mentions various kings and
   priests in 3:1, 2 for the same purpose. He assumes that his readers
   would appreciate the fact that the census in the territory of King
   Herod was conducted under the immediate orders of the king himself.

   Further, Luke certainly understands that Herod's kingdom was a part of
   the Roman world, and that Herod was bound to obey orders issued by
   Augustus in respect of numbering the population of the Roman world.

   We shall have to show -- what no one except a theological critic with a
   theory to maintain would dream of denying -- that Herod's kingdom was a
   part of the Roman world; that it was not independent, but ought rather
   to be styled a "dependent state"; and that any tendency on the part of
   such dependent kings to disregard their duty of submission to the
   general principles of Roman policy was sharply repressed by the
   emperors.

   3. Even if a census had been held in Palestine, it is asserted that
   there would have been no necessity for Joseph and Mary to go up from
   Nazareth to the city of Bethlehem, inasmuch as a Roman census would be
   made according to the existing political and social facts, and would
   not require that persons should be enrolled according to their place of
   birth or origin. The Roman method necessarily was to count the
   population according to their actual residence. It is, however, an
   essential point in Luke's story, that it should explain how the son of
   a resident in Nazareth came to be born in Bethlehem, and thus fulfilled
   the prophecy that the Messiah was to be born in that city. Hence it is
   contended that Luke's fiction is doubly erroneous, for even if it were
   true it would not lead to that journey, which is the critical point in
   the history.

   There can be no doubt that in the Roman census the existing facts were
   recorded, and that any disturbance of the existing distribution of
   population would defeat the purpose and impair the value of the census.
   Therefore, if the census which Luke had in mind were one carried out
   purely after the Roman method, it would not furnish the explanation
   which is the prime reason for mentioning the census. That must be
   freely conceded.

   But, far from asserting that this census was carried out strictly after
   the Roman method, Luke explains at the outset that it was made on a
   different principle, not merely by households (as the Roman method [34]
   required), but also at the same time according to descent and stock,
   that is by tribes. It will be our aim to show why this modification of
   the Roman method was necessary for Herod in his peculiar position: he
   disguised the Roman and foreign character by the additional requirement
   that the census should be tribal and thus less alien to the national
   feeling.

   4. It is maintained that no census was ever held in Judea until AD.
   6-7, on the ground that that "great census" (Acts 5:37) is described by
   Josephus as something novel and unheard of, rousing popular indignation
   and rebellion on that account.

   We freely concede that the attempts which have been made to find in
   Josephus any allusion to an earlier census held under Herod have
   failed. They have been directed on the wrong lines they have been made
   with a view to discover signs of such a knowledge of the finances of
   Palestine as would imply a formal Roman census and valuation made under
   Herod.

   We also fully acknowledge that the earliest census and valuation of
   property made after the Roman fashion in Palestine took place, as
   Josephus says, in AD. 7. It is a necessary part of our case that a
   totally new departure was made in that year; and that the novel,
   unheard-of, and anti-national proceeding roused indignation and
   rebellion. In all that Josephus is thoroughly right. But the census of
   Herod was tribal and Hebraic, not anti-national. It was wholly and
   utterly unconnected with any scheme of Roman taxation; and it was
   conducted by Herod on strictly tribal methods. It roused little
   indignation and no rebellion; and therefore gave no reason for Josephus
   to notice it.

   It is plain too how great an extent these four arguments against the
   "Enrollment" hang together, and depend on a false character ascribed to
   the operation. When Luke's narrative is looked at from the proper point
   of view by the true historical and sympathetic judgment, with the
   intention, not of picking all possible faults, but of understanding in
   the best light the testimony which he gives, we shall see that his
   evidence explains satisfactorily a peculiarly obscure episode in Roman
   provincial history. And we shall find that in one more case the
   progress of discovery in Egypt has set in a new light the problems that
   seemed insoluble to our predecessors, and made perfectly clear what was
   obscure to them.

   In addition to these four closely connected arguments, another of a
   different character is advanced.

   5. It is affirmed that Quirinius never governed Syria during the life
   of Herod, for Herod died in 4 BC. and Quirinius was governor of Syria
   later than 3 BC. and probably in 2 or 1 BC. Therefore a census taken in
   the time of Quirinius could not be associated with the birth of a child
   "in the days of Herod, King of Judea".

   The conclusion of Mommsen, of Borghesi, and of de Rossi, that Quirinius
   governed Syria twice, has been generally accepted by modern scholars.
   Quirinius went to govern Syria for the second time in AD. 6. The proof
   that his first governorship of Syria fell as late as the year 2 or 1
   BC. is incomplete, depending on an estimate of probabilities; and it is
   founded on the assumption that a statement made by Suetonius is
   inaccurate. We shall try to show that the decided balance of
   probabilities is in favor of his having held command in Syria before
   Herod died. In the present defective state of the evidence, one cannot
   go further than a probable statement.

   The propositions which we seek to defend are only probable. The
   evidence is too scanty to demonstrate any of them in such a perfectly
   conclusive fashion that the most prejudiced minds must be convinced.
   But how many of the "facts" of ancient history are demonstrated beyond
   all reach of cavil and dissension? Every one who has studied the
   foundations of ancient history knows that most of our knowledge is
   founded on a balance of evidence, often a very delicate balance; and,
   if there were any strong motive to make it worth while fighting the
   case, almost any detail in ancient history can be called in question.
   What I am concerned to maintain is that all our positions are the most
   probable issue of the scanty evidence, and that some of them rest on
   testimony, outside of Luke's writings, which in ordinary historical
   criticism is reckoned sufficient justification, while the others are in
   themselves quite natural, and there is practically no evidence against
   them, so that Luke's authority should be reckoned as sufficient to
   establish them.

   The possible views with regard to the present question seem to reduce
   themselves to three: --

   1. The story of the birth of Christ, as given by Luke, is so suspicious
   and encumbered with so many difficulties that it is as a whole
   incredible.

   2. The story is true.

   3. The main part of the story is true, but the reference to Quirinius
   is wrong, and the incident occurred ten to fourteen years before his
   census. It is possible to cut out the verse about Quirinius, which is a
   mere date added by Luke, and leave the story otherwise complete; but
   all the rest hangs together, and if one detail be false, everything is
   affected.

   As to the third alternative, besides the general considerations already
   urged, see to what a dilemma it reduces its supporters! They
   acknowledge that the date is added in error by Luke. The rest they hold
   to be true, because Luke learned it from some other authority not so
   inaccurate as himself. After discrediting Luke, they proceed to accept
   everything that is most difficult to believe in his History. But, when
   the channel through which the story reaches us is unworthy of belief,
   everything that comes through the channel is discredited; the story has
   in truth not a leg to stand upon except Luke's personal authority as a
   safe and trustworthy judge of truth and weigher of evidence. Those who
   first discredit Luke's personal authority, and then attach credibility
   to his story, are far less reasonable and critical than they who accept
   the whole.

   Obviously, the truth of the story in Luke 1, 2, can never be
   demonstrated. There will always remain a large step to be taken on
   faith. A marvelous event is described in it. They only will accept it
   who, for other reasons, have come to the conclusion that there is no
   adequate and rational explanation of the coming of Christianity into
   the world, except through the direct and "miraculous" intervention of
   Divine power.

   But it is highly important to show that the circumstances with which
   Luke connects this marvelous event are true, and that, in things which
   can be tested, he does not fall below the standard of accuracy demanded
   from the ordinary historians.

   Again, those who hold Luke's statement about the enrollment to be a
   mere blunder ought to give some explanation of the way in which the
   blunder originated. It is generally stated as an explanation that Luke
   was dependent on Josephus for the facts of general history which he
   mentions; and that, as he found in Josephus an account of "the Great
   Enrollment" made by Quirinius in AD. 6-8, he erroneously connected this
   enrollment with the birth of Christ.

   In discussing this suggested explanation, I shall lay no stress on the
   steadily growing consensus of opinion that all attempts to prove the
   dependence of Luke on Josephus have failed, and that Luke's work was
   composed before Josephus's work on Jewish Antiquities was published;
   for it is possible to maintain that the error was made through
   confusion and misunderstanding of some other historian's statement.
   Luke, who was not born when the events in question occurred, was
   dependent on some earlier authority or other for his knowledge of the
   Roman circumstances which he mentions; and the possibility of error
   arising must be admitted.

   But it is necessary to realize clearly how much is involved in the
   assumption that such an error was made. It is implied not merely that
   Luke misplaced that important event -- fundamental in the Roman
   organization of Palestine -- "the great census"; but also that he
   distorted the character of that census, which was, beyond all doubt,
   conducted on the Roman system without the slightest regard to tribal
   connection, and that he used this distortion of the census to explain
   why a family belonging to Nazareth came to be present in Bethlehem.
   Such a series of blunders of a very gross type cannot have been mere
   slips or mistakes due to ignorance. They bear on their face the
   character of deliberate invention. They have been concocted for a
   purpose, viz., to lend verisimilitude to the tale that Jesus was born
   in Bethlehem. But a tale which is buttressed by such shameful
   falsifications loses all claim on our belief. And what can we say about
   a historian who concocts such a series of inventions? What condemnation
   could be too strong for his shameful conduct? What words too sharp to
   characterize his imposture?

   I put the question to any reasonable person: Is it consistent with
   human nature that a writer who claims to be earnestly setting forth the
   simple facts should begin with so impudent a series of fabrications?
   Can any reasonable judge believe that the author who wrote the rest of
   the two books could be guilty of such deliberate deception?

   Another explanation may perhaps be offered, viz., that Luke did not
   himself invent the connection between the birth of Jesus and this
   fraudulent census, but that he incautiously adopted a series of errors
   which had either grown in popular tradition or been invented by some
   older writer.

   In the first place, we reply, oriental tradition does not take this
   character: it does not invent such a circumstantial historical setting,
   whose aim is to work an incident into a place in Roman Imperial
   history. The census would obviously have been introduced here, not by
   popular fancy, but by the calculated invention of a person trying to
   give plausibility to a fiction.

   Secondly, Luke's work has all the appearance of being the first attempt
   to show the place which early Christian history occupied in the general
   history of the empire: the author is evidently taking the Gospel from
   his earlier authorities, and on the ground of his own historical
   inquiries stating its place in Roman history, a subject in which his
   Jewish authorities took no interest: probably, therefore, he is not
   dependent on older Christian writers for his statements about the
   census This is, I think, generally admitted.

   Thirdly, Luke devotes much care to the relations of early Christianity
   to the Roman state; it was easy for him to acquire correct knowledge as
   to the Roman census; and, if he allowed a statement on that subject to
   find a place in his book, he makes himself responsible for it in the
   fullest sense.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [31] Westcott, Gospel of St. John, p. 78.

   [32] Ein allgemeiner Reichscensus war dazu weder nothig noch
   zweckmassig are his exact words (Augustus und seine Zeit, Part 1., vol.
   2., p. 923).

   [33] I do not mean to imply that Mommsen has shown any disposition to
   accept Luke's evidence on this point. On the contrary, he dismisses it
   as a mere mistaken inference from Josephus.

   [34] On this see chapter 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 6
  LUKE'S ACCOUNT OF THE ENROLLMENT

   LUKE wrote for readers belonging to the civilized Graeco-Roman world;
   and he conceived the History which he presented to his readers as
   occupying a place in the general history of the Roman world. He often
   speaks of "the world"; but to him "the world" was strictly the Roman
   world, and any order issued by Augustus affected the whole world, as he
   says in 2:1. Accordingly, at important stages in the action, he inserts
   a few brief notes, just sufficient to show the position of his subject
   in the general history of the empire.

   The most important of these notes is contained in the following words,
   2:1-4, which we give according to the Revised Version:

   Now it came to pass in those days, there went out a decree from Caesar
   Augustus that all the world should be enrolled. This was the first
   enrollment, made when Quirinius was governing Syria. And all went to
   enroll themselves, every one to his own city. And Joseph also went up
   from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to the city of
   David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and
   family of David -- to enroll himself with Mary his wife.

   It might seem hardly necessary to state that in this passage of Luke
   the term "world," oikoumene, must be understood as the "Roman world,
   and not the entire earth with all its inhabited lands. But some modern
   scholars actually charge it as an error that this passage makes an
   order of Augustus effective throughout the whole earth, whereas the
   order would have no force except in the Roman empire. Accordingly we
   must point out that in several places Luke uses the same term "world"
   when he obviously is speaking only of the Roman empire. To the citizens
   of the empire all the rest of the earth often passed out of mind; and
   when they spoke of the world their view was restricted to the Roman
   world. So, for example, Demetrius, the silversmith of Ephesus, spoke
   about the State-Goddess Diana, "whom all Asia and the world
   worshippeth," i.e., to worship whom the whole province Asia and the
   Roman empire send their representatives and their crowds of visitors.
   Again, Paul and Silas were accused before the magistrates of
   Thessalonica because they had "turned the world upside down"; the
   accusers were not thinking of the disturbance of order among the outer
   barbarians, but only in many parts of the Roman empire. Similarly, any
   ordinary rational interpretation will recognize that Luke 2:1 speaks of
   the order of Augustus as issued for the whole Roman empire.

   What was the extent of "the world" or "the Roman world," of which Luke
   speaks?

   It included, of course, Italy and the organized Roman provinces. But,
   further, Luke evidently considered that it included the dependent
   kingdoms, such as Judea, for he describes this order as being carried
   out in the kingdom of Herod. That such was his point of view seems not
   to be appreciated by the scholars who ridicule the whole episode; and
   hence they think that he contradicts himself, when he speaks as if this
   order extended to the kingdom of Herod.

   The question then arises whether it is justifiable to regard these
   dependent kingdoms, Judea and others, as forming part of the Roman
   world.

   This question Strabo, writing about AD. 19, answers emphatically in the
   affirmative. In the last chapter of his Geography he gives a
   description of the Roman empire as it was when he was writing about AD.
   19. He describes it as extending over the entire coasts of the
   Mediterranean Sea, and he expressly includes in it the western part of
   the African coast (Mauretania) which was ruled by King Ptolemy, who had
   just recently succeeded his father Juba II. Some parts of this empire
   are, he says, governed by kings, while part is in the form of
   provinces. There are also subject to the Romans certain dynasts, [35]
   and chiefs, and priests: and these live according to certain national
   laws. He distinguishes this whole empire, containing these various
   territories and governments and provinces, from the non-Roman and
   barbarian world. He declares that in the part of the empire which is
   directly under the authority and power of the emperor there are not
   merely Roman governors of three grades sent from Rome by himself, but
   also kings, and dynasts, and native officials of lower degree.

   Strabo uses several expressions which show how completely he considered
   these kingdoms to be part of the Roman world. He defines the entire
   complex of territories as "the possessions of the Romans," ta touton;
   he speaks of sumpases choras tes hupo Rhomaiois; and he describes how
   the Romans. obtained them, prosektesanto.

   Moreover, it is impossible to suppose that Augustus, when he defeated
   Mark Antony, abandoned the suzerainty which the latter had certainly
   exercised over many lands, and gave away to independent kings what had
   once belonged to Rome. The eastern parts of Asia Minor had been treated
   by Antony as subject to his own absolute authority. When he pleased, he
   set up a king over part of them; when he chose, he degraded the king.
   But whoever was the king, Antony claimed from him contributions and
   military service; and they all sent or led their troops to swell the
   army of their supreme lord at Actium. It would be irrational to suppose
   that Augustus, who claimed to be the champion of Rome against Antony,
   abandoned great territories which Antony had held to be under Rome.

   We cannot, therefore, doubt that Strabo expresses the view held by
   Augustus and by all Rome, that the territory ruled by these dependent
   kings was part of the Roman empire. They were subject kings, and not
   free from the suzerainty of Rome.

   Appian [36] describes the subject kings whom Antony appointed,
   including Herod, as paying tribute. We cannot doubt that the same was
   the case under Augustus. The empire did not abandon its claim to gain
   something from these kings; and Augustus would not gain less than
   Antony had gained. On the other hand, it seems to have been left to the
   discretion of the native rulers to govern and to collect revenue
   according to native customs and laws. Strabo, in his final chapter;
   distinguishes between the provinces, to which governors and collectors
   of taxes were sent from Rome, and the countries subject to Rome, but
   governed by native princes according to native laws.

   Further, Strabo on p. 671 describes the intention of the Romans in
   setting up these subject kings. He is speaking of Cilicia Tracheia, but
   he expresses the Roman theory as it was applied generally. Some of the
   subject countries were specially difficult to govern, either on account
   of the unruly character of the inhabitants, or because the natural
   features of the land lent themselves readily to brigandage and piracy.
   As these countries must be either administered by Roman governors or
   ruled by kings, it was considered that kings would more efficiently
   control their restless subjects, being permanently on the spot and
   having soldiers always at command. But the history of the following
   century shows how, step by step and district by district, these
   countries were incorporated in the adjacent Roman provinces, as a
   certain degree of discipline and civilization was imparted to the
   population by the kings, who built cities and introduced the
   Graeco-Roman customs and education.

   It appears, therefore, that when Luke counts the kingdom of Herod part
   of "the Roman World," his point of view agrees with the ideas expressed
   by Strabo and held generally in the empire.

   The decree of Augustus which Luke mentions is commonly interpreted as
   ordering that a single census should be held of the whole Roman world.
   This is not a correct interpretation of Luke's words. He uses the
   present tense (apographesthai pasan ten oikoumenen), and he means that
   Augustus ordered enrollments to be regularly taken, according to the
   strict and proper usage of the present tense. What Augustus did was to
   lay down the principle of systematic "enrollment" in the Roman world,
   not to arrange for the taking of one single census.

   It deserves notice that Malalas, who took the false sense from Luke and
   describes Augustus as ordering that a single enrollment should be made,
   unconsciously changes the expression and uses the aorist [37] where
   Luke uses the present tense. Similarly, when Luke tells that Joseph
   went up for enrollment on one definite occasion, he uses the aorist
   (anebe and apograpsasthai).

   Thereafter the text of Luke proceeds naturally: "This was the first
   enrollment, while Quirinius was administering Syria; and all persons
   proceeded to go for enrollment each to his own city". Here the
   presential tenses (apographesthai and eporeuonto) are necessitated by
   the sense: all persons, individually and severally, repaired to their
   proper cities for their respective enrollment. In the series of
   enrollments, which were inaugurated by the orders of Augustus, the
   first was the one with which the story is concerned; and Joseph, like
   the rest, went up from Galilee out of the city of Nazareth into Judea,
   to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the
   house and family of David.

   From this passage, then, it appears that Luke's conception of the
   procedure in the Roman empire was as follows: Augustus ordered a
   systematic numbering to be made in the empire. This system of numbering
   went on for a time, or more probably permanently, and hence the "first"
   of the series is here defined as the occasion on which the story turns.
   We may assume unhesitatingly that, if any such system was inaugurated,
   it would be periodic, recurring regularly either once a year or after a
   definite term of years.

   It is not stated or implied by Luke that the system was actually put
   into force universally. The principle of universal enrollments for the
   empire was laid down by Augustus; but universal application of the
   principle is not mentioned That point was a matter of indifference to
   Luke. What he implies, indubitably, is that the system was put into
   force in Syria, for it would be quite irrational that he should speak
   as he does, unless declare that Luke refers to a hitherto unsuspected
   fact in the methods of Imperial administration.

   But, if our interpretation of Luke's words is correct, we must frankly
   admit that his credit as a historian is staked on this issue: there was
   a periodical numbering or enrollment in the Syrian province, and Christ
   was born actually during the time when the first enrollment of the
   series was being made in Palestine.

   We observe that Luke knew about more than one "enrollment" or census
   (to use the strict Roman term). In 2:2 he speaks of a certain census as
   "the first"; in Acts 5:37 he mentions the census," i.e., the great
   census, meaning the epoch-making census taken about AD. 7, when Judea
   had just been incorporated in the Roman empire as part of the province
   of Syria. According to the proper and accepted canons of interpretation
   in ancient literature, he must be understood in these expressions to
   distinguish between the first census and the great census. In an
   ordinary Greek writer the distinction would be unhesitatingly drawn.
   Why should some scholars assume that Luke thought there had been one
   single census, as to the date of which he was in a the system had been
   in force for a time, at least, throughout the Syrian lands. Further, it
   is not easy to admit that Luke could have used these words, unless the
   system had come into permanent use.

   We conclude, then, that if Luke's authority is trustworthy, there must
   have prevailed during the first century a system of numbering the
   population at periodic intervals in the Syrian province, and probably
   elsewhere in the Eastern lands, or even in the whole empire.

   If one had ventured ten years ago to draw this conclusion from the
   words of Luke, it would have been regarded as a reductio ad absurdum of
   his statement. The idea that such a system could have existed in the
   East, without leaving any perceptible signs of its existence in
   recorded history, would have been treated with ridicule as the dream of
   a fanatical devotee, who could believe anything and invent anything in
   support of the testimony of Luke. But now such revelations of order and
   method in the Roman Imperial Government, unmentioned and unheeded by
   historians, have resulted from epigraphic and archaeological
   investigation, that it is no longer so hazardous to state of utter
   confusion, when he uses language which in the simple and natural
   interpretation indicates two different census? A scholar should never
   start by assuming that the author whom he is interpreting is wrong; but
   to say that Luke in these two passages refers to one and the same
   census, is to fasten an error upon him at the outset, by disregarding
   the distinction indicated in his words.

   Clement of Alexandria evidently understood the words of Luke in the
   same way as we have interpreted them. He speaks of the occasion when
   first they ordered Enrollments to be made. [38]

   It is hardly possible to avoid inferring from these words of Clement
   that he knew of some system of enrollments, either in the empire as a
   whole, or at least in the province of Syria. His use of the plural and
   of the word "first" force this inference upon us.

   Further, we shall find in chapter 7 that Clement, as residing in Egypt,
   was familiar with the Egyptian system of periodic enrollments. He could
   hardly avoid writing with this system in his mind, and his words imply
   beyond a doubt that he thought of some system of enrollments in
   Palestine. I do not see how any fair and unprejudiced critic can fail
   to conclude that Clement, rightly or wrongly, believed that the same
   system of periodic enrollments was maintained in Egypt and in Syria.

   Again, Clement expressly says that the system of enrollments in Syria
   began with the one at which the birth of Christ occurred. Luke in all
   probability was his sole ultimate authority for connecting the birth of
   Christ with the first enrollment, he, no doubt, saw the statement also
   in other authorities, but they in their turn probably got it, whether
   immediately or ultimately, from Luke. But it is not so certain that
   Clement had no other authority than Luke for his belief that the system
   began in the reign of Augustus. He knew the system from his own
   experience in Egypt. It had recurred there regularly throughout his own
   life, and long before his time. It must have been a matter of common
   knowledge in his time what was the origin of the system. We are, I
   think, fully justified in quoting Clement as believing that the system
   of enrollments which he saw round him in Egypt, and which he thought or
   knew to be also practiced in Syria, began from Augustus and was made
   according to the, orders of Augustus.

   A suggestion has been made that the Indictional Periods of fifteen
   years, which formed so important a feature in the administration of the
   later Roman empire, began to run from the census of Quirinius. On this
   theory the first census was taken in the year 3 BC. as the beginning of
   the first Indictional Period. But it can be shown positively that the
   Indictional System did not prevail under the early empire. The
   Indictions are an invention of the fourth century; and not merely are
   those periods unknown in earlier time, but a contradictory system
   existed. [39] Moreover, it is not easy to bring the evidence as to the
   duration of Herod's reign into consistence with the theory that he
   lived till 3 BC.

   Our whole theory is based on the determination of the periodical
   enrollment system in the early empire; and for this fortunate discovery
   we are indebted to the wonderful progress of research in Egypt during
   the last few years.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [35] This title was given to certain princes, e. g., those who ruled
   Ketis in Cilicia Tracheia.

   [36] Bell. Civil., 5., 75.

   [37] hoste apographenai pasan ten hup' auton genomenen gen kai hen
   proen eichon Rhomaioi, Malalas, p. 226.

   [38] hote proton ekeleusan apographas genesthai, Strom., 1., 21, 147.

   [39] Mr. Grenfell notes, "it is absolutely certain that the indictions
   began in A. D. 312, and not before," as is shown by one of the Rainer
   papyri.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 7
  ENROLLMENT BY HOUSEHOLDS IN EGYPT

   RECENTLY, three different scholars announced about the same time, and
   independently of one another, the discovery that periodical enrollments
   were made in Egypt under the Roman empire, and that the period was not
   of fifteen years, as in the later system of indictions, but of fourteen
   years. The same Greek term is used in the Egyptian documents and in
   Luke to indicate the census: they were called "Enrollments,"
   Apographai.

   Mr. Kenyon of the British Museum had slightly the priority in briefly
   declaring that these "Enrollments" obeyed a cycle of fourteen years;
   but Dr. Wilcken followed him within a month or two with an elaborate
   paper, and shortly afterwards Dr. Viereck with another, discussing
   their period, nature and purpose. [40] The three papers are the
   authority for what is here stated on the subject.

   The facts relating to the "Enrollments" in Egypt are deduced from the
   actual census papers, many of which have been found (usually in a more
   or less fragmentary condition). The census was always taken after the
   end of the year to which it belongs; thus, for example, a census paper
   dated in the end of the year AD. 90-91 contains a statement of the
   facts required for the enrollment of 89-90, and so on. The purpose
   evidently was to include in each enrollment all children born before
   the end of the first year of the census period, which we shall
   henceforth call the periodic year. All dates in these documents are
   given according to the Egyptian way of reckoning; and the Egyptian
   year, which began on the twenty-ninth day of August, was at the basis
   of the whole census system in Egypt. It is proved that enrollments were
   made for the years ending in the summer of AD. 90, 104, 118, 132 and so
   on till 230. An enrollment also took place under Vespasian, but its
   date is not fixed by the evidence. There can, however, be no doubt that
   Dr. Viereck is right in placing it for the year 75-76. [41]

   Though the Egyptian year was employed, the census was carried out by
   Roman officials, and formed part of the Imperial system of
   administration.

   It was the habit of the Romans in the East to adapt their arrangements
   to the custom of the country. They did not force the natives to adopt
   the Roman system of arranging the year and the months, but rather
   modified their practice to suit the native year, using an Asian year in
   the Province Asia, an Egyptian year in the Province Egypt, and so on.
   As the beginning and end of the years varied greatly in different
   Eastern provinces -- all, however, being now solar years, like the
   Roman -- we shall throughout these pages speak of the Roman year; and
   the reader will understand that in each province it has to be
   translated into the native year there employed. Censorinus mentions, as
   was to be expected, that the years of the Imperial system -- anni
   Augustorum -- were counted from the first of January: they differed in
   this from the years of any individual emperor's reign, which during the
   first century were usually reckoned from the day on which the reign
   began, though during the second century the habit of reckoning them
   from the first of January became general.

   Accordingly, instead of mentioning the enrollment for the Egyptian year
   falling in AD. 89-90, we shall call it the enrollment for the Roman
   year AD. 90. The periodic years, then, are as follows: BC. 23, BC. 9,
   AD. 6, 20, 34, 48, 62, 76, 90, 104, 118, 132, 146, 160, 174, 188, 202,
   216, 230, 244, 258, 272, 286, 300, 314, 328.

   In every case, of course, the actual enumeration began after the
   periodic year was ended, though the enumeration is called in the
   documents the enrollment of the past (periodic) year. Usually the
   enrollment paper is dated late in the following year; people were
   allowed to make their declaration at any time during the following
   year, and as human nature will have it, most people delayed until the
   year was approaching its end.

   It appears, therefore, that already under Vespasian a system of
   periodical enrollments was the rule of Roman administration in Egypt.
   The existing documents establish its existence from AD. 76 to 230; but
   the failure of documents attesting its previous or subsequent existence
   affords no evidence that it began under Vespasian or ended under
   Alexander Severus. The preservation of papyri is so accidental and
   precarious, that imperfection and lacunae are the rule in every
   department which they touch upon. We must be grateful for the light
   they throw on any subject, but it would be absurd to reason, because no
   fragment of papyrus has been found to attest a fact, that therefore the
   fact did not occur. The argument a silentio, always a dangerous one, is
   especially dangerous where papyrusfragments are concerned.

   On this point Mr. Grenfell writes: "I should admit that the argument a
   silentio cannot yet be used as regards the first century after Christ.
   About the second and third centuries it is, however, worth something,
   and also, I think, about the Ptolemaic period." The silence of the
   papyri about the period before AD. 76 therefore constitutes no argument
   that the periodic enrollments began in that year.

   At the last moment Mr. Grenfell, in a letter dated 12th Sept., 1898,
   brings to my knowledge, and the courtesy of the discoverer permits me
   to mention, that Mr. Kenyon has found, and is on the point of
   publishing in the forthcoming volume of the Catalogue of British Museum
   Papyri, a document [42] which mentions the enrollment for the eighth
   year of Nero, AD. 61-62. Mr. Kenyon thinks that it implies also still
   earlier enrollments. This important discovery will be regarded as a
   strong confirmation of the theory set forth in the following pages, and
   printed before I heard of the new evidence. The only argument that
   could be brought forward against the theory lay in the silence of the
   papyri; and already that silence is broken for part of the period.
   [Enrollment of AD. 20, see Preface]

   The question, then, must be put -- at what time and through whose
   organizing initiative is the Roman series of enrollments likely to have
   been begun? The answer to that question is not doubtful. We may appeal
   with confidence to the students of Roman history, and put the question
   in this way. We find that under Vespasian a system of periodical
   enrollments formed a fundamental part of the government of Egypt: these
   enrollments gave a basis on which a statistical account of the
   population according to households and place of residence at the
   beginning of each period could be drawn up. Whom should we expect to
   have introduced the system?

   In the first place every one who has studied the history of Roman
   provincial administration would reply that Augustus was, in all
   probability, the originator of this Roman system in Egypt. Any
   important part of Egyptian administration which was in existence under
   Vespasian is probably as old as the organization of the country by
   Augustus. It is well known with what peculiar and jealous and minute
   care: he regarded that country. No Roman of senatorial or equestrian
   rank was permitten, even to visit it without special leave from the
   Emperor. It was considered as the granary of Rome; and it was regulated
   in the most careful way so that its harvests should be reserved for
   Roman needs, and its resources should be always calculable and certain,
   as far as care and forethought could make them so.

   It is unnecessary to do more than briefly refer to those facts touching
   the policy and intentions of Augustus which have been skillfully
   collected and marshaled by a long succession of writers on this subject
   -- his general survey of the whole empire: the rationes imperii, "a
   sort of balance sheet published periodically": the libellus or
   breviarium totius imperii, a compendium of useful statistics about the
   kingdoms, the provinces, the allies, etc.

   These show how carefully and methodically Augustus organized his
   splendid machinery of government on the basis of accurate, minute and
   complete knowledge of everything that concerned the subject peoples,
   and make it probable that the system of periodic enrollments, which
   alone rendered a complete statistical account of those peoples
   possible, originated from him, and formed part of his plan of Imperial
   administration.

   In the second place, the system of periodic enrollments is likely to be
   as old as Augustus, because it probably rested on a pre-Roman
   foundation. Every year's discoveries strengthen the proof that the
   organization of Egypt was brought to a very high degree of perfection
   long before the Romans entered the country, and increase the
   probability that the germ or even the complete form of almost every
   detail of administration was found by Augustus already in existence in
   Egypt, and was merely adapted by him to Roman needs.

   Mr. Grenfell notes that the silence of the Ptolemaic papyri about
   Household-Enrollment -- constitutes an argument against its being an
   institution of the Ptolemaic period; whereas valuation papers of the
   class (described later in this chapter) are found not infrequently
   under the Ptolemies. There must, however, have been in that period some
   kind of numbering (as Wilcken thinks). Papyri are found c. BC. 3000, "a
   kind of census list of a household," naming the head of the house,
   resident female relatives, slaves, and young male children. [43] Two
   Apographai of unusual character. occur, [44] resembling the
   Household-Enrollment papers more than the Valuation papers, and dated
   BC. 19 and 18, before the Periodic Household-Enrollment system was
   organized.

   The probability remains that Augustus originated a new system in Egypt
   of Periodic Enrollment-by-Households, developing some previously
   existing system of numbering the population.

   In the third place, as we saw in the preceding chapter, Clement of
   Alexandria believed that the system of enrollments originated from
   Augustus; and he expresses the general opinion held in Egypt at the end
   of the second century.

   In the fourth place, chronological reasons suggest that the enrollments
   come down from the organization of Augustus, because the cycle leads us
   back to the year BC. 23, from which dates the Imperial rule of Augustus
   in the most formal and complete sense. The Roman emperors, beginning
   from Augustus, reckoned the years of their reign according to their
   tenure of the tribunicia potestas, which constituted them "Champions of
   the Commons"; Augustus received the tribunician power on 27th June, BC.
   23; and the number of years in his Imperial title is reckoned
   invariably in all later inscriptions from that date. The Coincidence
   that the EnrollmentCycle was arranged according to the official years
   of Augustus's reign, is conclusive in favor of the view that Augustus
   inaugurated the system of periodical enrollments.

   This coincidence, also, shows with almost complete certainty that the
   Fourteen-Years'-Cycle was not devised in Egypt, or for Egypt alone. Mr.
   Grenfell points out to me that in Egypt the reign of Augustus was
   invariably reckoned from the taking of Alexandria, the first year being
   considered to begin on 29th August, BC. 30; and there is not a trace of
   any other reckoning of his reign in the country. Had the
   Enrollment-Cycle been an Egyptian matter simply, it is in the last
   degree improbable that it would have been arranged according to the
   years of the tribunician power.

   On the other hand, that was the natural system in general Imperial
   matters. It was the only method of reckoning which was known
   universally throughout the empire: it was employed in every official
   statement of the Emperor's title: it was sometimes used even in dating
   private inscriptions. [45]

   The use of this epoch, further, proves in all probability that the
   Enrollment was, as Luke says, actually held first for the year BC. 9.
   It could not be devised until after the reign began, for the epoch was
   unknown until the epoch-making event had occurred; and, after it had
   occurred, no time remained to arrange all the details for an Imperial
   enrollment for the current year. Hence we find a different style of
   enrollment paper used in Egypt in the years BC. 19 and 18.

   We see also why the Egyptian year 24-23, and not 23-22, was taken as
   that correspondent to the Roman year 23. Augustus's reign began during
   the Egyptian year 24-23, two months before the end of that year on 29th
   August. Thus the reign of Augustus began officially in the Egyptian
   year BC. 24-23. On the other hand, in any country where the year began
   in the spring, the official year 1 of Augustus would be the year BC.
   23-22; and the year 15, which was the first periodic year, would be BC.
   9-8.

   These reasons justify the reasonable confidence that Augustus arranged
   a system of periodical "enrollments" in Egypt. As the system is fixed
   according to the year BC. 23, in which the fully formed constitutional
   Principate was organized and the reign of Augustus in the official
   reckoning began, the arrangement of this system must have taken place
   later than that year. The system of enrollments must therefore be
   distinguished from the operation called by Marquardt [46] the
   provincial census, which began to be taken in Gaul in BC. 27.

   The latter operation was intended to form the basis on which the
   taxation of the provinces of the empire should be regulated. It was
   repeated from time to time throughout the period of the empire, and was
   an essential part of the orderly working of the Imperial
   administration. That taxation should be proportionate to wealth was a
   Roman principle, and without frequent revaluation of property it was
   impossible to secure a fair apportionment of taxation. Augustus fully
   recognized the vast importance of making correct valuation of property
   in the provinces, as securing both fair taxation and a more lucrative
   revenue for the State.

   Such enumeration and valuation of property was confined, as a rule, to
   Roman provinces, and was often made as soon as any new province was
   incorporated in the empire. Such, for example, was the case in
   Palestine when Quirinius, in his second Syrian governorship, made that
   country part of the empire. The novel proceedings on that occasion, and
   the strict inquisition into value of property, brought vividly home to
   the Jews that they were now wholly reduced to servitude under a foreign
   power, and led to much disorder and rebellion. The name census was used
   by the Romans to denote this characteristic institution. In modern
   usage the term census denotes the periodic numbering of the people,
   without valuation of property. In this study we use the terms
   "valuation" or "rating" and "enrollment".

   But the system of periodic enrollments in Egypt is quite different from
   the system of rating and valuation. The latter system also existed in
   Egypt; many census papers are preserved among the papyri, and Wilcken
   gives several examples of them on pp. 231-240 of the article which we
   have quoted above. These valuations seem to have been made annually;
   [47] and it is often stated in the papers that the census is taken
   according to the orders of the governor of the province. They contain
   an enumeration and precise definition of all property in land, houses,
   and live stock [48] belonging to the enumerator, often also a statement
   whether the property is free from debt or mortgage, and often an
   estimate of the money value, of the whole. Where there is no estimate
   of value, it is understood that the value is unchanged from previous
   valuations and can be found in the older official registers.

   The same verb apographomai is used in both kinds of papyri, and both
   operations seem to have been termed Apographai. But the periodic
   enrollment papers are distinguished by other criteria besides the want
   of statistics about property and money value; they are dated according
   to the year of the reigning emperor, and contain no reference to the
   orders of the governor; they state accurately and exactly which
   periodic enrollment they are intended for; and they always use the
   phrase "Enrollment-by-Household", apographe kat' oikian. These periodic
   enrollments according to the Four-teen-Years'-Cycle [49] were therefore
   closely connected with the existing households, and served as basis for
   an enumeration of the total population. This operation obviously
   corresponds much more closely than the other kind of Egyptian census to
   the "enrollment" alluded to by Luke; and we shall therefore always
   allude to it as the enrollment system, or, more accurately,
   enrollment-by-household.

   The enrollment papers were filled up and sent in to the proper official
   by the heads of households. In the enrollment paper, the householder
   specified the house, or part of a house, which belonged to him; he
   declared that he was formally enrolling himself and his family for the
   house-to-house enrollment of the past year, twenty-eight of the Emperor
   Commodus, or whatever else the case was. But, if the owner did not live
   in the house himself, he enrolled only the tenants; if he kept lodgers,
   he enrolled himself, his family and the lodgers. He gave a complete
   enumeration of all the individuals who lived in the house, children,
   relatives, etc. In one case, twenty-seven persons are enumerated in one
   paper by a householder. No statement of income or of the money value of
   the house is given in the enrollment papers.

   Thus, according to our theory, the nature of the case led the Romans to
   adopt a double system, which presents a remarkable analogy to our
   modern methods. We have an enumeration of the people every ten years,
   the census: the Romans numbered the people every fourteen years. We
   have an annual making up of the valuation roll, and an annual system of
   income tax returns. The Romans, likewise, found it expedient to require
   annual valuation of property; but they did not require any estimate of
   annual income, for they, like the United States, arranged their taxes,
   not according to income, but according to property.

   The intention of this system of enrollment by households has been
   investigated by Wilcken. It furnished a complete enumeration of the
   population of Egypt; both provincials and resident Romans had to fill
   up their enrollment papers and send them in to the proper official. The
   papers not merely furnished the total numbers of the population; they
   were also useful in allotting the various burdens of public service,
   and especially they facilitated the conscription; and finally they gave
   information which aided in levying the poll-tax, determining the
   classes of persons who were free from the tax, and the date at which
   each male became of age to pay it (fourteen), or reached the age of
   exemption (sixty). [50]

   According to Marquardt, 2., p. 199, a poll-tax was levied by the Romans
   only in countries where it had been customary from ancient times, or
   where there was for the time no survey of property available to furnish
   a standard for a more rational kind of tax. He is disposed to consider
   the tributum capitis in the province of Syria as not a poll-tax, but a
   tax on those engaged in an industrial occupation; but Wilcken seems
   clearly right in regarding the Syrian tax as a poll-tax, exactly
   similar to the Egyptian poll-tax.

   Thus the Egyptian documents, and the inferences founded on them by
   comparison with other evidence, have revealed two most important and
   hitherto unsuspected facts.

   (1) In some parts at least of the empire the enrollment and numbering
   of the population according to their households was a distinct and
   separate process from the census and valuation, which previously was
   considered to be the only properly Roman kind of census.

   (2) The enrollment by households took place periodically, according to
   a cycle arranged according to the years of the reign of Augustus in
   Imperial, but not in Egyptian, reckoning. Probably this system was
   introduced later than 18 BC.
     __________________________________________________________________

   NOTE

   Papyrus Br. Mus. CCLX. is a poll-tax register of AD. 72-3, based on the
   Household-Enrollment of 61-2; and references to older poll-tax
   registers are made, which imply previous Enrollments. In fact the
   register is part of an existing system of some standing. [The
   Household-Enrollment of AD. 20 has just been discovered: see Preface].
     __________________________________________________________________

   [40] Kenyon in Classical Review, March 1893, p. 110; Wilcken in Hermes,
   1893, p. 203 ff.; Viereck in Philologus, 1893, p. 219 ff. There is a
   short supplementary paper by Wilcken in Philologus, 1893, p. 563.

   [41] Confirmed by Mr. Kenyon's new discovery.

   [42] CCLX. 78, 79, and CCLXI. 31, 32.

   [43] F. Ll. Griffith, Law Quart. Rev., 1898, p. 44 f.

   [44] Grenfell, An Alex. Erotic Papyrus, etc., Nos. 45 and 46.

   [45] See e.g. Varia 2. in Classical Review, Oct., 1898.

   [46] Rom. Staatsrecht, 2., p. 212 f.

   [47] Mr. Grenfell notes, "for seem to have been' you might say were':
   there are hundreds of instances to show it".

   [48] Mr. Kenyon notes, "returns of live stock are separate".

   [49] The Romans, who counted both initial and final years in each
   period, would have called it a Fifteen-Years'-Cycle; it was held in
   years 1, 15, 29, etc. We call that a Cycle of fourteen years.

   [50] So Kenyon writes correcting Wilcken's published statement. In
   Syria women, as well as men, paid; and the age was fourteen for men,
   twelve for women, until sixty-five, Ulpian, Dig., L. 15, 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 8
  THE SYRIAN ENROLLMENT IN 8 BC

   IN the preceding chapter we have seen that, in all probability,
   Augustus inaugurated a series of enrollments in Egypt. Now, according
   to Luke, Augustus laid down the principle that "enrollments" should be
   made over the whole Roman world; and this assertion stands on a very
   different level of probability from that which it occupied before the
   Egyptian discovery. If Luke be wrong, his error has been to extend over
   the whole Roman world a practice which Augustus established in Egypt.
   Every one must see that such an extension is not likely to have been
   made without some justification by the author of Acts, whoever he was.
   If there is anything certain about him it is that he had neither
   connection with Egypt nor interest in it, and that he was entirely
   uninfluenced by Alexandrian thought or Egyptian ideas; he even omits
   from his Gospel the incident of the flight into Egypt, which a writer
   connected with Egypt would be most unlikely to do. Such an author is
   not likely to have known about institutions peculiar to Egypt; and, if
   he thinks that the system of periodical enrollments, which existed in
   Egypt, was also found in other parts of the Roman world, there is a
   strong presumption that such was the case at least in those parts of
   the world which were best known to him. The reasons stated above,
   chapters 6 and 7, confirm this presumption.

   Other considerations, also, prove that some attempt was made in Syria,
   whether systematically or sporadically, to number the population Such
   enumerations can be traced back to the reign of Augustus and to the
   government of Syria by Quirinius.

   An inscription, which was long the subject of keen controversy and was
   condemned by Mommsen and many others as a forgery, [51] was recently
   found to be genuine, when half of the long-lost stone on which it was
   engraved was rediscovered in Venice. In that inscription, which records
   the career of Q Aemilius Secundus, a Roman officer, who served under
   Quirinius when governor of Syria, it is mentioned that by the orders of
   Quirinius he made the "census" of the population of Apameia,
   enumerating 117,000 citizens. The emphasis laid on the number suggests
   (though it does not demonstrate) that the numbering of the total
   population was the chief object of the Apamean "census"; in that case
   it would correspond to the periodic enrollment by households in Egypt
   rather than to the annual valuation.

   The inscription leaves it uncertain whether the Apamean numbering
   occurred in the first or second administration of Syria by Quirinius.
   He is called legatus Caesaris Syriae, without iterum, but there was no
   need for expressing in the inscription that he had held the government
   of Syria on two separate occasions. Our opponents, who hold that there
   was only one census under Quirinius, are justified in maintaining that
   this inscription refers to a numbering of the population of Syria, made
   by Quirinius in AD. 7 concurrently with his census and valuation in
   Palestine. We, on our side, are, for a different reason, bound to
   maintain that Quirinius ordered this enrollment of Apameia (and of all
   the other states of Syria) to be made in AD. 7, as will appear in
   chapters 9 and 11.

   Again, Suidas mentions that Augustus numbered the population of the
   territory that belonged to the Romans, and it was found to be 4,101,017
   men (andres). It is obvious that Suidas did not simply invent this
   number, but had access to some other authority besides Luke (whom he
   quotes in one of the two places [52] where he refers to this
   enumeration of the Roman world). The question is how far any confidence
   can be placed in that other authority. Had he real knowledge at his
   command?

   The number seems so small as to be absurd. Josephus [53] gives the
   population of Egypt, Alexandria excepted, as 7,500,000. Adding 500,00
   as the population of Alexandria, we have the total Egyptian population,
   8,000,000. But, according to Suidas, the population of the entire Roman
   world would not be much more than 21,000,000. Probably the populous
   countries of Syria and Asia Minor alone contained more than 21,000,000
   inhabitants, though we must remember that no slaves were counted in the
   enrollments.

   The most probable supposition is that Suidas is giving an inaccurate
   account of the total of Roman citizens. A numbering of Roman citizens
   was three times made by Augustus -- 28 BC., 8 BC. and 14 AD. -- and the
   total was in each case between 4,000,000 and 5,000,000. The liability
   of numbers to corruption is exemplified in the result of Augustus's
   first 80 census. The Latin text of the Monumentum Ancyranum, expressed
   in Augustus's own words, gives the total as 4,063,000, but the Greek
   translation gives 4,603,000, while Eusebius has it as 4,164,000. In the
   third census, Eusebius probably gave the correct total; but Jerome in
   his Latin version and the Armenian translator have both gone wrong in
   rendering Eusebius's words. Suidas, finding this total in Eusebius,
   took it as representing the total population of the empire, instead of
   the sum of cives Romant, an error which was easily made after the time
   of Caracalla, when all free citizens of the empire were cives Romani.
   Further, like Jerome, he misunderstood the numbers in Eusebius.
   Syncellus gives the total in still another form.

   Thus Suidas, when we trace him back, is found to have been using a
   distinct and good authority, but to be misunderstanding and
   misrepresenting it. He throws no light on Luke's statement.

   Further, there is a certain amount of positive evidence that
   "Enrollments" according to the Fourteen-Years'-Cycle were made in Syria
   and elsewhere. According to Luke, the first enrollment was made a few
   years BC. in the unknown year of Christ's birth, which is variously
   fixed, and must have been somewhere between 8 and 3 BC.. On the system
   that obtained in Egypt, the year 9 BC. would be the beginning of the
   second period; and the scanty evidence that exists about the general
   survey of the empire, shows that any enrollment according to the Cycle
   is not likely to have been made until the beginning of the second
   period. We find, then, that the year 8 BC. was the one in which the
   first "enrollment" would naturally begin to be made, if a Cycle was
   observed; for this enrollment was intended, as has been stated already,
   to include all children born in 9 BC. Now Tertullian declares that an
   "enrollment" was made by Sentius Saturninus, who was governor of Syria
   from about 9 to 7 BC. It is obvious that Tertullian did not make this
   assertion on Luke's authority, nor with the intention of bolstering up
   Luke. On the contrary, it has always been a serious problem how his
   statement can be reconciled with Luke's words. It can hardly be doubted
   that Tertullian was aware of the discrepancy between his own words and
   those of Luke; but he remains true to his own principle that "this
   world's things must be tested by its own documents". [54] He had the
   authority of Roman documents that Sentius Saturninus was the governor
   in question; and he prefers to follow "this world's documents". The
   discrepancy with Luke would not trouble him; his belief was too
   robust-to be affected by trifles of that kind; but whether or not he
   understood how the apparent discrepancy arose, he at any rate followed
   his Roman authority in this detail.

   Tertullian's procedure was probably this: he knew that an enrollment
   period fell in 9 BC. which was the first enrollment; and Roman
   authorities, either official documents or historians, showed him that
   Sentius Saturninus was governor of Syria at that time. The only other
   alternative seems to be that he investigated Roman documents, and found
   evidence that a census of Syria had been held by Saturninus. In the
   former case he was aware of the Fourteen-Years'-Cycle; in the latter
   case he knew of a census of Syria about 9-7 BC. and in either case he
   is an important yet independent witness in favor of Luke, so far as
   concerns the reality of a Syrian enrollment about 9-7 BC.

   We must observe that it was possible for any one living in the first or
   second or third century to discover for himself the facts about any of
   these early enrollments, if he were willing to take a little trouble
   and show a little care. Accurate observation, registration and
   preservation of all facts formed the basis of Roman Imperial
   administration. We know from Pliny [55] that the facts obtained at
   every census were so carefully preserved that in 48 AD. Claudius could
   verify from the records of earlier numberings the statement, which a
   citizen of a small Italian town made about his age; and there can be no
   doubt that similar careful preservation was the rule everywhere, as is
   proved in Egypt. Abundant material existed on which, the historian who
   was willing to take trouble could base an accurate narrative of facts.
   With an author of ordinary ability and care, serious error could hardly
   arise except from intention to mislead; though, of course, a slip in
   some unimportant detail may be made by any man, however careful, and
   probably none are free from them, not even Mommsen himself, whose grasp
   of detail is so marvelous.

   The discrepancy between Tertullian, who seems to connect the birth of
   Christ with the enrollment of Saturninus, and Luke, who connects that
   event with the enrollment of Quirinius, will engage our attention in
   chapter 11. For the moment our purpose is to show that the Egyptian
   enrollment periods were observed in Syria and elsewhere. But the
   existence of such a discrepancy is the conclusive proof that Tertullian
   had good evidence to trust to. He would never have contradicted Luke as
   regards the name, unless he had obtained the fact on undeniable
   authority.

   In the same year 8 BC.., in which "enrollments" seem to have been made
   in Syria and in Egypt, Augustus, as he mentions in his official review
   of his own life, made a census and found that the total number of Roman
   citizens in the whole empire was 4,233,000. A similar numbering of
   Roman citizens had been made by him in 28 BC.

   The fact that Augustus's first two enumerations show an interval of
   twenty years forms no argument against our theory of a
   Fourteen-Years'Cycle. The first enumeration was made before the plan
   was initiated, and the second, the initiation of the plan, was fixed
   according to the epoch of 23 BC.

   At any rate, 8 BC. was a marked year in the administration of the city
   of Rome. In that year, Augustus gave Rome a new municipal organization,
   dividing it into regions and quarters; and in a certain class of Roman
   city inscriptions, it is reckoned as the year 1 of an epoch which
   remained in use for a time. It was not an Imperial epoch; it was merely
   used in dating some documents connected with the new Roman municipal
   system, and the year I did not agree with the first of the
   Fourteen-Years'-Cycle, but was taken at, the: first year in which the
   new municipal system was actually in existence.

   The next periodic year was 6 AD. and the enrollment would, therefore,
   naturally be taken in the following year, 7 AD. Quirinius was governor
   of Syria for the second time in 6 and the following years; and he held
   "the great census" and valuation of Palestine, as Josephus records.
   Judea was now incorporated in the empire, administered by a Procurator,
   and connected with the Province Syria; and a complete set of statistics
   of the new territory was required as the basis of the Roman
   organization. "The great enrollment" might, it is true, be plausibly
   explained as due merely to the necessities of administration in a newly
   incorporated part of the empire. But it is, at least, an interesting
   coincidence that it should tally with the beginning of a new Cycle.
   Moreover, it is practically almost certain that Quirinius made a
   numbering of the population of Syria in 7 AD. as we have gathered from
   the inscription of Aemilius Secundus, previously qouted. The natural
   inference from the known facts is that two operations, one
   corresponding to the Egyptian periodic enrollment and one corresponding
   to the Egyptian annual census and valuation, occurred in Palestine in 7
   AD.; and that the periodic enrollment at least, if not the other also,
   was made throughout the province of Syria.

   The Cycle beginning 6 AD. seems not to have been observed by Augustus
   himself in Rome. It is well known that, as he grew old and feeble, his
   administration became more lax. Possibly, as Luke declares, he intended
   in 9 BC. to begin a series of "enrollments" for the empire; but, if he
   had that intention, the idea was too great for the time and was not
   fully carried into effect. The administrative machinery of the empire
   was not as yet sufficiently perfect and smooth-working to be able to
   carry into regular execution such a great idea; and Augustus postponed
   the next numbering of Roman citizens, until Tiberius was associated
   with him in the government, when 4,937,000 Roman citizens were
   numbered, 14 AD. Dion Cassius indeed mentions that in 4 AD. Augustus
   made a partial census; but that would be two years too early; and, as
   Mommsen and others have shown, Dion Cassius's account of the various
   numberings made by Augustus is wrong in almost every case, and his
   assertion about a census in 4 AD. cannot be credited on his sole
   authority. Mommsen, therefore, rejects it as an error of Dion's. [56]

   The next periodic year fell in 20 AD.; but no evidence survives to show
   that it was observed in any part of the Roman empire. Perhaps after the
   numbering of Roman citizens in 14, it was considered unnecessary by
   Tiberius to hold another in 20; and our authorities hardly ever mention
   any numberings except of cives Romani.

   The following census period began with 34 AD.; and it would appear that
   the numbering was held in the Province Syria in 35, as was usual. This
   we gather indirectly from the fact that an attempt was made by King
   Archelaos to enforce a census after the Roman style in his kingdom of
   Cilicia Tracheia. Now this kingdom was always considered as a
   dependency of the Province Syria; [57] and, when any Roman interference
   in its affairs was needed, the Syrian governor marched an army into the
   Tracheiotis. Archelaos's attempt, therefore, implies that the census of
   Syria was taken in 35, and was observed also in the dependent kingdom
   of Tracheiotis. It may be regarded as obviously true that Archelaos
   acted under Roman orders, for the imposition of a Roman custom on the
   free Cilicians, as if they had been inhabitants of a Roman province,
   was a curtailment of his rights, which he was not likely to initiate of
   his own accord, and which a monarch would not allow except under
   compulsion. But nations which were not thoroughly Romanised strongly
   objected to the census as a mark of subjection to the foreigner and as
   a serious step forward in the process of Romanising their country. King
   Archelaos was considered by his subjects to be weakly helping to impose
   on them the Roman yoke with his own hand. Disturbances broke out among
   the Kietai, [58] the leading people of Cilicia Tracheia; and, after the
   power of King Archelaos had proved insufficient to quell their,
   rebellion, the presence of Roman troops was required; and finally, in
   36 AD. Vitellius, the governor of Syria, sent an army to his aid.

   As in "the great enrollment" of Palestine in 7 AD., there was made in
   Cilicia in 35 AD. both a numbering of the population and a valuation of
   their property. A simple numbering of the people might not be felt so
   grievous, but a valuation of property seemed to be the beginning of
   incorporation in a province.

   Some scholars understand that the census among the Kietai was held
   because they had been subjected to the Roman authority and incorporated
   in the province. But Tacitus distinctly states that they were subject
   to Archelaos, and continued to hold out against his troops. His
   language is quite explicit, and could be misinterpreted only through
   prejudice. Moreover, if the Kietai had been incorporated in the
   province, that would show even more conclusively that an enrollment of
   the province was made in 34-5 AD.

   The next periodic year fell in 48; and Tacitus mentions that the
   Emperor Claudius held a census of the Roman citizens in that year, and
   numbered 6,944,000. He was personally engaged as censor in the
   operations at Ostia in the middle of October, 48 AD. The individual
   householders recorded their age in these numberings, just as they did
   in the Egyptian enrollments, for Pliny mentions that a citizen of
   Bononia stated his age as 150; Claudius thereupon ordered that his
   record in previous census should be examined, and his statements were
   found to be consistent. [59] This fact, mentioned incidentally by
   Pliny, proves that several census had previously been taken, and
   suggests that there was a system and a definite plan in the
   enumerations. No one who considers the method of the Romans and the
   orderly character of all their work, will regard it as probable that
   the taking of these general numberings was left purely to the caprice
   of the emperor. Some plan and order must have been aimed at, though the
   weakness or caprice of the emperors might occasionally disturb the
   order. The existence of some underlying plan is inexorably demanded;
   and if the plan which existed in Egypt was not common to the whole
   empire, one asks what was the plan elsewhere, and why the empire
   followed separate plans in different regions.

   Claudius evidently made his numbering a few months too early, before
   the periodic year was ended.

   The succeeding census period, beginning in 62 AD. is not known to have
   been observed in any part of the Roman world except Egypt (where Mr.
   Kenyon's new discovery has revealed it); and the Subsequent one, 76 AD.
   was anticipated in Italy by two years, for Vespasian and Titus held the
   censorship in 73 and 74, [60] and made all enumeration of Roman
   citizens.

   These facts, most of them only slight in themselves, establish in
   conjunction a strong case that the periods of the Egyptian enrollments
   were frequently coincident with the holding of census in some other
   parts of the empire; and thus the presumption is strengthened that the
   Egyptian Fourteen-Years'-Cycle has its root in a principle of wider
   application. This brings us very near to Luke's statement that Augustus
   laid down a general principle of taking census of the whole Roman
   world. The supposition that his statement is true has now ceased to be
   out of keeping with extra-scriptural evidence. On the contrary, Luke's
   statement supplies the missing principle which holds together and
   explains and makes consistent all the rest of the evidence. When Luke's
   evidence is held correct, the other recorded facts fall into line with
   it, and are seen to be the working of one general principle. Though
   weakness sometimes failed to carry out the principle, and though in
   other cases the time was anticipated a little, yet the recorded facts
   show a clear tendency to conform to the Cycle.

   In a number of cases nothing except the census of Roman citizens is
   recorded. Almost all Romans, with characteristic Roman pride, regarded
   a census of the subject population as beneath the dignity of historical
   record. Augustus himself, in that famous record of his achievements,
   which is commonly known as the Monumentum Ancyranum, mentions only his
   census of Roman citizens. Distinct evidence exists that the first and
   second periodic enrollments were carried out in Syria; but the Emperor
   thought them unworthy of notice in his review of his services to the
   State. Similarly it is only by indirect inference, through the accident
   that a rebellion was provoked, that we learn of the fourth enrollment
   in Syria. The Romans of that period did not agree with our estimate of
   what was most important in their history; and we must be very chary of
   drawing negative inferences merely from their silence. Evidence about
   the details of the Augustan system of provincial administration had
   almost completely perished, until inscriptions began to reveal a few
   isolated facts.

   Hence the silence of Augustus about the scheme of an Imperial census
   affords no argument against his having projected such a scheme. In his
   review of his career, Augustus says nothing about the reorganization of
   the. provincial administration (which, to our judgment, is almost the
   most important fact in his career); he mentions nothing about the
   provinces except the colonies which he founded in Pisidia, Gallia,
   etc., and the colonies are mentioned simply because they were
   settlements of Roman citizens. He therefore could not, ill accordance
   with his own plan, mention the scheme of numbering the subject
   population; he only speaks of the numbering of the Romans. Moreover,
   the principle of periodic enrollments appears not to have been,
   perhaps, carried out completely, and could not claim a place in the
   list of the emperor's achievements.

   The most important fact is that we have clear evidence, quite
   independent of Luke, that the first, second and fourth periodic
   enrollments were observed ill the Province Syria. The evidence for the
   first is Christian, and is therefore commonly set aside, except when
   the "critical" -- or rather uncritical -- theologian desires to bring
   out that these Christians don't even agree with one another: then he
   quotes Tertullian.

   The evidence for the second. periodic enrollment in Syria lies in the
   chance preservation of an inscription, ill which a Roman officer
   recorded his service at Apameia; but this evidence was long discredited
   as a forgery, made in modern times by some person who wanted' to
   illustrate Luke, and pretended to have copied the inscription from a
   stone. The demolition of a house in Venice revealed the stone, and
   justified the inscription.

   The evidence for the fourth periodic inscription is, found in Tacitus.
   Had the authority been a mere Christian, his words would have been
   ridiculed and disregarded.

   But three occurrences are sufficient to show what was the law of
   recurrence. If the other evidence is enough to suggest that some system
   was recognized in Syria, then the three dates show that the
   Fourteen-Years'-Cycle was the system which was followed there.

   Further, we observe that in all three cases it is only by a mere
   accident that we learn about the occurrence of a census -- a casual
   reference in Terullian's disputation against a heretic: the chance
   preservation of an inscription in Venice: the fact that a disturbance
   in a dependent kingdom was too serious for the king's strength, and
   required the intervention of the Roman arms, and thus rose to the level
   of dignity required for mention in Tacitus's Annals. The ordinary class
   of inscriptions on stone does not mention events of this kind, except
   through an occasional chance, as, e.g., that some private: individual
   was specially concerned with the taking of a census (like Aeimilius
   Secundus). But we cannot expect many such chances, as have preserved
   the memory of the three enrollments in Syria.

   In Syria there existed the same reasons which are considered by Wilcken
   to have required the periodic enrollment by households in Egypt. In
   both countries there existed a poll-tax (which was not a general Roman
   institution): conscription and imposition of various burdens in the
   State service were common to all parts of the empire: hence the
   periodic enrollments would enable the machinery of government to work
   with much greater ease and certainty in Syria.

   Any rational and scholarly criticism must accept the conclusion: There
   was a system of periodic enrollment in the Province Syria, according to
   a Fourteen-Years'-Cycle (in the modern expression --
   Fifteen-Years'-Cycle in the Roman form), and the first enrollment was
   made in the year 8 BC. (strictly the Syrian year beginning in the
   spring of 8 BC.).

   The fact that there exists no evidence of such frequent taking of
   census in Syria, as we suppose, constitutes no disproof of our theory.
   The evidence has perished. Twenty years ago no one dreamed to what a
   degree of minuteness and perfection the registration of inhabitants,
   property and values in Egypt was carried by the Romans. The evidence
   seemed to have perished. Now the graves and rubbish-heaps of Egypt have
   begun to give up their evidence; and our knowledge of Roman provincial
   administration has entered on a new stage. But elsewhere we cannot hope
   for such discoveries as in Egypt, for other climates are too moist to
   allow paper to survive. But the analogy of Egyptian administration is a
   strong argument as regards Syria; and, if Augustus instituted periodic
   enrollments in Egypt, the evidence of Luke, implying that he ordered a
   similar system in the whole empire, and that the system was carried
   into effect in Syria, has every probability in its favor and will be
   accepted by every candid historian.

   We have the evidence of Justin Martyr [61] a native of Syria, writing
   about 150 AD., that the tabulated information gathered from the
   periodic enrollments of the province was preserved, and might be
   consulted by any who doubted the evidence of Luke. Writing to the
   emperor, the Caesars, the senate, and the people of Rome, he tells them
   that they can learn the facts regarding the birth of Christ from the
   registers made under Quirinius. It is obvious that Justin had not
   himself consulted the registers. He merely knew that they existed and
   might be consulted. The facts he takes from Luke, and challenges all to
   disprove them by appeal to the registers.

   Similarly Tertullian [62] appeals to the letter of Marcus Aurelius, in
   which he had informed the senate of the important service rendered by
   Christian soldiers in the German war. He had not seen the letter
   himself, but he knew that all such documents addressed to the senate
   were preserved, and challenged his readers to consult the letter for
   themselves.

   It would be quite fair to quote Tertullian as evidence (if any evidence
   were needed) that such Imperial letters were preserved in official
   records; and similarly it is quite fair to quote Justin as evidence
   that the registers of the Syrian enrollments were preserved and might
   be consulted by those who wished.

   Mr. Kenyon writes that natives of Egypt refer to previous enrollments
   as evidence of relationship, etc. Josephus, Vit., 1., apparently is
   quoting similar enrollment-registers, when he speaks of the evidence
   for his family history.

   Justin himself had no desire or need to consult the registers in order
   to be convinced. It was quite enough for him that Luke recorded the
   facts; and he asked no further evidence. As to questions of date and
   officials he felt no interest. Perhaps he may have interpreted Luke's
   words as referring to Quirinius's second government of Syria in 6-7
   AD.; but he styles him procurator of Palestine, which does not suit
   that or any office held by him, for the procuratorship was an
   equestrian position, while Quirinius was of senatorial rank. But it
   tended to convince the Romans that the Gospels as a whole were true, if
   these little details were found to be correctly stated; and therefore
   he challenges his readers to verify them for themselves.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [51] Absolutely the only reason for thinking it to be a forgery was
   that it mentioned the census of Quirinius, and therefore seemed to give
   some support to Luke. But as this might be the historical census of
   Quirinius in AD. 7, the support was very slight and indirect; and, if a
   forger were inventing a support for Luke, he would hardly be content
   with such a small result for his work. See Mommsen in Ephemeris
   Epigraphica, 4., p. 588, on the rediscovery of the stone.

   [52] Suidas, s. vv.Apographe and Augoustos.

   [53] Bell. Jud., 2., 16, 4.

   [54] De uis enim instrumentis saecularia probari necesse est (de Cor.
   7).

   [55] Nat. Hist., 7., 48 (159).

   [56] Mommsen, Monum. Ancyran., ed. 2., p. 37.

   [57] Strictly the province was termed Syria et Cilicia et Phoenice.

   [58] Tacitus, Annals, 6., 41, and Wilhelm, Arch. Epigr. Mittheilungen,
   1894, p. 1 ff.

   [59] Tacitus, Annals, 9., 25, 31; Suetonius, Claud., 16; Pliny, Nat.
   Hist., 7., 48 (159).

   [60] Beginning April 73 (according to Chambalu, de magistrat.
   Flaviorum, quoted by Goyau, Chronologie de l'Emp. Rom., s. a.) their
   office lasted eighteen months. See Pliny, Nat. Hist., 7., 49 (162).

   [61] Apolog., 1., 34. Felix, governor of Egypt, is mentioned in it, and
   he governed Egypt about 150.

   [62] Apolog. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 9
  KING HEROD'S ENROLLMENT

   THE first enrollment in Syria was made in the year 8-7 BC., but a
   consideration of the situation in Syria and Palestine about that time
   will show that the enrollment in Herod's kingdom was probably delayed
   for some time later.

   Herod occupied a delicate and difficult position on the throne of
   Judea. On the one hand he had to comply with what was required of him
   by the Imperial policy; he was governing for the Romans a part of the
   empire, and he was bound to spread western customs and language and
   civilization among his subjects, and fit them for their position in the
   Roman world. Above all, the prime requirement was that he must maintain
   peace and order; the Romans knew well that no civilizing process could
   go on, so long as disorder and disturbance and insecurity existed in
   the country. Herod's duty was to keep the peace and naturalize the
   Graeco-Roman civilization in Palestine.

   On the other hand, he must soothe the feelings and accommodate himself
   to the prejudices of the jealous and suspicious people whom he
   governed. He could not hope to keep the peace among them, unless he
   humored their prejudices. They hated and despised Roman ideas, and they
   were intensely attached to their own customs. Their customs had all a
   religious foundation, and they could not comply with foreign
   requirements without doing violence to their deep-rooted pride of
   religion and their lofty contempt for the pagans by whom they were
   surrounded. Everything Roman was to them a heathen abomination; and, if
   Herod seemed to them to be forcing on them anything Roman, insurrection
   was almost certain to follow. But it was absolutely necessary to
   prevent insurrection, which was likely to make Augustus quite as angry
   with him as with the insurgents.

   On the whole, Herod had been successful in his ambiguous position. He
   built many fortresses and many cities of the Graeco-Roman type, with
   temples of the Graeco-Roman gods, beginning with the god incarnate, the
   emperor himself, whose refusal to accept Divine honors was not very
   much regarded in the eastern lands. That was the approved method of
   spreading the Graeco-Roman civilization. The "city" was originally a
   Greek creation, and every city tended towards the cosmopolitan type of
   the Roman empire. Education, luxury, commerce, imitation of western
   manners, dislike for the national and "barbarian" manners, use of the
   Greek language, were encouraged in the crowded and feverish line of
   cities; and the national piety and the national exclusiveness found it
   more difficult to maintain themselves in their old strength.

   But Jerusalem was left still Hebrew in spite of the theater and
   amphitheater and fortress called Antonia, which Herod built. There was
   really a double life in the ancient city, and Herod put on the
   appearance of fostering both. If he adorned the city with splendid
   buildings after the Greek fashion, he also was careful to rebuild the
   Jewish Temple with far greater magnificence than of old. He would show
   himself a true king of the Jews. He pretended to conform to the Jewish
   Law, and did so in some matters of form and ceremony. He refused to
   permit his sister Salome's marriage with the Arabian Syllaeus, unless
   the latter conformed to the Jewish law.

   Herod never entered the holy place, as Pompey did. He allowed the
   religious ritual free play. He never attempted to prevent any of the
   priestly ceremonial. He never assumed to himself ally of the priestly
   functions. When the temple was being built, only the priests were used
   in constructing the sanctuary, so that the holy place might never be
   profaned by any other than a priest's foot or hand. He avoided heathen
   emblems and devices on his coins and on the buildings of Jerusalem. He:
   permitted the Sanhedrin to continue during his reign, and to exercise a
   shadow of its ancient power doubtless only in religious matters, and
   subject, doubtless, to constraint from the ever-present thought of what
   would be the result to themselves, if they did anything that Herod
   disliked.

   Thus Herod kept up the appearance of maintaining national feeling, of
   defending the Jewish cause against all foreigners, and of respecting
   national ideas and prejudices. He governed his action on the natural
   and obvious principle. He did not attempt to force the Jews to do
   anything that was distinctly non-national and non-Jewish; he maintained
   their religious ceremonial, and refrained from obtruding on them
   personally anything that was offensive to them. The theaters and other
   pagan abominations were for the accursed heathen; but the Jews could do
   as they pleased about such unholy things. They tolerated Herod, and he
   did not outrage them. [63]

   But, in spite of all his care to comply with the Roman requirements,
   towards the end of his life Herod fell into disgrace with Augustus. He
   had made war on the Arabians; and Syllaeus, the Arabian minister, who
   was in Rome, obtained the ear and the confidence of Augustus, and
   persuaded him that Herod had made war on his own authority without
   Roman permission. Augustus was very angry, and wrote to Herod that,
   whereas hitherto he had treated the Jewish king as a friend, he would
   henceforth treat him as a subject. [64]

   The time when this letter was written is, uncertain. Schuerer is
   inclined to date it in 8 BC., probably rightly. Lewin, Fasti Sacri, p.
   109, places it in 7 BC.

   These emphatic words, coming from an emperor whose words were always
   well weighed and weighty, soon bore fruit in action, as we may be
   certain. Nothing is related by Josephus as to the exact form that the
   Roman action took; but he tells very emphatically how much Herod was
   embarrassed by the loss of Augustus's favor. In one point, Luke comes
   to our aid. He shows that Herod was ordered to consider that the recent
   orders for an enrollment in the Province Syria applied also to his
   kingdom and must be obeyed.

   A probable conjecture places at this point the oath of fidelity to the
   Emperor, which the whole Jewish people was ordered to take, and which
   6000 Pharisees refused. It is natural that, when the king was degraded
   to the rank of a subject, his people should be constrained to take the
   oath of allegiance to Caesar, in place of the oath to Herod which they
   had formerly taken. [65] It was the practice under the empire that all
   subjects, both Romans and provincials, should swear allegiance and
   fidelity to the Emperor. In later time, under Trajan, the oath was
   taken every year on the anniversary of the Emperor's accession, but it
   is uncertain when this custom was introduced. The words which Josephus
   uses would seem to imply that the oath to Caesar was taken and refused
   only once; [66] and the occasion is implied to have been towards the
   end of Herod's life.

   The two acts, the oath and the enrollment, obviously form part of the
   new policy of Augustus towards Herod, though we need not go so far as
   to suppose that the two were one (as some scholars have done), and that
   the oath was taken as part of the ceremony of enrollment.

   Incidentally, we may notice as a masterpiece of irrationality and
   uncritical prejudice, the reflection which Strauss makes about the oath
   of allegiance to Augustus imposed on the Jews. "That this oath, far
   from being a humiliating measure for Herod, coincided with his
   interest, is proved by the zeal with which he punished the Pharisees
   who refused to take it." [67] Naturally, Herod had to punish the
   refusal as an act of treason. If he did not do so, any one of his
   enemies could ruin him by reporting the fact to Augustus. Moreover,
   there were so many Roman officials in Syria that the omission to punish
   the recalcitrants could not be kept from their knowledge, and every
   official was in duty bound to report the omission to his superiors or
   to the Emperor. The punishment, however, was very mild: a fine was
   inflicted on the whole 6000 recalcitrants, and was paid by the wife of
   Herod's brother Pheroras. Subsequently, the ringleaders were put to
   death; but that was not on account of their refusing the oath, but
   because they were disobedient and disrespectful to Herod himself on a
   later occasion.

   Herod was, naturally, unwilling to accept this mark of servitude and
   degradation in rank without making an effort to avoid it. He would,
   doubtless, request time; and he would have little or no difficulty in
   obtaining leave from the Roman governor, Saturninus, to postpone the
   numbering, until he had sent an embassy to Rome. Herod had formerly had
   great influence with Augustus; he might become powerful again; and the
   Roman officials had no reason to refuse compliance with such a
   reasonable request for temporary delay. Herod could represent with
   perfect truth that the imposition of a Roman census in Palestine would
   offend the prejudices of the Jews, and endanger the peace of the
   kingdom. Moreover, the crafty king knew well how to make his requests
   acceptable to Roman officers, who were almost invariably accessible to
   bribery.

   Further, according to Josephus, Herod's case was a good and strong one,
   and Syllaeus was a false accuser. After Saturninus had come to Syria as
   governor, in succession to Titius (probably in the summer of 9 BC. [68]
   ), long negotiations went on in his presence between Herod and
   Syllaeus; an arrangement was made between them; it was afterwards
   broken by Syllaeus; Herod again complained to Saturninus, and was
   authorized to make war on the Arabians.

   Incidentally, we notice that both the accusation that Herod had made
   war without Roman sanction, and the defense that he had been authorized
   by the governor of Syria, show how far he was from being an independent
   king.

   It is, therefore, natural and probable that a postponement of the
   enrollment should have been granted to Herod; and, although our
   authorities merely say that an embassy was sent, and give no
   information as to the exact message, yet we may fairly assume that it
   was intended both to soothe the anger of Augustus and to beg for
   exemption from the enrollment, on the ground that this was likely to
   rouse the religious feeling of the Jews and cause disturbance and
   insurrection.

   The embassy was sent to Rome, but it was not received in audience, and
   it returned without effecting anything. Augustus, of course, knew in a
   general way what instructions had been given to it, and he did not
   think that Herod had been sufficiently humiliated. Perhaps Herod's case
   was not quite so good as Josephus represents it, and there was
   something to be said on the Arabian side of which we are not informed.
   Augustus must assuredly have received the reports of Saturninus the
   governor, and of Volumnius his own procurator; but he still continued
   stern and unforgiving to Herod.

   In these circumstances the delay granted to Herod in regard to the
   enrollment was not extended, and, as we may suppose, he was called upon
   to obey the emperor's orders. He sent a second embassy to Augustus,
   which was, in all probability, commissioned not, as before, to request
   exemption from the enrollment, but to announce his submission and to
   promise unconditional compliance. This embassy was much more favorably
   received, and returned from Rome successful; but Herod was evidently by
   no means completely pardoned or restored fully to favor. When once
   Augustus's anger had been roused at the Jewish monarch's assumption of
   too great freedom, it was far from easy to appease it entirely, and
   impossible to eradicate the effect produced on his mind.

   The succession to Herod's kingdom was subject to the sanction of
   Augustus [69] He could not punish his own sons without formally
   accusing them before a council of his relatives and the Roman officers
   of the province. [70] He had to send embassy after embassy to Rome to
   obtain the sanction of Augustus for his intended acts. He could not
   punish his guilty son Antipater without getting special leave from
   Augustus. In fact his kingdom was treated ostentatiously as an outlying
   part of the province, in which nothing of any consequence could go on
   without the Roman sanction.

   Luke's statement that the enrollment was applied to Palestine is
   therefore in perfect accord with the situation as revealed by Josephus
   during the last years of the life of Herod. The question that remains
   is: In what year was the enrollment made in Palestine?

   The year which was generally observed in the southern part of the
   Province Syria and perhaps followed by Josephus in his history, began
   in the spring. [71] In Syria, therefore, the periodic year was probably
   9-8 BC. and the actual numbering would take place in the year 8-7 BC.

   The recital of events which has just been given will prove that the
   numbering in Palestine could not have occurred so early as the year
   8-7, ending 17th April, 7 BC. A consideration of the character of the
   enrollment will bring us to a more precise result.

   Herod was naturally eager to avoid giving to the enrollment an entirely
   foreign and non-national character Such a character both accentuated
   his own humiliation and was more liable to rouse the ever-wakeful pride
   and jealousy of his Jewish subjects. Obviously, the best way to soothe
   the Jewish sentiment was to give the enrollment a tribal character and
   to number the tribes of Israel, as had been done by purely national
   Governments.

   The Roman officials would not be likely to object to this form of
   enrollment. Provided Herod obeyed the orders of Augustus that an
   enrollment must be made, it would be entirely in accordance with the
   spirit in which these subject kingdoms were treated, that the manner of
   making the enrollment should be left to the discretion of the
   responsible authority, viz., the king. Moreover, the marvelous success
   of Roman provincial administration was due to the skill and tact with
   which the officials accommodated themselves to the prejudices of the
   subject population; and this was clearly a case in, which Jewish
   susceptibilities might be taken into account as regards the manner of
   numbering. The people was well known to be stubborn and unyielding in
   its religious ideas; and, with rare exceptions, Rome humored its
   religious prejudices.

   In his work on the relations between the Imperial law and the National
   law, Dr. Mitteis has shown how much the Roman law was affected in the
   Eastern provinces by national law and custom. [72] In those countries
   Rome was brought in contact with an old civilization and a settled
   system of Greek law; and it did not seek to force on them its own law,
   as it did on the barbarous countries of the West. Similarly, the Roman
   governor of Syria was not likely to dictate the precise fashion in
   which the numbering of Palestine must be carried out.

   Moreover, we have already seen that the prime consideration in the
   Imperial system of administering the provinces was to avoid disturbance
   and sedition. Augustus and the later emperors emphatically inculcated
   this principle on their lieutenants in the provinces. Herod could with
   perfect justice show that tribal numbering was the form which would
   tend most to peace and order in his kingdom.

   Herod's method in governing his kingdom was, as we have seen, to humor
   the Jews, and to accept the distinction which they proudly drew between
   themselves and the heathen. Must we not, then, suppose that he would
   employ the same method in his enrollment? Owing to the care with which
   the Jews preserved their family records and pedigrees, all true Jews
   would know what was their family and their proper city according to the
   ancient tribal system, even though they might have been forced by
   circumstances to change their abode. This seems to have suggested the
   mode of enrollment which Luke describes a mode which would mark off by
   a broad clear line the true Jews from the mongrel population of
   Palestine. All who claimed to be Jews were to repair to the proper city
   of their tribe and family. The rest of the population, who were
   probably much more numerous, would be counted according to their
   ordinary place of residence.

   My friend, Professor Paterson, to whom I am indebted throughout these
   pages, points out that Augustus would specially desire an enrollment of
   Palestine in order to have some clear idea what was the military
   strength of the country. It was a troublesome district to rule.
   Disturbances were always apprehended. There was obvious advantage in
   knowing what was the exact strength of the possible rebels.

   Moreover, the non-Jewish population was peaceable and well-affected to
   Rome. The enrollment would obviously be much more useful, if in
   distinguished accurately the rebellious from the peaceful element in
   the population. The tribal enrollment furnished the means of gaining
   this information. It might safely be concluded that all those who were
   content to be counted as non-tribal would be loyal subjects of Rome.
   The imposition of the oath of allegiance to Augustus would also furnish
   a test, and the number of those who refused the oath was kept. Josephus
   says there were more than 6000. He implies, not that this was an
   estimate of the strength of the Pharisaic faction, but that those who
   actually refused to take the oath were counted; and he says that they
   were regarded as dangerous and likely to rouse war and disturbance.
   [73]

   According to Luke the tribal enrollment was made by ordering every head
   of a household to repair for the numbering to the proper city from
   which his family had sprung. Such a method would have been entirely
   inapplicable in a large country. But, as the traveler rides across the
   length of Palestine, it is vividly brought home to him that this was an
   easy and short method in that land. The Romans, who required that
   citizens should travel to Rome from the remotest part of Italy when
   they wished to register their vote, would see nothing to object to, if
   Herod consulted them as to his proposed scheme.

   In the national character which Herod gave to his enrollment, probably,
   lies the reason why Mary as well as Joseph went up to Bethlehem -- a
   detail which would be so inexplicable if the enrollment had been
   modeled after a Roman census. To go personally to the enrollment was
   regarded as substantiating a claim to true Hebrew origin and family.
   All they that went to their proper city were true Hebrews; and, as Luke
   says, "all (i.e., all true Hebrews in Palestine) went to enroll
   themselves, every one to his own city".

   It is important to notice the force of the word "all" here. This is one
   of many passages in Luke's History where the precise sense that should
   be attributed to the word "all" or the word "they" may be, or has been,
   a subject of controversy, and can be determined only from the whole
   train of thought in the historian's mind. He that misconceives the
   general thought underlying the whole passage inevitably misinterprets
   "they" or "all"

   For example, who are "they" in Acts 13:3? On the way in which that
   question is answered hinges a controversy as to Church government. Who
   are "all" in Acts 18:17? On the answer depends the whole sense of the
   incident; but an answer is difficult, and depends on the general
   conception in the reader's mind. Some say "all the Jews beat a
   Christian": others say "all the Greeks beat a Jew". Similarly, who are
   "us" in Luke 1:1? Professor Blass has recently answered that in his own
   way. Many would give a different reply.

   Accordingly, to understand "all" in Luke 2:3, one must put oneself at
   the narrator's point of view. As we have seen, he conveys the
   impression throughout the two chapters that he is giving the story of
   Mary herself. To her "all" are the Jews: she thinks only of her own
   people: the nonJewish population of Palestine is not embraced in her
   view.

   But, when such a plan of tribal numbering was adopted, the time of year
   had to be carefully considered. In the first place the winter months
   had to be avoided, during which traveling was often difficult, and in
   which unfavorable weather might cause great hardship and even prevent
   the plan from being carried out. As the day had to be fixed a long time
   beforehand, it must have been fixed in the season when good weather
   could be calculated on. In winter, weather might be good or it might be
   bad, and at the best it would be cold and trying.

   That a day was fixed by the authorities, and that it was not left to
   the discretion of the people to go when they pleased (as in Egypt
   people seem to have been permitted to send in their enrollment papers
   at any time they pleased within the year), seems to follow from the
   fact that Joseph and Mary traveled from Nazareth to Bethlehem at the
   very time when the birth of the child was approaching. Moreover, the
   advantages of the plan in ease and speed would have been sacrificed,
   unless a day had been fixed for the numbering.

   Further, it was urgently necessary that the time which was fixed should
   not interfere with agricultural operations -- that it should not come
   between the earliest date for the first harvest and the latest date for
   finishing the threshing, and getting in the grain and the fine cut
   straw from the threshing floors. [74] The harvest varied considerably
   in different parts of the country, and reaping extended over about
   seven weeks, beginning from the middle of April.

   Taking these circumstances into consideration, we may say with
   considerable confidence that August to October is the period within
   which the numbering would be fixed. It is no objection to this view
   that tradition places the birth of Jesus at Christmas. It is well known
   that the tradition is not early, that it varies in different periods
   and in different sections of the Church, and that the earliest belief
   was different.

   Lewin, in Fasti Sacri, p. 115, selects 1st August as the day and month.
   Without laying any stress on the reasoning from the priestly periods by
   which he reaches this precise and exact conclusion, we must attach
   great weight to the argument which he founds on the fact that the
   shepherds were watching their flocks in the open country by night. In
   Asia Minor, at least, the pasturing of the flocks by night takes place
   only during the hot season and not in the winter. The sheep will not
   eat under the hot sun: they stand idly in a dense crowd in any place
   where the semblance of shade can be found during the day, and during
   the night they scatter and feed. In cold weather they seek food during
   the day.

   On this characteristic of the sheep is founded the rule, said to be
   observed in Palestine, that the flocks were sent out after the Passover
   and brought in about October before the "former rain".

   Within that period, April to October, the day fixed for the numbering
   must fall; and during that period April to July was required for the
   reaping and garnering of the year's crop.

   It seems unnecessary to do more than refer to the idle objection that
   has been made: How were the shepherds numbered? There must always be
   some people for whom the numbering is inconvenient, whatever be the
   time at which it is fixed; and we need not trouble to inquire what was
   the method adopted to meet the special case of the shepherds. That
   inquiry belongs to the sphere of the archaeological student, who
   studies the minutiae of the census system; but the historian, in his
   more general view, must omit such details. No critic, who retains his
   sober reason and does not yield to mere prejudice, would find any
   difficulty in it.

   After all, not a great deal of journeying to and fro would be required
   for the enrollment. The remnant that could trace their origin to the
   Ten Tribes must have been very small. The majority of the strictly
   Jewish population was probably resident at that time in the southern
   part of Palestine, though there was also a large minority scattered
   over all the cities of the central and northern districts. A
   considerable number of people would have to make journeys of one to
   four days to their own city, and the same back again; but nothing
   approaching to a general transference of population would be
   necessitated.

   For Herod's enrollment, then, there is open only the late summer of 7
   or 6 BC. Unless we have omitted some important factor (which is, of
   course, far from improbable, considering how scanty the evidence is),
   the enrollment can hardly be brought down so late as 5 BC. and we have
   seen that 8 BC. is excluded by other considerations.

   Between the years 7 and 6 it is difficult to choose, so long as we
   confine ourselves to the evidence outside of Luke, for that evidence is
   insufficient to found a judgment upon, owing to the uncertainty of all
   the dates connected with the question. It may be that the embassy which
   was dismissed unheard by Augustus, returned so late that the necessary
   preparations and notice could not be made in time for the autumn of 7
   BC. and it is certain that Herod was by no means eager to hurry the
   numbering. But these are mere vague presumptions.

   Luke, however, gives additional information about the Savior's life,
   which affords reasonable confidence that 6 BC. was the year of Christ's
   birth.

   NOTE

   That a difference should be made in the treatment of Jews and non-Jews
   in Palestine, is quite in accordance with Roman usage. For example,
   after the rebellion under Hadrian, the Jews were forbidden to enter
   Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [63] Dr. Schuerer well describes the ambiguous policy of Herod, Gesch.
   d. Jud. Volkes, etc., 2., p. 327 f.

   [64] palai chromenos auto philo, nun hupekoo chresetai, Josephus, Ant.
   Jud., 16., 9, 3 ( 290).

   [65] Schuerer, l. c., 1., p. 329; Josephus, 15., 10, 4.

   [66] pantos goun tou Ioudaikou bebaiosantos di' horkon e men eunoesein
   Kaisari . . . hoide ouk omosan. Josephus, Ant. Jud., 17., 2, 4. The
   aorists imply a single occasion, not a regularly repeated custom.

   [67] Life of Jesus, 1., p. 203.

   [68] Some date his arrival as late as 8 BC. This would make the delay
   in the enrollment of Judea all the more natural. He was succeeded by
   Quinctilius Varus in 7. See Note 1 at end of chapter 11.

   [69] Ant. Jud., 17., 3, 2 ( 53); 8, 2 ( 195).

   [70] ton kata ten eparchian hegemonon Bell. Jud., 1., 27, 1.

   [71] See Niese in Hermes, 28., 1893, p. 212 ff.; also see Notes at the
   end of chapter 10.

   [72] Reichsrecht und Volksrecht, Leipzig, 1891.

   [73] ek tou prouptou eis to polemein te kai blaptein epermenoi, Ant.
   Jud., 17., 2, 4 (41).

   [74] See Mr. J. W. Paterson's excellent article on "Agriculture" in
   Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible. On the use of the fine chopped straw
   in the economy of the farm, see Contemporary Review, August, 1897, p.
   237.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 10
  CHRONOLOGY OF THE LIFE OF CHRIST

   LUKE 3:23 tells that Jesus appeared before the world as the teacher,
   when he was about thirty years of age. Now it is a characteristic usage
   in Greek to employ this vague expression, when there is no intention to
   imply doubt as to the age: it lies in the genius of the language to
   avoid positiveness in assertion, and to prefer less definite and
   pronounced and harsh forms of statement. [75] It is unnecessary to
   think that Luke was really doubtful what was the age of Jesus, whether
   twenty-eight or thirty-two. His elaborately careful and precise dating,
   3:1, 2, may be taken as an indication that he had good and accurate
   information on the subject; that he "had investigated all the
   circumstances accurately in their origin". But, like a true Greek, he
   says "about thirty," where the less sensitive barbarian of our northern
   island would use a rudely positive and definite number. The only doubt
   that remains is whether Luke means in his thirtieth year, or when he
   was thirty years old; and this doubt is resolved by the other facts
   recorded by Luke, as we shall see. Jesus was thirty years old, when he
   began his public career.

   The precise statement is doubtless derived from the same authority as
   the whole of the first two chapters (and perhaps also 4:16-30); and the
   only reason for recording it is that it was given exactly by a
   first-rate authority, and therefore helped Luke's readers "to know the
   certainty concerning the things wherein they had been instructed". An
   authority, who was really good on such a point, would know the exact
   age, and Luke expressly declares his intention of setting down only
   such facts as he had accurately and certainly on trustworthy authority.
   Where his knowledge was only vague, he usually refrains from making any
   statement.

   If the birth of Jesus occurred in BC. 6, he became thirty years of age
   in the second half of AD. 25, and his appearance as a teacher took
   place within the year that followed. If his birth occurred in BC. 7,
   the date of his appearance must be placed one year earlier, but we
   shall find reason to reject that supposition.

   Some time, but apparently quite a short time, before Jesus came forward
   as a teacher, John the Baptist began to preach that the Messiah was at
   hand; and Jesus was among the crowds who flocked to him to receive
   baptism. Now, as Luke mentions, "the word of God came to John" in the
   fifteenth year of the authority [76] of Tiberius Caesar. The date is
   given very precisely and definitely; but, unfortunately, it is by no
   means easy to say what year is meant by it.

   It is often found that, where an ancient writer aims at making his
   statement most precise and exact, his words lend themselves to several
   interpretations. [77] What did Luke understand by the authority of
   Tiberius? In the inscriptions of that emperor's lifetime, the years of
   his reign are estimated according to the number of times that he had
   received tribunician power. On that system his fifteenth year began on
   27th June, AD. 13. Obviously Luke cannot intend that year.

   Again, according to Velleius, the admirer and friend and faithful
   follower of Tiberius, associated with him in nine years of warfare,
   authority equal to that of Augustus in all the provinces and armies of
   the empire was granted to Tiberius by the senate and people, on the
   proposal of Augustus himself, before he returned to Rome to celebrate
   his triumph over the peoples of Pannonia and Dalmatia. Now this triumph
   was celebrated on

   16th January, AD. 12, [78] therefore the decree of equal power must
   have been passed before the end of AD. 11. Further, the language of
   Velleius suggests that the decree was issued not long before Tiberius
   returned, and it was so closely connected with his return that
   Suetonius seems to place it after he reached Rome. But Velleius's
   authority must be ranked superior in regard to such a point.

   There can be no doubt that this was the event which Tacitus had ill
   mind when he said that Tiberius had been created Collega Imperii during
   the lifetime of Augustus (Annals, 1., 3).

   It follows that the first year during which Tiberius held power as
   colleague of Augustus with equal power in all provinces of the empire
   coincided with the end of AD. 11 and the greater part of AD. 12, and
   the fifteenth year with AD. 25-6. [79]

   If Luke counted the years of Tiberius according to that system, all his
   statements as to time in these early chapters are found to be
   consistent and accurate. The first enrollment must have taken place in
   autumn BC. 6. Jesus was thirty years old in autumn BC. 25. In the later
   months of that year, when the fifteenth year of the Hegemonia of
   Tiberius in the provinces had just recently begun (according to the
   official usage [80] ), John appeared announcing the coming of Christ;
   and very shortly thereafter Jesus came and was baptized by John in the
   river Jordan. A month or two thereafter occurred the Passover on 21st
   March, AD. 26 (Lewin, Fasti Sacri, p. 173).

   The only reason for doubting whether Luke could have counted the years
   of Tiberius on that system, is that it is never employed elsewhere in
   reckoning the reign of that emperor. When his tribunician years are not
   stated, his reign is always elsewhere counted from the death of his
   predecessor, Augustus; and it is beyond dispute that he was not in any
   proper and strict sense emperor until that time. But it seems not
   impossible that his Hegemonia in the provinces might be counted from
   AD. 11, when his authority began in them. Similarly, we saw that in
   Egypt the reign of Augustus was reckoned, not from any date when he
   became emperor in a strict and proper sense, but from BC. 30, when his
   authority began in that country.

   Further, Luke, the whole spirit of whose History stamps it as belonging
   to the Flavian period, knew that the reign of Titus was counted from
   the day when he was made the colleague of his father, Vespasian; and
   thus he may have been led to apply to the time of Tiberius the
   principle which was in current and official use while he was writing.
   [81]

   Now the only dates that are permissible for the crucifixion are AD. 29,
   30 and 33. Different authorities vary between these three years. But,
   as it is not possible to allow that more than four Passovers occurred
   during the public career of Jesus, we are bound to the view that his
   career extended from the time preceding the Passover of 26 till the
   Passover of 29. The strength of the tradition that places the
   crucifixion in 29 has been admirably stated by Mr. C. H. Turner in his
   article on the "Chronology of the New Testament". [82]

   But is this consistent with Luke's narrative? Does he permit the
   supposition that four Passovers occurred within the period of Jesus'
   teaching?

   Luke does not refer to any Passover during that whole period except the
   last. He was not interested in the relation of Jesus to the Jewish
   feasts, and hardly alludes to the subject after the Passover that
   occurred in the Savior's twelfth year. Hence we cannot expect from him
   much direct evidence bearing on the Passovers during the teaching of
   Jesus.

   Moreover, Luke had little of the sense for chronology, the value of
   which in clearly understanding or describing any series of incidents
   had not been appreciated so early as the first century. Chronology,
   too, was much more difficult when no era had come into general use,
   when dates were commonly stated by the names of annual magistrates, or
   the years of sovereigns, and when in Asia scores of different eras for
   dating had just begun to come into use side by side with one another,
   so that, even when one does find a date by a numbered year, it is often
   a difficult problem to determine what era is used.

   Want of chronological sense or interest may seem a serious defect in a
   historian. But we are too apt to forget that Luke was not writing for
   us, and that he was not even writing for posterity. He wrote for the
   benefit of his own contemporaries. His work stands in the closest
   relation to the time. That which seemed most important for the
   requirements of the Church at the time was what Luke most desired to
   record with absolute accuracy and trustworthiness. Abstract scientific
   interest in the chronology of the Gospel did not exist among his
   readers. What they were concerned with was its truth; and that was
   gathered from the Savior's teaching, from his statements about himself,
   and from the facts of his Birth, Death and Resurrection. These were the
   points on which Luke's attention was concentrated in his first book.

   Some authorities are disposed to think that Luke believed the whole
   period of the teaching of Jesus to have been comprised within the
   period of a little more than a year, lasting from shortly before one
   Passover till the Passover of the following year. A widely-spread
   opinion in the second and third centuries assigned that duration to the
   Savior's ministry, but I can discover nothing to show that Luke shared
   it. The opinion, probably, was the result of two causes. In the first
   place, the notes of time in the Gospels are very slight and difficult
   to fit together. In the second place, the saying about "the acceptable
   year of the Lord" was easily misunderstood.

   The memory of the earliest authorities, as a rule, was entirely filled
   with the words and teaching of the Savior. Chronological order was
   little thought of; and we should probably find that most of the
   writings alluded to by Luke 1. I took the form of collections of
   sayings and parables. The only events, probably, that were vividly
   remembered in their historical aspect and apart from the doctrine
   connected with them, were the series of actions comprised within the
   last few days of the Savior's life. The sequence of these events was
   indelibly stamped on the memory of all. [83] But the rest of the
   tradition was a reproduction of past lessons and impressive sayings.
   These were connected with certain localities; some were associated with
   certain actions of the Savior or of those who were in his company. But
   his numerous journeys great and small were not remembered in their
   sequence. In this state of information, Luke evidently forbore the
   attempt to describe exactly the movements of Jesus during the greater
   part of the teaching.

   In the beginning, indeed, he describes the sequence of Jesus' first
   journeys. He tells how Jesus was baptized by John in Jordan, 3:21; and
   he dates at that point the beginning of his teaching, 3:23. Then he
   tells of the journey into the wilderness, i.e., the country south from
   Jerusalem, and mentions that Jesus was actually in Jerusalem, 4:1-13.
   Thereafter Jesus returned to Galilee and taught there for some time,
   4:14, 15, after which he returned to Nazareth for a brief visit,
   4:16-30. Being rejected and threatened with death at Nazareth, he came
   down to Capernaum, 4:31.

   The narrative during this stage touches that of the other Gospels at
   occasional points; and one paragraph, 4:1-13, is perhaps founded on the
   same ultimate authority as Matthew 4:1-11 (though with a difference in
   order). No indication of the lapse of time is given; but some
   considerable period is likely to have elapsed even in the events
   implied in 4:15 alone.

   But at this point, 4:31, begins a new section of the narrative. The
   indications of movement for a considerable period are of the vaguest
   kind. 4:42, He went into a desert place. 5:16, He withdrew himself in
   the deserts.5:27, He went forth.6:1, He was going through the
   cornfields, probably in May or June when the wheat was ripe but not
   cut. 6:12, He went out into the mountain to pray. 6:17, He came down
   with them. 7:1, He entered into Capernaum.7:1, He went soon afterwards
   to a city called Nain (an episode peculiar to Luke). His return from
   Nain is never mentioned, but 7:18 ff. probably belongs to the coasts of
   the Sea of Galilee. 8:1, He soon afterwards went about through cities
   and villages. 8:22, He entered into a boat (on the Sea of Galilee).
   8:26, He arrived at the country of the Gerasenes, which is over against
   Galilee. 8:38, He entered into a boat and returned. 9:10, He withdrew
   apart to a city called Bethsaida. 9:28, He went up about eight days
   after into the mountain to pray. 9:37, On the next day when they were
   come down from the mountain, a great multitude met him (and here Mark's
   reference to the green grass, 6:39, and John's to the abundant grass,
   6:10, show that the time was spring).

   In this part of the narrative, the lapse of time is hardly alluded to:
   only the brief and vague indications just quoted are given. The marks
   of locality, apart from those implied in the indications of movement,
   are also very vague and elusive. 4:44, He was preaching in the
   synagogues of Galilee. 5:1, He was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret.
   5:12, He was in one of the cities.

   This section of the narrative, 4:31-9:50, is as a whole (though with
   some considerable exceptions) closely parallel to Mark and Matthew.
   Great part of the section is evidently founded on an authority common
   to them (though we expressly avoid stating any opinion as to the nature
   of the connection between the three).

   It is plain that though Luke, with his usual indifference to the
   chronological aspect of history, does not properly mark the lapse of
   time, yet this section must extend over some considerable period.
   "Preaching in the synagogues of Galilee" is the sort of phrase by which
   Luke sums up a considerable period; and the different movements,
   mentioned or implied, vague as they are, together with the intervals
   between them, demand time.

   From 9:51 begins another new section describing the movement to
   Jerusalem preparatory to the culmination of Christ's teaching there. In
   10:38, as they went on their way, he entered into a certain village
   (viz., Bethany); and in 11:1, he was praying in a certain place. In
   this and the following chapters there continues the same vagueness.
   Luke only makes it clear that the most advanced stage in the ministry
   has begun, and that Jesus is moving gradually towards the south and is
   affecting the southern half of Palestine. In 13:22, he went on his way
   through towns and villages teaching and journeying on unto Jerusalem.
   In 17:11, as they were on the way to Jerusalem, he was passing through
   the midst of Samaria and Galilee. 8:31, We go up to Jerusalem. 18:35,
   He drew nigh unto Jericho.19:1, He entered and was passing through
   Jericho. 19:11, He was nigh to Jerusalem. 19:28 f., He went on before,
   going up to Jerusalem (by the steep road from Jericho), and he drew
   nigh to Bethany.

   Then comes the entry into Jerusalem, where the rest of the narrative
   has its scene.

   With very slight exceptions, the section 9:51-19:28 is quite peculiar
   to Luke, and has hardly any points of contact with any of the other
   Gospels. But the same vagueness of place and time continues.

   It is, however, clearly unnecessary and improbable that this section
   represents, or was considered by Luke to represent, the events of one
   single continuous approximately straight journey. The multitudes, the
   towns and villages, the frequent repetition of the idea of progress
   towards Jerusalem, imply a gradual advance of the circle of the
   teaching towards the south and towards the center of Jewish religion
   and the completion of his mission.

   If, as I believe to be probably the case, Luke knew what was the
   "certain village" of Martha and Mary, 10:38, but for some reason (about
   which we need not speculate) avoided naming it, our view would be
   raised to complete certainty, that in this section the historian is
   describing a general movement southwards, accompanied and complicated
   by many short journeys to and fro, up and down, "through towns and
   villages teaching". If he is at Bethany in 10., and at Jericho in 18,
   and in Samaria in 17, zigzag wanderings are clearly implied. But, as
   many may prefer to consider that 10:38 has been put in false local and
   chronological order by Luke through his ignorance that the "certain
   village" was Bethany, we need not press an argument that is not
   actually required for our purpose. Even without it the view which we
   are stating as to Luke's intention in this section seems certain.

   It is obvious, then, that Luke divides the teaching of Jesus, previous
   to the final scenes in Jerusalem, into three stages. The first and
   preliminary stage -- in the wilderness of Judah, in Galilee and in
   Nazareth -- is very briefly recorded The second -- spent in Galilee or
   the north continuously -- is described at much greater length: Jesus
   had now become a famous teacher, and attracted many hearers and
   followers. The third -- the extension of the sphere of influence over
   central Palestine as Far as Jerusalem -- is described still more fully.
   There is no attempt or intention to describe the movements of Jesus
   exactly in the second and third stages.

   Further, the second stage evidently lasted a Full year, For after it
   has begun some time, we find ourselves in the month of May or June, and
   at the end we are again in spring (as we know From Mark but not from
   Luke).

   The probability, then, is that roughly the three stages correspond to
   the three years; and the memory of the witnesses retained very little
   that was accurate and definite (except some important changes of scene
   and journeys) during the preliminary stage, AD. 26, more about the
   second, AD. 27, and still more about the third, AD. 28.

   The first Passover, AD. 26 (John 2:13), falls about Luke 4:13, and the
   year ends about 4:31. At the feast of this year, the Jews spoke about
   the 46th year of the building of the Temple (John 2:20); and the 46th
   year had begun shortly before they spoke. [84]

   The second Passover, AD. 27 (John 5:1), falls about Luke 5. Then
   follows the month of May, 6:1.

   The spring of AD. 28 and the third Passover (John 6:4) must be placed
   in Luke 9. The summer of this year, however, was still spent in
   Galilee, according to John 7:1; but it is not inconsistent with this
   statement that the third stage of Luke had already begun. The
   characteristic of that stage was that Jesus had now set his face firmly
   to go to Jerusalem, 9:51; but during it, he was still passing through
   the midst of Samaria and Galilee, 17:11. The period in Luke's
   estimation is rather one of firm and definite resolution than of bodily
   movement continuously towards Jerusalem. The visit to the country east
   of Jordan (Mark 10:1 and Matthew 19:1) certainly belongs to this stage.

   That there was a strong tradition to the effect that the Savior
   suffered at the age of thirty-three seems to follow from the agreement
   of Hippolytus [85] and Eusebius and Phlegon. The latter, as is allowed
   by Mr. Turner, was indebted to very early Christian authorities for his
   information. It is true that both Eusebius and Phlegon place the
   crucifixion in AD. 33, but this arises from their both depending on the
   original Christian calculation which ultimately gave rise to the modern
   era of the birth of Christ. This was wrongly calculated as early as the
   second century; and, starting from that initial error, the
   chronologists had to place the beginning of the teaching in thirty and
   the crucifixion in thirty-three.

   It is a strong confirmation of our result that it agrees with two so
   ancient traditions, which are quite unconnected with one another and
   evidently seemed to most of the ancients to be inconsistent with each
   other.

   Starting from a very different point of view from that of Mr. Turner,
   and working on utterly diverse lines, we have reached nearly the same
   conclusion that he reached. The only differences of importance are two:
   --

   1. I find myself obliged, on the principles of interpretation which I
   have followed consistently throughout, to attach a distinctly higher
   value than he does to Luke's statement as to the age of Jesus when he
   began to teach.

   2. Mr. Turner is inclined to think that Luke compressed the teaching
   into one year; and he holds that the teaching in reality lasted only
   for two years, interpreting John 5:1 as referring to some unnamed minor
   feast. [86] This view cannot be disproved, but it seems to have nothing
   to recommend it, and it introduces quite unnecessary discord between
   the different Gospels. The chronological marks in the Gospels are so
   slight that almost anything can be made out of them, if one is bent on
   doing so. Hence there was in ancient time an immense variety of opinion
   on this point. But in four independent accounts of one series of
   events, a reasonable criticism will prefer the interpretation in which
   all the various conditions are reconciled.

   At the last moment, after this chapter is in type, Professor Paterson
   reminds me that the result which we have attained agrees with the
   celebrated calculation of Kepler, who fixed on the year BC. 6, because
   in March of that year there occurred a conjunction of Jupiter, Saturn
   and Mars, which would present a most brilliant appearance in the sky,
   and would naturally attract the attention of observers interested in
   the phenomena of the heavens, as were the Wise Men of the East.

   I have no knowledge what is the value of Kepler's reckoning. Mr.
   Turner, who knows much more about the matter, speaks only of the
   conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, which occurred in, May, October and
   December, BC. 7; and I presume that he would have mentioned the triple
   conjunction (on which Kepler laid such stress), if he had accepted the
   calculation, even though it does not suit the date 7-6, to which he
   inclines. The coincidence, however, seems worthy of mention, but it is
   not presented as an argument.

   But, while we lay no stress upon it as an argument, the subject is so
   interesting, and presents so many curious coincidences, that a few
   paragraphs may profitably be devoted to it.

   The conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn in the constellation Pisces,
   according to a Jewish belief of some antiquity, [87] is the sign of the
   Messiah's coming. If there existed some belief that the coming of a
   King of the Jews was to be heralded thus, the occurrence of the
   phenomenon would necessarily arrest the attention of the
   astrology-loving priests in the East. Kepler's theory was, that just as
   the conjunction in 1604 of Jupiter and Saturn, culminated in 1605 in
   the conjunction of Jupiter, Saturn and Mars, and was followed by the
   appearance of a new and brilliant star, which disappeared again after
   about eighteen months, so in BC. 7 and 6, the exactly singular
   conjunctions were followed by the appearance of a new star after the
   triple conjunction, and that this was the star of Matthew 2:2.

   Now the visit of the Magi obviously did not occur until more than forty
   days after the birth of Jesus, [88] and may probably be placed during
   the winter of BC. 6-5. Kepler's theory involves that they appeared
   before Herod at this time, and informed him of the reason of their
   coming. Herod thereupon consulted the Jewish priests, and heard from
   them that the King was to be born in Bethlehem. He also questioned the
   Magi privately, and learned the exact facts with regard to the
   appearance of the star, and doubtless also with regard to the whole
   phenomenon in the heavens. He would learn from the Magi that the
   fateful conjunction first occurred in May of the year BC. 7. Then he
   sent the Magi away to Bethlehem, and awaited news of their discovery.
   When they did not return, he ordered all children under two years of
   age in Bethlehem to be killed. The King might have been born at any
   time after the first conjunction occurred; and that was at least
   eighteen months ago. Therefore, in order to make sure, the order
   included every child under two.

   Now about this time, as Josephus mentions, [89] Herod was troubled by a
   prophecy that the power was about to pass away from him and from his
   family; and the Pharisees, from favor to the wife of Pheroras (who
   promised to pay their fine), predicted that the succession would come
   to her and her children. Obviously, the second part of the prophecy was
   pure invention, due to partisanship; but the first part was almost
   certainly connected with the Jews' deep-seated belief in the coming of
   a new King, the Messiah. Lewin (whose arrangement of the events in the
   last three years of Herod's life seems very good) places this event in
   BC. 6; Schuerer dates it in 7. One or the other must be right. Herod
   put to death the ringleaders of the Pharisees, with two of his own
   personal attendants, and also all those of his own household that had
   associated themselves with the prediction of the Pharisees.

   There occurred therefore a number of deaths among the family and
   attendants of Herod in connection with the belief in the coming of a
   new King.

   Now Macrobius, a pagan writer about AD. 400, says that when the news
   was brought to Augustus that Herod, King of the Jews, had ordered
   children under two years of age in Syria to be slain, and that among
   them was a son of Herod's, the Emperor remarked, "It is better to be
   Herod's pig than his son". [90] It is not probable that Macrobius was
   indebted to a Christian writer for this story; [91] and, therefore,
   probably the story of the Massacre of the Infants was recorded in some
   pagan source. The execution of the conspirators in Herod's household
   perhaps occurred about the same time; but among them there is not
   likely to have been a son of Herod's. Only a few months before,
   however, Herod had put to death two of his sons, and the remark of
   Augustus may have been prompted by hearing successively of so many
   barbarities, the execution of two sons, of a number of infants, and of
   several of his own family and personal attendants.

   While all these statements furnish only vague presumptions, yet they
   certainly tend to show that much was going on of a remarkable character
   about BC. 7-6, and they fit in well with both Luke and Matthew. If the
   narratives of these two writers are true, they throw much light on
   Josephus and Macrobius, and receive illustration and confirmation from
   them.

   But that which is most certain is that our non-Christian authorities
   are most meager and fragmentary. It is the extreme of uncritical and
   unscholarly procedure to condemn the Christian authorities because they
   tell some things which are not mentioned in any non-Christian source.
     __________________________________________________________________

   NOTE 1

   The fifteenth year of Tiberius. There are various ways of counting the
   years of an emperor's reign; and doubt often exists which way is
   intended, when a date is given.

   Luke might reckon the years of an emperor as beginning always from the
   anniversary of the day on which power was conferred on him. That mode
   of reckoning seems to have been always used by the emperors of the
   first century. In that case the fifteenth year of Tiberius's rule in
   the provinces began near the end of AD. 25, on the anniversary of the
   day when he originally received collegiate authority in the provinces.
   But that method was rarely, if ever, used by the general public or by
   historians in the East.

   There was, however, a different method which was usually employed by
   many historians and chronologists, and was officially used by the
   emperors of the second and third centuries. The first year of the
   emperor was estimated to run from the day on which he assumed power to
   the conclusion of the current year; then the second year of the emperor
   began on the first day of the following current year.

   If that reckoning was followed by Luke, we should have to inquire what
   system of years he followed, whether he counted the years as beginning
   on the Roman system from 1st January, or on the most usual Greek system
   in the Aegean lands from 23rd September, or on a common Syrian system
   from 18th April. [92] On these three systems the fifteenth year of
   Tiberius might begin either 1st January, BC. 25, or 23rd September, 25,
   or 18th April, 25.

   But according to every system it will be found that the first Passover
   of Jesus' teaching was the Passover of AD. 26: the only difference
   which they make to the reckoning is that John's preaching might be made
   to begin a little earlier on some than on other systems.

   NOTE 2

   It is unfortunate that, in his admirable article on the "Chronology of
   the New Testament," Mr. C. H. Turner sometimes disregards the principle
   admitted by most of the recent chronologists -- that when any event was
   taken as an era, the years were not reckoned beginning from that day,
   but the year 1 was reckoned as the current year within which the event
   occurred, as for example in the Asian year beginning 23rd September,
   the year 1 of the Actian era was the year ending 22nd September, B. C.
   31, although the battle of Actium was fought as late as 2nd September,
   31 (so that the year 1 of this era came to an end three weeks after it
   began). This principle has been proved repeatedly in the last few
   years, and many difficulties, formerly found in reckoning ancient
   dates, disappear as soon as it is applied. Mr. Turner follows the old
   method, that the year 1 runs for twelve months from the epoch-making
   event (e.g., that the first year of Herod's reign lasted for 365 days
   from the day of his accession, and so on). Thus he is beset by the
   difficulties that result from it: e.g., he declares that Josephus
   contradicts himself when he says that Antigonus died "on the day of the
   Great Fast in the consulship of Agrippa and Gallus (BC. 37),
   twenty-seven years to a day since the entry of Pompey into Jerusalem in
   the consulship of Antonius and Cicero (BC. 63)". Josephus, indeed, has
   admitted not a few faults and slips into his historical works; but it
   is surely going too far to say that the two reckonings given in this
   sentence contradict one another. There is no contradiction, if one
   counts like Josephus. According to Mr. Turner's reckoning, the lapse of
   twenty-seven years after (circa) 30th September, 63, brings us to 30th
   September, 36, but it brought Josephus only to 30th September, 37; and
   his two statements (made side by side in his text) agree exactly.

   According to Niese in Hermes, 1893, p. 208 ff., Josephus in reckoning
   the years under the Roman emperors employed a solar year of the Julian
   type, but reckoned according to a Ty1ian (and perhaps common Syrian)
   method so that the year began from I Xanthicus, 18th April. Josephus
   also, as Niese holds, in order to avoid making the last year of one
   emperor coincide with the first year of his successor, reckoned the
   final year of each emperor as continuing, to the end of the current
   year, and made the first year of his successor begin only on 18th April
   following his accession. This was necessary if the years of the
   emperors were to be used in a continuous chronological system. In this
   way, the year 1 of Tiberius began on 18th April, AD. 15, and the year
   22 continued to run till 17th April, AD. 37 (though the reign really
   lasted from 19th August, A.D. 14, to 16th March, AD. 37, i.e.,
   twenty-two years, six months, twenty-eight days). Similarly, the year 1
   of Nero began only on 18th April, AD. 55, full six months after he
   really began to reign.

   Mr, Turner points out that Eusebius followed a similar (but not
   identical) method, counting the years of every emperor from the
   September after his succession.

   Orosius either employed a reckoning of this character or was misled by
   some authority who did so; and hence he makes the tenth year of
   Claudius include an event that happened in 51, and we must suppose that
   he means the fourth year of Claudius to be AD. 45, and the ninth, AD.
   50 (see St. Paul the Traveller, pp. 68, 254, where I did not perceive
   what was the explanation of Orosius's statements and called them
   errors).

   But it is clear that Josephus did not employ this kind of reckoning for
   the Jewish rulers before Christ. It is more probable that he used
   either the Jewish sacred year beginning 1st Nisan (usually some time in
   March) or the Roman year beginning 1st January. For our purposes it
   will make no difference which system we follow (though there are, of
   course, many cases in which it might make the difference of a year);
   and as it will be simpler to use the Roman and modern reckoning from
   1st January, we shall show the dates on that system.

   1. Herod's reign de jure began from a decree of the Senate passed in
   the consulship of Domitius and Pollio BC. 40, during the 184th Olympiad
   which ended at midsummer in that year. Year 1 of Herod's reign de jure
   ended on 31st December BC.. 40: year 37 of Herod's reign de jure ended
   on 31st December, BC. 4.

   (If the decree was passed at a Senate meeting of 1st January or 1st
   February, and the Jewish reckoning from 1st Nisan be followed, the
   years of Herod's reign would all be carried back one year, so that the
   year 37 would end on 18th April, BC 4; but it is improbable that the
   decree was passed at these first two Senate meetings.) Herod died in
   the thirty seventh year of his reign de jure, i.e., in the year BC. 4,
   immediately before the Passover, and perhaps (as Lewin reckons) on 1st
   April.

   2. Pompey entered Jerusalem on the Great Fast about the end of
   September, BC. 63. In reckoning from this event, year 1 is the year
   ending 31st December, BC. 63; year 27 is the year ending 31st December,
   BC. 37; Herod succeeded as de facto king on the same fast day,
   twenty-seven years after Pompey entered Jerusalem, i.e., about the end
   of September, BC. 37, in which year the consuls were Agrippa and
   Gallus. Year 1 of Herod's reign de facto ended 31st December, BC. 37;
   year 18 of Herod's reign de facto ended 31st December, BC. 29; year 34
   of Herod's reign de facto ended 31st December, BC. 4.

   Herod died in the year 34 of his reign de facto, i.e., in the year BC.
   4. This agrees exactly with the previous result.

   Now the Temple began to be built in the eighteenth year of Herod, i.
   e.,BC. 20. In reckoning from this event (John 2:20), the Jews would
   presumably count according to their own system of sacred years
   beginning 1st Nisan. There is therefore a doubt what was the first year
   of the building of the Temple. If the building began in January-March,
   BC. 20, the first year would end at 1st Nisan 20, and would begin from
   1st Nisan, BC. 21; but if the building began in April or later, the
   first year would end at 1st Nisan in BC. 19. We take the latter as more
   probable. Then the year 1 of the building of the Temple begins on 1st
   Nisan, BC. 20; year 46 of the building of the Temple begins on 1st
   Nisan, AD. 26.

   The Jews disputing with Jesus at the Passover in the middle of Nisan
   AD. 26 would therefore on their system of reckoning call it the 46th
   year. "Forty and six years has this temple been in course of building
   (and is still building)." [93]

   It is apparent how many uncertainties are caused in ancient chronology,
   through the variety of systems of reckoning the year, and other
   variations in different cities. We have not indicated nearly all such
   causes of doubt. For example, as M. Clermont Ganneau says, the Seleucid
   era was reckoned from 1st October, BC. 312, but the era of Damascus was
   reckoned from 23rd March of the same year.

   NOTE 3

   A different explanation of Luke's chronology may be approved by some,
   and it therefore deserves a place here. I am not aware that it has been
   advocated; but in all probability it has found some supporters, like
   every other possible view on this subject.

   It is founded on the theory -- which some think highly probable -- that
   Luke considered the teaching of Jesus to have extended only over a
   little more than twelve months, beginning shortly before the Passover
   in one year and ending with the Passover of the following year. On that
   theory one might interpret the fifteenth year of Tiberius's reign in
   the usual way, from his assumption of power after the death of
   Augustus, 19th August, AD. 14. If, as many historians did, Luke
   reckoned the first year of Tiberius to end on 31st December, AD. 14,
   and the fifteenth year to begin 1st January, AD. 28, the baptism of
   Jesus would have to be placed early in that year, and the crucifixion
   at the Passover of 29. If, on the other hand, he reckoned the first
   year of Tiberius from 19th August, AD. 14, to 18th August, AD. 15, then
   the baptism of Jesus would have to be placed early in 29, and the
   crucifixion in AD. 30; but we have already set aside this supposition
   as less probable.

   According to this method of explanation it would be necessary to
   suppose that in 3:23 Luke depended on an excellent authority, who knew
   both the correct age when Jesus began his teaching and the fact that
   the teaching lasted three years and a few months; but in 3:1-2 he
   depended on his own reckoning, founded on his false impression that the
   teaching lasted only one year and a few months. The fact would remain
   clear and certain that the crucifixion took place in AD. 29, and the
   teaching really began in the early spring of 26 (exactly as we have
   placed them).

   There seems to us to be no necessity for supposing this partial error
   on Luke's part.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [75] The less definite form is strictly correct: Jesus was thirty years
   and a few months, more or less.

   [76] Hegemonia, hegemonia, is the word; on its sense see Chapter 11.

   [77] Mommsen quotes a remarkable case in the Monumentum Ancyranum where
   Augustus's desire to be precise and certain has exposed his statement
   of a number to be interpreted in three different ways by different
   writers.

   [78] Prosopographia Imp. Rom., 2., p. 183; Mommsen, Staatsrecht, 2., p
   1159.

   [79] See Note at end of chapter 10.

   [80] See Note at end of chapter 10.

   [81] See Mr. Turner in Dr. Hastings' Dict. of Bible, 1., p. 406.

   [82] In Dr. Hastings' Dict. of Bible.

   [83] Yet compare John 12:1 and Mark 14:1. See Note at the end of
   Chapter 4.

   [84] See Note 2 at the end of Chapter 10.

   [85] On Hippolytus see Mr. Turner's remarks, l. c. p. 413, col. 2.

   [86] Reading "a feast" instead of "the feast" (heorte for he heorte).

   [87] Mr. Turner says: "The statement of a medieval Jew, R. Abarbanel,
   that the conjunction of these two planets in Pisces is to be a sign of
   Messiah's coming, may perhaps have been derived ultimately from ancient
   traditions known to the Chaldaeans".

   [88] The ceremony in Jerusalem, Luke 2:22, could not have taken place
   after the visit of the Magi, for the flight into Egypt must have
   followed immediately on the visit.

   [89] Ant. Jud., 17., 2, 4.

   [90] Augustus must have uttered the witticism in Greek: the pun (hun
   ehuion) is lost in Latin or English: see Macrobius, Sat., 2., 4.

   [91] (1) The pagans of that time were strongly prejudiced against
   Christians and not likely to quote them. (2) A Christian author would
   have spoken about Palestine, not about Syria.

   [92] See below, Note 2.

   [93] See Mr. Turner on his p. 405.
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 11
  QUIRINIUS THE GOVERNOR OF SYRIA

   WE come now to the last serious difficulty in Luke's account of the
   "First Enrollment". He says that it occurred while Quirinius was
   administering Syria.

   The famous administration of Syria by Quirinius lasted from about AD. 6
   to 9; and during that time occurred the" Great Enrollment" and
   valuation of property in Palestine. [94] Obviously the incidents
   described by Luke are irreconcilable with that date.

   There was found near Tibur (Tivoli) in AD. 1764 a fragment of marble
   with part of an inscription, which is now preserved in the Lateran
   Museum of Christian Antiquities, as one of the important monuments
   bearing on the history of Christianity. The inscription records the
   career and honors of a Roman official who lived in the reign of
   Augustus, and survived that emperor. He conquered a nation; he was
   rewarded with two Supplicationes and the Ornamenta Triumphalia, i.e.,
   he gorgeous dress of a triumphing general, with ivory scepter and
   chariot, etc.; he governed Asia as proconsul; and he twice governed
   Syria as legatus of the divine Augustus.

   Though the name has perished, yet these indications are sufficient to
   show with practical certainty (as all the highest authorities are
   agreed -- Mommsen, Borghesi, de Rossi, Henzen, Dessau, and others),
   that the officer who achieved this splendid career was Publius
   Sulpicius Quirinius. His government of Syria, AD. 6-9, was therefore
   his second tenure of that office. He had administered Syria at some
   previous time. Is not this earlier administration the occasion to which
   Luke refers?

   Here again, however, we are confronted with a serious difficulty. The
   supreme authority on the subject, Mommsen, considers that the most
   probable date for Quirinius's first government of Syria is about BC.
   3-1; but the question is involved in serious doubts, which Mommsen
   fully acknowledges. That time is doubly inconsistent with Luke: Herod
   was dead before it, and it is inconsistent with the whole argument of
   the preceding pages that the enrollment should have been postponed so
   long after the periodic year BC. 9.

   Again, Luke does not specify exactly what was the Roman office which
   Quirinius held at the time when this first enrollment was made. The
   Greek word which he uses hegemoneuontos tes Surias Kureniou occurs
   elsewhere in his History, indicating the office of procurator (Luke
   3:1; so hegemon, Acts 23:24, 26, 33; Acts 24:1, 10 and Acts 26:30) and
   the noun connected with it is even used (Luke 3:1) to indicate the
   supreme authority exercised by the reigning Emperor in a province.

   Hence the word, as employed by Luke, might be applied to any Roman
   official holding a leading and authoritative position in the province
   of Syria. It might quite naturally denote some special mission of a
   high and authoritative nature; and many excellent authorities have
   argued that Quirinius was dispatched to Syria on some such mission, and
   that Luke, in assigning the date, mentions him in preference to the
   regular governor.

   We find, then, that uncertainty reigns both as to the date of
   Quirinius's first governorship, and as to whether Luke called him
   governor or intended to indicate that he held a special mission in
   Syria.

   Let us now scrutinize closely the evidence bearing on the career of
   Quirinius. We shall find that, as in so many other cases, a firm grasp
   of the clue that Luke offers us will guide us safely through a
   peculiarly entangled problem, and will illuminate a most obscure page
   of history. The difficulties of the case are due to the contempt in
   which Luke's testimony has been held by the historians and one school
   of theologians, and the timorous and faltering belief of others.

   The only certain dates in the life of Quirinius are his consulship in
   BC. 12, his second government of Syria beginning in AD. 6, his
   prosecution of his former wife, Domitia Lepida, in AD. 20, and his
   death and public funeral in AD. 21. It is certain that during the
   eighteen years' interval between his consulship, BC. 12, and his second
   Syrian administration, AD. 6, the following important events in his
   career occurred.

   1. He held office in Syria, and carried on war with the Homonadenses, a
   tribe in the inner mountainous district lying between Phrygia, Cilicia
   and Lycaonia: he gained in this war successes which were judged so
   important that two solemn acts of thanksgiving to the gods
   (supplicationes) in Rome were decreed, and the decorations of a
   triumphing general were awarded to him. The two supplicationes were
   probably awarded for victories in two successive years, for a
   supplicatio was the compliment awarded for a successful campaign, and
   it is hardly probable that two such compliments would be paid to a
   general in one year for a single war against one tribe. Moreover,
   taking into consideration the difficult character of the country where
   the war occurred, the distance from Syria, the strength of the tribe
   which had successfully defied the armies of King Amyntas, and the
   stubborn resistance likely to be offered at point after point and town
   after town in their large territory, it is quite natural that two
   campaigns might be required for the whole operations. It is, however,
   not wholly impossible that two specially brilliant victories may have
   been gained in one year over the tribe, and that each was thought
   worthy of a supplicatio.

   2. Quirinius governed Asia after his first administration of Syria.
   This was usually an annual office, and the probability therefore is
   that in his case also it lasted only one year. The exact date is
   uncertain. We know with great probability that

   Asinius Gallus governed Asia in BC. 6-5.

   Cn. Lentulus Augur governed Asia in BC. 2-1, also BC. 1-AD. 1 [95]

   M. Plautius Silvanus governed Asia in AD. 1-2.

   Marcius Censorinus governed Asia in AD. 2-3.

   Further, Quirinius was probably in Armenia in AD. 3, as tutor of Gaius
   Caesar. There are therefore open for Quirinius's tenure of the
   proconsulship of Asia only the years BC. 5-4, or 4-3, or 3-2, or AD.
   4-5, or 5-6.

   Again, as M. Waddington, the supreme authority on the subject, points
   out, the normal interval between the consulship and the proconsulate of
   Asia during Augustus's reign was five or six years. The only long
   interval known in that period is twelve years, viz., in the case of Cn.
   Lentulus Augur, who was consul BC. 14 and proconsul of Asia BC. 2. It
   is therefore not probable that Quirinius's proconsulate was postponed
   over such a long interval as sixteen years (BC. 12 to AD. 4). We
   therefore conclude that he was probably governor of Asia some years
   between BC. 5 and 2, and at latest BC. 3-2. Now, his Syrian
   administration was earlier, and therefore BC. 4-3 is the latest that he
   can have spent in Syria.

   Thus already we find ourselves led to a different opinion from
   Mommsen's theory.

   3. When Lollius, the tutor of Augustus's young grandson Gaius Caesar,
   who was charged with the arrangement of the Armenian difficulties, died
   in AD. 2, Quirinius was selected as his successor, obviously on the
   ground of his great experience in Eastern service. Thereafter he must
   have spent AD. 3 in Armenia, and probably remained in company with
   Gaius until the latter, coming back towards Italy wounded and ill, died
   on the Lycian coast on 21st February, AD. 4.

   Zumpt, however, argued that Quirinius was sent to Armenia with Gaius
   Caesar in BC. 1; and that afterwards Lollius took his place. We follow
   Mommsen; but it is obvious how difficult and slippery the whole career
   of Quirinius is, and how slow we should be to condemn Luke for an error
   in regard to him.

   4. Quirinius married Domitia Lepida at some unknown date. He afterwards
   divorced her, and accused her of attempting to poison him in A. D. 20.
   Suetonius mentions, as a fact which roused general sympathy for
   Domitia, that the accusation was brought in the twentieth year after.
   We ask, "After what?" Common-sense shows Mommsen and others to be right
   in understanding "the twentieth year after the marriage"; we therefore
   reject the other interpretation "the twentieth year after the divorce".
   [96] Mommsen supposes that the marriage was contracted in AD. 4, when
   Quirinius returned from his honorable duties in Armenia, and that
   Suetonius makes a great exaggeration when he speaks of the twentieth
   year. But in such an obscure subject it is surely best to follow the
   few authorities whom we have, unless they are proved to be inconsistent
   with known facts. Suetonius is a good authority. Can we not justify him
   to some extent?

   Domitia Lepida had been betrothed to Augustus's elder grandson, Lucius
   Caesar, and on his premature death was married to Quirinius. Now Lucius
   died on 20th August, AD. 2. But the Romans of that period showed the
   minimum of delicacy in respect of marriages. As soon as the betrothed
   husband of a wealthy and noble heiress died, the place was open to
   reward some of Augustus's trusted servants; and no long delay is likely
   to have occurred in giving her a substitute for Lucius. It is probable
   that she was married to Quirinius in the autumn of AD. 2, and thus the
   accusation was brought against her in the nineteenth year (according to
   Roman methods of counting) from her marriage. In round numbers the
   populace would talk of "the twentieth year," and thus Suetonius's
   expression is justified; he professes to be reporting the common talk
   about the trial.

   We conclude, then, that Quirinius was in Rome in the autumn of AD. 2;
   and was then honored with this grand marriage and the post of guardian
   to the future emperor, Gaius Caesar. But such honors as this imply that
   his career in preceding years had been very distinguished. Thus we
   become still more firmly convinced that his pro-consulate in Asia was
   past as well as his government of Syria, and that these positions, with
   the experience in Oriental affairs acquired in them, marked out
   Quirinius as the proper person to guide the inexperienced Gaius Caesar,
   and to set right the muddle which had been produced by the headstrong
   and ill-regulated conduct of Lollius, the previous guardian of the
   young prince.

   These lines of reasoning make it most probable that the two years
   during which Quirinius was administering Syria and conquering the
   Homonadenses cannot have been later than BC. 5-3, and may have been
   earlier.

   The same result follows from the consideration that the punishment of
   the Homonadenses is not likely to have been postponed so late as the
   years BC. 3-2. The presence of a tribe of barbarians, hostile and
   victorious, on the frontier of the Roman provinces Galatia and
   Pamphylia, and adjoining the dependent kingdom of Cilicia Tracheia
   governed by Archelaos, must have been a source of constant danger. We
   know that about BC. 6 the pacification of the mountainous Pisidian
   districts in the south of the Galatic province was proceeding, and the
   system of military roads was being constructed; [97] and this operation
   was probably coincident with or even subsequent to the war against the
   Homonadenses.

   But here we find ourselves face to face with the difficulty which has
   determined Professor Mommsen to place the first Syrian government of
   Quirinius in BC. 3-1. Quinctilius Varus governed Syria for at least
   three years, 7-4 BC.: this is rendered quite certain by dated coins of
   Syrian Antioch struck in his name, [98] and by the statement of Tacitus
   that he was governing Syria during the disturbances that followed on
   the death of Herod. [99] Sentius Saturninus certainly governed Syria
   9-7 BC., and Josephus says that he was succeeded by Quinctilius Varus.
   [100] There seems therefore no room for Quirinius's administration of
   Syria until we come down as late as BC. 3; yet we have already seen
   that other lines of argument prompt us to place his Syrian government
   earlier than that year.

   In this difficulty I see no outlet in any direction, whether favorable
   or unfavorable to Luke, except in the supposition that the foreign
   relations of Syria, with the command of its armies, were entrusted for
   a time to Quirinius, with a view to his conducting the difficult and
   responsible war against the Homonadenses, while the internal
   administration of the province was left to Saturninus or to Varus
   (according to the period when we place the mission of Quirinius). This
   extraordinary command of Quirinius lasted for at least two years, and
   had come to an end before the death of Herod in BC. 4, for we know on
   the authority of Tacitus that the disturbances arising in Palestine on
   that event were put down by Varus; and this trouble, as belonging to
   the foreign relations of the Province, would on our hypothesis have
   been dealt with by Quirinius, if he had been still in office.

   The question will be put, and must be answered, whether such a
   temporary division of duties in the Province is in accordance with the
   Roman Imperial practice. Such a theory is not permissible, unless it is
   defended by analogous cases and by natural probability. The theory was
   first suggested to my mind by the analogous case of the African
   administration, which from the time of Caligula onwards was divided in
   such a way, that the military power, and with it the foreign policy of
   the Province, was controlled by a Lieutenant of Augustus, [101] while
   the internal affairs of the Province were left to the ordinary
   governor, a Proconsul.

   Almost simultaneously with my papers on the subject there appeared a
   memoir by Monsieur R. S. Bour, [102] in which he quotes some other
   analogies to justify this view. He points out that Vespasian conducted
   the war in Palestine, while Mucianus was governor of Syria, from which
   Palestine was dependent. Tacitus [103] styles Vespasian dux, which is
   not a strictly official title, but exactly describes his actual duty.
   He was a Lieutenant of the reigning Emperor Nero, [104] holding
   precisely the same title and technical rank as Mucianus. We suppose
   that Quirinius stood in exactly the same relation to Varus as Vespasian
   in regard to Mucianus. Quirinius was a special Lieutenant of Augustus,
   who conducted the war against the Homonadenses, while Varus
   administered the ordinary affairs of Syria. The duties of Quirinius
   might be described by calling him dux in Latin, and the Greek
   equivalent is necessarily and correctly hegemon, as Luke has it.

   Again, Corbulo commanded the armies of Syria in the war against Parthia
   and Armenia, while Ummidius Quadratus [105] and Cestius Gallus were
   governors of Syria. Josephus speaks of Gallus, but never mentions the
   name of Corbulo. We suppose that Quirinius stood in the same relative
   position as Corbulo, and Josephus preserves the same silence about
   both.

   The chief difference between the view which M. Bour holds and the
   theory which we advocate is that he distinguishes this position which
   Quirinius held in BC. 7-6 from the first governorship of Syria, which,
   like Mommsen, he places after BC. 4. This makes the unnecessary
   complication that Quirinius first commanded the Syrian armies, then
   after two or three years governed Syria, and then once more governed
   Syria. But M. Bour does not observe that even on the first occasion
   Quirinius was legatus Augusti; and it appears quite correct to say that
   in AD. 6-9 he as legatus Divi Alugusti iterum Syria obtinuit, even if
   he had not been again governor of Syria after BC. 7-6.

   Moreover, in the inscription recording the career of (probably)
   Quirinius, there is no possible space to insert a distinct government
   of Syria between his successes against the Homonadenses and his second
   governorship. The inscription clearly implies that the Homonadenses
   were conquered in his first Syrian administration.

   It is a matter of secondary importance that M. Bour supposes Saturninus
   to have ruled Syria while the enrollment of Palestine was going on, and
   yet acknowledges that this occurred in BC. 7 or 6. As we have seen,
   Varus came to govern Syria in the summer of BC. 7. [106]

   The conclusion of the whole argument is this.

   About BC. 8-5, Augustus made a great effort to pacify the dangerous and
   troublesome mountaineers of Taurus, to prevent the continual plundering
   Which they practiced on the peaceable provinces to which they were
   neighbors, Asia, Galatia and Syria-Cilicia, and to avenge the death of
   the Roman tributary King of Galatia, Amyntas, in BC. 25. On the one
   hand the governor of Galatia, on the other hand the governor of Syria,
   were both required in this work. Part of the mountaineers' country was
   nominally part of the Province Galatia, having been formerly in the
   kingdom of Amyntas (which had been transformed into the Province
   Galatia). But Galatia did not contain an army; and the administration
   of Syria-Cilicia had always to intervene, when Roman troops were needed
   during that period on the eastern Roman frontiers.

   In BC. 6 the first great step and foundation of the Roman organization
   was in process of being carried out among the western and northern
   mountaineers by Cornutus Aquila, governor of Galatia. A military road
   system was built among them, and a series of garrison-cities (Coloniae)
   was founded, Olbasa, Comama, Cremna, Parlais and Lystra. These
   fortresses were connected by the Imperial roads [107] with the
   governing center of Southern Galatia, the great Colonia Caesarea
   Antiocheia in Southern Phrygia adjoining Pisidia.

   About the same time the military operations from the side of Syria were
   carried out. Josephus tells so much about Saturninus, as to make it
   clear that he was not engaged in an arduous and difficult war far away
   in the Taurus mountains, south from Iconium and Lystra. Either the war
   was later than his time, or it was conducted by a distinct official. As
   to the official's name there is no doubt. Strabo [108] tells us that it
   was Quirinius who conquered the Homonadenses and revenged the death of
   Amyntas. The period is, on the whole, likely to coincide with the
   connected operations of Cornutus Aquila on the north-western side.

   Accordingly, the probability is that in BC. 7, when Varus came to
   govern Syria, Augustus perceived that the internal affairs of the
   province would require all the energy of the regular governor, and sent
   at the same time a special officer with the usual title, Lieutenant of
   Augustus, to administer the military resources of the province, and
   specially to conduct the war against the Homonadenses and any other
   foreign relations that demanded military intervention. Moreover, Varus
   had no experience in war; and an experienced officer was needed. Thus,
   Quirinius conducted the war pretty certainly in BC. 6, perhaps in 7 and
   6, perhaps in 6 and 5.

   The first periodic enrollment of Syria was made under Saturninus in BC.
   8-7. The enrollment of Palestine was delayed by the causes described
   until the late summer or autumn of BC. 6. At that time, Varus was
   controlling the internal affairs of Syria, while Quirinius was
   commanding its armies and directing its foreign policy.

   Tertullian, finding that the first periodic enrollment in Syria was
   made under Saturninus, inferred too hastily that the enrollment in
   Palestine was made under that governor. With full consciousness and
   intention, he corrects Luke's statement, and declares that Christ was
   born during the census taken by Sentius Saturninus. Luke, more
   accurately, says that the enrollment of Palestine was made while
   Quirinius was acting as leader (hegemon) in Syria.

   The question will perhaps be put whether Luke could rightly describe
   the authority of Quirinius by the words "holding the Hegemonia of
   Syria". The preceding exposition leaves no doubt on this point. The
   usage of Luke shows that he regards Hegemonia in the provinces as the
   attribute both of the Emperor and of the officers to whom the Emperor
   delegates his power. Now that is quite true in point of fact. The
   Emperor primarily held the supreme authority in Syria (which was one of
   the Imperatorial provinces, as distinguished from those which were
   administered by the Senate through the agency of its officers, entitled
   Proconsuls). But the Emperor could not himself be present in Syria or
   in Palestine, hence he delegated to substitutes, or Lieutenants, the
   exercise of his authority in the various provinces which were under his
   own direct power. These substitutes, when of senatorial rank, bore the
   title Legatus Augusti pro praetore, and when of equestrian rank the
   title Procurator cum jure gladii; but both Legati and Procuratores are
   called by Luke Hegemones, as exercising the Hegemonia that belongs to
   the Emperor. Now Quirinius was exercising this delegated Hegemonia over
   the armies of the Province Syria, and it seems quite in keeping with
   Luke's brief pregnant style to say that he held the Hegemonia of Syria.

   But why did Luke not name Varus, the ordinary governor, in place of
   dating by the extraordinary officer? If he had had regard to the
   susceptibilities of modern scholars, and the extreme dearth of
   knowledge about the period, which was to exist 1800 years after he
   wrote, he would certainly have named Varus. But he was writing for
   readers who could as easily find out about Quirinius as about Varus,
   and he had no regard for us of the nineteenth century. Quirinius ruled
   for a shorter time than Varus, and he controlled the foreign relations
   of the province, hence he furnished the best means of dating.

   But why did Luke not distinguish clearly between this enrollment and
   the later enrollment of A. D. 7, which was held by Quirinius in Syria
   and in Palestine? We answer that he does distinguish, accurately and
   clearly. He tells that this was the first enrollment of the series, but
   the moderns are determined to misunderstand him. They insist that Luke
   confused the use of comparative and superlative in Greek, and that we
   cannot take the full force of the word "first" as "first of many". They
   go on to put many other stumbling-blocks in the way, but none of these
   cause any difficulty if we hold fast to the fundamental principle that
   Luke was a great historian who wrote good Greek of the first century
   kind.

   NOTE 1

   Quinctilius Varus, governor of Syria. The exact date is shown by the
   coins of Antioch, which bear the numbers ke, ks', kz' of the Actian
   era, accompanied by the name of Varus. Now the battle of Actium was
   fought on 2nd September, 31. When such an event was taken as an era,
   the years were not (as was formerly assumed by many authorities) made
   to begin from the anniversary of the event. The years went on as
   before; but the current year in which the event occurred was reckoned
   the year 1. Hence, in countries where the Greek year common in the
   Aegean lands, beginning at the autumn equinox, was employed, the year 1
   of the Actian era was BC. 32-31 (beginning 24th September, 32).

   But that system could not be the one which was employed in reckoning
   the Actian years at Antioch, for the year 26 in that case would end in
   the autumn of BC. 6. Now, coins of the Actian year 26 mention the
   twelfth consulship of Augustus, which did not begin till 1st January,
   BC. 5; similarly coins of the year 29 (ending on that system in autumn
   BC. 3) mentioned the thirteenth consulship of Augustus, which did not
   begin until 1st January, BC. 2.

   The Actian years in Antioch were therefore reckoned by a system in
   which the years began before 2nd September. It is probable that the
   year which was sometimes used in Syria, beginning on 18th April, may
   have been employed also in Antioch. But whatever the exact day of New
   Year was, the following table shows the system of Actian years in
   Antioch: --

   Actian year  1 ended in spring (perhaps 17 th April), BC. 30

   Actian year 25 ended in spring (perhaps 17 th April), BC. 6

   Actian year 27 ended in spring (perhaps 17 th April), BC. 4

   Actian year 29 ended in spring (perhaps 17 th April), BC. 2

   Varus, therefore, came to Syria at such a time that coins marked 25
   were struck after his arrival, i.e., he arrived probably soon after
   midsummer of that year, i.e., July to September, BC. 7. He remained in
   Syria until at least the midsummer of BC. 4, some months after the
   death of Herod.

   NOTE 2

   The theory has also been advanced that Quirinius was one of a number of
   commissioners, appointed by Augustus to hold the enrollment throughout
   the Roman world, Quirinius being the commissioner for Syria and
   Palestine. In this capacity, also, Quirinius would be a delegate
   exercising the Emperor's authority, Legattts Augusti; and therefore he
   might rightly be said by Luke hegemoneuein tes Surias This theory is
   possible; it offends against no principle of Roman procedure or of
   language. It may be the truth. But, on the whole, it seems to have less
   in its favor than the one which has been advocated in the text. M. R.
   S. Bour [109] judges of it exactly as I have done. It was advocated in
   the summer of 1897 by Signor O. Marucchi in the Italian review
   Bessarione.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [94] Acts 5:37; Josephus, Ant. Jud., 17., 13; 18., 1, 1.

   [95] Lentulus was in office in Asia on 10th May, BC. 1, and therefore,
   as Mommsen says, governed during the year 2-1 (Res Gestae D. Aug., p.
   170). But, as Waddington sees (Fastes d'Asie, p. 101), Lentulus seems
   to have been still in office on 12th August, and therefore probably
   ruled Asia also in the year 1 BC. -- 1 AD.

   [96] Mr. Furneaux takes the latter sense in his admirable edition of
   Tacitus, Annals, 3., 23, and so apparently does Nipperdey also; and it
   must be acknowledged that Suetonius's expression suits that. Sense and
   the historical facts, however, show it to be impossible.

   [97] See my Church in the Roman Empire, p. 32; C. I. L., 3., No. 6974.

   [98] See Note 1 at the end of Chapter 11.

   [99] Probably about 1st April, BC. 4.

   [100] Ant. Jud., 17., 5, 2.

   [101] Legatus Augusti pro praetore.

   [102] See Note 2 at the end of Chapter 11.

   [103] Hist., 1., 10.

   [104] Legatus Augusti pro praetore.

   [105] He was unfit for the war, Mommsen, Rom. Gesch., 5., 382 f.
   Corbulo governed Syria for a time after Quadratus; but the burden
   apparently was too great, and Gallus was appointed.

   [106] M. Bour also finds an allusion to the universal enrollment in a
   phrase of the Monumentum Ancyranum where the restored text was omnium
   prov[ inciarum censure egi or statum ordinavi]; but he has not remarked
   that the recovered Greek translation proves the sense and words to have
   been omnium prov[ inciarum Populi Romani]... fines auxi.

   [107] basilikai hodoi, Church in Rom. Emp., p. 32; Lanckoronski, Stadte
   Pamphyliens, 2., p. 203.

   [108] Strabo, p. 569. His account certainly suggests both that the
   revenge was not delayed so late as Mommsen's view implies, and that a
   good deal of time was needed to carry out all the operations involved,
   the foundation of new cities, the transference of population, etc.

   [109] L'Inscription de Quirinius et le Recensement de St. Luc, Rome,
   1897: a treatise crowned by the Pontificia Accademia di Archeologia.
   This skillful argument was presented to the Academy in Dec., 1806, and
   published in the late summer or autumn of 1897. It refers in a
   concluding note to my papers on the same subject in Expositor, April
   and June, 1897.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                     PART 3
                           SOME ASSOCIATED QUESTIONS
     __________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER 12
  SOME ASSOCIATED QUESTIONS

   A BRIEF reference to some of the other difficulties, which have been
   found in Luke's references to matters of contemporary history, will
   form a fitting conclusion to this study.

   In some cases all that is wanted to solve the difficulty is proper
   understanding of Luke's words. That, for example, is the case with Acts
   11:28, where the statement, that in the days of Claudius there was
   famine over all the world, has been misinterpreted to imply that
   harvests failed and a famine ensued in every part of the whole world at
   exactly the same time, which would be an obvious exaggeration, and
   therefore not entirely trustworthy: it would be quite in the rhetorical
   style of Tacitus or Juvenal, not in the simple and true manner of Luke.

   But, as all the commentators have pointed out, Suetonius, Dion Cassius,
   Tacitus and Eusebius mention scarcity occurring at different times in
   widely scattered parts of the Roman world during that reign; and an
   inscription has been interpreted (though not with certainty) as
   referring to a famine in Asia Minor some years before AD. 56. [110] At
   no period in Roman history are so many allusions to widespread famine
   found as under Claudius. Luke refers to what must then have been an
   accepted belief, that at some time or other during the reign of
   Claudius every part of the Roman world suffered from famine.

   A much more difficult case occurs in Acts 5:36-37, where Gamaliel in
   addressing the Sanhedrin says: "Before these days rose up Theudas,
   giving himself out to be somebody, to whom a number of men, about 400,
   joined themselves, who was slain, and all, as many as obeyed him, were
   dispersed and came to naught. And after this man rose up Judas the
   Galilean in the days of the enrollment' and caused people to revolt
   under his leadership: he also perished; and all, as many as obeyed him,
   were scattered abroad."

   Now Josephus describes "a certain magician, named Theudas, who, while
   Fadus was Procurator of Judea, persuaded most of the people ton
   pleiston ochlon to take up their property and follow him to the river
   Jordan; for he told them he was a prophet, and he said that he would
   divide the river by his command and afford them easy passage through
   it; and he deceived many by telling them this. Fadus, however, did not
   permit them to profit by their folly, but sent a squadron of cavalry
   against them, which falling unexpectedly upon them, slew many of them
   and captured many alive. And they took Theudas himself alive and cut
   off his head and brought it to Jerusalem "(Ant Jud., 20., 5, 1).

   In the following paragraph Josephus describes what happened under the
   government of Tiberius Alexander, the successor of Fadus; and, among
   other things, he tells that "the sons of Judas the Galilean were slain,
   viz., that Judas who caused the people to revolt from the Romans when
   Quirinius was making the valuation of Judea".

   It is pointed out that in two successive paragraphs Josephus speaks
   first of Theudas and then of Judas, dating the latter under Quirinius;
   and that in two successive verses Luke speaks first of Theudas and then
   of Judas, dating the latter at the great enrollment (i.e., under
   Quirinius). From this the inference is drawn that Luke, reading
   hurriedly and carelessly the passage of Josephus, falsely inferred that
   Theudas, who is mentioned first, was the elder; and they point to the
   analogy, between the two accounts of Judas, [111] as evidence that Luke
   borrowed from Josephus.

   Finally, since Josephus's Theudas rose and fell several years after
   Gamaliel is supposed to have delivered his speech, they infer that Luke
   had no authority for the words which he puts into Gamaliel's mouth, but
   freely invented the whole according to a common practice among ancient
   historians. Luke, as they say, constructed a suitable speech for
   Gamaliel out of his own scrappy and inaccurate reading, and thus made
   Gamaliel describe an event that had not yet occurred, supposing it to
   have taken place before AD. 6.

   Without doubt, if this theory is correct, we must throw up our whole
   case as hopeless. The blunder attributed to Luke is so ingeniously
   many-sided as to destroy his credit in various directions. It shows
   that he invented his speeches without authority; that he was incapable
   of reading two short paragraphs of Greek without misunderstanding them;
   that, even when he had a good authority before him, he could not report
   his information without introducing a portentous blunder; that he was
   so ignorant of Judean history as to think that an event which Josephus
   dates under Fadus could be, in the first place, older than Gamaliel's
   speech (delivered soon after AD. 29 or 30), and, in the second place,
   older than the great enrollment. The most wretched old chronicler, in
   the worst and most ignorant Byzantine time, has not succeeded in doing
   anything so bad as that. To find a parallel instance of ignorance and
   stupidity, where knowledge is professed and must be expected, one must
   come down to modern times and look in the papers of rejected candidates
   in a "pass" examination, who have vainly tried, with the minimum of
   care and work, to delude the examiner into the belief that they know
   enough to be permitted to scrape through the test.

   But is not this too gross a blunder? Is it credible that a person who
   was so shockingly ignorant and inaccurate should aspire to be a
   historian? The aspirations of men are usually Founded on the conscious
   possession of some qualifications for success. Luke evidently aimed --
   and probably was the first to aim -- at connecting the story of the
   development of Christianity with the course of general Imperial
   history. Surely he would not have aimed at doing so, unless he
   possessed a certain moderate knowledge of that history. In his preface
   he declares that his motive for writing his work was that he was in
   possession of such exceptionally excellent information, gained from
   first-rate authorities. But only the grossest incapacity and ignorance
   combined could have enabled him to succeed in attaining so colossal a
   blunder.

   The theory seems to me incredible, irrational, and psychologically
   impossible. It is irreconcilable with the known facts and the character
   of Luke's History; and I am confident that if it had been stated about
   any writer who was not a Christian, it would have been universally
   treated with the contempt that it merits. It is the sort of fancy that
   brands its originator and its believer as either lacking the critical
   faculty or blinded by prejudice.

   Moreover, the theory is founded on an accidental peculiarity of order
   in the text of Josephus, and presupposes that Luke was indebted
   entirely to one passage of Josephus for his knowledge of Theudas and
   Judas. He could hardly have read any additional authority without
   acquiring some more correct idea as to the time when Theudas lived.

   It is not here the place to discuss the question whether Luke had read
   Josephus. As Dr. Sanday [112] says, the assumption that he used the
   Jewish Antiquities "rests on little more than the fact that both
   writers relate or allude to the same events, though the differences
   between them are really more marked than the resemblances". He adds
   that "Schuerer [113] sums up the controversy by saying that either Luke
   had taken no notice of Josephus at all, which he thinks the simpler and
   more probable supposition, or at once forgot everything that he had
   read". The latter opinion is that of a scholar who believes Luke to
   have written after Josephus. We hold Luke to have written before him.

   In truth there is between Luke and Josephus the minimum of resemblance
   and the maximum of discrepancy possible between two authorities writing
   about the same period, and both (as we believe) enjoying access to
   excellent authorities.

   Moreover, it is clear, on the recognized principles of critical study,
   that Luke used some other authority and was not indebted to Josephus
   alone; for he mentions the exact number of persons who followed
   Theudas, viz., 400, whereas Josephus would lead one to believe that
   Theudas had a very much larger following. [114] Thus Luke had other
   means of learning the date of Theudas. It may be answered that Luke
   invented the number, and designedly or through incapacity varied from
   the account that Josephus gives. To that no reply need be given: they
   who say so will be ready to declare that Luke, who could read Josephus
   and suppose the procurator Fadus to be older than the great enrollment,
   was equally capable of reading any number of additional authorities
   without profiting by them!

   We cannot, it is true, tell who was the Theudas to whom Gamaliel
   refers. The period is very obscure; Josephus is practically our only
   authority. He does not allude, or profess to allude, to every little
   disturbance on the banks of the Jordan. There is no real difficulty in
   believing that more than one impostor may have borne or taken the name
   Theudas; that one Theudas, amid the troubles that followed the death of
   Herod the Great (a period about which we have no information except
   that there were great troubles, calling for the presence of a Roman
   army from the Province Syria), or at some earlier time, pretended to be
   somebody, and found 400 followers; and that another Theudas, about AD.
   44-46, called himself a prophet, and led after him a great part of the
   Jewish people.

   The result is, at present, disappointing. We have to leave the
   difficulty unsolved. We must hope for the discovery of further
   evidence. Meantime, no one who finds Luke to be a trustworthy historian
   in the rest of his History will see any difficulty in this passage.

   But there is good cause to look forward confidently to the progress of
   discovery. The advance in knowledge, due to the increased activity in
   searching, has been immense during recent years. The whole essay, which
   has been here set before the public, is founded on one discovery; and
   after it was print it has been confirmed by a new find. [115]

   We may suitably conclude the essay with another discovery, slight in
   itself, but significant of the general trend of advancing knowledge.
   [116]

   The reference in Acts 10:1 to an Italic Cohort (of which Cornelius was
   a centurion) has caused some difficulty and discussion in recent years.
   Some excellent scholars have entertained the suspicion that this detail
   is an anachronism, caused by the intrusion of circumstances that were
   true at a later time into this early period. It is established by an
   inscription that an Italic Cohort was stationed in Syria at a
   considerably later time; and the theory is that Luke, knowing that such
   a Cohort was there at the time when he wrote, either incorrectly added
   this detail to the story which he learned about Cornelius, or in some
   other way manipulated or invented the story. What reason he had for so
   treating the story, and how precisely he treated it, the theory does
   not state. It simply casts discredit in a vague way on the story,
   accusing it of containing a false detail. [117]

   Among non-theologians, Professor Mommsen pronounces no judgment, but
   avoids making any positive suggestion about the Cohort, in his
   illuminative paper in the Sitzungsberichte of the Berlin Academy, 1895,
   p. 503. [118] Marquardt, in the work from which all study must always
   begin in these subjects, Romische Staatsverwaltung, 2., p. 467, note 5,
   accepts the words of Acts as an ordinary authority, quoting them along
   with other references to an Italic Cohort. A recent discovery confirms
   the position taken by Marquardt, and will probably be held by most
   scholars as a sufficient proof that, in our present state of knowledge,
   the suspicion that has been entertained about the reference is contrary
   to the balance of evidence.

   Dr. Bormann [119] publishes an inscription found recently at Carnuntum,
   one of the great military stations in Pannonia, on the south bank of
   the Danube, a little below Vienna. It is the epitaph of a young
   soldier, Proculus, a subordinate officer (optio) in the second Italic
   Cohort, who died at Carnuntum while engaged on detached service from
   the Syrian army (as an officer in a corps of archers from Syria,
   temporarily sent on special service and encamped at Carnuntum). [120]
   Proculus was born at Philadelphia (doubtless the city of that name
   beyond Jordan, the old Rabbath-Ammon), and his father bore the Syrian
   name Rabilus.

   As to the date of this epitaph, Bormann and Domaszewski, two of the
   highest authorities, have come independently to the same conclusion.
   The epitaph was found with a group of others, stamped by criteria
   derived both from nomenclature, and from inscriptional and alphabetical
   character, as belonging to the period of the early emperors. This group
   belongs to all older cemetery, which was in use before AD. 73, when a
   new camp near Carnuntum was built for the soldiers stationed there.
   Further, the service on which these Syrian soldiers had come to
   Carnuntum can be dated with the highest probability.

   In AD. 69, Syrian detachments to the number of 13,000 men swelled the
   army which Mucianus, governor of Syria, led westwards to support
   Vespasian in his struggle against Vitellius. But before Mucianus
   arrived on the scene, the armies of Pannonia and Moesia had declared
   for Vespasian, marched into Italy, and finished the contest. Their
   departure had left the northern frontier undefended against the
   barbarians, Dacians, Germans, etc., beyond the Danube. As Tacitus
   mentions, the Dacians showed signs of invading Moesia, and Mucianus
   dispatched the Sixth Legion [121] to guard against them on the Lower
   Danube. Tacitus does not say anything about the Upper Danube; but there
   also the danger was so obvious, that an experienced governor like
   Mucianus could hardly fail to send a guard thither also; for the words
   of Tacitus (Hist., 3., 46) show that he was fully alive to the danger
   all along the northern frontier. In this way we may conclude that part
   of the detachments came to Carnuntum; and there Proculus died, perhaps
   in AD. 70. The Syrian armies were evidently soon sent back to the East,
   where the Sixth Legion is shortly afterwards mentioned as engaged in
   operations in the northern parts of Syria in 73.

   There was therefore an Italic Cohort stationed in Syria in AD. 69. It
   was recruited from Syria, [122] and therefore, according to the
   principle laid down by Mommsen, it belonged to the eastern Roman
   armies. It is therefore in every way probable that an Italic Cohort was
   stationed in the Province Syria, as Dr. Bormann has observed, about AD.
   40, when Cornelius is mentioned as "a centurion of the Cohort called
   Italic," resident in Caesarea (the Roman governmental center of
   Palestine).

   This discovery, it is true, does not prove conclusively that the Italic
   Cohort, which had been stationed in Syria before AD. 69, was there as
   early as about AD. 40. It is not beyond the range of possibility that
   the Cohort might have been sent to Syria between 40 and 69. Movements
   of troops from province to province were not rare, and the Italic
   Cohort might have been moved in that interval. But, in general, the
   movements were caused by military requirements which can be
   ascertained. As Marquardt says of Syria, "the same Legions remained for
   centuries in the province," and they were divided between many
   different stations, not massed in single centers: for example,
   detachments of the Third Legion called Gallica, can be traced in Sidon,
   Beirut, Aera in the district Auranitis, and Phaena in Trachonitis. The
   whole burden of proof, therefore, rests with those who maintain that a
   Cohort which was in Syria before 69 was not there in 40. There is a
   strong probability that Luke is right when he alludes to that Cohort as
   part of the Syrian garrison about AD. 40.

   A series of arguments have been advanced to buttress this assumption
   that Luke when he spoke of an Italic Cohort in Syria about 40 was
   guilty of an anachronism.

   It is pointed out, in the first place, that between AD. 41 and 44,
   during which period Judea was formed into a dependent kingdom ruled by
   Herod Agrippa, a Roman Cohort would not be stationed in Caesarea. If
   this were certain, it would merely confirm the view taken by many
   scholars that the incident of Cornelius occurred earlier than 41. But
   as a matter of fact we know far too little of the relations between the
   rule of Agrippa and the provincial administration to be sure that a
   centurion would not be resident in Caesarea during his short reign.
   There is nothing more obscure than the precise terms on which the
   numerous dependent kingdoms in Asia Minor and Syria were administered.
   It is practically certain that these subject kingdoms were tributary
   from the first, even when they had never before been subject to Rome;
   and even Herod the Great's action was controlled by Rome in many
   important respects, and his subjects took an oath to be faithful to the
   Romans. But the Judean kingdom of Agrippa, as it existed in AD. 41-44,
   had long been actually part of a Roman province; and there is great
   probability that it might retain certain relations with the provincial
   government, and that officers of the provincial soldiery might be kept
   resident in the capital, Caesarea, to maintain these relations. There
   is much that might be said on this point; but it is not necessary for
   our main purpose. Moreover, the whole subject is so obscure that a
   scholar who aims simply at understanding the subject will at present
   refrain from any dogmatic statement about it, and will certainly be
   very slow to condemn an ancient author for inaccuracy, because he does
   not confirm the modern scholar's hasty conjecture. All that need be
   said is that at present we find the argument so devoid of force that it
   hardly even affords any presumption in favor of a date for the incident
   of Cornelius earlier than AD. 41.

   In the next place it has been argued that even between AD. 6 and 41,
   when Judea was part of the Province Syria, and when Roman auxiliary
   troops were stationed both at Caesarea and at Jerusalem, an Italic
   Cohort cannot have been stationed at Caesarea. This assertion is based
   on a series of conjectures as to the Roman forces stationed in Judea
   during these years. It is fortunately unnecessary for me to discuss
   these conjectures: I need only point out

   (1) that they are in direct contradiction to the principles previously
   laid down by Mommsen, the supreme authority on the subject; [123]

   (2) that Mommsen has now considered them and judged them to be
   "erroneous in every respect". [124]

   But, further, even supposing that these conjectures were strong enough
   to support the conclusion that the Italic Cohort was not stationed in
   Caesarea, we know far too little to justify the inference that a
   centurion of that Cohort could not be on duty there, detached from his
   Cohort on special service. The entire subject of detachment-service is
   most obscure; and. we are very far from being able to say with
   certainty that the presence of an auxiliary centurion [125] in Caesarea
   is impossible, unless the Cohort in which he was an officer was
   stationed there.

   Since the question of the Roman troops in Palestine is so full of
   difficulties, that it is hardly possible to make any assertion in the
   matter, what judgment should be pronounced on the light-heartedness
   which suspects Luke of inaccuracy, because he does not conform to the
   conjectures which some distinguished German professor sets forth? It is
   a matter of interest to observe how slow some very learned New
   Testament scholars are to appreciate the principle, which is regarded
   as fundamental by the historical and antiquarian students, that no
   conjecture which is not founded on clear evidence has any right even to
   be propounded, if it contradicts the direct statement of an ancient
   authority. Much less ought the ancient authority to be discredited
   because he disagrees with a loose and disputed modern conjecture.

   The episode of Cornelius in Acts is characterized by that vagueness and
   want of direct, incisive statement of details, which Luke shows in
   handling the early history of the Church in Palestine. He was not at
   home in the province of Syria, and the Jewish people in particular he
   neither understood nor liked. If the narrative of Cornelius showed the
   same mastery of facts and surroundings as is apparent in Philippi or
   Ephesus or Cyprus or Athens, we should find it far more instructive
   than it is as to the way in which an officer of the Roman army of
   occupation lived. Was he resident in a private house? How was he in
   such close relations with the Jews throughout Palestine? Many questions
   suggest themselves, pressing for an answer, which I cannot give. But
   the tendency of discovery distinctly is, in this as in other cases, to
   confirm the trustworthiness of the general situation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [110] St. Paul the Traveller, p. 48 f.

   [111] en tais hemerais tes apographes kai apestese laon opi so autou in
   Luke, and ton laon hapo apostesantos Kuriniou tes Ioudais timeteuontos
   in Josephus.

   [112] Bampton Lectures, 1893, p. 278.

   [113] Lucas und Josephus in Zeitschr. f. krit. Theologie, 1876, p. 574
   ff. Josephus's great work on the Jewish Antiquities was written about
   AD. 93-94.

   [114] peithei ton pleiston ochlon . . . hepestha are his words.

   [115] See Preface.

   [116] The following paragraphs are shortened and modified (but without
   altering the opinions stated) from an article in the Expositor,
   September, 1896.

   [117] Steht . . . unter dem Verdacht, Verhaltnisse einer spateren Zeit
   in eine fruhere zuruck verlegt zu haben.

   [118] Mit Sicherheit vermoegen wir weder diese cohors Augusta (Acts
   27:1) noch die speira Italike . . . zu identificieren.

   [119] Archaol. Epigr. Mittheil. aus Oesterreich, 1895, p. 218.

   [120] Ex vexil. sagit. exer. Syriaci, where Bormann's completion of the
   abbreviations seems beyond question ex vexillariis sagittariis
   exercitus Syriaci.

   [121] This Legion, called. Ferrata, was enrolled by Augustus and
   stationed in Syria. It formed part of Mucianus's army in AD. 69; and it
   remained in Judea at least as late as the third century.

   [122] Proculus was in his seventh year of service when he died, and had
   probably enlisted in AD. 64 (when he was nineteen years old).

   [123] See Mommsen in Hermes, 19., p. 217.

   [124] In jeder Hinsicht verfehlt, Mommsen in Berlin. Akad. Sitz. 1895,
   p. 501.

   [125] Auxiliary centurions, being of lower rank than legionary, were
   not employed as frumentarii (like Julius in Acts 27.); but there were
   other ways of detached service.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    APPENDIX
                             SPECIMENS OF DOCUMENTS

APPENDIX: DOCUMENTS
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE INSCRIPTION OF QUIRINIUS
  (LAPIS TIBURTINUS)

   GEM  QVA  REDACTA  INPOI
   AVGVSTI  POPVLIQVE  ROMANI  SENATV
   SVPPLICATIONES  BINAS  OB SVPPLICATIONES  RES  PROSP
   IPSI  ORNAMENTA  TRIVMPI
   PRO  CONSVL SVPPLICATIONES  ASIAM  PROVINCIAM  OP
   DIVI  AVGVSTI SVPPLICATIONES  ITERVM  SYRIAM  ET  PH

   The following restoration is often doubtful: --

   P. Sulpicius P. F. Quirinius cos., datus rector Gaio Caesari Divi
   Augusti
   nepot..................................................................
   ...... Pr., pro consule Cretam et Cyrenas provinciam optinens
   Marmaridas et Garamantas
   subegit................................................................
   ........................................................ Legatus pro
   praetore Divi Augusti Syriacas legiones optinens bellum gessit cum
   gente Homonadensium quae interfecerat Amyntam Galatarum regem, qua
   redacta in potestatem Imp. Caesaris Augusti Populique Romani, Senatus
   dis immortalibus supplicationes binas ob res prospere ab eo gestas, et
   ipsi ornamenta triumph alia decrevit

   Proconsul Asiam provinciam optinuit, legatus pr. pr. Divi Augusti
   iterum Syriam et Phoenicen provinciam optinens regnum Archelai in
   provinciae formam redegit.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE INSCRIPTION OF AEMILIUS SECUNDUS
  (LAPIS VENETUS)

   Q  A E M I L I V S .  Q .  F
   P A L  S E C V N D V S i n
   C ^ S T R I S  D I V I  A V G .  S u b
   P  S V L P I c I O  Q V I R I N I O  L E G a u g .
   ^5 C a E S A R I S  S Y R I A E  H O N O R I
   B V S  D E C O R A T V S  P R a E F E C T
   C O H O R T  A V G  I  P R a E F
    C O H O R T  I I  C L A S S I C A E  I D E M
    I V S S V  Q V I R I N I  C E N S V M  E G I
   ^1 A P A M E N A E  C I V I T A T I S  M I L
   L I V M  H O M I N  C I V I V M  C X V I I
   I D E M  M I S S V  Q V I R I N I  A D V E R S V S
   I T V R A E O S  I N  L I B A N O  M O N T E 
   C A S T E L L V M  E O R V M  C E P I  E T  A N T E
   ^1 5 M I L I T I E M  P R A E F E C T  F A B R V M 
   D E L A T V S  A  D V O B V S  C O S  A D  A E
   R A R I V M  E T  I N  C O L O N I A 
   Q V A E S T O R  A E D I L  I I  D V V M V I R  I I
   P O N T I F E X S

   ^2 I BI  P OS IT I  S VN T  Q  A EM IL I VS  Q  F  P AL
   S EC VN D VS  F  E T  A EM IL I A  C HI A  L IB
   H  M  A M P L I V S  H  N  S
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE ITALIC COHORT INSCRIPTION
  (LAPIS CARNUNTENSIS)

   P R O C V L V S
   R A B I L I  F  C O L
   P H I L A D E L  M I L 
   O P T I O  C O H I I
   I T A L I C  C  R  F
   T I N I  E X  V E X I L S A
   G I T  E X E R S Y R I A C I
   S T I P  V I I  V I X I T  A N
   X X V I
   A P V L E I V S  F R A T E
   F  C 

   Proculus Rabili f (ilius) Col( lina)
   Philadel( phia) mil( es) optio
   coh( ortis) II Italic( ae) c( ivium)
   R( omanorurn centuria) F[ aus] tini,
   ex vexil( lariis?) sagit( tariis?)
   exer( citus) Syriaci stip( endiorum)
   VII; vixit an( nos) XXVI. Apuleius
   frate( r) f( aciundum) c( uravit).
     __________________________________________________________________

  RATING PAPER: Apographe

   Metrodoroi epimeleteI
   para Apunchios Inarotios
   hellenomemphites ^sic Apographomai
   kata to ektethen prostagma
   ten huparchusan ^sic moi oikian
   kai aule ^sic en ton Hellenioi en topoi Imensthot
   hieroi, hes metra tes men oikias p(echeis) ka epi p(echeis) ig
   tes de aules p(echeis) d epi p(echeis) [. . .],
   geitones pros noton oikia Taupsaitos
   Phanotos, pros borran Pasitos harianios
   kai hodos ana meson, pros liba
   sitopoeion mou kai hodos ana meson,
   pros apelioten Pokaus Petept. n. os.
   Tauten oun timomai (pachmon) d' (=400).
   Kai allen oikian, en e sitopoiousin
   kai aule, ^sic hon metra tes men oikias
   metra p(echeis) ka epi p(echeis) ig, kai tes aules p(echeis) d
   epi p(echeis) ig, geitones Onnophris Horou oikias,
   pros borran Pasitos tou Harianois kai hodos
   ana meson, pros liba Nephergerios
   Pachratou, pros apelioten he progegramene ^sic
   oikia kai hodos ana meson. Tauen oun
   timomai chalkou (drachmon) b' (=2000)
     / ta(lanton) a.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Judges

   [1]11:12

   2 Samuel

   [2]16:10

   1 Kings

   [3]17:18

   2 Chronicles

   [4]35:21

   Matthew

   [5]2:2   [6]2:6   [7]2:23   [8]4:1-11   [9]4:15   [10]6:3-4
   [11]9:10   [12]12:46   [13]13:56-57   [14]15:24   [15]17:19
   [16]19:1   [17]26:6-13   [18]28:19

   Mark

   [19]1:9   [20]2:1-4   [21]2:1-4   [22]2:2-4   [23]2:15   [24]3:33-3
   [25]10:1   [26]14:1   [27]14:3-9   [28]16:15

   Luke

   [29]1:1   [30]1:1   [31]1:1-4   [32]1:1-4   [33]1:1-80   [34]1:4
   [35]1:4   [36]1:5   [37]1:5   [38]1:24   [39]1:36   [40]1:41
   [41]1:41   [42]1:65-66   [43]1:80   [44]1:80   [45]2:1   [46]2:1
   [47]2:1-4   [48]2:1-4   [49]2:1-52   [50]2:2   [51]2:3   [52]2:4
   [53]2:19   [54]2:22   [55]2:39   [56]2:40   [57]2:40   [58]2:40
   [59]2:51   [60]2:52   [61]3:1   [62]3:1   [63]3:1-2   [64]3:1-2
   [65]3:1-2   [66]3:1-38   [67]3:21   [68]3:23   [69]3:23   [70]3:23
   [71]4:1-13   [72]4:1-13   [73]4:13   [74]4:14-15   [75]4:16-30
   [76]4:16-30   [77]4:25-27   [78]4:25-27   [79]4:31   [80]4:31
   [81]4:31   [82]4:31-9:50   [83]4:42   [84]4:44   [85]5:1   [86]5:1-39
   [87]5:12   [88]5:16   [89]5:17-20   [90]5:17-20   [91]5:18-19
   [92]5:20   [93]5:27   [94]5:29   [95]6:1   [96]6:1   [97]6:10
   [98]6:12   [99]6:17   [100]6:39   [101]7:1   [102]7:1   [103]7:18-20
   [104]7:34   [105]7:36   [106]7:36-38   [107]7:36-50   [108]8:1
   [109]8:2   [110]8:22   [111]8:26   [112]8:31   [113]8:38
   [114]9:1-62   [115]9:2   [116]9:10   [117]9:28   [118]9:37
   [119]9:51   [120]9:51   [121]9:51-19:28   [122]9:52-56   [123]10:33
   [124]10:38   [125]10:38   [126]10:38   [127]10:38   [128]10:38
   [129]11:1   [130]11:27   [131]11:27   [132]13:22   [133]15:11-12
   [134]17:11   [135]17:11   [136]17:16-18   [137]18:10   [138]18:10-12
   [139]18:35   [140]19:1   [141]19:5   [142]19:9   [143]19:11
   [144]19:28   [145]23:2   [146]23:27   [147]23:29   [148]23:56
   [149]24:47

   John

   [150]1:45   [151]1:45   [152]2:4   [153]2:4-5   [154]2:13   [155]2:20
   [156]2:20   [157]5:1   [158]5:1   [159]6:4   [160]7:1   [161]7:40-41
   [162]7:41   [163]11:2   [164]12:1   [165]12:1-9   [166]18:30

   Acts

   [167]1:1-80   [168]1:14   [169]2:1-52   [170]4:6   [171]5:36-37
   [172]5:37   [173]5:37   [174]5:37   [175]10:1   [176]10:38
   [177]11:28   [178]13:3   [179]13:9   [180]14   [181]15   [182]18:17
   [183]18:18   [184]23:24   [185]23:26   [186]23:26   [187]23:33
   [188]24:1   [189]24:3   [190]24:10   [191]26:25   [192]26:30
   [193]27:1   [194]27:1-44

   Romans

   [195]1:3

   2 Timothy

   [196]2:8

   Revelation

   [197]22:8
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * gunai: [198]1
     * parekolouthekoti: [199]1
     * anebe: [200]1
     * anataxasthai: [201]1
     * ap' arches: [202]1
     * apographesthai: [203]1
     * apographesthai pasan ten oikoumenen: [204]1
     * apographomai: [205]1
     * apograpsasthai: [206]1
     * apographe kat' oikian: [207]1
     * andres: [208]1
     * anothen: [209]1 [210]2 [211]3
     * Apographe: [212]1
     * Apographe: [213]1
     * ek tou prouptou eis to polemein te kai blaptein epermenoi: [214]1
     * en meso tes ekklesias: [215]1
     * en tais hemerais tes apographes kai apestese laon opi so autou :
       [216]1
     * eporeuonto: [217]1
     * heorte: [218]1
     * ee soi aute: [219]1
     * he heorte: [220]1
     * hegemon: [221]1 [222]2 [223]3
     * hegemonia: [224]1
     * hegemoneuein tes Surias: [225]1
     * hegemoneuontos tes Surias Kureniou: [226]1
     * he: [227]1 [228]2
     * hina epignos . . . ten asphaleian: [229]1
     * hote proton ekeleusan apographas genesthai: [230]1
     * hun ehuion: [231]1
     * hoste apographenai pasan ten hup' auton genomenen gen kai hen proen
       eichon Rhomaioi: [232]1
     * Augoustos: [233]1
     * Metrodoroi epimeleteI para Apunchios Inarotios hellenomemphites
       sic: [234]1
     * aules: [235]1
     * basilikai hodoi: [236]1
     * dia ton keramon: [237]1
     * keramos: [238]1
     * kai: [239]1
     * kathos paredosan hoi autoptai: [240]1
     * kathexes soi grapsai: [241]1
     * ke: [242]1
     * kz': [243]1
     * kratiste: [244]1
     * kratiste Basse: [245]1
     * kratistos: [246]1 [247]2 [248]3
     * ks': [249]1
     * oikoumene: [250]1
     * palai chromenos auto philo, nun hupekoo chresetai: [251]1
     * pantos goun tou Ioudaikou bebaiosantos di' horkon e men eunoesein
       Kaisari . . . hoide ouk omosan: [252]1
     * parekolouthekoti: [253]1
     * parekolouthekoti anothen pasin akribos: [254]1
     * peithei ton pleiston ochlon . . . hepestha: [255]1
     * prosektesanto: [256]1
     * speira Italike: [257]1
     * sumpases choras tes hupo Rhomaiois: [258]1
     * ta touton: [259]1
     * ti emoi kai soi, gunai: [260]1
     * ti emoi: [261]1
     * ton laon hapo apostesantos Kuriniou tes Ioudais timeteuontos:
       [262]1
     * ton pleiston ochlon: [263]1
     * ton kata ten eparchian hegemonon : [264]1
     * philtate: [265]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Collega Imperii: [266]1
     * Coloniae: [267]1
     * De uis enim instrumentis saecularia probari necesse est: [268]1
     * Legati: [269]1
     * Legatus Augusti pro praetore: [270]1
     * Legatus Augusti pro praetore.: [271]1 [272]2
     * Procurator cum jure gladii: [273]1
     * Procuratores: [274]1
     * a silentio: [275]1 [276]2
     * anni Augustorum: [277]1
     * atrium: [278]1 [279]2 [280]3 [281]4
     * aula: [282]1 [283]2
     * breviarium totius imperii: [284]1
     * cives Romani: [285]1
     * cives Romant: [286]1
     * de facto: [287]1 [288]2 [289]3 [290]4
     * de jure: [291]1 [292]2 [293]3
     * ex vexillariis sagittariis exercitus Syriaci.: [294]1
     * frumentarii: [295]1
     * impluvium: [296]1 [297]2 [298]3 [299]4
     * lacunae: [300]1
     * legatus Augusti;: [301]1
     * legatus Divi Alugusti iterum Syria obtinuit: [302]1
     * libellus: [303]1
     * minutiae: [304]1
     * omnium prov: [305]1 [306]2
     * optimus: [307]1 [308]2
     * peristylium: [309]1
     * rationes imperii: [310]1
     * reductio ad absurdum: [311]1
     * supplicatio: [312]1 [313]2
     * supplicationes: [314]1 [315]2
     * tribunicia potestas: [316]1
     * tributum capitis: [317]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of German Words and Phrases

     * Dichtung und Wahrheit: [318]1
     * Ein allgemeiner Reichscensus war dazu weder nothig noch
       zweckmassig: [319]1
     * In jeder Hinsicht verfehlt: [320]1
     * Mit Sicherheit vermoegen wir weder diese cohors : [321]1
     * Steht . . . unter dem Verdacht, Verhaltnisse einer spateren Zeit in
       eine fruhere zuruck verlegt zu haben.: [322]1
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=12#iii.iv-p22.7
   2. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii.iv-p22.4
   3. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=18#iii.iv-p22.5
   4. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=35&scrV=21#iii.iv-p22.6
   5. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.vi-p45.2
   6. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.i-p8.1
   7. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.i-p8.2
   8. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.vi-p21.2
   9. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.vi-p21.3
  10. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iii.iv-p21.4
  11. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=10#iii.iii-p36.1
  12. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=46#iii.iv-p21.1
  13. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=56#iii.iv-p21.2
  14. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.iii-p38.1
  15. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=19#iii.iv-p22.3
  16. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iv.vi-p36.7
  17. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=6#iii.iv-p40.1
  18. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#iii.iii-p38.4
  19. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.i-p1.1
  20. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.iii-p15.2
  21. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.iii-p16.1
  22. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.iii-p23.1
  23. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.iii-p36.2
  24. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=33#iii.iv-p21.3
  25. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iv.vi-p36.6
  26. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv.vi-p19.4
  27. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=3#iii.iv-p40.2
  28. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#iii.iii-p38.5
  29. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.iv-p18.1
  30. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.v-p34.3
  31. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.iv-p25.1
  32. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.iv-p25.4
  33. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.vi-p19.1
  34. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.iii-p30.3
  35. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.iv-p25.2
  36. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.iv-p25.3
  37. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.i-p22.1
  38. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.iv-p4.1
  39. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=36#iii.iv-p4.3
  40. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#iii.iv-p4.2
  41. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#iii.iv-p4.4
  42. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=65#iii.iv-p6.1
  43. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=80#iii.iv-p9.1
  44. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=80#iii.iv-p27.1
  45. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.ii-p1.1
  46. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.ii-p4.2
  47. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=1#ii-p1.1
  48. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.ii-p2.1
  49. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii-p42.1
  50. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.ii-p21.1
  51. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.v-p35.1
  52. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.i-p22.2
  53. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.iv-p3.2
  54. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iv.vi-p46.2
  55. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=39#iv.i-p11.2
  56. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=40#iii.iv-p9.2
  57. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=40#iii.iv-p14.1
  58. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=40#iii.iv-p28.1
  59. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=51#iii.iv-p3.3
  60. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=52#iii.iv-p29.1
  61. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.vii-p6.2
  62. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.vii-p6.7
  63. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.i-p22.3
  64. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.vi-p1.3
  65. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.vi-p74.2
  66. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.ii-p42.2
  67. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.vi-p20.1
  68. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.vi-p1.1
  69. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.vi-p20.2
  70. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.vi-p74.1
  71. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.vi-p20.3
  72. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.vi-p21.1
  73. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.vi-p34.2
  74. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.vi-p20.4
  75. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.vi-p2.1
  76. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.vi-p20.5
  77. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.iii-p37.2
  78. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.iii-p38.2
  79. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=31#iv.vi-p20.6
  80. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=31#iv.vi-p22.1
  81. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=31#iv.vi-p34.3
  82. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=31#iv.vi-p24.1
  83. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=42#iv.vi-p22.2
  84. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=44#iv.vi-p23.1
  85. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.vi-p23.2
  86. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.vi-p35.2
  87. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.vi-p23.3
  88. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.vi-p22.3
  89. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.iii-p15.1
  90. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.iii-p18.1
  91. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iii.iii-p23.2
  92. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii.iii-p29.1
  93. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iv.vi-p22.4
  94. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=29#iii.iii-p36.3
  95. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.vi-p22.5
  96. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.vi-p35.3
  97. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.vi-p22.19
  98. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.vi-p22.6
  99. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iv.vi-p22.7
 100. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=39#iv.vi-p22.18
 101. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iv.vi-p22.8
 102. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iv.vi-p22.9
 103. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iv.vi-p22.10
 104. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=34#iii.iii-p36.4
 105. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=36#iii.iv-p33.1
 106. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=36#iii.iv-p33.3
 107. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=36#iii.iv-p40.3
 108. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iv.vi-p22.11
 109. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iii.iv-p32.1
 110. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=22#iv.vi-p22.12
 111. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iv.vi-p22.13
 112. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iv.vi-p26.6
 113. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=38#iv.vi-p22.14
 114. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=1#iv.vi-p36.2
 115. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=2#iii.iii-p23.3
 116. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=10#iv.vi-p22.15
 117. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=28#iv.vi-p22.16
 118. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=37#iv.vi-p22.17
 119. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=51#iv.vi-p26.1
 120. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=51#iv.vi-p36.4
 121. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=51#iv.vi-p28.1
 122. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=52#iii.iii-p37.3
 123. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=33#iii.iii-p37.4
 124. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iii.iv-p34.1
 125. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iii.iv-p40.6
 126. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iv.vi-p26.2
 127. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iv.vi-p30.1
 128. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iv.vi-p30.2
 129. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iv.vi-p26.3
 130. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.iv-p23.1
 131. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.iv-p36.2
 132. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iv.vi-p26.4
 133. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=11#iii.iii-p37.5
 134. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=11#iv.vi-p26.5
 135. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=11#iv.vi-p36.5
 136. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=16#iii.iii-p37.6
 137. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=10#iii.iii-p36.5
 138. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=10#iii.iii-p37.7
 139. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=35#iv.vi-p26.7
 140. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iv.vi-p26.8
 141. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iii.iii-p37.8
 142. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.iii-p37.8
 143. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=11#iv.vi-p26.9
 144. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=28#iv.vi-p26.10
 145. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=2#iii.iii-p33.1
 146. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=27#iii.iv-p35.1
 147. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=29#iii.iv-p36.1
 148. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=56#iii.iv-p35.1
 149. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#iii.iii-p38.3
 150. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=45#iv.i-p1.2
 151. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=45#iv.i-p2.1
 152. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.iv-p22.1
 153. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.i-p11.1
 154. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.vi-p34.1
 155. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.vi-p34.4
 156. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.vi-p68.1
 157. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.vi-p35.1
 158. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.vi-p41.1
 159. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv.vi-p36.1
 160. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iv.vi-p36.3
 161. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=40#iv.i-p3.1
 162. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=41#iv.i-p5.1
 163. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iii.iv-p40.5
 164. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iv.vi-p19.3
 165. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#iii.iv-p40.4
 166. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=30#iii.iii-p33.2
 167. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.i-p41.1
 168. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.iv-p23.2
 169. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.i-p41.2
 170. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.i-p2.2
 171. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=36#v.i-p4.1
 172. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=37#iv.i-p28.1
 173. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=37#iv.ii-p21.2
 174. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=37#iv.vii-p2.2
 175. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.i-p20.1
 176. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iv.i-p1.3
 177. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.i-p2.1
 178. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iv.v-p34.1
 179. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.iii-p8.2
 180. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii.iii-p23.4
 181. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iii.i-p23.1
 182. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=17#iv.v-p34.2
 183. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=18#iii.iii-p13.1
 184. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=24#iv.vii-p6.4
 185. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=26#iii.iii-p30.4
 186. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=26#iv.vii-p6.4
 187. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=33#iv.vii-p6.4
 188. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=1#iv.vii-p6.5
 189. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=3#iii.iii-p30.5
 190. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=10#iv.vii-p6.5
 191. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=25#iii.iii-p30.6
 192. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=30#iv.vii-p6.6
 193. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=1#v.i-p21.3
 194. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=1#v.i-p32.3
 195. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.i-p4.1
 196. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.i-p4.2
 197. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=8#iii.i-p2.3
 198. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iv-p22.10
 199. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p15.3
 200. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p16.3
 201. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iv-p18.3
 202. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p20.2
 203. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p17.1
 204. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p15.1
 205. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p28.1
 206. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p16.4
 207. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p28.2
 208. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iv-p5.1
 209. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p15.2
 210. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p15.4
 211. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p20.3
 212. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iv-p5.3
 213. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#vi.iv-p0.2
 214. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.v-p30.2
 215. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p46.1
 216. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p7.2
 217. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p17.2
 218. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p41.3
 219. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iv-p22.11
 220. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p41.4
 221. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p6.3
 222. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p30.5
 223. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p41.1
 224. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p4.2
 225. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p55.1
 226. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p6.1
 227. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iv-p22.12
 228. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iv-p22.14
 229. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p20.1
 230. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p24.2
 231. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p49.2
 232. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p16.2
 233. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iv-p5.4
 234. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#vi.iv-p1.1
 235. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p46.2
 236. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p37.3
 237. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p27.4
 238. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p27.3
 239. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iv-p22.13
 240. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p24.1
 241. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p19.1
 242. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p46.1
 243. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p46.3
 244. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p42.4
 245. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p42.3
 246. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p30.2
 247. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p42.1
 248. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p43.2
 249. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p46.2
 250. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p4.1
 251. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.v-p8.2
 252. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.v-p11.3
 253. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p16.1
 254. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.i-p15.1
 255. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p15.2
 256. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p9.3
 257. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p21.4
 258. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p9.2
 259. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p9.1
 260. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iv-p22.2
 261. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iv-p22.9
 262. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p7.3
 263. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p5.1
 264. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.v-p20.3
 265. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p42.5
 266. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p8.1
 267. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p37.1
 268. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iv-p9.2
 269. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p42.3
 270. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p42.1
 271. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p29.2
 272. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p30.4
 273. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p42.2
 274. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p42.4
 275. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p8.2
 276. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p9.1
 277. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p5.1
 278. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p21.2
 279. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p25.1
 280. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p25.3
 281. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p26.2
 282. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p26.4
 283. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p26.7
 284. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p13.3
 285. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iv-p18.1
 286. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iv-p7.1
 287. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p66.1
 288. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p66.2
 289. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p66.3
 290. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p66.4
 291. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p64.1
 292. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p64.2
 293. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vi-p65.1
 294. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p22.3
 295. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p32.2
 296. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p21.1
 297. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p25.2
 298. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p26.3
 299. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p27.5
 300. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p8.1
 301. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p32.1
 302. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p32.2
 303. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p13.2
 304. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.v-p43.1
 305. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p34.2
 306. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p34.3
 307. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p43.1
 308. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p44.1
 309. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iii.iii-p26.6
 310. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p13.1
 311. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.ii-p23.1
 312. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p11.3
 313. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p11.4
 314. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p11.1
 315. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.vii-p11.2
 316. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p19.1
 317. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.iii-p32.1
 318. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.i-p16.1
 319. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#iv.i-p18.2
 320. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p31.2
 321. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p21.2
 322. file:///ccel/r/ramsay/bethlehem/cache/bethlehem.html3#v.i-p20.3
