     __________________________________________________________________

         Title: Commentary on Isaiah - Volume 3
    Creator(s): Calvin, John (1509-1564)
                (Alternative)
                (Translator)
        Rights: Public Domain
    LC Call no: BS491
   LC Subjects:

                The Bible

                Works about the Bible
     __________________________________________________________________

   COMMENTARY

   ON THE

   BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH


   BY JOHN CALVIN



   TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL LATIN, AND COLLATED WITH
   THE LATEST FRENCH VERSION

   BY THE REV. WILLIAM PRINGLE



   VOLUME THIRD



   CHRISTIAN CLASSICS ETHEREAL LIBRARY
   GRAND RAPIDS, MI

   [1]http://www.ccel.org
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 33
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 33:1-24

   1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
   treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou
   shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make
   an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

   1. Vae qui spolias, nec fuisti spoliatus; qui inique agis, nec inique
   actum in to fuit! Ubi desieris spoilare, spoliaberis; ubi tinem inique
   agendi feceris, inique in to agetur.

   2. O LORD, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou their
   arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.

   2. Iehova, miserere nostri; in to speravimus; esto, qui fuisti brachium
   eorum in matutinis, etiam salus nostra in tempore tribulationis.

   3. At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of
   thyself the nations were scattered.

   3. A voce tumultus fugerunt pcpuli; ab exaltatione tua dissipatae sunt
   gentes.

   4. And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the
   caterpillar: as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon
   them.

   4. Et colligetur praeda vestra collectione bruchorum; secundum
   discursum locustarum pergens illuc.

   5. The LORD is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion
   with judgment and righteousness.

   5. Exaltatus est Iehova, qui habitat in excelsis. Implevit Sion judicio
   et justitia.

   6. And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and
   strength of salvation: the fear of the LORD is his treasure.

   6. Et erit stabilitas temporum tuorum fortitudo, salutes, sapientia, et
   scientia; timor Jehovae ipse thesaurus ejus.

   7. Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of
   peace shall weep bitterly.

   7. Ecce nuncii eorum vociferabuntur foris; legati pacis amare flebunt.

   8. The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth; he hath broken
   the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man.

   8. Desolatae sunt viae, cessavit viator; irritum fecit foedus, sprevit
   civitates, nihil reputavit hominem.

   9. The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewn
   down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off
   their fruits.

   9. Luxit, emarcuit terra; pudefactus est Libanus et succisus; facta est
   Saron instar deserti; excussus est Basan et Carmelus.

   10. Now will I rise, saith the LORD; now will I be exalted; now will I
   lift up myself.

   10. Nunc surgam, dicit Jehova; nunc exaltabor, nunc extollar.

   11. Ye shall conceive chaff; ye shall bring forth stubble: your breath,
   as fire, shall devour you.

   11. Concipietis quisquilias, parietis stipulas; spiritus vestri ignis
   devorabit vos.

   12. And the people shall be as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut up
   shall they be burned in the fire.

   12. Et erunt populi combustiones calcis, (vel, calx combusta,) tanquam
   spinae abscissae igni exurentur.

   13. Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are near,
   acknowledge my might.

   13. Andite, qui longe abestis, quid fecerim; cognoscite, vicini,
   potentiam meam.

   14. The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the
   hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among
   us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

   14. Expaverunt in Sion impii; terror apprehendit hypocritas (vel,
   sceleratos.) Quis ex nobis (vel, pro nobis) habitabit cam igne
   devorante? Quis ex nobis habitabit cum ardoribus aeternis?

   15. He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that
   despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding
   of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth
   his eyes from seeing evil;

   15. Ambulans injustitiis, loquens recta, aspernars lucrum ex vi et
   calumnia, excutiens manus suas a susceptione muneris; obturans aurem
   suam, ne audiat sanguines; comprimens oculos suos, ne videat malum.

   16. He shall dwell on high: his place of defence shall be the munitions
   of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters shall be sure.

   16. Hic in excelsis habitabit; propugnacula petrarum asylum ejus; huic
   panis dabitur, et aquae ejus certae (erunt.)

   17. Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold the
   land that is very far off.

   17. Regem in decore suo videbunt oculi tui; videbunt terram procul
   remotam.

   18. Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is
   the receiver? where is he that counted the towers?

   18. Cor tuum meditabitur terrorem. Ubi scriba? Ubi appensor? Ubi qui
   annotat domos insigniores?

   19. Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech
   than thou canst perceive; of a stammering tongue, that thou canst not
   understand.

   19. Popalum trucem non videbis, populum abstrusi labii, ut non
   intelligas; linguae balbae, ut non capins.

   20. Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see
   Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken
   down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither
   shall any of the cords thereof be broken.

   20. Aspice Sionem civitatem solennitatum (vel, conventuum) nostrarum;
   oculi tui videbunt Ierusalem, habitaculum tranquillum, tentorium quod
   non transferetur; cujus paxilli non amovebuntur in seculum, et cujus
   funes cuncti non rumpentur.

   21. But there the glorious LORD will be unto us a place of broad rivers
   and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall
   gallant ship pass thereby.

   21. Adeo (vel, quia si) illic fortis nobis Iehova locus fluminum,
   rivorum spatiis amplorum, per quem non transibit navis remigum, et per
   quem navis magnifica non pertransibit.

   22. For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is our lawgiver, the LORD is
   our king; he will save us.

   22. Quia Iehova judex noster, Iehova legislator noster, Iehova rex
   noster; idem servabit nos.

   23. Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their
   mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil
   divided; the lame take the prey.

   23. Laxati sunt funes tui, ut non solidaverint malum suum, neque
   expanderint velum; tunc divisa est praeda spolii multi, claudi quoque
   dirlpuerunt praedam.

   24. And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell
   therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

   24. Nec dicet habitator, AEgrotus sum; populus habitans in ea solutus
   est ab iniquitate.


   1. Wo to thee that spoilest. If these words shall be expounded as
   relating to the Babylonians, the strain will flow easily enough; for,
   after having promised freedom to the prisoners, (Isaiah 32:15,) he now
   appropriately taunts the conquerors. Besides, they needed to be
   peculiarly confirmed, that they might give credit to a prediction which
   appeared to be incredible; for they could not think it probable that
   such vast power would be destroyed and overthrown, and that, the
   wretched prisoners who were now in a state of despair would speedily be
   permitted to return to their native country. Amidst such distresses,
   therefore, they might have fainted and given up all hope of safety, if
   the Prophet had not met them with these exhortations. Accordingly, he
   anticipates those doubts which might have tormented their minds and
   tempted them to despair, after having been carried away by the
   Babylonians, and reduced to slavery; for they saw none of those things
   which are here promised, but everything entirely opposite.

   Yet, as it is almost universally agreed that this is the beginning of a
   new discourse, and that it is addressed to Sennacherib and his army, I
   am not unwilling to believe that the Prophet pronounces against the
   Assyrians, who unjustly oppressed all their neighbors, a threatening
   which was intended to alleviate the distresses and anxieties of the
   people. He therefore means that there will be a wonderful revolution of
   affairs, which will overthrow the flourishing condition of Nineveh,
   though it appears to be invincible; for the Babylonians will come in a
   hostile manner to punish them for that cruelty which they exercised on
   other nations.

   In order to impart greater energy to this discourse, he addresses the
   Assyrians themselves, "Wo to thee that plunderest; you may now ravage
   with impunity; no one has power to resist you; but there will one day
   be those who in their turn shall plunder you, as you have plundered
   others." He speaks to them in the singular number, but in a collective
   sense, which is very customary. Others read it as a question, "Shalt
   thou not be spoiled? Dost thou think that thou wilt never be punished
   for that violence? There will one day be those who will render to thee
   the like." But we may follow the ordinary exposition, according to
   which the Prophet exhibits in a striking light the injustice of
   enemies, who were so eager for plunder that they spared nobody, not
   even the innocent who had never injured them; for that is a
   demonstration of the utmost cruelty. I am therefore the more disposed
   to adopt this exposition, according to which he describes in this first
   clause what the Assyrians are, shews them to be base and cruel robbers,
   and gives a strong exhibition of their cruelty in harassing and
   pillaging harmless and inoffensive persons; so that, when the Jews
   beheld such unrestrained injustice, they might consider that God is
   just, and that such proceedings will not always pass unpunished.

   When thou shalt have ceased to plunder. This is the second clause of
   the sentence, by which the Prophet declares that the Assyrians now
   plunder, because God has given loose reins to them, but that he will
   one day check them, so that they will have no power to do injury. If we
   were to understand him to mean, "when they would no longer wish to
   plunder," that would be a feeble interpretation; but the Prophet
   advances higher, and declares that the time will come "when they shall
   make an end of plundering," because the Lord will restrain and subdue
   them. The meaning is therefore the same as if he had said, "When thou
   shalt have reached the height;" for we see that tyrants have boundaries
   assigned to them which they cannot pass. Their career is rapid, so long
   as they keep their course; but as soon as the goal, their utmost limit,
   has been reached, they must stop.

   Let us cheer our hearts with this consolation, when we see tyrants
   insolently and fiercely attack the Church of God; for the Lord will at
   length compel them to stop, and the more cruel they have been, the more
   severely will they be punished. The Lord will destroy them in a moment;
   for he will raise up against them enemies who will instantly ruin and
   punish them for their iniquities.

   Here we ought also to acknowledge the providence of God in the
   overthrow of kingdoms; for wicked men imagine that everything moves at
   random and by the blind violence of fortune; but we ought to take quite
   another view, for the Lord will repay their deserts, so that they shall
   be made to know that the cruelty which they exercised against
   inoffensive persons does not remain unrevenged. And the event shewed
   the truth of this prediction; for not long afterwards Nineveh was
   conquered by the Babylonians, and lost the monarchy, and was even so
   completely destroyed that it lost its name. But as Babylon, who
   succeeded in her room, was not less a "spoiler," the Prophet justly
   foretells that there will be other robbers to rob her, and that the
   Babylonians, when their monarchy shall be overthrown, will themselves
   be plundered of those things which they seized and pillaged from
   others.

   2. O Jehovah, have pity upon us. This sentiment was added by the
   Prophet, in order to remind the godly where they ought to go amidst
   such distresses, even when they shall appear to be deprived of all hope
   of safety; that they ought to betake themselves to prayer, to
   supplicate from God the fulfillment of these promises, even when they
   shall be most wretched, and when the power of the enemy to oppress them
   cruelly shall be very formidable. And here we ought carefully to
   observe the order which the Prophet has followed, in first exhibiting
   the promise of God and immediately exhorting to prayer. Not only so,
   but he breaks off the stream of his discourse, and suddenly bursts out
   into prayer; for although the Lord hastens to perform what he has
   promised, yet he delays for a time, in order to exercise our patience.
   But when we ought to wait, there is found in us no steadfastness or
   perseverance; our hearts immediately faint and languish. We ought,
   therefore, to have recourse to prayer, which alone can support and
   gladden our hearts, while we look earnestly towards God, by whose
   guidance alone we shall be delivered from our distresses. Yet let us
   patiently, with unshaken hope and confidence, expect what he has
   promised to us; for at length he will shew that he is faithful, and
   will not disappoint us.

   At the same time the Prophet bids us not only consider in general the
   judgment of God against the Assyrians, but God's fatherly kindness
   towards his chosen people; as if he had said that the Assyrians will be
   destroyed, not only that they may receive the just reward of their
   avarice and cruelty, but because in this manner God will be pleased to
   provide for the safety of his Church. But while he exhorts us to pray
   for mercy, he likewise declares that we shall be miserable.

   In thee have we hoped. In order to cherish the hope of obtaining favor,
   believers next declare that they "have hoped in God," on whom they now
   call; and indeed our prayers must be idle and useless, if they are not
   founded on this principle.

   "Let thy mercy be upon us," saith David,
   "according as we have hoped in thee." (Psalm 33:22.)

   For to go into the presence of God, if he did not open up the way by
   his word, would be excessively rash; and, therefore, as he kindly and
   gently invites us, so we ought to embrace his word, whenever we
   approach to him. Besides, patience must be added to faith; and,
   therefore, when faith is taken away, we do not deserve that the Lord
   should hear us, for it is by faith that we call upon him. Now faith
   alone is the mother of calling on God, as is frequently declared in
   many passages of Scripture; and if faith be wanting, there can be
   nothing left in us but hypocrisy, than which nothing is more abhorred
   by God. (Romans 10:14.)

   And hence it is evident that there is no Christianity in the whole of
   Popery; for if the chief part of the worship of God consists of prayer,
   and if they know not what it is to pray, (for they bid us continually
   doubt, and even accuse of rashness the faith of the godly,) what kind
   of worshippers of God are they? Can that prayer be lawful which is
   perplexed by uncertainty, and which does not rely with firm confidence
   on the promises of God? Do not those Rabbins, who wish to be reckoned
   theologians, shew that they are mere babes? Certainly our children
   excel them in knowledge and in the true light of godliness. [1]

   Let us also learn from these words that our faith is proved by
   adversity; for the actual trial of faith is when, with unshaken
   patience in opposition to all dangers and assaults, we continue to rely
   on the word and the promises. Thus we shall give practical evidence
   that we have sincerely believed.

   Be what thou hast been, their arm in the morning. Others render it as
   if it were a continued prayer, "Be our arm in the morning, and our
   salvation in tribulation." As to believers speaking in the third
   person, they consider it to be a change which is frequently employed by
   the Hebrews. But I think that the Prophet's meaning is different; for
   he intended to express that desire which is rendered more intense by
   benefits formerly received; and, therefore, in my opinion, that clause
   is appropriately inserted, "their arm in the morning," in which I
   supply the words "who hast been," in order to bring forward the ancient
   benefits bestowed by God on the fathers. "Thou, Lord, didst hearken to
   the prayers of our fathers; when they fled to thee, thou gavest them
   assistance i now also be thou our salvation, and relieve us from our
   afflictions."

   "Arm" and "salvation" differ in this respect, that "arm" denotes the
   power which the Lord exerted in defense of his Church, and that before
   she was afflicted; while "salvation" denotes the deliverance by which
   the Lord rescues the Church, even when she appears to be ruined. He
   therefore places on record ancient benefits which the Lord formerly
   bestowed on the fathers, that he may be moved to exercise the same
   compassion towards the children. As if he had said, "O Lord, thou didst
   formerly turn away the dangers which threatened thy Church; relying on
   thy favor she flourished and prospered. Thou didst also deliver her
   when oppressed. In like manner wilt thou act on our own account,
   especially since it belongs to thy character to render assistance when
   matters are desperate and at the worst." [2]

   The particle 'ph, (aph,) even, is very emphatic for confirming our
   faith, that we may not doubt that God, who always continues to be like
   himself, and never degenerates from his nature or swerves from his
   purpose, will also be our deliverer; for, such have believers found him
   to be. We ought, therefore, to place continually before our eyes the
   manner in which the Lord formerly assisted and delivered the fathers,
   that we may be fully convinced that we also shall not fail to obtain
   from him assistance and deliverance.

   3. At the voice of the tumult the peoples fled. He now returns to the
   former doctrine, or rather he continues it, after having inserted a
   short exclamation. He had already shewn that the Assyrians would be
   defeated, though they appeared to be out of the reach of all danger;
   and now he bids the Jews look upon it as having actually taken place;
   for their power was vast, and all men dreaded them and reckoned them
   invincible. Isaiah therefore places before the eyes of the Jews the
   dreadful ruin of the Assyrians, as if it had been already accomplished.
   He makes use of the plural number, saying that they were peoples; for
   the kingdom of the Assyrians consisted of various "peoples," and their
   army had been collected out of various nations; and therefore he
   affirms that, although their number was prodigious and boundless, yet
   they would miserably perish.

   At thy exaltation. The word "exaltation" is explained by some to mean
   the "manifestation" by which the Lord illustriously displayed what he
   was able to do. But I explain it in a more simple manner, that the
   Lord, who formerly seemed as it were to remain at rest, when he
   permitted the Babylonians to ravage with impunity, now suddenly came
   forth to public view; for his delay was undoubtedly treated with proud
   scorn by the enemies, as if the God of Israel had been humbled and
   vanquished; but at length he arose and sat down on his judgmentseat,
   and took vengeance on the crimes of the ungodly. There is therefore an
   implied contrast between the "exaltation" and that kind of weakness
   which the Lord appeared to exhibit, when he permitted his people to be
   afflicted and scattered. [3]

   By "the voice of the tumult" some suppose to be meant that the Lord
   will put the enemies to flight by merely making a noise; but that
   interpretation, I fear, is more ingenious than solid. I therefore
   willingly interpret the word "voice" to mean the loud noise which would
   be raised by the Medes and Persians.

   4. And your prey shall be gathered. Here he addresses the Assyrians, if
   it be not thought preferable to refer it to the Jews, and to take the
   word "prey" in an active sense. But the former opinion is more
   appropriate; and this sudden turn of direct address imparts great
   vehemence to the prediction, when he openly and expressly taunts the
   proud adversaries. Yet it is doubtful whether it denotes the final ruin
   of the nation, or the defeat of King Sennacherib, when his army was
   destroyed by the hand of an angel before the walls of Jerusalem. (2
   Kings 19:35.) The latter opinion has been adopted by almost all
   commentators, but it appears to me to be too limited; for I think that
   the Prophet, from the beginning of the chapter, intended to express
   something more, when he spoke of the destruction of that nation, The
   prophecy might even be still farther extended, as I suggested a little
   ago, so as to include likewise the Babylonians, who were the latest
   enemies of the Church; but, passing this, it is sufficiently evident
   that his pen is directed against the monarchy of Nineveh.

   By your gathering of caterpillars. He compares that warlike nation to
   "caterpillars," because they will have no power to resist, but will all
   tremble and faint, so that they shall be gathered into large heaps to
   be destroyed. The comparison is highly appropriate, and is employed
   also by the Prophet Nahum, (Nahum 3:15,) though in a somewhat different
   sense; for that insect, we know, is exceedingly destructive to trees,
   and exceedingly hurtful, so that it may justly be called The calamity
   of the earth. But as their vast number gives no power to defend
   themselves, even children can easily shake off, and gather, and slay
   them in heaps wherever they meet with them. This also, the Prophet
   declares, will befall those insatiable robbers; for, although they did
   much injury by plundering for a long period, they will at length be
   slain and destroyed without the smallest effort; because, deprived of
   manly vigor, and almost of life, they will fall into the power of their
   enemies; and the wealth of Nineveh, amassed by robbery, shall be
   carried to Babylon.

   According to the running of locusts. He now adds another comparison,
   that the Babylonians will "run like locusts," to devour the whole
   country; for those creatures, being exceedingly voracious, and moving
   forward without interruption, and leaping with astonishing rapidity,
   consume all the fruits of the earth. Some refer it to the same
   Assyrians, as if the Prophet compared them to "locusts," because they
   will be easily dispersed; but that interpretation does not apply, for
   the Prophet draws up an army of "locusts," so as completely to cover in
   its march the whole land; and he beautifully draws a comparison between
   the "caterpillars" and the "locusts," on account of their insatiable
   avarice and vast numbers.

   5 Jehovah is exalted. He explains more fully what we briefly noticed a
   little before, about the exaltation of God, and follows out the subject
   which we formerly mentioned, that the destruction of a monarchy so
   powerful will make it evident how highly God values the salvation of
   his Church, for whose sake he will utterly ruin Nineveh, the queen of
   cities, and her inhabitants. This lesson is highly useful, that God
   does not spare reprobate and irreligious men; for, by opposing their
   unlawful desires, his object is to testify how much he loves his elect;
   and it is no ordinary consolation that the glory of God shines most
   brightly in the salvation of the Church.

   Who dwelleth on high. First, he declares that God is raised "on high,"
   whereas wicked men imagine that he was cast down and humbled by the
   destruction of the people. Again, lest any one should think that God
   has only recovered what he lost, as it frequently happens in the world
   that they who have been vanquished, as soon as a favorable change takes
   place, again put forth fresh vigor, he expressly declares that God is
   "exalted" before the eyes of men, because this is due to him on account
   of his greatness, for he inhabiteth the heavens. Hence it follows, that
   although he frequently conceals his power, yet he never loses his
   right, but, whenever he thinks proper, openly displays his exalted
   rank; for to dwell "in the heavens" denotes, as we know, supreme
   authority, to which the whole world is subject. (Psalm 115:3.) In this
   manner he not only shews that God can easily and readily cast down all
   that is lofty in the world, but argues from God's eternal nature, that
   when God is despised by wicked men, he cannot, at length, do otherwise
   than manifest his glory; for otherwise he would "deny himself." (2
   Timothy 2:13.)

   He hath filled Zion with judgment and righteousness. Thus he again
   confirms the statement, that it will be a proof of God's wonderful
   kindness, when the Jews shall be delivered from the tyranny of the
   Babylonians. It was proper to place before their eyes the Author of so
   great a blessing; for we see how basely his glory is obscured by our
   ingratitude. Now, "the fullness of righteousness and judgment" means,
   that God will largely and copiously pour forth his kindness in
   restoring the Church. Yet it will not be unsuitable to view these words
   as referring to lawful order, when everything is justly and properly
   administered; for without this the Church will never enjoy prosperity,
   though everything else may succeed according to the wish. Holy and
   welladjusted order, therefore, and not corruptible riches, is the
   standard by which our prosperity should be judged.

   6. And the stability of thy times shall be. He promises that the state
   of the kingdom under the reign of Hezekiah will yet be happy and
   prosperous, especially when he contrasts it with the wretched,
   destructive, and ruinous aspect which it exhibited under the reign of
   Ahaz; for, although the enemy had been driven out, hardly any one would
   have expected that the Jews, who had been so heavily oppressed, would
   be restored to their former order. As to the words, some translate
   them, "Truth, and strength, and salvation shall be in thy times;" as if
   the Prophet described the prosperity which the nation should enjoy
   under a pious king; and they think that each of those terms denotes so
   many of God's benefits. Others think that 'mvnt (emunath) denotes
   "fidelity," as if the Prophet said that it would be "salvation and
   strength." Others draw from it a somewhat different sense, that
   "strength, salvation, and knowledge" will be "stable" under the reign
   of Hezekiah. But when I examine closely the words of the Prophet, I
   choose rather to make a different distinction, that "stability,
   strength, and salvation will be established by wisdom, and knowledge,"
   during the reign of Hezekiah.

   The fear of Jehovah is his treasure. When he says that "the fear of God
   is the treasure" of a pious king, this accords with the explanation
   which we have now given; for during peace all men wish to lead a safe
   and easy life; but few care how they shall enjoy such distinguished
   benefits. Indeed the greater part of men would desire to fatten like a
   herd of swine; and thus while all are eagerly directed by blind lust to
   seek outward benefits, the light of heavenly doctrine, which is an
   invaluable blessing, is almost set at nought. He therefore means that
   the prosperity of the Church will be "stable," [4] when "wisdom and
   knowledge" shall reign in it; that its "strength" will be lasting, when
   the "knowledge" of God shall prevail; and that its salvation will be
   eternal, when men shall be well instructed in the knowledge of God.

   This is a very remarkable passage; and it teaches us that our
   ingratitude shuts the door against God's blessings, when we disregard
   the Author of them, and sink into gross and earfifty desires; and that
   all the benefits which we can desire or imagine, even though we
   actually obtained them, would be of no avail for our salvation, if they
   were not seasoned with the salt of faith and knowledge. Hence it
   follows that the Church is not in a healthy condition unless when all
   its privileges have been preceded by the light of the knowledge of God,
   and that it flourishes only when all the gifts which God has bestowed
   upon it are ascribed to Him as their author. But when the knowledge of
   God has been taken away, and when just views of God have been
   extinguished or buried, any kind of prosperity is worse than all
   calamities.

   For these reasons I consider stability, strength, and salvations, to
   denote the same thing, that the condition of the Church will be secure,
   when men shall have been cured of blindness and ignorance, and shall
   begin to know God. And hence we see what kind of Church the Papists
   have, distinguished, indeed, by pomp and splendor, but they want this
   "knowledge," and, therefore, it cannot be stable or secure, and is not
   a Church of God. If, therefore, the Lord shall grant to us this
   blessing, that the brightness of faith shall actually shine in the
   midst of us, other blessings will follow of their own accord, and if we
   are shaken and tossed about by various tempests, we shall always be
   supported by the arm of God.

   Of thy times. He addresses Hezekiah, not as a private individual, but
   as the head of the whole people; and he includes the whole people in
   this description. But since the kingdom of Hezekiah was but a slender
   shadow of the kingdom of Christ, as we formerly remarked, these words
   must be referred to Christ, in whom is found true wisdom and knowledge.
   (Colossians 2:3.)

   It is proper to observe the designations which are here employed in
   order to commend the word of God and the gospel. They are likewise
   employed by Paul, when he speaks of "teaching in all wisdom and
   knowledge;" for by this commendation he extols the dignity of the
   gospel. (Colossians 1:9, 28.) Hence also it ought to be inferred that,
   where Christ is not known, men are destitute of true wisdom, even
   though they have received the highest education in every branch of
   learning; for all their knowledge is useless till they truly "know
   God." (John 17:3.)

   The fear of Jehovah is his treasure. [5] I think that the expression,
   "the fear of Jehovah," was added by the Prophet for the sake of
   explanation, in order to state more fully that the knowledge of which
   he spoke is the teacher of piety, and is not cold or lifeless, but
   penetrates powerfully into our heart, to form us to "the fear of God."
   Hence also, in other passages of Scripture, this "fear" is called
   "wisdom," or rather "the beginning of wisdom," that is, the substance
   and chief part of it. (Proverbs 1:7, and 9:10.) It is a mistake to
   suppose that the word "beginning" denotes rudiments or elements, for
   Solomoil means by it the chief part and design; and the reason is,
   that, as men are fools till they submit to the word of God, so the
   perfection of wisdom springs from the docility or obedience of faith.
   "The fear of God" is therefore called a "treasure," without which all
   prosperity is miserable; and this shews more fully the scope of the
   passage, that the full perfection of a happy life consists in the
   knowledge of God, which we obtain by faith.

   Thus, in the person of the king he shews that it is an invaluable
   blessing to worship God with due piety and reverence. They who are
   destitute of "the fear of God" are pronounced by him to be miserable
   and ruined; and, on the other hand, they who "fear the Lord" are
   declared to be very happy, even though in other respects they be
   reckoned in the judgment of men to be very miserable. He speaks of that
   "fear" which contains within itself true obedience, and renews our
   hearts; for it is a different kind of fear which influences even wicked
   men, and leads them to dread God as criminals dread a judge. That
   "fear" does not deserve to be so highly applauded; for it springs
   neither from a true knowledge of God, nor from a cheerful desire to
   worship him, and therefore differs widely from that wisdom which Isaiah
   describes. These statements were made by him in reference to Hezekiah,
   but, as we have already said, they related to the whole body of the
   people; and hence we infer that they apply both to men of ordinary rank
   and to the king, but more especially to Christ, who was filled with
   "the Spirit of the fear of the Lord," as we formerly saw, [6] (Isaiah
   11:2,) that he might make us partakers of it.

   7. Behold, their messengers [7] shall cry without. It is difficult to
   determine whether Isaiah relates historically the fearful perplexity
   and imminent danger to which the Jews were reduced, in order to exhibit
   more strikingly the favor of deliverance, or predicted a future
   calamity, that the hearts of the godly might not soon afterwards faint
   under it. For my own part, I think it probable that this is not the
   history of, a past transaction, but that, as a heavy and sore
   temptation was at hand, it was intended to fortify the hearts of
   believers to wait patiently for the assistance of God when their
   affairs were at the worst. However that may be, the sad and lamentable
   desolation of the Church is here described, that believers may not
   cease to entertain good hope even in the midst of their perplexity, and
   that, when they have been rescued from danger; they may know that it
   was accomplished by the wonderful power of God.

   The ambassadors of peace wept bitterly. It is given as a token of
   despair, that the ambassadors who had been sent to appease the tyrant
   were unsuccessful; for every way and method of obtaining peace was
   attempted by Hezekiah, but without any success. Accordingly, "the
   ambassadors" returned sad and disconsolate, and even on the road could
   not dissemble their grief, which it was difficult to conceal in their
   hearts, when matters were in so wretched a condition. He undoubtedly
   means that Sennacherib has haughtily and disdainfully refused to make
   peace, so that "the ambassadors," as; if they had forgotten their rank,
   are constrained to pour out in public their grief and lamentations,
   and, ere they have returned to their king and given account of their
   embassy, openly to proclaim what kind of answer they have obtained from
   the cruel tyrant, [8] Others think, that by "the ambassadors of peace"
   are meant those who were wont to announce peace; but that
   interpretation appears to me to be feeble and farfetched. By "the
   ambassadors of peace," therefore, I understand to be meant those who
   had been sent to pacify the king, that they might purchase peace on
   some condition.

   8. The roads are deserted. He now adds, that "the roads" will be shut
   up, so that no one shall go in or out; which commonly happens when war
   has been declared. The Prophet appears to represent the ambassadors as
   declaring that henceforth there will be no opportunity of carrying on
   merchandise, and even that the highways will not be safe. [9] It is
   immediately added, --

   They have violated the treaty. These words are viewed by some
   commentators as a complaint made by hypocrites that God does not
   fulfill his promises. If it were thought proper to view them as
   referring to God, still it would not be necessary to say that such a
   complaint proceeds from none but wicked men; for sometimes believers
   also quarrel with God in this manner. But I cannot approve of that
   interpretation; and, therefore, consider this to be a part of the
   description which the Prophet gives of the cruelty and insatiable rage
   of Sennacherib, in treacherously breaking the treaty which he had
   formerly made with Hezekiah; for, although he had promised that he
   would maintain peace, yet as soon as an opportunity presented itself
   for invading Judea, he violated his promise and made preparations for
   war. Such is also the import of the conclusion of the verse, that he
   hath despised the cities, he hath regarded no man, which means that his
   cruelty will be so great that he will not be restrained by shame or
   fear.

   9. The earth hath mourned and languished. Here he describes more fully
   how wretched and desperate the Jews would perceive their condition to
   be, that their confidence might nevertheless come forth out of a deep
   gulf. The places are also specified by him, Lebanon, Bashan, and
   Carmel, which are widely distant from each other, and which form almost
   the farthest boundaries of the holy land, in order to shew that no part
   of it; will remain safe or uninjured. He describes this calamity in
   such a manner as to assign to each place what peculiarly belongs to it.
   To "Lebanon" he assigns confusion, because it is elsewhere mentioned as
   beautiful and glorious, in consequence of having been covered with
   lofty and valuable trees. He declares that "Sharon," which was a level
   and fertile district, will be "like a wilderness," and that "Bashan and
   Carmel," which abounded in "fruits," will be "shaken." Thus he alludes
   to the natural character of each place, and describes the misery and
   distress in such a manner as to magnify and illustrate the kindness of
   God, by whom they would be delivered, even though they appeared to be
   utterly ruined; for here we may see the hand of God openly displayed,
   if it be not thought preferable to view the Prophet as relating a past
   transaction in order to excite them to thankfulness.

   10. Now will I rise. There is great force in the particle now, and
   likewise in the repetition which is added, "I shall be exalted, I shall
   be lifted up on high." We ought to observe the time to which these
   statements relate, that is, when the Church appeared to be utterly
   ruined; for God declares that he will judge that to be the most
   suitable time for rendering assistance. This is, therefore, a
   comparison of things which are contrary to each other; for he exhibits
   to believers the heavy and grievous calamities by which they should be
   oppressed, and under which they would easily sink, if they were not
   upheld by some consolation. As if he had said, "The Lord will suffer
   you to be brought very low, but when your affairs shall be at the
   worst, and when you shall have in vain tried every remedy, the Lord
   will arise and succor you." Thus even when we are afflicted and brought
   very low, we ought to acknowledge that our safety cometh from God
   alone.

   Accordingly, the word now denotes a period of the deepest distress. Men
   might think it exceedingly strange, but we plainly see the best reason
   why God thus delays to render assistance. It is, because it is useful
   to exercise the patience of the godly, to try their faith, to subdue
   the desires of the flesh, to excite to earnestness in prayer, and to
   strengthen the hope of a future life; and, therefore, he lays a
   restraint, that they may not with headlong eagerness anticipate that
   period which God has already marked out for them. The repetition is
   very emphatic, and is added for the purpose of confirming the
   statement; for when our affairs are desperate, we think that we are
   ruined, but at that very time we ought especially to hope, because the
   Lord generally selects it for giving a display of his power. For this
   reason, by extolling his loftiness, he arouses believers to the
   exercise of courage, that they may boldly defy the insolence of their
   enemies. [10]

   11. Ye shall conceive chaff. He now addresses his discourse to the
   enemies of the Church, whose insolence, he says, is foolish and to no
   purpose; for when God shall have brilliantly displayed his power, they
   shall know that their efforts will be fruitless, and that they will
   accomplish nothing, even though they be leagued together in vast
   crowds. The Lord laughs at their madness, in thinking that everything
   is in their power, when he can instantly, by the slightest expression
   of his will, restrain and destroy them, though they may be defended by
   a very powerful army.

   It is customary in the Scriptures to employ the word conceptions for
   denoting the designs and efforts of men. (Job 15:35; Psalm 7:14; Isaiah
   26:17, and 59:4.) The metaphor is taken from pregnant women. Men are
   said to "conceive" and to "bring forth," when they attempt anything;
   but he declares that their "conception" shall be fruitless, and that
   they shall also "bring forth" to no purpose, for whatever they
   undertake shall be unsuccessful. There is nothing, therefore, in the
   brilliant military forces of our adversaries that ought to alarm us;
   for, although God may permit them for a time to bustle, and toil, and
   rage, yet God will at length turn into "chaff" all their rash and
   daring attempts. Let us learn that what Isaiah foretold about
   Sennacherib relates to all the adversaries of believers and of the
   Church.

   The fire of your breath shall devour you. That they "shall be devoured
   by the fire of their breath" is usually explained to mean, "Your
   breath, like fire, shall devour you." But that is an unsuitable and
   even absurd comparison, and the true meaning readily suggests itself,
   "The fire kindled by your breath shall devour you." We commonly kindle
   a fire by blowing, and therefore he declares, that the fire which
   wicked men have blown by their wicked contrivances shall be destructive
   to them, because it shall consume them. It is the same statement which
   is often conveyed by a variety of metaphors in Scripture.

   "They shall fall into the pit which they have digged. They are
   entangled in a net which they had prepared for others. The sword which
   they had drawn hath entered into their own bowels. Their arrow hath
   been turned back to pierce their own hearts." (Psalm 7:15; 37:15;
   57:6.)

   Thus the Prophet shews that the wicked tyrant who laid waste Judea and
   besieged Jerusalem with a numerous army, and all others who in like
   manner are adversaries of the Church, bring down destruction on
   themselves, and will at length be destroyed; and, in short, that they
   will be consumed by that "fire" which they have kindled.

   12. And the peoples shall be the burnings of lime. He compares them to
   "the burning of lime," because their hardness shall be bruised, as fire
   softens the stones, so that they shall easily be reduced to powder;
   and, undoubtedly, the more powerfully wicked men are inflamed with a
   desire to commit injury, the more do they bruise themselves by their
   own insolence.

   As thorns cut up. [11] This metaphor is not less appropriate; for
   although they hinder men from touching them by the painful wounds which
   they inflict on the hands, yet there is no kind of wood that burns more
   violently or is more quickly consumed. Something of the same kind, we
   have said, may be observed in "lime," which at first is hard, but is
   softened by the fire. The Prophet declares that the same thing will
   happen to the Babylonians, whom the Lord will easily destroy, though at
   first they appear to be formidable, and though it may be supposed to be
   unlikely that they shall be consumed by any conflagration. Whenever,
   therefore, we behold the enemies of the Church collecting all sorts of
   wealth and forces, and military preparations, in order to destroy us
   and set on fire the whole world, let us know that they are kindling a
   fire which shall miserably destroy them.

   We know that this was fulfilled in Sennacherib, for the event proved
   the truth of these predictions, though they appeared to be altogether
   incredible. Let us hope that the same thing shall happen to all others
   who shall imitate the actions of this tyrant, and let us comfort
   ourselves by that example, and innumerable others, amidst our
   distresses and afflictions, which shall be followed by certain
   deliverance and dreadful vengeance on our enemies.

   13. Near, ye that are far off. Isaiah here makes a preface, as if he
   were about to speak on a very weighty subject; for he bids his hearers
   be attentive, which is commonly done when any important and remarkable
   subject is handled. He addresses both those who are near, who would be
   eyewitnesses of this event, and the most distant nations to whom the
   report would be communicated; as if he had said that the power of God
   will be such as to be perceived not only by a few persons, or by those
   who are at hand, but also by those who shall be at a very great
   distance. Thus he means that it will be a striking and extraordinary
   demonstration of the power of God, because wicked men, who formerly
   were careless and unconcerned, as if they had been free from all danger
   of distress or annoyance, shall be shaken with terror.

   14. The sinners in Zion are afraid. But some one might object that the
   subject here treated is not so important as to need that lofty preface
   intended to arouse the whole world. Was it a matter of so great
   importance that wicked men were struck with fear? But by an attentive
   examination it will be found that it is no ordinary exhibition of
   divine power, when wicked men are aroused from their indolence, so
   that, whether they will or not, they perceive that God is their judge,
   especially when contempt of God is accompanied by hypocrisy, For
   although it is difficult to arouse irreligious men, when a veil is
   spread over their hearts, [12] yet still greater is the obstinacy of
   hypocrites, who imagine that God is under obligations to them. Thus we
   see that men are so bewitched by madness, that they despise all
   threatenings and terrors, and mock at the judgments of God, and, in
   short, by witty jesting, set aside all prophecies, so that it ought to
   be regarded as a miracle that men who make such resistance are
   overthrown. Hence Isaiah, with good reason, kindles into rage against
   them;for, when he employs the word Zion, he undoubtedly reproves the
   degenerate Jews, because, when they were covered with the shadow of the
   sanctuary, they thought that they were in possession of a fortress
   which could not be stormed; and undoubtedly, as I remarked a little
   before, the haughtiest and proudest of all men are they who shelter
   themselves under the name of God, and glory in the title of the Church.

   Terror hath seized the wicked, hnphym (chanephim) is translated
   hypocrites, but still more frequently it may be viewed as denoting
   "treacherous revolters and men utterly worthless." Since, therefore,
   they were so wicked, and mocked at God and the prophets, he three, tens
   that God will be a judge so sharp and severe, that they shall no longer
   find pleasure in their impostures. Next is added a conression which
   wears the aspect of humility, in order to shew more clearly that
   hypocrites, who do not willingly obey God, at length find that
   experience is their instructor how dreadful is the judgment of God. As
   soon, therefore, as their "laughing" is turned into "gnashing of
   teeth," they begin to acknowledge that their whole strength is chaff or
   stubble. (Luke 6:25; Matthew 8:12.)

   Which of us shall dwell with the devouring fire? As to the meaning of
   the words, some translate them, "Who shall dwell instead of us?"
   Others, "Which of us shall dwell?" If we view them simply as meaning
   "to us," or "for us," the meaning may be thus explained, "Who shall
   encounter the fire, or place himself between, so that the flame may not
   reach us?" There are also other interpretations which amount to the
   same thing; but commentators differ in this respect, that some view the
   words as relating to the king of Assyria, and others as relating to
   God. I prefer the latter opinion, as has been already shewn; for
   although the king of Assyria might be regarded as a "fire" that would
   burn up the earth with his heat, yet the Prophet intended to express
   something far more dreadful, namely, the inward anguish by which
   ungodly men are tormented, the stings of conscience which cannot be
   allayed, the unquenchable burning of crimes which exceeds every kind of
   torments; for whatever is the course pursued by ungodly men, such will
   they find the dispensations of God to be towards them.

   On their account, therefore, God is called a devouring fire, as we may
   learn from Moses, (Deuteronomy 4:24, and 9:3,) from whom the prophets,
   as we have frequently remarked, borrow their doctrines, and who is also
   followed by the Apostle. (Hebrews 12:29.) This exposition is confirmed
   by the Prophet himself, who shews what was the cause of that terror. It
   might be objected that God was excessively severe, and that he
   terrified them beyond measure; but he is usually kind and gentle to the
   godly, while wicked men feel that he is severe and terrible. Some think
   that the Prophet intended to convince all men of their guilt, in order
   that they might abandon all confidence, in their works, and in a lowly
   and humble manner betake themselves to the grace of God, as if he had
   said, "None but he who is perfectly righteous can stand before the
   judgmentseat of God, and therefore all are accursed."

   But he rather speaks in the name, and agreeably to the feelings, of
   those who formerly scorned all threatenings; and he now represents
   those very persons as inquiring with trembling dismay, "Who shall dare
   to go into the presence of God?" This mournful complaint is a
   manifestation of that terror which hath lately seized them, when, being
   convinced of their frailty, they cry out in sorrow, "Who shall endure
   the presence of God?" But since they still murmur against God, though
   he compels them reluctantly to utter these words, the Prophet, on the
   other hand, in order to restrain their wicked barkings, replies that
   God is not naturally the object of terror or alarm to men, but that it
   arises through their own fault, because conscience, which God does not
   suffer to lie idle, terrifies them with their crimes.

   15. He that walketh in righeousness. Now, therefore, he explains more
   fully what we briefly remarked a little before, that they who provoke
   his anger, and thus drive away from them his forbearance, have no right
   to complain that God is excessively severe. Thus he convinces them of
   their guilt and exhorts them to repentance, for he shews that there is
   a state of friendship between God and men, if they wish to follow and
   practice "righteousness," if they maintain truth and integrity, if they
   are free from all corruptions and act inoffensively towards their
   neighbors; but because they abound in every kind of wickedness, and
   have abandoned themselves to malice, calumny, covetousness, robbery,
   and other crimes, it is impossible that the Lord should not strike them
   down with fear, by shewing that he is terrible to them. In short, the
   design of the Prophet is to shut the mouths of wicked babblers, that
   they may not accuse God of cruelty in their destruction; for the whole
   blame rests on themselves. By evasions they endeavor to escape
   condemnation. But the Prophet declares that God is always gracious to
   his worshippers, and that in this sense Moses calls him "a fire,"
   (Deuteronomy 4:24, and 9:3,) that men may not despise his majesty and
   power; but that every one who shall approach to him with sincere piety
   will know by actual experience that nothing is more pleasant or
   delightful than his presence. Since, therefore, God shines on believers
   with a bright countenance, they enjoy settled peace with him through a
   good conscience; and hence it follows that God is not naturally
   terrible, but that he is forced to it by our wickedness.

   This discourse is directed chiefly against hypocrites, who throw a
   false veil of piety over their hidden pollutions and crimes, and make
   an improper use of the name of God, that they may indulge more freely
   in wickedness. By the examples which he adduces in illustration of
   "righteousness," the Prophet more openly reproves their crimes. He
   enumerates the principal actions of life by means of which we shew what
   sort of persons we are. Here, as in many other passages, he treats of
   the second table of the Law, by which the sincerity of godliness is put
   to the test; for, as gold is tried in the fire, so the dispositions
   which we cherish towards God are ascertained from the habitual course
   of our life, when our sincerity comes to be seen by the duties which we
   owe to each other.

   The word walketh is the wellknown metaphor of a road, which is
   frequently employed in Scripture for describing the manner of life or
   habitual conduct. By righteousness he means not the entire keeping of
   the Law, but that equity which is included in the second table; for we
   must not; imagine that subtle disquisitions about "righteousness" are
   here intended.

   Who speaketh what is right. He now enumerates the chief parts of that
   uprightness which ought to be maintained; and as the tongue is the
   chief instrument by which a man regulates his actions, he places it in
   the second rank after "righteousness." He who restrains it from slander
   and evilspeaking, from deceit, perjury, and falsehood, so as not to
   injure his brother in any matter, is said to "speak what is right."
   Next is added another department,

   Who despiseth the gain arising from violence and calumny. He might have
   said in a single word, "who despiseth money;" but he employed more
   homely language, and accommodated himself to the ignorance of men. He
   who is desirous of riches, and does not refrain from robbery or from
   base and unlawful means of making gain, harasses and oppresses the poor
   and feeble, and cares for nothing else than to lay hold on money in
   every direction, and by every method either right or wrong. He next
   proceeds farther, and describes corruptions of every sort.

   Who shaketh his hands from accepting a bribe. Under the name of bribes,
   by which judges are corrupted, he likewise includes everything else.
   There is nothing by which the dispositions of men and righteous
   judgment are so much perverted; and therefore he bids them "shake their
   hands," so as to intimate in what abhorrence they should be held, and
   with what care they should be avoided by all, lest, if they only
   handled or were tainted by barely touching them, they should be drawn
   aside kern what is just and right; for "bribes" have wonderful powers
   of fascination, so that it is very difficult for judges to keep their
   hands altogether clean and uncorrupted by them. What, then, can we
   think of those who always have their hands stretched out and ready to
   receive, and crooked nails ready to catch; and not only so, but, like
   harlots, openly hire themselves out for gain? Need we wonder if God
   thunders against them with unrelenting vengeance?

   Who stoppeth his ear that it way not hear blood. At length he demands
   that the manifestation of uprightness shall be made in the ears. By
   blood he means murder and manslaughter, but he likewise includes wicked
   conspiracies of every kind, that the "ears" may not be open to hear
   them, so.as to give our consent.. He does not mean that our "ears"
   should be shut against the cries of the poor, when they suffer injuries
   and oppression; but he means that we should detest wicked devices by
   which unprincipled men contrive the ruin of the innocent, that we may
   not even lend our "ears" to their discourses, or allow ourselves to be
   solicited in any way to do what is evil.

   Who shutteth his eyes. At length he demands the same holiness in the
   "eyes." In short, he teaches that we ought to restrain all our senses,
   that we may not give to wicked men any token of our approbation, if we
   wish to escape the wrath of God and that terrible burning of which he
   formerly spake.

   16. He shall dwell in high places. That the Jews may know that the
   chastisements which God had inflicted on them were righteous, and may
   endeavor to be restored to his favor, he says that his blessing is
   ready to be bestowed on good and upright men, such as he described in
   the former verse, and that they are not subject to any danger, and have
   no reason to dread that burning which he mentioned, because they shall
   be made to dwell in a place of the greatest safety. As to wicked men,
   slanderers, robbers, and deceitful persons, on the other hand, who
   cannot restrain their tongue, and hands, and ears, and eyes from base
   and wicked actions, the Prophet shews that we need not wonder if God
   treat them with severity, and that, while God is their judge, their own
   conscience is at the same time their executioner; and consequently,
   that the only means of hindering them from dreading the presence of
   God, is to keep themselves voluntarily in the fear of God. By "high
   places," he means a very safe place, and free from all danger, which ns
   attack of the enemy can reach, as he declares plainly enough
   immediately afterwards by assigning to them a habitation among
   "fortified rocks."

   Bread shall be given to him. To a safe dwelling he adds an abundance of
   good things; as if he had said that the holy and upright worshippers of
   God shall lack nothing, because God will not only protect them so as to
   keep them safe from all danger, but will also supply them abundantly
   with all that is necessary for the support of life. By the words
   "bread" and "water" he means all the daily necessaries of life.

   And his waters shall be sure. Though wicked men have abundance for a
   time, they shall afterwards be hungry; as God threatens in the Law,
   that they shall have famine and hunger. (Leviticus 26:19; Deuteronomy
   28:23, 48.) The same remark may be made with regard to "bread," for the
   word "sure" relates to both; as if he had said, that all believers
   shall have their food made "sure." "Lions are hungry, and wander about;
   but they that fear God shall not want any good thing," (Psalm 34:10;)
   because God, who is by nature bountiful, is not wearied by bestowing
   liberally, and does not exhaust his wealth by acts of kindness.

   Besides, as the life of men is exposed to various dangers, and as
   abundance of meat and drink is not all that is necessary for our
   support, unless the Lord defend us by his power, we ought, therefore,
   to observe carefully what he formerly mentioned, that believers are
   placed in a safe abode. The Lord performs the office of a shepherd, and
   not only supplies them with food, but also defends them from the
   attacks of robbers, enemies, and wolves; and, in short, keeps them
   under his protection and guardianship, so as not to allow any evil to
   befall them. Whenever, therefore, it happens, that enemies annoy us,
   let us consider that we are justly punished for our sins, and that we
   are deprived of God's assistance because we do not deserve it; for we
   must reckon our sins to be the cause of all the evils which we endure.

   Yet let not those who are conscious of their integrity imagine that God
   has forsaken them, but let them to the latest day of their life rely on
   those promises in which the Lord assures his people that he will be a
   very safe refuge to them. No man, indeed, can be so holy or upright as
   to be capable of enduring the eye of God; for "if the Lord mark our
   iniquities," as David says, "who shall endure?" (Psalm 130:3.) We
   therefore need a mediator, through whose intercession our sins may be
   forgiven; and the Prophet did not intend to set aside the ordinary
   doctrine of Scripture on this subject, but to strike with terror wicked
   men, who are continually stung and pursued by an evil conscience, [13]
   This ought to be carefully observed in opposition to the Popish
   doctors, by whom passages of this kind, which recommend works, are
   abused in order to destroy the righteousness of faith; as if the
   atonement for our sins, which we obtain through the sacrifice of
   Christ, ought to be set aside.

   17. The king in his beauty. Although the Prophet changes the person,
   yet this verse must be connected with the preceding verse; for he
   addresses the sincere worshippers of God, to whom he promises this
   additional blessing, Thou shalt see the king in his beauty This promise
   was highly necessary for supporting the hearts of believers, when the
   state of affairs in Judea was so lamentable and so desperate. When
   Jerusalem was besieged, the king shut up within the city and surrounded
   by treacherous counsellors, the people unsteady and seditious, and
   everything hastening to ruin, there appeared to be no hope left. Still
   the royal authority in the family of David was a remarkable pledge of
   the love of God. Isaiah, therefore, meets this danger by saying, that
   though they behold their king covered with filthy garments, yet he
   shall be restored to his former rank and splendor.

   First, it ought to be observed how invaluable is the kindness of God,
   when the commonwealth is at peace, and enjoys good princes, by whom
   everthing is administered justly and faithfully; for by their agency
   God rules over us. Since, therefore, this happiness is not
   inconsiderable, the Prophet was unwilling to leave out this part, in
   promising prosperity to the worshippers of God. Yet it, ought also to
   be observed, that that kingdom was a type of the kingdom of Christ,
   whose image Hezekiah bore; for there would be a slight fulfillment of
   this promise, if we did not trace it to Christ, to whom all these
   things must be understood to refer. Let no man imagine that I am here
   pursuing allegories, to which I am averse, and that this is the reason
   why I do not interpret the passage as relating directly to Christ; but,
   because in Christ alone is found the stability of that frail kingdom,
   the likeness which Hezekiah bore leads us to Christ, as it were, by the
   hand. I am, therefore, disposed to view Hezekiah as a figure of Christ,
   that we may learn how great will be his beauty. In a word, Isaiah here
   promises the restoration of the Church.

   The land very far off. The restoration of the Church consists of two
   parts; first, that "the king shall be seen in his beauty;" and
   secondly, that the boundaries of the kingdom shall be extended. We know
   that the appearance of Christ is so disfigured as to be contemptible in
   the eyes of the world, because "no beauty or loveliness" (Isaiah 53:2)
   is seen in him; but at length, his majesty and splendor and beauty
   shall be openly displayed, his kingdom shall flourish and be extended
   far and wide. Although at present wicked men have everything in their
   power, and oppress the true servants of God, so that they scarcely have
   a spot on which they can plant their foot in safety, yet with firm hope
   we ought to look for our King, who will at length sit down on his
   bright and magnificent throne, and will gloriously enrich his people.

   18. Thy heart shall meditate terror. Believers are again informed what
   calamities are at hand, lest, by being suddenly overtaken with such
   heavy afflictions, they should sink under them. yhgh (yehgeh) is
   translated by some in the preterite, "meditated," and by others in the
   future, "shall meditate;" because such an exchange of tenses is
   customary in the Hebrew language. For my own part, believing that he
   warns the people of approaching distresses, instead of relating those
   which had been formerly endured, I willingly retain the future tense,
   which is also the tense employed by the Prophet, "shall meditate."

   Where is the scribe? He relates in a dramatic and lively manner
   (mimetikos) the speeches of those who, overcome by terror, break out
   into these exclamations: Where is the scribe? Where is the weigher?
   thus expressing the powerful impression made on their minds. If any one
   suppose that the line of thought is suddenly broken off, because the
   Prophet, having in the former verse spoken of "the kings beauty," now
   brings forward terrors, I have no doubt that he magnifies the kindness
   of God by means of comparison, in order that believers, when they have
   been delivered, may set a higher value on the condition to which they
   have attained. Men are forgetful and niggardly in judging of God's
   favors, and, after having been once set free, do not consider what was
   the depth of their misery. Such persons need to be reminded of those
   wretched and disastrous times, during which they endured great
   sufferings, in order that they may more fully appreciate the greatness
   of the favor which God has bestowed on them. We ought also to observe
   another reason why it was advantageous that the people should be
   forewarned of that terror. It was that, after having heard of the kings
   magnificence, they might not promise themselves exemption from all
   uneasiness, but might be prepared to undergo any kind of troubles and
   distresses, and that, even while they were subject to tribute and
   placed under siege, they might, know that the kingdom of Judah was the
   object of God's care, and would be rescued from the hands of tyrants.

   It is a very wretched condition which the Prophet describes, that a
   free people should be oppressed by such cruel tyranny as to have all
   their property valued, and an inventory taken of their houses,
   possessions, families, and servants. How grievous this slavery is, many
   persons formerly unaccustomed to it actually know by experience in our
   times, when their property is valued to the very last farthing, and a
   valuation is made not only of their undoubted incomes but also of their
   expected gains, and not only their money and possessions, but even
   their names are placed on record, while new methods of taxation are
   contrived, not only on food but on the smallest articles, so that
   tyrants seize on a large portion of those things which are
   indispensably necessary to the wretched populace; and yet those
   calamities do not restrain men from insolence, licentiousness, and
   rebellion. What then will happen when they shall be free and at full
   liberty? Will they not, forgetful of all their distresses, and
   unmindful of God's kindness, abandon themselves more freely than before
   to every kind of indulgence and licentiousness? It is not without good
   reason, therefore, that the Prophet places before the eyes of the
   people that wretched condition, that they may not, when delivered from
   it, giveway to their unlawful passions, but may acknowledge their
   deliverer and may love him with all their heart.

   Some have falsely imagined that Paul (1 Corinthians 1:20) quotes this
   passage; for that would spoil the Prophet's meaning and torture his
   words to a different purpose. They have been led into a mistake by the
   mere use of the word "scribe," which there denotes a Teacher. Isaiah
   gives the name of "the scribe" to the person who took account of
   persons, families, lands, and houses, and, in short, who kept the
   registers of the taxes. By "the weigher," he means the person who
   received the taxes, for he "weighed" the money which was paid. That
   office is discharged in the present day by those who are called
   treasurers.

   Where is he who singles out the principal houses? He now.adds a very
   troublesome and exceedingly disliked class of men, "the describers of
   the towers," that is, of the more remarkable buildings; for they visit
   and examine each person's house, in order to know who are more wealthy
   than others, that they may demand a larger sum of money. Such men, like
   hunting-hounds, are commonly employed by tyrants to scent the track of
   money, for the sake of laying on some unusual impost in addition to the
   ordinary taxes. The arrival of such persons must have been exceedingly
   annoying to the people, for they never cease till they have sucked all
   the blood and marrow. If any one prefer to view this term as denoting
   the servants of the king himself, whose business it was to destroy the
   houses adjoining to the walls of the city, let him enjoy his opinion.
   For my own part, I think it probable that the Prophet speaks of the
   receivers of taxes, whom conquerors appoint over vanquished nations for
   the sake of maintaining their authority.

   19. Thou shaft not see a fierce people. The word nvz (nognaz) is
   translated by some "strong," and by others "impudent;" but,
   undoubtedly, he intends to express the fierceness of the Assyrians,
   which he afterwards affirms by saying that they would have no
   intercourse with them, because they spoke a different language. Nothing
   is more fitted to excite men to compassion than the intercourse of
   speech, by which men explain their distresses to each other. When this
   is wanting, there can be no means of gaining their hearts; each party
   is a barbarian to the other; and nothing more can be obtained from them
   than if one were dealing with wild and savage beasts. The Prophet,
   therefore, dwells largely on the wretched condition of the people, in
   order to shew, on the other hand, how great was the kindness of God in
   delivering them from so great terror. In like manner, the Holy Spirit
   magnifies the grace of God, in preserving his people in Egypt, though

   "they did not understand the language of that nation."
   (Psalm 131:5.)

   20. Behold Zion. Some read it in the vocative case, "Behold, O Zion;"
   but it is preferable to read it in the accusative case. He brings
   forward a promise of the restoration of the Church, which ought to have
   great weight with all godly persons; for when the Church shakes or
   falls, there can be no hope of prosperity. That the Church will be
   restored he shews in such a manner that he places it before our eyes as
   having actually taken place, though he speaks of what is future; and
   his object is to give greater energy to his style, as if he had said,
   "Again you will see Zion restored and Jerusalem flourishing." Although
   believers see everything destroyed and scattered, and although they
   despair of her safety, yet in Jerusalem there shall be a quiet and safe
   habitation.

   The city of our solemnities, or of our assemblies. By this designation
   he shews that we ought to judge of the restoration of Zion chiefly on
   this ground, that the people "assembled" there to hear the Law, to
   confirm the covenant of the Lord, to call upon his name, and to offer
   sacrifices. When the people were deprived of these things, they were
   scattered and nearly lost, and appeared to be separated from their head
   and utterly abandoned. Accordingly, nothing was so deeply lamented by
   godly persons, when they were held in captivity at Babylon, as to be
   banished from their native country and at the same time deprived of
   those advantages; and that this was the chief complaint of all
   believers is very manifest from many passages. (Psalm 137:4.)

   "Zion" is called by him "a city," because it formed the middle of the
   city, and was also called "the city of David." (Isaiah 22:9.) The
   extent of Jerusalem was different and larger; for, as we mentioned in
   the explanation of another passage, [14] there was a double wall, which
   is customary in many cities. Here it ought to be observed that the
   restoration of the Church is the most valuable of all blessings, and
   ought above all things to be desired; that everything else, even though
   it should be most abundant, is of no avail, if this single blessing be,
   wanting; and, on the other hand, that we cannot be unhappy, so long as
   Jerusalem, that is, the Church, shall flourish. Now, it is restored and
   flourishes, when God presides in our assemblies, and when we are
   assembled in his name and thus cleave to him. Wicked men indeed shelter
   themselves under the name of God, as if they were assembled at his
   command; but it is an empty mask, for in their heart they are very far
   from him, and attempt nothing in obedience to his authority.

   Jerusalem a peaceful habitation. He says that believers, who had long
   been agitated amidst numerous alarms, will have a safe and "peaceful
   habitation" in the Church of God. Although God gave to his people some
   taste of that peace under the reign of Hezekiah, yet it was only in
   Christ that the fulfillment of it was manifested. Not that since that
   time the children of God have had a quiet habitation in the world; even
   in the present day this peacefulness is concealed; for we lead an
   exceedingly wandering and uncertain life, are tossed about by various
   storms and tempests, are attacked by innumerable enemies, and must
   engage in various battles, so that there is scarcely a single moment
   that we are at rest. The peace which is promised, therefore, is not
   that which can be perceived by our bodily senses, but we must come to
   the inward feelings of the heart, which have been renewed by the Spirit
   of God, so that we enjoy that peace which no human understanding is
   able to comprehend; for, as Paul says, "it goes beyond all our senses."
   (Philippians 4:7.) The Lord will undoubtedly bestow it upon us, if we
   dwell in the Church.

   A tent which shall not be carried away, the stakes of which shall never
   be removed. By these metaphors of "a tabernacle" and of "stakes," he
   describes accurately the condition of the Church. He might have called
   it a well-founded city, but he says that it is "a tabernacle," which,
   by its very nature, is such that it can be speedily removed to a
   different place, in order that, though we may consider the condition of
   the Church to be uncertain and liable to many changes, yet we may know
   that it cannot be moved or shaken; for it will remain in spite of
   storms and tempests, in spite of all the attacks of enemies, and in
   opposition to what appears to be its nature, and to the views of our
   understanding. These two statements appear to be inconsistent with each
   other, and faith alone reconciles them, by maintaining that it is safer
   to dwell in this "tabernacle" than in the best defended fortresses.

   We ought to employ this as a shield against temptations, which
   otherwise would speedily destroy our faith, whenever we perceive the
   Church to be not only shaken, but violently driven about in all
   possible directions. Who would say that amidst that violent storm the
   "tabernacle" was safe? But since God does not wish his people to be
   wholly fixed on the earth, that they may depend more on himself alone,
   the protection which he promises to us ought to be reckoned better than
   a hundred, better than a thousand supports.

   21. Because there the mighty Jehovah will be to us. The two particles
   ky ym (ki im) often serve the place of a double affirmative, but here a
   reason is assigned, and they might even be appropriately rendered, For
   if; but I willingly retain what is more clear. The Prophet assigns the
   reason why the Church, which appears to resemble a movable "tent,"
   exceeds in stability the best founded cities. It is because "the Lord
   is in the midst of her," as it is also said, (Psalm 46:5,) and
   "therefore she shall not be moved." If we separate the Church from God;
   it will immediately fall without any attack; for it will consist of men
   only, than whom nothing can be more weak or frail.

   Will be to us a place of rivers. When God dwells with us, he confirms
   and supports what was naturally feeble, and supplies to us the place of
   a very strong fortress, a very broad ditch, and walls and "rivers"
   surrounding the city on every side. He alludes to the situation of the
   city Jerusalem, which had only a small rivulet, and not large and rapid
   rivers, like those of Babylon and other cities; for in another passage
   (Isaiah 8:6) he enjoined them to rest satisfied with the power of God
   alone, and not to covet those broad rivers. As if he had said, "Our
   strength shall be invincible, if God rule over us; for under his
   guidance and direction we shall be abundantly fortified."

   There shall not pass a ship with oars. Large rivers are attended by
   this inconvenience, that they may give access to enemies, so as to
   enable them to approach with their ships nearer than is desirable; and
   thus, very frequently, what appeared to be of service is found to be
   injurious. But while the Lord says that he will be "a river," he says
   also that there will be no reason to dread such an inconvenience, and
   that enemies will not be allowed to approach, he mentions two kinds of
   ships, long ships, and ships of burden, in order to shew that enemies
   will be shut out in every possible way. Hence we ought to draw a very
   useful doctrine, that the hope of safety should not be sought from any
   other than from God alone, and that it is in vain to collect various
   means of defense, which will be useless, and even hurtful, if He be not
   on our side.

   22. For Jehovah is our judge. The Prophet now explains the manner in
   which God dwells in the Church. It is, that he is there worshipped and
   acknowledged as Judge, Lawgiver, and King; for they who obey God and
   yield subjection to him as their King, shall know by experience that he
   is the guardian of their salvation; but they who falsely glory in his
   name, vainly hope that he will assist them. Let us only yield to his
   authority, hear his voice, and obey him; and, on the other hand, he
   will shew that he is our protector and most faithful guardian. But when
   we despise his voice and disobey his word, we undoubtedly have no
   reason to wonder that he abandons and forsakes us in dangers.

   Hence, also, we ought to observe what is the true Church of God. It is
   that which acknowledges God to be a "Lawgiver" and "King." With what
   effrontery, therefore, do the Papists dare to boast that they are the
   Church of God, seeing that they reject that lawful government of it
   which was enjoined by Moses, and the Prophets, and Christ, and
   substitute in the room of it inventions and base traffic? They exert a
   cruel tyranny over consciences, and, by taking away all the liberty
   which Christ has bestowed on us, they wretchedly harass souls and lead
   them to perdition; but God alone has the right to rule the conscience,
   because he alone is "Lawgiver" and "Judge," and he alone ought to rule
   and guide us by his word. He combines here the three words, "Judge,"
   "Lawgiver" and King," because the subject is of very great importance,
   and ought not to be lightly set aside. If, therefore, we permit
   ourselves to be guided by his word, he will never fail us; and this is
   the only way of obtaining salvation.

   23. Thy cords were loosed. He directs his discourse to the Assyrians,
   in whose person he likewise addresses all the enemies of the Church.
   After having promised to the Church such stability as shall never be
   disturbed, he rebukes the foolish confidence with which ungodly men are
   puffed up; as if they had been so deeply rooted as to reach the center
   of the earth. Although, during the intoxicating influence of
   prosperity, they imagine that their wealth is exceedingly secure, he
   foretells that ruin will quickly overtake them, because they are not
   supported by the hand of God.

   He follows out the comparison which he had employed at the
   commencement. Having said that the Church resembles a place that is
   fortified and surrounded by very broad rivers which do not admit the
   approach of enemies, he now compares the condition of wicked men to
   ships; by which he means that they have no solid foundation, though
   they appear to be formidable, and though they are madly eager and
   fiercely cruel, and imagine that none can resist their rage. Although,
   therefore, they have long ships and ships of burden, by which they may
   be said to form a union between countries placed at great distances
   from each other, and to make themselves masters of sea and land, still
   they shall have no permanency or stability. The Lord will sink their
   ships, will take away their ropes and masts, and will involve them in a
   universal shipwreck. Let us not therefore be terrified by their fury
   and insolence, but let us look for the day of the Lord, when he shall
   make their rage and violence to fall on their own heads.

   24. And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick. The Prophet again
   returns to the Church; for the destruction which he threatened against
   the Assyrians tended also to the consolation of the godly, since the
   safety of the Church could not be maintained unless the Lord granted
   his protection against so many adversaries who attack and molest her on
   every hand. Accordingly, having briefly remarked that all the reprobate
   who annoy the children of God shall be defeated, he appropriately
   follows out his subject by affirming that God will leave nothing undone
   that could promote the salvation of the godly. He says, therefore, that
   the citizens of the Church shall be freed from every inconvenience,
   because through the favor of God they shall enjoy prosperity.

   The people that dwell in it have been freed from iniquity. This latter
   clause of the verse explains the former; for it shews that there is
   nothing to prevent the blessings of God from being largely enjoyed by
   us, when our sins have been pardoned. Hence, also, we conclude, that
   all the miseries which press upon us spring from no other source than
   from our sins. On any other ground the reason which he assigns might
   appear to be, farfetched and inappropriate; but we must hold this
   principle, that all the evils which God inflicts upon us are so many
   tokens of his anger. Hence it follows that, when guilt has been
   removed, nothing remains but that God will regard us with the affection
   of a father, and will graciously bestow upon us all that we need. If,
   therefore, we desire to be delivered from afflictions, we ought to
   observe this order, to seek first to be reconciled to God; for the
   removal of the cause would be speedily followed by the removal of the
   effect.

   But seeing that our desires, are illregulated, and that, in consequence
   of being anxious merely to avoid punishments, we shut our eyes against
   the root of our distresses, we need not wonder that we obtain no
   alleviation of them. Those persons, therefore, are mistaken who indulge
   in their vices, and yet wish to be exempted from every kind of
   afflictions. If they do not suffer and adversity, still they will not
   cease to be miserable, and cannot enjoy peace of mind so long as they
   are pursued by the consciousness of their crimes. Consequently, true
   happiness consists in this, that we have obtained pardon from God, and
   sincerely believe that all the blessings which we receive from his hand
   are the results of his fatherly kindness.

   Let us also learn that there is no other way in which we can please
   God, or obtain the honor of being accounted his children, than when he
   ceases to impute to us our sins; and therefore it is only the
   reconciliation which we obtain by free grace that pacifies God toward
   us, and opens up the way to the enjoyment of his goodness. That there
   is no visible evidence of that exemption from afflictions does not
   lessen the truth of the promise, because believers are abundantly
   satisfied with this comfort in their afflictions, that even when they
   are chastened by the hand of God, still they are his beloved children.
   So far as they have been renewed by his Spirit, they begin to taste the
   blessing which was in full perfection before the fall of Adam; but
   because they are burdened with many sins, they constantly need to be
   cleansed. Still, however, through compassion on their weakness, God
   mitigates their punishment, and, if not by removing altogether, yet by
   abating and soothing their grief, shews that he promotes their
   happiness; and therefore it is not without good reason that the Prophet
   declares the Church to be exempted from ordinary calamities, so far as
   they proceed from the curse of God.

   Hence, also, we see clearly how childish is the distinction of the
   Papists, that the removal of guilt is of no avail; as if we had to
   satisfy the judgment of God. But far otherwise do the prophets teach,
   as may be easily learned from various passages; and if there had been
   nothing more than this single passage, can anything be plainer than
   that sicknesses come to an end, because iniquity has been pardoned? The
   meaning is undoubtedly the same as if he had said, that punishment
   ceases because sin has been pardoned. True, indeed, though God has been
   pacified towards them, [15] he sometimes inflicts punishment on
   believers; and the object is, that by fatherly chastisement he may
   instruct them more fully for the future, and not that he may take
   vengeance on them, as if he had been but half reconciled. But Papists
   think that their punishments are of the nature of satisfactions, and
   that by paying them the sinner in some measure redeems himself, and
   puts away his guilt; which is absolutely inconsistent with a free
   pardon. Thus their abominable inventions, both about satisfactions, and
   about the fire of purgatory, fall to the ground.

   It is also worthy of observation, that none but the citizens of the
   Church enjoy this privilege; for, apart from the body of Christ and the
   fellowship of the godly, there can be no hope of reconciliation with
   God. Hence, in the Creed we profess to believe in "The Catholic Church
   and the forgiveness of sins;" for God does not include among the
   objects of his love any but those whom he reckons among [he members of
   his onlybegotten Son, and, in like manuel', does not extend to any who
   do not belong to his body the free imputation of righteousness. Hence
   it follows, that strangers who separate themselves from the Church have
   nothing left for them but to rot amidst their curse. Hence, also, a
   departure from the Church is an open renouncement of eternal salvation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] "Certainement nos enfans sont plus savans et religieux qu'eux."
   "Certainly our children are more learned and religious than they are."

   [2] "Puis que ton naturel est d'assister aux tiens, quand tout est
   reduit au desespoir." "Since thy disposition is to assist thy people
   when all is reduced to despair."

   [3] The rising meant is not the ascent of the Judge to the
   judgmentseat, (Piscator,) nor the exaltation of the Assyrian power,
   (AbenEzra.) but the act of rising from a state of seeming inaction, as
   when one rouses himself to strike, (Barnes.)" -- Alexander.

   [4] This word is rendered by Calvin and our own translators,
   "stability."

   [5] "Here Judah is spoken of in the third person, though mentioned in
   the second just before; an enallage frequent in Hebrew poetry." --
   Stock.

   [6] See Commentary on Isaiah, [2]vol. 1, p. 374.

   [7] "Their valiant ones, or messengers." -- (Eng. Ver.) "The Targum and
   some other ancient versions seem to treat 'r'lm, (erellam,) as a
   contraction of 'r'h lm, (ereh lam, or eraeh lam.) Thus Aquila has
   horathesomai autois Symmachus,ophthesomai; the Vulgate, videntes But
   there is no example of the form lm (lam) for lhm (lahaem). --
   Alexander.

   [8] "Eliakim, with the rest, who returned to Hezekiah, with their
   clothes rent, in despair at the rejection of all conditions of peace.
   Isaiah 36:2, 22." -- Stock.

   [9] "These are not the words of the ambassadors reporting the condition
   of the country (Grotius), but of the Prophet himself describing it. The
   scene presented is not that of Protestant cities seized by Antichrist,
   and a stop put to a religious course and conversation (Gill), but the
   actual condition of Judea during the Assyrian invasion. (Compare Judges
   5:6)." -- Alexander.

   [10] "The emphasis is not upon the pronoun (Barnes), which in that case
   would have been expressed in Hebrew, but upon the adverb now, which is
   twice repeated to imply that the time for the divine interposition is
   arrived, and that there shall be no more delay." -- Alexander.

   [11] "In the Chaldee ksch (chasach) signifies "to prune," and in the
   Syriac it denotes "the pruning of vines," as in Asseman. Bibl. Orient.,
   tom. 1, p. 374. The meaning therefore is, as thorns lopped off and
   dried are quickly consumed, with a crackling noise, by the fire laid
   under them." -- Rosenmuller.

   [12] "Quand leurs coeurs sont endureis." "When their hearts are
   hardened."

   [13] "D'un remords de mauvaise conscience." "By the remorse of a bad
   conscience."

   [14] Commentary on Isaiah

   [15] "Encore qu'il leur air pardonne." "Though he has forgiven them."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 34
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 34:1-17

   1. Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the
   earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that
   come forth of it.

   1. Accedite gentes ad audiendum, et populi attendite. Audiat terra, et
   plenitudo ejus; orbis, et cuncta germina ejus.

   2. For the indignation of the LORD is upon all nations, and his fury
   upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath
   delivered them to the slaughter.

   2. Quia indignatio est Iehovae super omnes gentes, et furor super omnem
   exercitum earum; vastavit eas, tradidit eas in mactationem.

   3. Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up
   out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their
   blood.

   3. Interfecti earum abjicientur, et e cadaveribus eorum ascendet foetor
   earum, ac liquefient montes prae sanguine eorum.

   4. And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall
   be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as
   the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig
   tree.

   4. Et tabescent omnes exercitus coelorum, et complicabuntur ut liber.
   Coeli et onmes exercitus eorum defluent, sicut defiuit folium e vite,
   et sicut defiuit ex ficu.

   5. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down
   upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.

   5. Quoniam inebriatus est in coelis gladius meus. Ecce, super AEdom
   descendet, super populum, inquam, anathematis met in judicium.

   6. The sword of the LORD is filled with blood, it is made fat with
   fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the
   kidneys of rams: for the LORD hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great
   slaughter in the land of Idumea.

   6. Gladius Iehoae impletus eat sanguine, impinguatus est ab adipe;
   sanguine, inquam, agnorum et hircorum, adipe renum arietum. Quoniam
   victima Iehova in Bozra, et mactatio magna in terra AEdom.

   7. And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with
   the bulls; and their l.and shall be soaked with blood, and their dust
   made fat with fatness.

   7. Et descendent unicornes cum eis, et juvenci cum tauris; et
   inebriabitur terra eorum sanguine, et pulvis adipe impinguabitur.

   8. For it is the day of the LORD'S vengeance, and the year of
   recompences for the controversy of Zion.

   8. Quoniam dies ultionis Iehovae, annus retributionum in causam Sion.

   9. And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust
   thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning
   pitch.

   9. Et convertentur flumina ejus in picem, et pulvis ejus in sulphur;
   eritque terra ejus in picem ardentern.

   10. It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go
   up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none
   shall pass through it for ever and ever.

   10. Noctu et die non extinguetur, perpetuo ascendet fumus ejus; a
   generatione in generationem devastabitur, perpetuis aeternitatibus nemo
   transibit per cam.

   11. But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also
   and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the
   line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.

   11. Itaque accipient eam in possessionem pelicanus et ulula; noctua et
   corvus habitabunt in ea; extendetque super earn funiculum inanitatis et
   lapides perpendiculares vantratis.

   12. They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall
   be there, and all her princes shall be nothing.

   12. Nobiles ejus sine regno vacabunt, et cuncti principes ejus erunt
   nihilum.

   13. And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in
   the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a
   court for owls.

   13. Proferet in palatiis ejus spinas, et urticam, et carduum in arcibus
   ejus; eritque habitaculum draconum, et mansio pullis struthionis.

   14. The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts
   of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl
   also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest.

   14. Et occurrent bestiae sylvestres satyris, et stryx ad socium suum
   vociferabur;etiam Lamina ibi per noctabit, invenietque sibi mansionem
   quietam.

   15. There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and
   gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered,
   every one with her mate.

   15. Ulula faciet ibi nidum, et incubabit, et excludet, et congregabit
   in umbra ejus; quinetiam vultures ibi congregabuntur, unaquaeque cum
   socia sua.

   16. Seek ye out of the book of the LORD, and read: no one of these
   shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded,
   and his spirit it hath gathered them.

   16. Sciscitamini ex libro Iehovae, et legite. Nunquid unum ex illis
   substractum; nullum sociae suae deerit; quoniam os ejus praecepit, et
   spiritus ejus congregavit eas.

   17. And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it
   unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to
   generation shall they dwell therein.

   17. Et ipse projecit eis sortem, etmarius ejus divisit illis in
   perpetuum, quasi per funiculum. Ideo haereditabunt eam, in generationem
   et genereationem illic habitabunt.


   1. Draw near, ye nations. Hitherto the Prophet, intentding to comfort
   the children of God, preached, as it were, in the midst of them; but
   now, directing his discourse to the Gentiles, he pursues the same
   subject, but in a different manner. Having formerly shewn (Isaiah 33:6,
   20) that the Lord takes such care of his people as to find out the
   means of preserving them, he now likewise adds, what we have often seen
   in earlier parts of this book, that, after having permitted wicked men
   to harass them for a time, he will at length be their avenger, He
   therefore pursues the same subject, but with a different kind of
   consolation; for he describes what terrible vengeance the Lord will
   take on wicked men who had injured his people.

   Hearken, ye peoples. In order to arouse them the more, he opens the
   address by this exclamation, as if he were about to discharge the
   office of a herald, and summon the nations to appear before the
   judgmentseat of God. It was necessary thus to shake off the
   listlessness of wicked men, who amidst ease and prosperity despise all
   threatenings, and do not think that God will take vengeance on their
   crimes. Yet amidst this vehemence he has his eye principally on the
   Church; for otherwise he would have spoken to the deaf, and without any
   advantage.

   Let the earth hear. He addresses the Edomites who would haughtily
   despise these judgments, and therefore he calls heaven and earth to
   bear witness against them; for he dedares that the judgment will be so
   visible and striking, that not only all the nations but even the dumb
   creatures shall behold it. It is customary with the prophets thus to
   address the dumb creatures, when men, though endued with reason and
   understanding, are stupid, as we have formerly seen. (Isaiah 1:2;
   Deuteronomy 32:1.)

   2. For the indignation of Jehovah is on all the nations. He undoubtedly
   means "the nations" which were hostile to the Jews, and at the same
   time were contiguous to them; for, being surrounded on all sides by
   various nations, they had almost as many enemies as neighbors. Though
   this hatred arose from other causes, such as envy, yet the diversity of
   religion very greatly inflamed their rage, for they were exceedingly
   offended at having their superstitions condemned. So much stronger was
   the reason why God proraised that he would be a judge and avenger.

   On all their army. This is added because the Jews were few in number
   when compared with the rest of the nations. Although, therefore, "the
   nations" were proud of their vast numbers, and despised the Jews
   because they were few, yet he declares that God will easily diminish
   and crush them, in order to preserve, his little flock, of which he is
   the guardian.

   He hath destroyed them. Though he speaks of future events, yet he chose
   to employ the past tense, in order to place the event immediately
   before the eyes of those who were lying low and overwhelmed with
   adversity. These predictions were made, as I briefly noticed a little
   before, not on account of the Edomites, who paid no regard to this
   doctrine, but for the sake of the godly, whom he wished to comfort,
   because they were wretchedly harassed by their enemies.

   3. Their slain shall be cast out. By this circumstance he shews that it
   will be a great calamity, for if a few persons are "slain," they are
   committed to the earth; but when so great a multitude is slain at one
   time, that there are not left as many as are necessary for burying
   them, there is no thought of interment, and therefore the air is
   polluted by the stench of their carcases. Hence it is evident, that God
   is sufficiently powerful to lay low innumerable armies. Perhaps, also,
   the Prophet intended to heighten the picture of the judgment of God,
   because to the slaughter of the nations there will be added shame and
   disgrace, so that they shall be deprived of the honor and duty of
   burial

   And the mountains shall melt on account of their blood. Another figure
   of speech is employed to shew more fully the extent of the slaughter,
   for the "blood" will flow from "the mountains," as if the very
   mountains were melted, just as when the waters run down violently after
   heavy showers, and sweep away the soil along with them. Thus, also, he
   shows that there will be no means of escape, because the sword will
   rage as cruelly on the very mountains as on the field of battle.

   4. And all the armies of heaven shall fade away. Isaiah employs an
   exaggerated style, as other prophets are accustomed to do, in order to
   represent vividly the dreadful nature of the judgment of God, and to
   make an impression on men's hearts that were dull and sluggish; for
   otherwise his discourse would have been deficient in energy, and would
   have had little influence on careless men. He therefore adds that "the
   stars" themselves, amidst such slaughter, shall gather blackness as if
   they were ready to faint, and he does so in order to show more fully
   that it will be a mournful calamity. In like manner, as in a dark and
   troubled sky, the clouds appear to be folded together, the sun and
   stars to grow pale and, as it were, to faint, and all those heavenly
   bodies to totter and give tokens of ruin; he declares that thus will it
   happen at that time, and that everything shall be full of the saddest
   lamentation.

   These statements must be understood to relate to men's apprehension,
   for heaven is not moved out of its place; but when the Lord gives
   manifestations of his anger, we are terrified as if the Lord folded up
   or threw down the heavens; not that anything of this kind takes place
   in heaven, but he speaks to careless men, who needed to be addressed in
   this manner, that they might not imagine the subject to be trivial or a
   fit subject of scorn. "You will be seized with such terror that you
   shall think that the sky is falling down on your heads." It is the just
   punishment of indifference, that wicked men, who are not moved by any
   fear of God, dread their own shadow, and tremble "at the rustling of a
   falling leaf," (Leviticus 26:36,) as much as if the sun were falling
   from heaven. Yet it also denotes a dreadful revolution of affairs, by
   which everything shall be subverted and disturbed.

   5. For my sword is made drunken in the heavens. He says that the
   "sword" of the Lord is bloody, as extensive slaughter makes the
   "swords" wet with gore; and, in order to give greater weight to his
   style, he represents the Lord as speaking. But why does he say that it
   is in heaven? for God does not call men to heaven to inflict punishment
   on them, but executes his judgments openly in the world, and by the
   hand of men. [16] Here the Prophet looks at the secret decree of God,
   by which he appoints and determines everything before it is executed;
   and he does not mean the act itself, but extols the efficacy of the
   prediction, because the certainty of the effect is manifest from the
   unchangeable purpose of God; that unbelievers may know that the Lord in
   heaven takes account of the crimes of wicked men, although for a time
   they may pursue their career of iniquity without being punished, and
   that, although they enjoy profound peace, still the sword by which they
   shall be slain is even now bloody in the sight of God, when he
   determines to inflict punishment on them. In like manner Sodom (Genesis
   19:28) was already burning in the sight of God, while it freely
   indulged in wine and feasting, and in satisfying its lust; and the same
   thing must be said of other wicked men, who, while they are wallowing
   in pleasures, are held as appointed by God to be slain. We ought not,
   therefore, to fix our attention on the present state when we see wicked
   men enjoy prosperity and do everything according to their wish. Though
   no one annoys them, still they are not far from destruction when God is
   angry with them and is their enemy.

   So it shall come down on Edom. He expressly mentions the Edomites, who
   were hostile to the people of God, though related to them by blood, and
   distinguished by the same mark of religion; for they were, as we have
   formerly mentioned, [17] descended from Esau, (Genesis 36:8,) and were
   the posterity of Abraham. At the present day, in like manner, we have
   no enemies more deadly than the Papists, who have publicly received the
   same baptism with ourselves, and even profess Christ, and yet cruelly
   persecute and would wish utterly to destroy us, because we condemn
   their superstitions and idolatry. Such were the Edomites, and therefore
   the Prophet has chiefly selected them out of the whole number of the
   enemies.

   On the people of my curse. By giving them this appellation he confirms
   the sentence which he had pronounced, for in vain would they endeavor
   to escape that destruction to which they were already destined and
   devoted. By this term he declares that they are already destroyed by a
   decree of heaven, as if they had been already separated and cut off
   from the number of living men. That it may not be thought that God has
   done it unjustly, he adds, to judgment; for there is nothing to which
   men are more prone than to accuse God of cruelty, and the greater part
   of men are unwilling to acknowledge that he is a righteous judge,
   especially when he chastises with severity. Isaiah, therefore, shews
   that it is a just judgment, for God does nothing through cruelty or
   through excessive severity.

   6. The sword of Jehovah is filled with blood. He follows out the same
   statement, but by a different description, which places the matter in a
   much stronger light, in order to shake off the drowsiness of wicked
   men, who are wont to laugh and scoff at all doctrine, as we have
   formerly remarked. It is therefore necessary that the judgments of God
   should be set forth as in a lively picture, that it may not only make a
   deep impression on their dull minds, but may encourage believers by
   holy confidence, when they learn that the pride and rebellion of their
   enemies cannot at all hinder them from being dragged like cattle to the
   slaughter, whenever it shall be the will of God.

   He compares it to sacrifices, for animals are slain in sacririce for
   the worship and honor of God, and in like manner the destruction of
   this people will also tend to the glory of God. And here he confirms
   what was formerly said about judgment, for when God executes his
   judgments, he shews forth his glow; so that the destruction of wicked
   men is justly compared to "sacrifices," which belonged to his worship.
   "Sacrifices," indeed, were undoubtedly not very pleasant and agreeable
   to behold, for the revolting act of taking away life, the reeking
   blood, and the stencil of the smoke, might have a repulsive effect; and
   yet in these things the honor of God shone brightly. Thus, also, this
   slaughter was hideous to behold, and little fitted to obtain regard;
   but believers, in order that they may hallow the name of God in this
   respect, are commanded to lift up their eyes to heaven; because, in
   executing such punishment, God erects altars to himself for slaying
   sacrifices. Because they unjustly oppressed the Church of God, and,
   forgetful of all humane feelings, treated the children of God with
   cruelty, Isaiah declares that in their blood is offered a sacrifice of
   sweet savor, and highly acceptable to God, because he executes his
   judgment.

   With the blood of lambs and of goats. Under this appellation he
   describes metaphorically the people that were to be slain, and,
   alluding to the various kinds of victims, includes not only all men of
   ordinary rank, but all the nobles, in order to intimate that the Lord
   will punish his enemies in such a manner that no man of any class
   whatever shall be exempted he mentions Bozrah, the chief city and
   metropolls, as it were, of the nation, where the greatest slaughter
   shall take place; and next, he adds, the country of Edom, through the
   whole of which this calamity shall take its course. [18]

   7. And the unicorns shall come down with them. This verse is closely
   connected with the former, for he adds nothing new, but proceeds with
   the same figure, amplifying what he had said about "rams" and "goats,"
   to which he adds not only bullocks but wild and savage beasts. It
   amounts to this, that the vengeance of heaven will be so unrelenting as
   to spare neither age nor rank, and to mark; for slaughter even cruel
   giants, notwithstanding their silly fierceness, just as if one were
   preparing a sacrifice which consisted indiscriminately of every kind of
   animals. It ought not to be thought strange that lambs are mingled with
   cruel beasts, for the term "lambs" is not employed in commendation of
   their mildness or harmlessness, but is applied comparatively to those
   who are feeble and who belong to the ordinary rank, which lays them
   under the necessity of having some appearance of modesty.

   Although God may appear to be harsh in thus directing his hostility
   against all classes, yet, by the use of the word "sacrifice," he claims
   for himself the praise of justice; and indeed no man, when he comes to
   the trial, will be found to be without blame, so that on good grounds
   all, without exception, are irrecoverably ruined. Such is the
   destruction which awaits all the reprobate, who of their own accord
   refuse to devote themselves to the service of God; irreligious hands
   shall offer them in sacrifice. [19]

   'vrym (abbirim) is translated strong by some commentators; I have
   preferred to follow those who explain it to mean bulls, which it means
   also in Psalm 50:13, though in this passage the Prophet employs the
   word bulls to denote metaphorically those who are very strong and
   powerful.

   8 For it is the day of vengeance of Jehovah. This verse must be viewed
   as closely connected with the preceding verses, for it points out the
   object which the Lord has in view in punishing the Edomites with such
   severity; and that object is, that he wishes to avenge his people and
   defend their cause. If, therefore, he had not also assigned this
   reason, the former statements might have appeared to be obscure or
   inappropriate; for it would, have been an uncertain kind of knowledge
   if we did not consider that God, in punishing wicked men, testifies his
   unceasing affection and care to preserve his own people.

   What was formerly said about the Edomites must undoubtedly be extended
   to the enemies of the Church, for all of them were included by the
   Prophet under a particular class; and, therefore, in adversity our
   hearts ought to be supported by this consolation, that the attacks
   which we now suffer shall come into judgment before God, who justly
   claims for himself this office. The Prophet does not only mean that it
   is in his power to punish wicked men whenever he thinks proper, but,
   that he reigns in heaven, in order to punish every kind of injustice at
   the proper time.

   But we must attend to the words day and year, by which he reminds us
   that God does not sleep in heaven, though for a little time he does not
   come forth, but delays his vengeance till a fit season, that believers
   may in the meantime "possess their souls in patience," (Luke 21:19,)
   and may leave him to govern according to his inscrutable wisdom.

   9. And its streams shall be turned into pitch. What the Prophet now
   adds contains nothing new, but describes more fully this desolation. We
   have formerly explained the reason wily the prophets employ these
   lively pictures in representing the judgments of God. It is for the
   purpose of leading men to view them as actually present, and of
   compelling them to acknowledge those things which their eyes and minds
   do not discern, or which, as soon as they are beheld and known, are
   immediately forgotten. But it ought also to be observed that the
   Prophets spoke of things which were dark and secret, and which were
   generally thought to be incredible; for many persons imagined that the
   Prophets uttered them at random. It was, therefore, necessary to add
   many confirmations, such as those which he employs in this and in other
   passages; and thus he denotes a horrible change, which shall destroy
   the whole face of Judea.

   Moreover, he alludes to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, (Genesis
   19:24,) as the prophets very frequently do. In that destruction, as
   Jude informs us, we have a perpetual representation of the wrath of God
   against the reprobate, (Jude 7;) and it is not without good reason that
   the prophets call it to our remembrance, that all may learn to dread
   the judgments of God. To the same purpose is what he adds, --

   10. By night and by day it shall not be quenched. The Prophet's
   language is undoubtedly hyperbolical; but the Lord is compelled to act
   towards us in this manner, for otherwise plain words would produce no
   impression on us. When he declares that the wrath of God against the
   Edomites will resemble a fire that burns continually, he cuts off from
   them all hope of pardon, because, having never ceased to provoke God,
   they find that he is implacable; and Malachi also pronounces this
   expression of reprobation, that the curse of God will for ever rest on
   that nation. (Malachi 1:4.) The contrast must be supplied, because some
   mitigation is always held out to the people of God for their comfort.
   But this does not need a lengthened interpretation. It is enough that
   we understand the meaning and design of the Prophet.

   11. Therefore the pelican and the owl shall possess it. As to these
   animals there are various opinions, and Hebrew commentators are not
   agreed about them; but the design of the Prophet is evident, which is,
   to describe a desert place and an extensive wilderness. He undoubtedly
   mentions dreadful beasts and hideous monsters, which do not dwell with
   men, and are not generally known by them, in order to shew more fully
   how shocking will be this desolation. The former clause therefore is
   plain enough, but the latter is attended by some difficulty.

   He shall stretch over it the cord of emptiness. Some view the phrase
   "an empty cord" as bearing an opposite sense, and apply it to the Jews;
   but I take a more simple view, and think that, like all the preceding
   statements, it must relate to the Edomites. Anti to make it more clear
   that this is Isaiah's natural meaning, we read the same word in the
   Prophet Malachi, who lived a long time afterwards. That passage may be
   regarded as an approbation of this prophecy.

   "If Edom shall say, We have been diminished, we shall therefore return
   and rebuild the desolate places; thus saith the Lord of Hosts, They
   shall indeed build, but I shall pull down, and they shall call them the
   borders of wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord is angry
   for ever. And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, Let the Lord be
   magnified on the borders of Israel." --
   (Malachi 1:4, 5.)

   What Isaiah had foretold more obscurely, Malachi explains with greater
   clearness. The latter declares that "the Edomires shall build in vain,"
   and the former that "they shall stretch an empty cord." As if he had
   said, "In vain shall the masterbuilders bestow their exertions on
   rebuilding the cities;" for builders make use of cords and plummets in
   all their measurements. He therefore shews that the efforts of those
   who shall intend to restore the land of Edom will be fruitless; for his
   meaning is, that they shall be destroyed in such a manner that they
   cannot at all recover from that destruction, though God usually
   alleviates other calamities by some consolation.

   And hence we ought to draw a very profitable doctrine, that when cities
   are in some measure restored after having been thrown down, this arises
   from the distinguished kindness of God; for the efforts of builders or
   workmen will be unavailing, if he do not put his hand both to laying
   the foundation and to carrying forward the work. Fruitless and
   unprofitable also will their work be, if he do not conduct it to the
   conclusion, and afterwards take it under his guardianship. In vain
   shall men bestow great expense, and make every possible exertion, if he
   do not watch over and bless the work. It is only by the blessing of
   God, therefore, that we obtain any success; and hence also it is said
   that "his hands have built Jerusalem." (Psalm 147:2; Isaiah 14:32.)
   What Isaiah threatens in this passage against the Edomites, the Holy
   Spirit elsewhere declares as to the house of Ahab, meaning that it
   shall be razed to the very foundation. (2 Kings 21:13.)

   12. They shall call her nobles without a kingdom. This passage has
   received various interpretations, which I do not quote, because it
   would be tedious to refute them. One of the most probable is, "They
   shall call his nobles to reign, but in vain." As if he had said, "In
   their wretched condition none will be found willing to rule over them,
   and to undertake the charge of the commonwealth." A statement of the
   same kind is found elsewhere, and we have formerly (Isaiah 3:6,7) seen
   one that is almost alike; but the words do not correspond. When the
   Prophet speaks thus, "They shall call her nobles, and they shall not be
   there," he employs, I doubt not, witty raillery to censure the pride of
   that nation which had been cherished by longcontinued peace and
   abundance. When the Edomites, therefore, out of their mountains
   breathed lofty pride, the Prophet declares that they shall be
   disgracefully cast down, so that they shall have no nobility and no
   government; just as, when a kingdom has been overturned, government is
   taken away, so that the general mass of the people resembles a maimed
   or disfigured body, and there is no distinction of ranks. To those
   stately nobles who vaunted themselves so much, he says in mockery, that
   they shall be princes without subjects.

   And all her princes shall be nothing. The meaning of the former clause
   is still more evident from this second clause, in which he adds for the
   sake of explanation, that her princes "shall be reduced to nothing.' It
   amounts to this, that the land of Edom shall resemble a mutilated body,
   so that nothing shall be seen in it but shocking confusion. This is the
   utmost curse of God; because, if men have no political government, they
   will hardly differ at all from beasts. Indeed, their condition will be
   far worse, for beasts can dispense with a governor, because they do not
   make war against their own kind; but nothing call be more cruel than
   man, if he be not held by some restraint, for every one will be driven
   by the furious eagerness of his own passions to every kind of vicious
   indulgence.

   13. In her palaces she shall bring forth thorns. He pursues the same
   subject; for he describes a frightful desolation, by which splendid
   houses and palaces are levelled to the ground, or reduced to a state so
   wild that they are of no use to men, but produce only briers, thorns,
   and nettles; which is more disgraceful than if they had been turned
   into fields and meadows. In this manner does the Lord punish the
   insolence of those who built lofty and magnificent houses and costly
   palaces, that the remembrance of them might be handed down to the
   latest posterity. Having banished men, he turns those dwellings into
   nests of birds and dens of wild beasts, that, instead of being, as they
   expected, the trophies of their name and renown, they may stand as
   monuments of foolish ambition. Thus the place of men is nearly supplied
   by beasts, which represent the dispositions of those who reared those
   goodly edifices. This overthrow of order is likewise a sad token of the
   wrath of God, when the earth, which was created for the use of man,
   beholds its natural lords banished, and is compelled to admit other
   inhabitants; for then, undoubtedly, it is cleansed from the defilements
   with which it was polluted.

   14. And the wild beasts shall meet with the satyrs. [20] These animals
   are thought by some commentators to mean fauns, by others screechowls
   or goblins, and by others satyrs; and it is not fully agreed what is
   the exact meaning of the Hebrew words; but it would serve no good
   purpose to give ourselves much uneasiness about them, for it is quite
   enough if we understand the meaning and design of the Prophet. He draws
   a picture of frightful desolation, as if he had said that Idumea shall
   be destroyed so as to be without inhabitants, and instead of men it
   shall be inhabited by frightful beasts. This reward is most justly
   reaped by the ambition of those who built costly palaces to be, as we
   have already said, monuments of their name and reputation. Yet this is
   also a punishment threatened against the cruelty of a wicked nation,
   which was eagerly bent on the oppression of neighbours and brethren.

   Though we cannot absolutely determine whether the Prophet means
   witches, or goblins, or satyrs and fauns, yet it is universally agreed
   that these words denote animals which have the shape of men. We see
   also what various delusions are practiced by Satan, what phantoms and
   hideous monsters are seen, and what sounds and noises are heard. But of
   these we have already spoken under the thirteenth chapter. [21]

   The sin which God punished so severely in a single nation, is common to
   almost every nation; for hardly ever are those splendid buildings
   reared without committing much violence and injustice against the poor,
   and giving great and numerous annoyances to others; so that the lime,
   and stones, and timber, are filled with blood in the sight of God.
   Therefore, as Habakkuk says,

   "the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
   shall bear witness to it." (Habakkuk 2:11.)

   Let us not wonder, therefore, at those dreadful changes, when ambition
   lays hold on plunder and wicked extortions, but let us contemplate the
   righteous judgments of God.

   16. Inquire at the book of Jehovah. By "the book of the Lord" some
   understand this prophecy, as if he had enjoined them to read
   attentively this prediction; for not even in the minutest point will it
   fail at the appointed time, as he will afterwards add. Others explain
   it more ingeniously as denoting the eternal decree of God; "inquire if
   such be not the purpose of God;" but this exposition is not
   sufficiently natural. I willingly interpret it as denoting the Law
   itself, which by way of eminence is called "the book of the Lord;" for
   from the Law, as from its source, the Prophets drew their doctrine, as
   we have frequently remarked.

   Lest the strangeness of the event should prevent the prediction from
   being believed, Isaiah says that the Jews had been warned of it long
   before; and thus he indirectly censures the unbelief of those who
   stared at the announcement, as if it had been something uncommon. He
   appropriately brings them back to the Law, in which God frequently
   declares that he will take care of his people, and that he will punish
   the wicked and reprobate. Moses having long ago spoken in this manner,
   the Prophet says that there is no reason why it should be difficult to
   believe what he foretells, since he brings forward nothing new, but
   only confirms now what Moses declared and testified. Such appears to me
   to be the natural meaning of the Prophet, and by these words he
   intended to fortify the Jews, patiently to look for what the Lord
   promised, and fully to believe that all that had been foretold about
   the Edomites and the other adversaries of the Church would at length be
   actually fulfilled, since Moses was a credible witness, that God would
   always be the avenger of his people. Besides, it was proper that they
   should be reminded of this, in order that, when these things should
   befall the Edomites, they might not think that they had happened by
   chance, but might know that they were brought about by the judgment of
   God. Such is the rebellion of men, that they do not believe God when he
   forewarns them, and what afterwards takes place by the judgment of God
   is ascribed by them to fortune. Isaiah therefore meets this, and bids
   them inquire at Moses, whose authority they all revered.

   Not one of those; that is, of the animals; for the Hebrew writers
   employ these terms, 'ys (ish) and 'sh, (ishshah,) not only for men and
   women, but for males and females of any species.

   For his mouth hath commanded. He confirms what he formerly said; for
   although the works of God are sufficiently plain, yet by his mouth,
   that is, by the word, he makes them plainer to us, that we may see them
   more clearly. And this is the true contemplation of the works of God,
   when we keep our eye fixed on the mirror of the word; for otherwise our
   boldness is carried to excess, and we tke greater liberty than is
   proper, if heavenly doctrine do not guide us like a lamp. This ought
   therefore to restrain the boldness and rashness of men, who, despising
   the doctrine of the word, wish to dispute and form opinions about the
   judgments of God and all his worlds. If they "inquired at the book,"
   and asked at the mouth of the Lord, we should see greater piety and
   religion among them.

   Yet by "the mouth of the Lord" the Prophet intended to confirm the
   vengeance which he had foretold, because nothing that has come out of
   God's holy mouth can fail of its effect. Isaiah affirms that what God
   has once decreed, and published in his own name, cannot be reversed. By
   this shield he thus wards off all the doubts which quickly arise,
   whenever the promises of God go beyond our senses. Sometimes, indeed,
   he threatens conditionally, as he threatened the Ninevites, (Jonah
   1:2,) Pharaoh, (Genesis 12:17,) and Abimelech, (Genesis 20:3,) whom he
   spared, because they repented; but when he has once determined to
   revenge and punish, he gives actual proof that he is not less true and
   powerful than when he promised salvation to his people. The agreement
   of the words Mouth and Spirit makes it still more evident.

   And his Spirit hath gathered them. Although "the breath of the mouth"
   often means the same thing as "speech," and although it is customary
   with the Hebrew writers to repeat the same thing twice, yet here he
   alludes elegantly to the breath, from which the words proceed, and by
   which they are formed; as if he had said that this prediction is
   abundantly powerful, because the same God who by his voice commanded
   the brute animals to possess the land of Edom, will bring them by
   merely breathing. He speaks of a secret influence; and we ought not to
   wonder that the slightest expression of the will of God causes all the
   animals to assemble, as happened at the flood, (Genesis 7:15,) and
   likewise at the very creation of the world, when, as Moses relates, all
   the animals were gathered together, by the command of God, to the first
   man, that they might be subject to his authority. (Genesis 2:19.) And
   undoubtedly they would have continued to be subject and obedient to
   him, had not his own rebellion deprived him of that power and
   authority; but when he revolted from God, the animals at the same time
   began to refuse subjection and to attack him.

   17. And he hath cast the lot for them. He says that to those wild
   beasts and monsters there hath been granted a secure and permanent
   habitation, from which they cannot be easily banished or driven out;
   because God hath allotted it to them as.their portion by inheritance.
   This means that the whole of Idumea is at the disposal of the Lord, to
   drive out the inhabitants, and to grant possession of it to whomsoever
   he pleases, either wild beasts, or birds, or monsters.

   Hence infer that it is vain for men ever to promise themselves a
   permanent abode, unless so far as every person has obtained his place
   "by lot," and on the express condition that he shall instantly leave
   it, whenever God calls. We lead a dependent life wherever he supports
   us; and either on our native soil, or at a distance from our
   fatherland, we are strangers. If he shall be pleased to give us a
   peaceable habitation for a long time in one place, it will only be by
   his special favor that we shall dwell there; and as soon as he thinks
   proper, he will constrain us to change our abode. Besides, if we
   acknowledge that a residence in this or that country has been appointed
   to us by God, we may dwell in it with safety and composure; for if he
   keeps wild beasts in possession of the place which he has allotted to
   them, how much more will he preserve men, for whose sake he created
   heaven, earth, the seas, and all that they contain?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [16] Nothing is more customary among Eastern poets than to employ a
   sword drunken with blood' to denote extensive slaughter. (Schurrer on
   Habakkuk 3:9.) Or, perhaps, in this verse the sword in heaven ought
   rather to be understood to be drunk with the divine anger, before it is
   let down on the earth to be glutted with the blood of enemies; in which
   case the following verse would fifty describe that sword as glutted
   with blood in the land of the Edomites." -- Rosenmuller.

   [17] Commentary on Isaiah, [3]vol. 1 p. 393.

   [18] "Au travers de la quelle ceste desconfiture passera sans espargner
   endroit quelconque." "Across which this overthrow shall pass without
   sparing any place whatever."

   [19] "Ils seront sacrifiez par les mains d'aussi mecans qn'eux." "They
   shall be sacrificed by the hands of persons as wicked as themselves."

   [20] "Les bestes sauvages (assavoir Ziim avec Iim,) s'y rencontreront."
   "The wild beasts (that is, the Ziim with the Iim) shall meet there."

   [21] Commentary on Isaiah, [4]vol 1, p. 429.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 35
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 35:1-10

   1. The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and
   the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

   1. Laetabuntur solitudo et desertum; exultabit locus squalidus, et
   florebit quasi lilium.

   2. It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing:
   the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the execellency of Carmel
   and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the LORD, and the excellency of
   our God.

   2. Florens florebit, et exultabit adhuc (vel, etiam) exultatione, at.
   que jubilabit; gloria Libant dabitur ei, decor Carmel et Saron. Ipsi
   videbunt gloriam Iehovae, majestatem Dei nostri.

   3. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.

   3. Confortate manus remissas, genua labantia roborate.

   4. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not:
   behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence;
   he will come and save you.

   4. Dicite eis qui trepidi sunt corde: confortemini, ne timeatis. Ecce
   Deus vester cum ultione veniet; cum retributione Deus (vel, Dei) ipse
   veniet, et salvabit nos.

   5. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf
   shall be unstopped:

   5. Tunc aperientur oculi caecorum, et antes surdorum aperientur.

   6. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb
   sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the
   desert.

   6. Tunc saliet instar cervi claudus, clare personabit lingua muti;
   quoniam effodientur in deserto aquae, et flumina in solitudine.

   7. And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land
   springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall
   be grass, with reeds and rushes.

   7. Vertetur locus aridus in stagnum, et regio siticulosa in
   scaturigines aquarum; in habitaculo draconum, cubili, inquam, ejus
   locus erit arundini et junco.

   8. And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The
   way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be
   for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.

   8. Et erit illic semita et via, et via suncta vocabitur. Per cam non
   transibit immundus; et erit illis ambulans in via, ut stulti non
   errent.

   9. No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon,
   it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there:

   9. Non erit illic leo, nec fera bestia ascendet per eam, neque ibi
   invenietur, ut redempti ambulent.

   10. And the ransomed of the LORD shall return, and come to Zion with
   songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
   gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

   10. Itaque redempti Jehovae redibunt, et venient in Sion cum
   exultatione; et gaudium perpetuum erit super caput eorum; et
   apprehendent gaudium et laetitiam, fugientque tristitia et gemitus.


   1. The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad. Here the
   Prophet describes a wonderful change; for having in the former chapter
   described the destruction of Idumaea, and having said that it would be
   changed into a wilderness, he now promises, on the other hand,
   fertility to the wilderness, so that barren and waste lands shall
   become highly productive. This is God's own work; for, as he blesses
   the whole earth, so he waters some parts of it more lightly, and other
   parts more bountifully, by his blessing, and afterwards withdraws and
   removes it altogether on account of the ingratitude of men.

   This passage is explained in various ways. I pass by the dreams of the
   Jews, who apply all passages of this kind to the temporal reign of the
   Messiah, which they have contrived by their own imagination. Some
   explain it as referring to Judea, and others to the calling of the
   Gentiles. But let us see if it be not more proper to include the whole
   world along with Judea; for he predicted the destruction of the whole
   world in such terms as not to spare Judea, and not only so, but because
   "the judgment of God begins at his house or sanctuary," (1 Peter 4:17,)
   the singularly melancholy desolation of the Holy Land was foretold,
   that it might be a remarkable example. Thus beginning appropriately and
   justly with Judea, he calls the whole world a wilderness, because
   everywhere the wrath of God abounded; and, therefore, I willingly view
   this passage as referring to Judea, and afterwards to the other parts
   of the world. As if he had said, "After the Lord shall have punished
   the wickedness and crimes of men, and taken vengeance on Jews and
   Gentiles, the wilderness shall then be changed into a habitable
   country, and the face of the whole earth shall be renewed." Now this
   restoration is a remarkable instance of the goodness of God; for, when
   men have provoked him by their revolt, they deserve to perish
   altogether, and to be utterly destroyed, especially they whom he has
   adopted to be his peculiar people. Isaiah has his eye chiefly on the
   Jews, that in their distressful condition they may not faint.

   Let us now see when this prophecy was fulfilled, or when it shall be
   fulfilled. The Lord began some kind of restoration when he brought his
   people out of Babylon; but that was only a slight foretaste, and,
   therefore, I have no hesitation in saying that this passage, as well as
   others of a similar kind, must refer to the kingdom of Christ; and in
   no other light could it be viewed, if we compare it to other
   prophecies. By "the kingdom of Christ," I mean not only that which is
   begun here, but that which shall be completed at the last day, which on
   that account is called "the day of renovation and restoration," (Acts
   3:21;) because believers will never find perfect rest till that day
   arrive. And the reason why the prophets speak of the kingdom of Christ
   in such lofty terms is, that they look at that end when the true
   happiness of believers, shall be most fully restored.

   After having spoken of dreadful calamities and predicted the lamentable
   ruin of the whole world, the Prophet comforts believers by this
   promise, in which he foretells that all things shall be restored. This
   is done by Christ, by whom alone they can be renewed and made glad; for
   he alone renews everything, and restores it to proper order; apart from
   him there can be nothing but filth and desolation, nothing but most
   miserable ruin both in heaven and in earth. But it ought to be
   carefully observed, that the world needed to be prepared by
   chastisements of this nature, in order that it might be fit and
   qualified for receiving such distinguished favor, and that the grace of
   Christ might be more fully manifested, which would have been concealed
   if everything had remained in its original state. It was therefore
   necessary that the proud and fierce minds of men should be cast down
   and subdued, that they might taste the kindness of Christ, and partake
   of his power and strength.

   2. Flourishing it shall flourish. He describes more fully how great,
   will be the effect of the grace of Christ, by whose power and might
   those places which had been overgrown with filthy and noxious weeds
   "flourish" exceedingly and regain their vigor. This repetition is used
   for the sake of amplification. The doubling of the word "flourish" may
   be taken in two senses; either to denote the prolongation of time in
   incessant vegetation; as if he had said, "It shall not flourish with a
   passing or fading blossom, so as to return immediately to the foul
   condition in which it once was, but with a continual, uninterrupted,
   and long-continued bloom, which can never fade or pass away;" or to
   denote the increase and daily or yearly progress of improvement; for
   Christ enriches us in such a manner as to increase his grace in us from
   day to day.

   The glory of Lebanon, the beauty of Carmel and Sharon. These metaphors
   display more fully the fertility already described; for the Prophet is
   not satisfied with saying that where formerly there was a gloomy
   wilderness smiling fields will be seen, and that dry places will be
   clothed with the beauty of flowers, but adds that there will be such
   luxuriant beauty as "Lebanon, Carmel, and Sharon" were celebrated for
   possessing. Though Carmel denotes a cultivated and fertile field, yet
   here it is a proper name, like the other two. We have seen in other
   passages [22] that these mountains were highly celebrated, and
   throughout the whole of Judea held the undisputed preeminence both for
   delightfulness and for abundance of fruits.

   They shall see the glory of Jehovah. What he had formerly spoken
   metaphorically he now explains clearly and without a figure. Till men
   learn to know God, they are barren and destitute of everything good;
   and consequently the beginning of our fertility is to be quickened by
   the presence of God, which cannot be without the inward perception of
   faith. The Prophet undoubtedly intended to raise our minds higher, that
   we may contemplate the abundance and copiousness of heavenly benefits;
   for men might be satisfied with bread and wine and other things of the
   same kind, and yet not acknowledge God to be the author of them, or
   cease to be wretched; and indeed men are often blinded and rendered
   more fierce by enjoying abundance. But when God makes himself visible
   to us, by causing us to behold his glory and beauty, we not only
   possess his blessings, but have the true enjoyment of them for
   salvation.

   3. Strengthen ye the weak hands. We might explain this passage
   generally, as if he had said, "Let those who have feeble hands
   strengthen them, let; them whose knees tremble and totter compose and
   invigorate their hearts." But the following verse shews that the whole
   of this passage relates to the ministers of the word; for he addresses
   the teachers of the Church, and enjoins them to exhort, arouse, and
   encourage weak men whose hearts are broken or cast down, that they may
   be rendered more firm and cheerful. This exhortation is seasonably
   introduced, because he saw that so many tokens of God's anger, of which
   he had spoken, could not do otherwise than fill even the strongest
   minds with alarm and dread; for, seeing that we are always enfeebled by
   adversity, when God himself proclaims what may be called open war
   against us on account of our sins, who would not tremble? But the
   Prophet commands that they who are cast down and almost lifeless shall
   be enlivened, and the manner of doing it is explained by him in the
   following verse.

   4. Say to them that are faint hearted. That strength of which he spoke
   is breathed into our hearts by God through his word, as "by faith alone
   we stand" (2 Corinthians 1:24) and live; and therefore he adds the
   promise of grace yet to come.

   Behold, your God will come. First, it ought to be observed that God
   does not wish that his grace should remain concealed and unknown, but
   rather that it should be proclaimed and imparted, that they who totter
   and tremble may compose and invigorate their hearts. And this is one
   method by which our hearts may be cheered amidst heavy distresses; for
   if we are not supported by the word of the Lord, we must faint and
   despair. This, then, is the office assigned to the teachers of the
   word, to raise up them that are fallen down, [23] to strengthen the
   feeble, to upheld the tottering.

   We ought also to observe how great is the efficacy of the word in
   "invigorating the feeble hands and strengthening the tottering knees;"
   for if it had not been a powerful instrument in communicating this
   strength, the Prophet would never have spoken in this manner; and,
   indeed, if God struck only our ears by his word, and did not pierce our
   hearts, these words would have been spoken in vain. Since, therefore,
   the Lord assigns this office to the word, let us know that he also
   imparts this power to it, that it may not be spoken in vain, but may
   inwardly move our hearts, not always indeed or indiscriminately, but
   where it pleases God by the secret power of his Spirit to work in this
   manner. And hence we infer that the same word makes us disposed to obey
   him; for otherwise we shall be indolent and stupid; all our senses
   shall fail, and we shall not only waver, but shall be altogether
   stupified by unbelief. We, therefore, need to receive aid from the
   Lord, that the removal of our fear and the cure of our weakness may
   enable us to walk with agility.

   Fear not; behold, your God will come. This warning deeply fixed in our
   minds will banish slothfulness. As soon as men perceive that God is
   near them, they either cease to fear, or at least rise superior to
   excessive terror.

   "Be not anxious," says Paul, "for the Lord is at hand." (Philippians
   4:5, 6.)

   On this subject we have spoken largely on other occasions; and the
   Apostle to the Hebrews appears to allude to this passage, when, after
   having charged them not to be wearied and faint-hearted, he quotes the
   words of the Prophet. (Hebrews 12:3, 12.) Yet he directs this discourse
   to every believer, that they may be excited to perseverance, and
   because they have many struggles to maintain, may advance steadfastly
   in their journey. Nor is it superfluous that he adds your God; for if
   we do not know that he is our God, his approach will produce terror,
   instead of giving cause of joy. Not the majesty of God, which is fitted
   to humble the pride of the flesh, but his grace, which is fitted to
   comfort the fearful and distressed, is here exhibited; and, therefore,
   it is not without reason float he is represented as a guardian, to
   shield them by his protection.

   If it be objected that he brings terror when he comes to take
   vengeance, I reply that this vengeance, is threatened against wicked
   men and enemies of the Church. To the latter, therefore, he will be a
   terror, but to believers he will be a consolation; and accordingly he
   adds that he will come to save them, because otherwise it might be
   objected, "What is it to us if our enemies be punished? What good does
   it do to us? Must we take delight in the distresses of enemies?" Thus
   he expressly declares that it will promote our "salvation;" for the
   vengeance which God takes on wicked men is connected with the salvation
   of the godly. In what manner the godly are delivered from anxiety and
   dread by the favor of God and by the expectation of his aid, has been
   explained at a former passage). [24] (Isaiah 7:4.) At present it ought
   to be observed, that God is prepared and armed with vengeance, that
   believers may learn to lean on his aid, and not to fancy some deity
   unemployed in heaven. Such is also the object of the repetition of the
   words, "he will come;" because distrust is not all at once banished
   from the hearts of men.

   The end of the verse may either be rendered, God himself will come with
   a recompense, or He will come with the recompense of God; but as the
   meaning is the same, the reader may make his choice Yet if it be
   thought preferable to view 'lhym (elohim) as in the genitive case, "of
   God," then by "the recompense of God" is emphatically meant that which
   belongs peculiarly to God, that believers may be fully convinced that
   he is a "rewarder" as truly as he is God. [25]

   5. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened. [26] He continues the
   promise about the restoration of the Church, in order to encourage the
   hearts of the godly, who must have been grievously dismayed by the
   frightful calamities which he foretold. Since a true restoration is
   accomplished by Christ, we must therefore come to him, if we wish to
   know the meaning of the words which Isaiah employs in this passage; and
   indeed it is only by his kindness that we rise again to the hope of a
   heavenly life. Isaiah probably alludes to a former prediction, (Isaiah
   29:10,) in which he threatened against the Jews dreadful blindness,
   madness, and total stupefaction of the soul. He now promises that, when
   Christ shalt shine forth, those senses of which they were deprived for
   a time shall be renovated and brightened to a new life. There is weight
   in the adverb Then; for we ought to infer from it that, so long as we
   are alienated from Christ, we are dumb, blind, and lame, and, in short,
   that we are destitute of all ability to do what is good, but that we
   are renewed by the Spirit of Christ, so as to enjoy real health.

   By the tongue and ears and feet he means all the faculties of our soul,
   which in themselves are so corrupt that nothing that is good can be
   obtained from them till they are restored by the kindness of Christ.
   The eyes cannot see what is right, and the ears cannot hear, and the
   feet cannot guide us in the right way, till we are united to Christ.
   Though the senses of men are abundantly acute wherever they are
   impelled by sinful passions; though the tongue is eloquent for slander,
   perjury, lying, and every kind of foolish speaking; though the hands
   are too ready for thefts, extortions, and cruelty; though the feet are
   swift to do injury; and, in short, though the whole of our nature is
   not only willing but strongly bent on doing what is evil; yet we are
   altogether slothful and dull to do what is good, and therefore every
   part of us must be created anew by the power of Christ, that it may
   begin to understand aright, to feel, to speak, and to perform its
   offices; for

   "no man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Spirit." (1
   Corinthians 12:3.)

   This renewal proceeds from the grace of Christ alone, and, therefore,
   sound strength is regained by those who are converted to Christ, and
   who formerly were in all respects useless, and resembled dead men; for,
   while we are separated from Christ, we either are destitute of
   everything that is good, or it is so greatly corrupted in us, that it
   cannot be applied to its proper use, but on the contrary is polluted by
   being abused. Christ gave abundant proofs and examples of this, when he
   restored speech to the dumb, eyes to the blind, and perfect strength to
   the feeble and lame; but what he bestowed on their bodies was only a
   token of the far more abundant and excellent blessings which he imparts
   to our souls.

   6. For waters shall be dug. He next adds other blessings with which
   believers shall be copiously supplied, as soon as the kingdom of Christ
   is set up; as if he had said, that there will be no reason to dread
   scarcity or want, when we have been reconciled to God through Christ,
   because perfect happiness flows to us from him. But he represents this
   happiness to us under metaphorical expressions; and, first, he says
   that "waters shall be dug;" because, where formerly all was barren,
   there the highest fertility shall be found. Now, we are poor and
   barren, unless God bless us through Christ; for he alone, brings with
   him the blessing of the Father, which he bestows upon us. Wicked men,
   indeed, have often a great abundance of good things, but their wealth
   is wretched; for they have not Christ, from whom alone proceeds a true
   and salutary abundance of all blessings. Death unquestionably would be
   more desirable than that abundance of wine and of food with which we,
   at the same time, swallow the curse of God. When, therefore, Christ
   shall gloriously arise, rivers and waters shall flow out and yield true
   and valuable advantage.

   7. The dry place shall be changed into a pool. He confirms the former
   statement, that Christ will come in order to enrich his people with all
   abundance of blessings; for waters shall flow out of "dry places." [27]
   We must keep in remembrance what we mentioned a little before, that the
   Prophet delineates to us what may be called a picture of a happy life;
   for although this change was not openly visible at the coming of
   Christ, yet with good reason does the Prophet affirm that, during his
   reign, the whole earth shall be fruitful; for he had formerly said that
   without Christ all things are cursed to us.

   In the habitation of dragons. The whole world, therefore, shall
   resemble a parched wilderness, in which lions, "dragons," and other
   wild beasts prowl, till the kingdom of Christ shall be set up; and, on
   the other hand, when he is established on his throne, the godly shall
   lack nothing. An instance of this was given, when the Lord delivered
   his people and brought them out of Babylon; but the accomplishment of
   this prophecy must be looked for in Christ, through whom their ruinous
   condition is amended and restored; for that deliverance was but a
   feeble representation of it. And yet the full accomplishment of this
   promise ought not to be expected in the present life; for as it is
   through hope that we are blessed, (Romans 8:24,) so our happiness,
   which is now in some respects concealed, must be an object of hope till
   the last day; and it is enough that some taste of it be enjoyed in this
   world, that we may more ardently long for that perfect happiness.

   8. And a path shall be there. Here it is promised to the Jews that they
   shall be allowed to return to their native country, lest, when they
   were carried into Babylon, they should think that they were led into
   perpetual banishmerit. Yet this statement is, in my opinion, extended
   much farther by the Prophet; for, as he promised a little before, that
   there would be plenty and abundance of provisions where there had been
   barrenness, so now he says that those places where formerly no man
   dwelt shall be occupied with the.journeys and habitations of a vast
   multitude of men; and, in short, that the whole of Judea shall enjoy
   such harmony and peace with other countries, that men shall pass from
   the one country to the other without fear; for where there are no
   inhabitants, there can be no intercourse and no roads. He therefore
   means that the Jews will carry on intercourse and merchandise with
   other nations, after having been brought back and restored to their own
   land.

   And it shall be called, The holy way. Not without reason does the
   Prophet add that "the way shall be holy;" for wherever there is a great
   multitude of men, innumerable vices and corruptions abound. What else
   is done by a crowd of men than to pollute the land by infecting each
   other with mutual contagion? The Prophet therefore means that not only
   the earth, but also the minds of men are renewed by the kindness of
   Christ, so that they sanctify the earth which they formerly were wont
   to corrupt by their pollution. Yet what I stated briefly ought to be
   remembered, that the Jews, to whom the way shall be consecrated, will
   return to their native country, that they may worship their Redeemer in
   it in a holy manner; as if he had said that the land will be cleansed
   from the disgraceful rabble of a wicked people, that it may be
   inhabited by the true worshippers of God.

   The unclean person shall not pass through it. He now adds a more full
   explanation; for polluted persons shall not tread the land which God
   hath set apart for his children; as if he had said, that the Lord will
   separate believers in such a manner that they shall not be mingled with
   the reprobate. This ought, unquestionably, to be reckoned among the
   most valuable blessings of the Church; but it is not fulfilled in this
   life; for both despisers of God and hypocrites rush indiscriminately
   into the Church and hold a place there. Yet some evidence of this grace
   becomes visible, whenever God, by various methods, cleanses his Church;
   but the full cleansing of it must be expected at the last day. Even the
   worshippers of God, whom he has regenerated by his Spirit, are attended
   by much uncleanness. Though they have been sanctified by God, yet their
   holiness cannot be perfect; their flesh is not wholly dead, but subdued
   and restrained so as to obey the Spirit. Now, it is because the Lord
   reigns in them, and subdues their natural dispositions, that, on
   account of that part of them which is the most important, they are
   called Saints.

   And he shall be to them one that walketh in the way. This clause has
   been tortured in various ways by commentators. Some render it "This
   shall be their road; they who have been used to the road, and they who
   are unacquainted with it, shall not go astray." Others render it, "This
   shall be the road for the children of Israel, and they who walk shall
   not go astray, though they be unacquainted with it." But the
   demonstrative pronoun hv', (hu,) he, is more correctly, in my opinion,
   viewed as referring to God; as if he had said, that God will go before
   them to lead and direct the way. And the context absolutely demands it;
   for it would not be enough to have the way opened up, if God did not go
   before to guide his people. The Prophet therefore extols this
   inestimable kindness, when he represents God as journeying along with
   his people; for, if he do not point out the road, our feet will always
   lead us astray, for we are wholly inclined to vanity. Besides, though
   the road be at hand, and though it be plain before our eyes, yet we
   shall not be able to distinguish it from the wrong road, and if we
   begin to walk in it, our folly will quickly lead us off on the right
   hand or on the left. But the Prophet shews that we shall be in no
   danger of going astray, when we shall follow God as the leader of the
   way; for he condescends to perform this office; and he probably alludes
   to the history of the first redemption, for at that time God directed
   his people

   "by means of a cloud by day, and of a pillar of fire by night." (Exodus
   13:21.)

   At the same time he points out how necessary it is that God should
   govern us, in directly laying folly to our charge, when he adds --

   Fools shall not go astray; for they who are wise in their own eyes, and
   who rely on their own guidance, will be permitted by God to wander in
   uncertain courses; and therefore, if we wish that he should walk along
   with us, let us know that we need his guidance. Yet he offers us this
   most excellent reward, that they who follow him, even though they did
   not formerly possess any wisdom, shall be in no danger of going astray.
   Yet the Prophet does not mean that believers, after the Lord has taken
   them by the hand, will be ignorant; but he shews what they are before
   the Lord becomes their leader.

   9. There shall not be there a lion. He adds another favor of God, that
   the people, though they travel through a wilderness, will be protected
   against every hostile attack. Formerly he mentioned it (Isaiah 34:14)
   as one of the curses of God, that wild beasts would meet the Jews
   wherever they went; but now he declares that, when they have been
   received into favor, no lions and no beasts of prey shall attack them;
   because the Lord will ward them off, so as to open up a way for his
   people free from all danger and from all fear. For although they had
   received liberty to return, yet they might have met with many
   obstacles; and therefore he says that the Lord will remove every
   annoyance and obstruction.

   We may draw from this a profitable doctrine, namely, that God not only
   begins, but conducts to the end, the work of our salvation, that his
   grace in us may not be useless and unprofitable. As he opens up the
   way, so he paves it, and removes obstacles of every description, and is
   himself the leader during the whole journey. In short, he continues his
   grace towards us in such a manner that he at length brings it to
   perfection. And this ought to be applied to the whole course of our
   life. Here we walk as on a road, moving forward to that blessed
   inheritance. Satan presents numerous obstructions, and dangers surround
   us on every side; but the Lord, who goes before and leads us by the
   hand, will not leave us in the midst of the journey, but at length will
   perfectly finish what he has begun in us by his Spirit. (Philippians
   1:6.) Yet it ought to be observed that the very beasts, through God's
   kindness, shall be tamed, so as not to direct their rage and cruelty
   against us, as it is said,

   "I will make a covenant for you with the fowls of heaven, and with the
   beasts of prey." (Hosea 2:18.)

   10. Therefore the redeemed of Jehovah shall return. The Prophet
   confirms the former doctrine, that God hath determined to redeem his
   people, and therefore that nothing can resist his decree. He calls them
   "the redeemed of God," that they may consider his power, and may not
   estimate by human means the promise which he has made about their
   return. He says also, that they will come to Zion, because God does not
   in vain wish to bring them out of Babylon, and to leave them when they
   have commenced their journey. At the same time, it ought to be
   observed, that we have no means of entering the Church but by the
   redemption of God; for under the example of the ancient people, a
   general representation is placed before our eyes, that we may know that
   no man is rescued from the tyranny of the devil, to which we are all
   subject, till the grace of God go before; for no man will redeem
   himself. Now, since this redemption is a gift peculiar to the kingdom
   of Christ, it follows that he is our only deliverer, as is also
   attested by the declaration,

   "If the Son shall make you free,
   you shall be free indeed." (John 8:36.)

   Yet it is not enough that we have once been redeemed; for the design
   is, that we should dwell in the Church of God, and make progress from
   day to day. Since therefore we have been delivered by Christ, we ought
   to labor with all our might, and continually to strive to gain that
   end. If it be said that we do not need to perform a long journey, in
   order to be admitted into the Church of God, (for we are received into
   it by baptism,) I reply, that here the Prophet discourses
   metaphorically about the whole course of life; because the time when"
   the redeemed of God" shall actually "come to Zion," is when the course
   of life is closed, and they pass into a blessed life. And it ought also
   to be observed, that the greater the progress which we make in the
   grace of God, and the more close our alliance to the Church, the nearer
   do we approach to Zion.

   And they shall obtain joy and gladness. By the words "joy and
   gladness," he means that there will be so great happiness under the
   reign of Christ, that we shall have abundant reason to rejoice. And
   indeed the true and only ground of rejoicing is, to know that we are
   reconciled to God, whose favor is sufficient for our perfect happiness,
   "so that we may glory even in tribulation," (Romans 5:3;) and, on the
   other hand, when Christ does not enlighten us, we must, be darkened by
   sorrow. Besides, it is certain that the godly do not rejoice in a
   proper manner without also expressing grafftude to God; and therefore
   this spiritual joy must be distinguished from that ordinary joy in
   which irreligious men indulge; for the reprobate also rejoice, but
   their end at length shews how pernicious is the wantonness of the
   flesh, which leads them to take delight in despising God. This kind of
   "joy" Paul justly (Romans 14:17; Galatians 5:22) calls spiritual; for
   it does not depend on fading things, such as honor, property, riches,
   and other things of that nature which quickly perish; but this joy is
   secret and has its seat in the hearts, from which it cannot be shaken
   or torn away in any manner, though Satan endeavors by every method to
   disturb and afflict us; and therefore the Prophet justly adds --

   Sorrow and sighing shall flee away. The joy is everlasting, and all
   "sadness flees away;" for although many bitter griefs are daily endured
   by the children of God, yet so great is the power and strength of their
   consolation, that it swallows up all sorrow. "We glory," says Paul, "in
   our tribulations," (Romans 5:3;) and this glorying cannot be without
   joy. The Apostles

   "departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were
   accounted worthy of suffering dishonor for the name of Jesus." (Acts
   5:41.)

   Yet the godly often suffer heavy distresses, and are not exempt from
   grief. This is undoubtedly true, but they are not overwhelmed; for they
   look straight towards God, by whose power they become victorious, just
   as if a person, elevated on a lofty mountain, looking at the sun, and
   enjoying his brightness, beheld others in a low valley, surrounded by
   clouds and darkness, whom that brightness could not reach.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [22] Commentary on Isaiah, [5]vol 2, pp. 330 and [6]420.

   [23] "Fortifler ceux qui sont prests a tomber." "To support those who
   are ready to fall."

   [24] Commentary on Isaiah, [7]vol 1, p. 232.

   [25] "Vengeance shall come. The meaning is the same as if he had said,
   God will come in vengeance, or as an avenger.' Again, the retribution
   of God shall come against your enemies and deliver you." -- Jarchi.
   "The construction of the second clause is greatly perplexed by making
   'lhym (elohim) the subject of yvv' (yabo.) The true construction as
   given by Junius, Cocceius, Vitringa, and most later writers, makes
   behold your God an exclamation, and vengeance the subject of the verb."
   -- Alexander.

   [26] "That is," says Jarchi, "who have hitherto been blind so as not to
   know the reverence (or fear) of me upon them." Or, as explained by his
   annotator Breithaupt, "Who have hitherto shaken off the yoke of the
   fear of God, and have not manifested the reverence that is due to God."

   [27] "Instead of the general meaning put upon srv (sharab,) by the
   older writers following the Septuagint (anudros) and the Vulgate (quoe
   erat arida) it is now agreed that the word denotes the illusive
   appearance caused by the unequal refraction in the lower strata of the
   atmosphere, and often witnessed both at sea and land, called in
   English, looming, in Italian, fata morgana, and in French, mirage In
   the deserts of Arabia and Africa, the appearance presented is precisely
   that of an extensive sheet of water, tending not only to mislead the
   traveler, but to aggravate his thirst by disappointment. The phenomenon
   is well described by Quintus Curtius, in his Life of Alexander the
   Great." -- Alexander.
   The same view is given by Vitringa, who speaks of it as held by other
   learned men, and illustrates it very happily. It is also maintained by
   Rosenmuller, who supports it by curious and instructive extracts from
   Arabic scholiasts, and from the Koran, and by a host of other
   authorities. -- Ed
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 36
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 36:1-22

   1. Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that
   Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of
   Judah, and took them.

   1. Accidit anno decimo quarto regis Ezechiae, ut ascenderet Sennacherib
   rex Assur contra omnes urbes Iuda munitas, et caperet eas.

   2. And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem
   unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of
   the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field.

   2. Tum misit rex Assur Rapsacen e Lachis Ierosolymam ad regem Ezechiam
   cum manu valida, qui stetit in aquae ductu piscinae superioris, in via
   agri fullonis.

   3. Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the
   house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder.

   3. Et egressus est ad eum Eliacim filius Helchiae praefectus domus, et
   Sobna cancellarius, et Ioach filius Asaph secretarius.

   4. And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the
   great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou
   trustest?

   4. Et dixit illis Rapsaces: Dicite agedum Ezechiae, Sic dicit rex
   magnus, rex Assur, Quae fiducia haec qua confisus es?

   5. I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words,) I have counsel
   and strength for war: now, on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest
   against me?

   5. Dixi: (tantum verbum labiorum:) Consilium et fortitudo ad bellum.
   Nunc super quo confisus es, quod rebellasti adversum me?

   6. Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt;
   whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is
   Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.

   6. Ecce confiusus es super baculo isto arundineo confracto, super
   AEgypto; eui si quis innititur, penetrabit in manum ejus, et perforabit
   eam. Talis est Pharao rex AEgypti erga omnes qui fiduciam habent in eo.

   7. But if thou say to me, We trust in the LORD our God: is it not he,
   whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and said
   to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?

   7. Quod si dixeris mihi, In Iehova Deo nostro confidimus; annon hic est
   enjus abstulit Ezechias excelsa et altaria, dixitque ad Iuda et
   Ierusalem, coram altari hoc adorabitis?

   8. Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of
   Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on
   thy part to set riders upon them.

   8. Nunc age, da obsidem domino meo regi Assur. Dabo tibi duo millia
   equorum; an tibi erunt equites quos illis imponas?

   9. How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of
   my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for
   horsemen?

   9. Et quomodo aspernaris faciem ducis unius e servis domini mei
   minoribus, et fiduciam tibi statuis in AEgypto ob currus et equites?

   10. And am I now come up without the LORD against this land to destroy
   it? The LORD said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.

   10. Et nunc an absque Iehova ascendi ad terrain hanc, ut perdam eam?
   Iehova mihi dixit: ascende in terram hanc, ut perdas eam.

   11. Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray
   thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it:
   and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people
   that are on the wall.

   11. Et dixit Eliacim, et Sobna, et Ioach, ad Rapsacem: loquere quaeso
   ad servos tuos Syriace, quoniam nos intelligimus, et non loquaris
   nobiscum Iudaice, audiente populo qui est super murum.

   12. But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to
   thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon
   the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss
   with you?

   12. Et dixit Rapsace: Nunquid ad dominum tuum et ad to misit me dominus
   meus, ut loquar verba ista? Annon ad viros sedentes super murum, ut
   comedant stercora sua et bibunt lotium suum vobiseum?

   13. Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews'
   language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of
   Assyria.

   13. Stetit ergo Rapsace, et cla--mavit voce magna Iudaice, ac dixit:
   Audite verba regis magni, regis Assur.

   14. Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not
   be able to deliver you.

   14. Sic dicit rex: Ne vobis imponat Ezechias, quia non poterit vos
   liberare.

   15. Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, The LORD
   will surely deliver us: this city shall not be delivered into the hand
   of the king of Assyria.

   15. Neque vos confidere faciat Iehovae Ezechias, dicens, Liberando
   liberabit nos Iehova; non tradetur haec urbs in manum regis Assur.

   16. Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make
   an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye every
   one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one
   the waters of his own cistern;

   16. Ne audieritis Ezechiam; quoniam sic dicit rex Assur: Facite mecum
   benedictionem, et egredimini; et comedant singuli e ficu sua, et bibant
   singuli aquas putei sui.

   17. Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land
   of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards.

   17. Donec veniam et assumam vos in terrain similem terre vestrae,
   terrain frumenti et vini, terrain panis et vinearum.

   18. Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, The LORD will deliver
   us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the
   hand of the king of Assyria?

   18. Ne forte decipiat vos Ezechias, dicens, Iehova eripiet nos. An
   eripuerunt dii Gentium quisque terram suam e mann regis Assur?

   19. Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the gods of
   Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?

   19. Ubi est Deus Amath et Arpad? ubi Dens Sepharvaiim? An liberaverunt
   Samariam e manu mea?

   20. Who are they among all the gods of these lands, that have delivered
   their land out of my hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem out
   of my hand?

   20. Quis est in omnibus diis istarum terrarum qui liberaverit terram
   suam e manu mea; ut eruat Iehova Ierusalem e mann mea?

   21. But they held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the
   king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.

   21. Tacuerunt, nec responderunt ei verbum; quoniam praeceptum hoc regis
   erat, qui dixerat: Ne respondeatis illi.

   22. Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household,
   and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph, the recorder, to
   Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.

   22. Venit antem Eliacim praefectus palatii, et Sobna cancellarius, et
   Ioach, filius Asaph, secretarius, ad Ezechiam scissis vestibus, et
   nuntiaverunt illi verba Rapsace.


   1. It happened in the fourteenth year. In this and the following
   chapter the Prophet relates a remarkable history, which may be regarded
   as the seal of his doctrine, in which he predicted the calamities that
   would befall his nation, and at the same time promised that God would
   be merciful to them, and would drive back the Assyrians and defend
   Jerusalem and the Holy Land. What had already been accomplished made it
   evident that he had not spoken in vain; but God intended that it should
   also be testified to posterity. Yet to the men of that age it was not
   less advantageous that such a record should be preserved. He had often
   threatened that the vengeance of God was near at hand, and that the
   Assyrians were ready at his bidding to be employed by him as scourges;
   and st the same time he promised that he would assist Jerusalem even
   when matters were come to the worst. Both were accomplished, and the
   greater part of the nation passed by, as with closed eyes, those
   evident judgments of God, and not less basely despised the assistance
   which was offered to them. So much the more inexcusable was their gross
   stupidity.

   But to the small number of believers it was advantageous to perceive
   such illustrious proofs of the hand of God, that greater credit might
   afterwards be given to Isaiah. The Prophet also might pursue his course
   more ardently and with unshaken firmness, since God had given so
   splendid an attestation of his doctrine from heaven. And because the
   truth of God scarcely obtains from us the honor due to it, unless it be
   supported by strong proofs, God has provided not less largely for our
   weakness, that we may perceive as in a mirror that the power of God
   accompanied the words of Isaiah, and that what he taught on earth was
   confirmed from heaven. More especially has calling was manifestly
   sealed, when God delivered Jerusalem from the grievous siege of
   Sennacherib, and when no hope of safety remained; so that believers saw
   that they had been rescued from the jaws of death by the hand of God
   alone. For this reason I have said that it was a seal to authenticate
   the prophecies which might otherwise have been called in question.

   In the fourteenth year. Not without reason does he specify the time
   when these things happened; for at that time Hezekiah had restored the
   worship of God throughout the whole of his dominions, (2 Kings 18:4;)
   and, not satisfied with this, sent messengers in various directions to
   invite the Israelites to come with speed from every place to Jerusalem,
   to offer sacrifices, and, after long disunion, again to unite in holy
   harmony of faith, and to worship God according to the injunctions of
   the Law. While such was the condition of the kingdom that superstitions
   were removed and the Temple cleansed, and thus the true worship of God
   was restored, Judea is invaded by the king of Assyria, fields are
   pillaged, cities are taken, and the whole country is subject to his
   authority. Jerusalem alone, with a few inhabitants, is left; and in
   that city Hezekiah was shut up as in a prison.

   We must now consider what thoughts might occur to the pious king and to
   other persons; for if we judge of this calamity according to the
   perception of the flesh, we shall think that God was unjust in
   permitting his servant to be reduced to such extremities, whose piety
   seemed to deserve that the Lord would preserve him in safety and free
   from all molestation, since his whole desire was to maintain the true
   worship of God. This was no small trial of the faith of Hezekiah, and
   ought to be continually placed before our eyes, when we are subjected
   to the same temptations. The Lord did not punish Hezekiah for
   carelessness, pleasures, or luxury, and much less for superstitions, or
   unholy contempt of the Law; for as soon as he began to reign, he
   labored with the utmost zeal and carefulness and industry to restore
   the purity of religion. God therefore intended to try his faith and
   patience.

   2. Then the king of Assyria Rent Rabshakeh. The order of the narrative
   may here have been altered; for he had formerly said that Sennacherib
   had taken all the cities of Judea, and now he says that he sent
   Rabshakeh [28] from Lachish, implying that he was besieging it, and
   consequently he had not yet stormed them all. But it ought to be
   observed that historical connection is frequently disturbed, and that
   what was first in the order of time, comes last in the narrative.
   Besides, the Scriptures frequently make use of a figure of speech in
   which a part is taken for the whole, and by which it might be said that
   all the cities were taken, because those which had been left were few,
   and Hezekiah had no means of intercourse with them. It appeared,
   therefore, that the king of Assyria had brought the whole of Judea
   under his dominion, because nearly all that remained was Jerusalem
   alone, in which Hezekiah was shut up.

   This history is more fully related in the Books of Kings, where it is
   shewn how eager for peace Hezekiah was; for he labored to obtain it on
   any terms. He had delivered up "three hundred talents of silver and
   thirty talents of gold," which that tyrant had demanded; and he found
   it necessary to seize the vessels of the Temple, and the golden plates
   which had been attached to its doors, to make up that sum, because his
   treasury was exhausted. (2 Kings 18:14.) But as such gulfs are
   insatiable, when he had received that money, he next demanded more, and
   sought to enforce harder conditions. This was done partly, in order to
   provoke and torment Hezekiah, (for, having once abused the ready
   compliance of the pious king, he thought that he would obtain
   anything,) and partly because he sought an occasion of renewing the
   war. Yet it ought to be observed that the people were justly punished
   for their iniquities, as had been foretold; for although true religion
   flourished as to external worship, yet their life was not changed for
   the better, and their wickedness was not removed, nor was the inward
   pollution cleansed from their hearts. Accordingly, because the people
   did not repent, it was necessary that their obstinate depravity should
   be severely chastised. But because the measure of their iniquities was
   not yet full, God abated the fierceness of his anger, and suddenly,
   when matters were desperate, brought such assistance as could not have
   been believed.

   3. And Eliakim went to him. Eliakim was formerly mentioned. It was he
   to whom the Lord promised that he would give him the chief power in the
   kingdom after the banishment of Shebna. (Isaiah 22:20.) It now appears
   as if that promise had failed, when he is sent to an enemy as a
   suppliant, and as one who is about to surrender himself and his
   companions, and to undergo cruel tyranny. This might also fill the
   hearts of believers with anxiety, and lead them to doubt the promises
   of God. Besides, the godly king had such a scarcity of good men, that,
   along with Eliakim, he was compelled to send Shebna, whom he knew well
   to be deceitful and treacherous.

   sphr (sopher) means scribe; and accordingly it often denotes learned
   men or doctors, and sometimes those who took charge of writings and
   those who had the custody of the royal records. I have translated it
   chancellor, for unquestionably it does not relate to legal skill; and
   we may infer that this Shebna held a high rank, though he had been
   deprived of his office as governor. mzkyr(mazkir) denotes a secretary
   or recorder.

   4. Say now to Hezekiah. He relates that the three ambassadors, though
   they were attended by all the magnificence that yet remained in the
   kingdom, were not only repulsed, but disdainfully treated by the
   tyrant's delegate, and loaded with disgraceful reproaches; for, as if
   Hezekiah had been convicted of wicked revolt, Rabshakeh asks how he had
   dared to rebel. The particle n' (na) is supposed by some to denote
   entreaty, and is rendered by them I pray; but it would be unsuitable to
   a proud and insolent man to entreat in this manner. He speaks in the
   ordinary language of those who lay conditions on the vanquished, or on
   those who are overwhelmed with fear, whom they wish to compel to make
   an unconditional surrender, or, as we commonly say, (sommer) to summon.

   Thus saith the great king. In order to give greater validity to the
   summons, that general speaks in the name of his king, whose greatness
   he extols to the skies, in order to terrify Hezekiah, when he learns
   that he has to do with a king of such vast resources. He does not only
   mean that the first monarch in the world was far superior to Hezekiah,
   who in comparison of him was but a petty prince; but he calls the king
   of Assyria great, because by his power he eclipsed all others, so that
   he stood alone in his lofty rank. By these thunderbolts of words
   Hezekiah might have been overthrown and subdued, especially since he
   was so far from being able to resist the power of that tyrant that he
   was shut up in the city and unable to move out of it.

   5. I have said (only a word of the lips.) In the sacred history (2
   Kings 18:20) the word employed is, Thou hast said This may be explained
   as a declaration what kind of courage Rabshakeh thinks that Hezekiah
   possesses; as if he had said, "Such are thy deliberations." In this
   passage the use of the first person, "I have said," does not alter the
   sense; because Rabshakeh, as if he had examined the counsels of
   Hezekiah and fully understood them all, ironically reproaches him; "I
   see what thou art thinking, but they are words of the lips." This
   passage is explained in various ways. Some interpret it, "Thou sayest,
   that thou hast not merely words of the lips," that is, "Thou boastest
   that thou excellest not only in the use of words, but likewise in
   courage and wisdom." Others interpret it, "Thou hast words indeed, but
   wisdom and courage are necessary in war."

   Some think that by "words" are meant "prayers." I do not approve of
   that exposition; for it is excessively farfetched and unnatural, and
   therefore I view it thus: "Hezekiah has words of lips, that is, he
   employs a beautiful and elegant style, to keep the people in the
   discharge of their duty, or, as we commonly say, He has fine speeches;
   [29] but it is not by these that war can be begun or carried on." He
   therefore means, that he perfectly understands what Hezekiah is doing,
   and what it is on which he places his chief reliance, namely, on words
   and eloquence; [30] but these are of no use for war, in which wisdom
   and courage are needed. It might also be appropriately viewed as
   relating to the Egyptians, as if he had said that Hezekiah acts
   foolishly in allowing himself to be cheated by empty promises; and
   undoubtedly the Egyptians were liberal in promising mountains of gold,
   though they gave nothing in reality. But as we shall find that he
   speaks of the Egyptians, soon afterwards, in a particular manner, I
   have no doubt that here he ridicules Hezekiah, as if he fed the
   expectation of the people by empty boasting, while he was not provided
   with military preparations.

   6. Behold, thou hast trusted in, that broken staff of reed. This is
   probably separate from the former verse; for, having formerly said that
   the eloquence by which he flatters the people is all that Hezekiah
   possesses, and having inferred from this that his confidence is
   exceedingly foolish, he now comes to other particulars. He employs
   every method for shaking the hearts of the people, that all, being
   stunned, may absolutely surrender. Accordingly, after having
   represented Hezekiah to be contemptible as to his internal resources,
   he next adds, that the external resources are idle and useless, and
   says that they are greatly mistaken in expecting any assistance
   whatever from the Egyptians.

   And, first, he compares the Egyptians to "a staff of reed" on account
   of their weakness; secondly, for the sake of amplification he calls
   them "a broken staff;" thirdly, he says that it is so far from
   supporting that it pierces the hands that lean upon it. The meaning may
   be thus summed up, "the hope which the Jews entertain of receiving aid
   from the Egyptians is not only false and unfounded, but pernicious."
   And indeed with truth might Rabshakeh have said this, if it had been
   true that Hezekiah relied on the Egyptians; but he slanderously and
   falsely accuses the pious king of this vain confidence Yet God justly
   rewarded a rebellious and disobedient people by allowing this filthy
   dog to reproach them with their wicked revolt. Isaiah had formerly
   (Isaiah 30:1, and 31:1, 6) condemned this crime in severe terms, but
   their deaf ears refused to admit the reproof; and therefore the Jews,
   who had wickedly despised a Prophet that spoke to them in the name of
   God, deserved to have Rabshakeh for their instructor.

   We are therefore warned by this example, that there is no reason to
   wonder if unbelievers, who do not obey the counsel of God for their
   salvation, and reject all prophecies, are subjeered to the jeers of
   their enemies, as Rabshakeh, the captain of the Assyrian king, now
   haughtily taunts the rebellious Jews. Yet it is of importance to
   consider how great a difference there is between the warnings of God
   and the mockeries of Satan. When God wishes to dissuade us from sinful
   confidence in the flesh, he declares in general terms, "Cursed be he
   that trusteth in man," (Jeremiah 17:5.) that the whole world may be
   reduced to nothing, and that thus we may be satisfied with himself
   alone; and therefore, when he has brought us low, he instantly imparts
   courage to us by holding out a remedy. But when Satan deceitfully
   blames any vain hope, he drives us to despair, and urges us to many
   other hopes equally bad or still worse, and tempts us to adopt unlawful
   methods; as Rabshakeh does not smite the hope which the Jews
   entertained from the Egyptians, in order that they may rely on God
   alone, but substitutes the king of Assyria, as if safety ought not to
   be expected from any other quarter, tie names Pharaoh, but likewise
   includes the whole nation.

   7. And if thou shalt say to me. Rabshakeh employs an argument which
   consists of three parts. Either Hezekiah thinks that he has sufficient
   strength to resist, or he expects assistance from Egypt, or he trusts
   in God. If he trusts in himself, he is mistaken; for what is he when
   compared to my king? As to Egypt, it will render him no assistance, but
   on the contrary will inflict serious damage. It remains therefore that
   he expects some assistance from God. But he has thrown down his altars
   and curtailed his worship; will he not rather be punished on that
   account? In short, this Rabshakeh takes away from the pious king all
   assistance, both divine and human.

   By this slander Satan attempted not only to wound the heart of the
   king, that it might sink under the weight, of affliction, but to make
   an impression on the light and fickle multitude; because hitherto in
   the hearts of many there remained an attachment to superstition, and
   there was a strong tendency to fall back into this imposture, because
   the religion which was ancient, and to which they were long accustomed,
   had been changed, and, in their opinion, [31] Hezekiah was about to be
   chastised for his own rashness. In like manner, the Papists in the
   present day, whenever any adverse event befalls us, maintain that we
   are punished by God, because we have ventured to set aside ancient
   ceremonies. [32]

   8. Now come, give a hostage. [33] He concludes that there will be
   nothing better for Hezekiah than to lay aside the intention of carrying
   on war, to surrender himself, and to promise constant obedience to the
   king of Assyria. To persuade him the more, Rabshakeh again reproaches
   him with his poverty. "If I shall give thee two thousand horses, thou
   wilt not find among all thy people men to ride on them. What then is
   thy strength; or with what confidence dost thou dare to oppose my
   king?" He does not offer him horses for the sake of respect or of
   kindness, but in order to terrify and shake still more the heart of
   Hezekiah. The future tense ought therefore to be explained by the
   subjunctive mood, "Although I give thee two thousand horses, yet thou
   wilt not find an equal number of riders." I am aware of what is alleged
   by other commentators; but whoever examines the matter fully will
   quickly perceive that this is ironical language. [34]

   9. And how dost thou despise? [35] He confirms the preceding statement,
   and shews that ttezekiah is so far from being able to endure the
   presence of his king, that he ought not to be compared to the very
   smallest of his captains. In this insolent manner does he taunt him,
   that the Jews may not derive courage from the absence of Sennacherib,
   who was still detained by the siege of Lachish. Although, therefore,
   Sennacherib does not yet appear before them with his whole army,
   Rabshakeh boasts that his lieutenants are sufficiently powerful, so
   that Hezekiah ought not to hesitate to make submission.

   10. And now have I come up without Jehovah? He now attacks Hezekiah in
   another manner, by telling him that it will serve no purpose to
   assemble his forces and to make other warlike preparations. For he
   alleges that Hezekiah has not to do or to contend with a mortal man,
   but with God himself, at whose suggestion, and not at his own, he camo
   hither to destroy the country; and therefore that they who oppose him
   will fight against God, and consequently all their efforts will be
   fruitless.

   Hence we ought to learn that however earnestly we may be devoted to
   godliness, and however faithfully we may labor to advance the kingdom
   of Christ, still we must not expect to be free from every annoyance,
   but ought rather to be prepared for enduring very heavy afflictions.
   The Lord does not always recompense our piety by earthly rewards; and
   indeed it would be an exceedingly unsuitable recompense that we should
   possess abundant wealth and enjoy outward peace, and that everything
   should proceed to our wish; for the world reckons even wicked men to be
   happy on this ground, that they do not endure bad health or adversity,
   and are free from the pressure of poverty, and have nothing to disturb
   them. In this respect our condition would not differ at all from that
   of the reprobate.

   This example of Hezekiah, who labored with all his might to restore
   religion and the true worship of God, and yet endured calamities so
   heavy and violent that he was not far from despair, ought to be
   constantly placed before our eyes, in order that, when we shall think
   float we have discharged our duty, we may nevertheless be prepared to
   endure conflicts and troubles of every kind, and may not be disturbed
   if enemies gain an advantage at the first onset, as if all at once they
   would swallow us up. Those proud and haughty minds will quickly fall,
   when the first ardor has boiled over and spent its foam, and their
   eagerness and pride will speedily disappear Rabshakeh boasted of the
   greatness and power of his king, in order to terrify Hezekiah. Such is
   the manner in which wicked men act towards us. By threatening words
   they attack us, and by various terrors they try our patience, or rather
   through their agency Satan labors, whom we plainly see speaking by the
   mouth of Rabshakeh. Nay, Satan assumes the character of God himself,
   and "is transformed into an angel of light." (2 Corinthians 11:14.)
   Thus also the Spirit of God himself declares, that the strength of man
   is frail and fading, and that every one who leans on it seeks his own
   destruction. (Jeremiah 17:5.) Rabshakeh says the same thing, and
   discourses as if he were discharging the prophetical office by the
   command of God.

   We ought therefore to distinguish wisely when God speaks, and when, on
   the other hand, his name is falsely assumed by men; for Satan resorts
   to various artifices to make himself appear to be like God. All these
   reproaches were unjustly, as we have said, brought by Rabshakeh against
   Hezekiah, who did not place his hope in his own strength, and did not
   vaunt himself through reliance on the Egyptians; but godly men, even
   when they do well, must be exposed to evil reports. By these stratagems
   Satan attacks our faith, and unjustly slanders us among men. This
   temptation is highly dangerous, for we are desirous that our integrity
   should be well known; and when we are well disposed, we take it ill if
   other men put a different interpretation on our conduct. Thus Satan
   endearours by slander to overturn all that has been done out of a good
   conscience, or accuses us of something with which we are not at all
   chargeable, or loads us with unfounded slanders, or contrives what
   never came into our mind; but an upright conscience ought to be like a
   brazen wall to us, that, imitating the example of Hezekiah, we may
   stand unshaken against such accusations and slanders.

   So far as relates to the last clause, in which Rabshakeh reproaches him
   with having overturned the worship of God, [36] every person must
   plainly see how slanderous is that charge; for Hezekiah had taken away
   false gods and superstitious [37] worship, which God abhors. (2 Kings
   18:4.) But we need not wonder that wicked men cannot distinguish
   between the true God and the false, between superstition, and religion.
   And the same thing is practiced amongst us every day; for the Papists,
   who are delighted with nothing but their own superstitions, accuse us
   of having taken away innumerable inventions of men, and complain that
   we have impaired and almost abolished the worship of God. They taunt us
   also in the same manner as that Rabshakeh, "Would God assist those who
   have taken away his worship, profaned the holy temples, and everything
   that was established in that beautiful order?" The reason is, that in
   Popery everything had a dazzling appearance, and drew the admiration of
   men; while we retain no ceremonies but those which are plain and
   simple, and free from all pageantry, and therefore they think that we
   have taken away the worship of God, which they estimate by outward
   appearances. If any adverse event befalls us, they exclaim that it; is
   richly deserved, that all the blame attaches to us, that the whole
   world is punished for our ungodliness, and if we ourselves suffer any
   calamity they taunt us still more.

   Yet with resolute faith we must stand out against such ungodly
   speeches, by shewing that what they call the worship of God is not his
   worship, but that we have taken away, and have justly taken away, mere
   trifles, and that all the contrivances of men do not belong to the
   worship of God, but are delusions of Satan, and that nothing is more
   destructive. We must therefore stand out with unshaken faith against
   reproaches of every kind, by which Satan endeavors to throw a shade
   over the practice of godliness. At first sight it appears to be
   shameful that he overthrew many altars and left but one, that he
   profaned many temples that one might remain. (2 Kings 18:4.) But
   Hezekiah was fully acquitted by this single defense, that he undertook
   nothing but by the word of God; and therefore that he was satisfied
   with a single altar, because God had forbidden him to erect more, and
   that he had thrown down all images, because they had been unlawfully
   set up in opposition to the instructions of the Law. (Exodus 20:4.) We
   have the same dispute with the Papists in the present day, because they
   blame us on no other ground than that we have set aside a huge mass of
   ceremonies, and retain only what God has enjoined. In such cases,
   however, we must not argue about what pleases men, but what is approved
   by God.

   11. Then said Eliakim. This circumstance again shews how deeply
   Hezekiah was depressed, when by his ambassador he entreats so humbly
   the servant of his enemy. It shews also with what pride Rabshakeh was
   puffed up, when he rejected so insolently all entreaties; and the
   refusal was the more shameful, because what was requested was not of
   great value. From these matters we learn that it was not owing to
   Hezekiah that he did not pacify the rage of the enemy; for forgetful
   almost of his royal rank, Hezekiah endearours with all possible modesty
   to soothe him. If at any time we happen to be oppressed by unjust
   violence, let us not be ashamed to yield up our rights and to
   supplicate with humility. Now, when Hezekiah was so submissive, because
   he saw that he was unable to resist the king of Assyria, this tends
   powerfully to magnify the glory of God in preserving a nation which was
   nearly ruined. For that deliverance would have been less remarkable, if
   they had been rescued only from an ordinary danger; but when they were
   not far from destruction, so much the more manifest is the hand of God,
   who by an extraordinary miracle subdued and ruined an enemy that had
   already set his feet on their neck. (2 Kings 19:31.)

   Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language. [38] They
   request that he will not speak in this manner in the presence of the
   people; because it is difficult to restrain a people naturally giddy
   and fickle, for they are easily moved, and tremble at the smallest
   alarm. [39] They would have wished that Rabshakeh should not speak to
   them in the Jewish language, because they were desirous to enter into
   any moderate terms of peace. For that good king tried every method of
   allaying the rage of that tyrant, but without any success. [40] These
   ambassadors therefore gain nothing from Rabshakeh; when he is
   entreated, he grows worse, and (as is usually the case with haughty
   men) becomes moro insolent.

   12. And Rabshakeh said. Hence we see the fierceness and insolence of
   the enemy, and hence also it is evident that Hezekiah's kingdom was on
   the brink of ruin; for here Rabshakeh speaks like a conqueror, and does
   not address Hezekiah as a king, but as if he had been his slave. When
   therefore we see Rabshakeh swelled with so much pride, we ought at the
   same time to recollect that Hezekiah was entirely overwhelmed and
   destitute of all confidence, so that he was looked upon as ruined.
   Hence we also infer that Rabshakeh was not sent for the purpose of
   offering any conditions of peace, but rather to obtain an unconditional
   surrender, and to strike the people with alarm; for Sennacherib had
   sent him for this purpose with a powerful army. Hence also he boasts
   that he has nothing to do with the king, that he addresses the people
   for their advantage, and, in order to terrify them still more, mentions
   the distress and calamities into which they will throw themselves if
   they choose to obey Hezekiah; that they will perish through hunger, and
   will be compelled to eat and drink what is revolting; and therefore,
   that their wisest course will be to surrender in good time, and to
   provide for their safety.

   13. Therefore Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the
   Jewish language. The Prophet shews by what expedients Rabshakeh
   endeavored to shake the heart of the people, and first relates that he
   spoke in the Jewish language, though the ambassadors entreared him not
   to do so. It was, indeed, exceedingly shocking that the holy language,
   which had been consecrated to the mysteries of heavenly wisdom, was
   profaned and prostituted to wicked blasphemies; and this must
   undoubtedly have been a sore temptation to weak minds. But this should
   lead us to remark, that no enemies are more destructive than those who
   speak the same language as ourselves. At the present day we find this
   to be true in many who learn our language, that is, our way of
   speaking, that they may be able to insinuate themselves into the ears
   of weak and ignorant persons, so as to draw them aside from the true
   faith. Thirty years ago, the Papists had a language which was barbarous
   and totally at variance with the style of the Holy Spirit; scarcely
   were they heard to utter a word which breathed of Christian piety; but
   now they have succeeded in acquiring such skill as to know how to cloak
   their impieties under the ordinary language of Scripture, as if they
   were speaking in a Christian manner. Thus we see that it was Satan who
   framed that style; for he is their teacher and instructor as truly as
   he formerly was the teacher and instructor of Rabshakeh.

   When the Prophet says that he stood, he expresses the fierceness and
   insolence of the wicked man; for the very attitude shews how haughtily
   he conducted himself. Formerly he stood, but now he placed himself in
   such an attitude as to be better seen, and strike greater terror into
   the Jews.

   Hear the words of the great king. Having already spoken of the
   greatness of his king, he repeats his commands. It is customary with
   Satan to exaggerate in words the power of the enemies, and to represent
   the dangers as greater than they really are, in order to compel us to
   lose courage; for when our eyes are dazzled by the vain splendor of
   earthly objects, we faint. We ought therefore to contrast the power of
   God with all dangers; and if we have that power constantly placed
   before our eyes, there is nothing that can do us injury. With high
   disdain and great insolence the enemies will boast of their greatness
   and strength, and, on the other hand, will meek at our feebleness and
   our small numbers; but if the Lord is with us, we have nothing to fear.

   14. Thus saith the king. While he claims for his master the name of
   king, he speaks of Hezekiah as a private individual, without adding any
   title.

   Let not Hezekiah impose upon you. He goes on to utter impudent
   calumnies against him, and at the same time vomits out his venom
   against God himself; for he calls it "imposture" and "deception" for
   Hezekiah to rely on his favor, and to exhort his subjects to cherish
   the same confidence. But with similar calumnies are we now assailed by
   the Papists, who say that we bewitch the minds of men and lead them to
   destruction, and who have no pretext for saying so, except that we
   teach them that they ought to hope in the true God. But we have no
   reason to wonder that the same things which were spoken against the
   good king are likewise brought forward against us, since they proceed
   from the same inventor and teacher of slander, Satan.

   For he will not be able to deliver you. Rabshakeh's assertion, that
   they cannot be delivered by the hand of Hezekiah, is indeed true,
   unless God assist; and Hezekiah did not lay claim to this or rob God of
   the honor due to him, but, on the contrary, testified that his own
   safety and that of the people were in the hand of God. But the enemy
   found it necessary to employ some pretext, as wicked men commonly do at
   the present day, when they slander our doctrine; for they employ
   pretexts which give high plausibility to what they say, and which
   actually deceive men, when they are not closely examined.

   15. And let not Hezekiah make you trust in Jehovah. He quotes the
   exhortation by which Hezekiah encouraged the people, and speaks lightly
   of it as an idle and unfounded speech. Hence we see plainly that wicked
   men, though they assert the power of God, treat it with contempt; for
   although he does not openly deny that God can assist, if he choose,
   yet, by sapping the foundations of their faith, he does all that he can
   to reduce the power of God to nothing. His intention is, to discourage
   the hearts of the people in such a manner that they may be constrained,
   as if in despair, to submit and receive laws from a victorious tyrant.

   But in order to destroy their confidence in the assistance of God, he
   employs also another expedient, by flattering their hearts with the
   allurements of a more comfortable life; for there is nothing to which
   we are more prone than to revolt from God, when we are drawn away by
   the appearance of advantage. If the world flatter and caress, the hope
   of eternal salvation quickly passes away; for our senses are always
   fixed on the present state of things. Fortified by this resource,
   Rabshakeh advises, "Do not depend on an uncertain hope, but rather
   receive what is certain." And this discourse is powerfully fitted to
   persuade; for nothing is more agreeable to men than to have in hand
   what they consider to be desirable; and they are so impatient of delay
   that they prefer an immediate advantage to what is very distant.
   Rabshakeh, therefore, reasons thus: "Hezekiah promises to you the
   assistance of God, but we do not see it; he holds you in suspense about
   what is uncertain; but my king proraises to you those things which are
   at hand, and will assuredly bestow them." This might appear to be a
   strong argument; but we must observe the sophistry; for by the same
   stratagem does Satan frequently attack us, and lead us aside from
   confidence in God.

   The Lord calls us to the hope of eternal life; that hope is concealed,
   "for we hope (Romans 8:25) for what we do not see;" he promises that he
   will be our deliverer, and yet allows us to languish and hint.; so that
   it appears that our hope is vain, if we look at the present condition
   of things. On this ground Satan attacks us. "Why dost thou hope in
   vain? What is the fruit of thy faith? What dost thou expect beyond the
   world?" In short, this is our daily lamentation. When Christ calls us
   to heaven, Satan endeavors to keep us still on the earth; and therefore
   we must adhere firmly to the promises, that, "hoping against hope,"
   (Romans 4:18,) we may trust in God, and not suffer ourselves to be
   drawn away from him by any allurements.

   16. Do not listen to Hezekiah. While he labors to turn away the hearts
   of the people from Hezekiah, he at the same time invites them to
   pleasures, that they may forget God and not expect anything from him.
   It is as if he had said, "Do not believe God, but rather believe my
   king." Thus Satan deals with us; for, darkening the goodness of God by
   his clouds, and holding out to us the masks of false hope, he secretly
   and indirectly creeps into the place of God, or employs creatures to
   entangle us in his nets. He holds out pleasures, and some kind of more
   agreeable life, with this boast, "God shews it to you at a distance, I
   present it to you."

   Though Hezekiah is mentioned, yet the comparison is actually made
   between God and the king of Assyria; for Hezekiah, as he was the
   servant of God, made no false pretensions, and did not boast of any
   vain confidence, but, relying on true and most certain promises,
   faithfully exhorted the people to seek God; but Rabshakeh adorned his
   king by robbing God, and yet was the servant of Satan, to withdraw the
   people from confidence in God to all impiety.

   Make with me a blessing. [41] "To make a blessing" is to conduct
   themselves in a friendly manner; as if he had said, "Do not give any
   hostile indication, or risk a battle. Surrender, make your submission
   to my king." Sennacherib does not merely demand that he shall be heard,
   but likewise that the people shall swear allegiance to hint; and, in
   order to allure them to him the more powerfully, he makes use of the
   word blessing as a cloak to that bondage which was in itself hateful.
   He bids them purchase a quiet life, and other conveniencies which they
   formerly enjoyed, by that miserable revolt; that is, by forsaking
   Hezekiah and going out to him; for to revolt from a pious king, whom
   God had appointed, and who was a type of Christ, was more wretched and
   miserable than anything else that could befall them, and could not take
   place without denying God himself, who had set up in Judea that token
   of heavenly favor.

   17. Till I come and take you away. He now adds another condition far
   harder than the former; for he declares that peace cannot be made with
   Sennacherib in any other way than by the people going into banishment.
   This was nothing else than to abandon the worship of God and degenerate
   into superstition, and voluntarily to quit the inheritance which God
   had given them. But because he addresses a people whose distressed
   condition and extreme danger had struck them with terror, he insolently
   commands them to save their lives.

   Into a land of corn and wine. Here we see more clearly that Rabshakeh's
   speech is nothing else than an image of the temptations by which Satan
   daily attacks our faith; for there is nothing which Satan more
   constantly attempts [42] than to withdraw us from confidence in God by
   the allurements and pleasures of this world; that we ought to enjoy
   peace and quietness, and to purchase them at any price; and that
   happiness consists in plentiful abundance of good things. But most of
   all, he makes a wicked use of adversity to press upon us, and more
   eagerly urge us to shake off the yoke of God. Gently indeed, and by
   secret and unseen methods, he insinuates himself; but, after having
   once inveigled and caught us in his net, so as to lead us to value
   present advantages more highly than those which are future, he adds
   this condition, that he shall hold us entirely bound and devoted to
   him; which we certainly cannot avoid, when he holds us entangled by his
   plausible hopes, and by the relish of present objects.

   Into a land like your own land. Because the word banishment was harsh
   and disagreeable, and it was not easy to part with the delightfulness
   of their native country, in order to shew that they sustain no loss by
   leaving it, he says, that the country into which they are about to be
   conveyed is equally fertile and productive. [43] Thus he draws a veil
   over their eyes, that they might not think that they were losing
   anything. Yet he cunningly passes by what ought above all other things
   to be valued by them, the worship of God, the temple, the kingdom, the
   order of holy government, and everything else that belonged to the
   heavenly inheritance. Without these what happiness can there be? Let
   every one therefore learn diligently to apply his mind to spiritual
   blessings; "for to dwell in the house of God," is justly pronounced to
   be a far more valuable blessing than all the luxuries and prosperity of
   the world. (Psalm 84:4, 10.) Thus shall we guard against being led away
   by the hope of present objects and deprived of true happiness; for this
   is a dreadful punishment by which the Lord takes vengeance on the
   unbelief of men, and which all godly persons ought to dread, that they
   may not faint or give way under any distresses and calamities.

   18. Lest perhaps Hezekiah deceive you. This is another argument
   different from the former, by which he endeavors to withdraw the people
   from Hezekiah and from confidence in God. Formerly he boasted that he
   was God's servant, and that God had sent him to destroy Judea, and on
   that ground he assured himself of certain victory; but now he openly
   insults God himself. At the first onset wicked men do not usually
   betray their scorn and impiety, but at length the Lord makes known
   their dispositions, and constrains them to discover the venom of their
   own heart. Now therefore the wicked Rabshakeh bursts forth with greater
   violence, and boasts that he will gain the victory over God himself.

   Have any of the gods of the nations rescued their land? He speaks in
   the person of his master, that he had obtained great victories over
   many and powerful nations. They had their "gods," by whose protection
   they thought that they were defended; and therefore Sennacherib thought
   that he had vanquished the "gods" themselves, because he had vanquished
   the nations which relied on their aid. The consequence is, that he
   breaks out into such insolence as not to hesitate to compare himself to
   the living God, and is impelled by such rage that he brings his own
   strength into conflict with the power of God.

   Thus, although at first wicked men conceal their contempt of God, yet
   they afterwards shew that they claim everything for themselves, and
   that they are "without God." [44] (Ephesians 2:12.) In words, indeed,
   they pretend to ascribe victories to their idols; but afterwards, as
   Habakkuk says, they

   "sacrifice to their net, and offer incense to their drag."
   (Habakkuk 1:16.)

   We see hypocrites do this also at the present day; for they run to do
   honor to their idols after having obtained a victory, but immediately
   afterwards boast of their plans, and wisdom, and courage, and military
   forces; which plainly shews that they ascribe to themselves and not to
   their idols all that has happened.

   By such insolent boasting, therefore, he shewed that it was a lie, when
   he said that he acknowledged God to be the author of his victories.
   Besides, it was impossible that these words should not give dreadful
   agony to the heart of the good king, when he was informed that the
   promises of God were condemned as false, when that wicked man openly
   insuited God and linked their cause with idols. And these things are
   related, in order that we may behold the patience of the good king, and
   may resolve to imitate him when anything of the same kind shall take
   place.

   Have they delivered? When he sets himself in opposition to all the
   gods, and declares that he is more powerful than they are, this is so
   much at variance with common sense, that it is abhorred even by wicked
   men themselves; yet if the Lord press hard upon them, if he put them to
   the torture, he speedily extorts from them such language. When they
   make a premeditated speech, they pretend that they are worshippers of
   God, but afterwards God constrains them to bring out and acknowledge
   what was lurking within. Let us therefore learn, that superstition is
   always accompanied by pride; so that they who do not know God, do not
   scruple to rise up against everything that is called God; and let us
   not be astonished at the rebellion and insolence of wicked men, for
   nothing but the pure knowledge of God can teach us humility. And yet
   that wicked man cannot be excused as if he justly reproached idols with
   their weakness and uselessness; for we ought to observe his sentiments
   and the purpose of his heart, since he does not ridicule the
   superstition and vain confidence of the nations, but in the idols
   themselves he pours contempt on the power of God. In like manner, when
   Dionysius the tyrant ridiculed his gods, he fought with God and defied
   him to a contest; for he attacked, in opposition to his conscience,
   such a deity as his mind could comprehend. The same observation might
   be made on all other infidels who treated with scorn false religions
   which they supposed to be from God.

   Here we ought also to observe another kind of blasphemy, by which the
   majesty of God is wickedly dishonored; which is, that Rabshakeh
   confounds God with idols, and represents him to be one of the
   multitude. For what blasphemy is it to confound the immortal God and
   creator of all things with what is most detestable, to confound truth
   with falsehood, glory with shame, heaven with earth?

   "The Lord is great," says David, "and worthy of the highest praise; he
   is to be feared above all gods. For all the gods of the nations are
   nothing; but the Lord made the heavens. Majesty and honor are before
   him; strength and beauty are in his sanctuary." --
   (Psalm 96:4-6.)

   19. Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? It is supposed that Hamath
   was Antioch in Syria, that Arpad was that city from which colonies were
   brought to Damascus, and that Sepharvaim was a city situated in the
   country of Damascus. If this be true, Rabshakeh mentions the ancient
   names of cities, from which many nations had formerly come, and which
   afterwards lost not only their celebrity, but likewise their
   distinctive names, and aims at producing in them greater alarm, by
   reminding them of so great revolutions. However that may be, he
   mentions chiefly the neighboring cities, the destruction of which might
   affect them more deeply on account of their being better known to the
   Jews. And I have no doubt that these places belonged to Syria and
   Israel; as if he had said, "Look at these two kingdoms subdued, which
   were presided over by their gods as their guardians. Will your God
   resist me?"

   20. That Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem out of my hand? [45] The
   particle ky (ki) is taken by commentators in both places
   interrogatively, "Did the gods of the nations deliver? And will your
   God deliver?" But in order to make the meaning flow more smoothly, I
   have preferred to render the second clause, "that your God should
   deliver;" for the repetition of the same word marks a resemblance. Yet
   the words appear also to contain irony; as if he had said in mockery,
   "Yes; as the gods of the nations delivered their worshippers, so will
   your God assist you."

   This insolence of ungodly men arises from their not understanding that
   God punishes the sins of men when they suffer any adversity. And first
   they go wrong in this respect that they institute a wicked and absurd
   comparison, "I have conquered that nation, and therefore I am better or
   stronger." They do not perceive that they were appointed to be the
   executioners of God's anger for the punishment of iniquities; for,
   although they say that they have received something from God, they do
   it hypocritically, and do not consider his will or his justice. They
   afterwards rise higher, for they venture to make a comparison between
   them and God himself, "I have conquered those over whom God presided,
   and therefore I have conquered God himself."

   And here we see painted in a lively manner what was formerly expressed,
   --

   "Ah! Assyria, the rod of my indignation; but he thought not so."
   (Isaiah 10:5.)

   In that passage God forewarned believers, that although Sennacherib, in
   blind madness, lifted himself up and attempted to overthrow all divine
   power, still they should continue to believe this doctrine, that he
   could do nothing more than what he was permitted by heaven to do. It is
   our duty to acknowledge that God inflicts punishment by the hand of
   wicked men, who may be regarded as the instruments of God's anger; and
   therefore we ought to turn away our eyes from them, that we may look
   directly at God, by whom we are justly punished. If wicked men are more
   powerful, let us not think that the arm of God is broken, but let us
   consider that we do not deserve his assistance; for he arms enemies for
   our destruction, supplies them with vigor and with armies, drives them
   backwards and forwards whenever he thinks proper, and gives us up into
   their hands when we have turned away from him.

   Accordingly, when the Turk now rises up haughtily against us, because
   he has already vanquished so great a multitude of Christians, we need
   not be alarmed on that account, as if the power of God were diminished,
   and as if he had not strength to deliver us. But we ought to consider
   in how many ways the inhabitants of Greece and of Asia provoked his
   anger, by the prevalence of every kind of base and shocking
   licentiousness in those countries, and by the dreadful superstitions
   and wickedness which abounded. On this account very severe chastisement
   was needed for restraining the crimes of those who made a false
   profession of the name of God. Hence came the prosperity of the Turk,
   and hence was it followed by a shockingly ruinous condition throughout
   the whole of the east. Yet we see him insolently raising his crest,
   laughing at our religion, and applauding his own in a strange manner;
   but still more does he applaud himself, and "sacrifice to his net,"
   (Habakkuk 1:16,) as we have already said of other infidels.

   We ought, therefore, to direct our minds towards the judgments of God,
   that we may not think that the Turk acquired such extensive dominion by
   his own strength. But the Lord allowed him greater freedom, for the
   purpose of punishing the ungodliness and wickedness of men, and will at
   length restrain his insolence at the proper time. Now, although
   prosperity is a token of the blessing of God, yet we must not begin
   with it if we wish to form right views of God himself, as Mahometans
   and Papists infer from the victories which they have gained, that God
   is in some respects subject to their control. But when we have known
   the true God, blessings are added in the proper order to testify his
   grace and power.

   Yet we ought always to beware of making the smallest claim for
   ourselves, for as soon as foolish confidence has gained admission, we
   shall immediately be seized with such fury as to believe that even God
   is not equal to us. At first, even wicked men will be shocked at
   anything so grossly irreligious; but when we are maddened by such
   diabolical pride as to rob God and adorn ourselves with the spoils, we
   easily fall into the practice of open insult. Sennacherib still
   retained some form of piety, for we shall afterwards read (Isaiah
   37:38) that "he was slain in the temple of his god, while he was
   worshipping there;" and he undoubtedly wished that God would be
   gracious to him; but, as in this passage he treads under his feet the
   Creator of heaven and earth along with the gods of the nations, so he
   would not have hesitated, when an opportunity occurred, to act in the
   same manner towards his own idol.

   21. And they were silent. This is added in order that we may more fully
   understand how deep was the affliction which prevailed throughout the
   whole of Judea; for the good king, having hardly any strength or means
   of defense, is therefore struck dumb even when an enemy insults him.
   Ambassadors were sent to soothe the enemy; when they are unsuccessful
   they are enjoined to be silent, that they might not provoke that savage
   beast, which already was too much excited, to cruelty. Yet it is
   uncertain whether these words relate to the ambassador or to the
   people, against whom Rabshakeh threw out these reproaches; and indeed
   it is probable, that it rather refers to those who guarded the walls,
   who, though they were sharply piqued by the taunts of the enemy, yet
   were not provoked to quarrels or disturbance, because they obeyed the
   kings command. Hence, also, we infer that it arose from the peculiar
   kindness of God, that they were so much disposed to yield obedience
   when matters were desperate.

   It will perhaps be objected that they ought not to have been silent
   when such blasphemies were uttered against God; for we ought not to
   conceal our sentiments when wicked men mock, and jeer, and reproach
   God, even though our life should be put in danger. We ought, at least,
   to testify that we cannot patiently endure that his honor and glory
   should be attacked. But it is not said that they were silent because
   they expressed their assent, or cared nothing about the reproaches
   which were cast on God, and which, though not a word was uttered by
   them, gave deep pain to the ambassadors, and prompted them to the
   attitudes and tokens of grief; for afterwards, such is the bitterness
   of their sorrow that they tear their garments, and by this token they
   shew that they hold such blasphemies in abhorrence and detestation. But
   as it would have been of no avail for the ambassadors to debate with
   Rabshakeh, they returned peaceably and without any tumult; and the
   people, because it was useless to make any disturbance, reckoned it
   enough to meet the wicked man's impertinence by silent groans. And it
   is no despicable courage, even when we have it not in our power to
   utter a syllable, still not to shrink or flinch, but to remain quietly
   in our place.

   Hence we are also reminded, that we ought not always to contend with
   wicked men when they reproach and tear in pieces the name of God; for
   amidst bitter strife and confused noise the truth will not be heard.
   And yet we must not on that account give way to cowardice, by thinking
   that we ought to be excused for being silent, whenever wicked men rise
   up against God; for our silence will have no excuse if we do not in
   some way testify that it is highly displeasing to us, and if we do not,
   as far as lies in our power, declare that nothing is more distressing
   to us than that the name of God should be dishonored. We must,
   therefore, give expression to our zeal, that wicked men may not think
   that we have no regard for the honor of God, and that we are not moved
   when they blaspheme it.

   22. Then came Eliakim. We now see that Eliakim and the other
   ambassadors were not silent as if they either approved of the impiety
   of Rabshakeh, or through dread of danger connived at such blasphemies;
   for they tear their garments, and in that manner give visible display
   how highly they are offended at those wicked slanders. I except Shebna,
   who was destitute of piety, and was only driven by shame to assume the
   dress of mourning along with others as a matter of form. It was
   customary among the Jews and other eastern nations, when they viewed
   anything with strong abhorrence, to tear their garments; for those
   nations, having much greater warmth of temperament than we have who
   inhabit cold countries, display greater vehemence in gesture,
   deportment, dress, and other outward signs. Here it ought also to be
   observed, that they who took no notice of the insults offered to them
   as private individuals, whenever they hear reproaches uttered against
   God, "tear their garments;" for they who are ready to take offense at
   an insult offered to them in their private, capacity, where patience
   was needed, and who are unmoved when they learn that the name of God is
   dishonored, give evidence that they have no zeal or piety.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [28] "The Hebrew doctors will have it that this Rabshakeh was an
   apostate Jew, and Procopius is of the same opinion, which is not
   altogether improbable, both because he could speak readily in the
   Hebrew tongue, and when he blasphemed the Divine Majesty, the king and
   nobles rent their clothes, which was not usual unless he that uttered
   such blasphemous words was an Israelite. Some think his name imports
   that he was the principal cupbearer to the king of Assyria, who assumed
   to himself the title of the Great King, because of his great conquests
   and large dominions." -- White.

   [29] Il a de belles paroles.

   [30] "Assavoir, sur belles paroles." "Namely, on fine speeches."

   [31] "A leur advis."

   [32] "Pource que nous avons ose abolir les traditions et ceremonies qui
   estoyent en usage de long temps." "Because we ventured to abolish the
   traditions and ceremonies which had been long used."

   [33] "Now therefore give pledges or hostages." -- Eng. Ver.

   [34] "He seems to challenge him to come out and fight with his master,
   and if he would give security to make that use of them, he would
   furnish him with two thousand horses, provided he was able to find so
   many men to set upon them, which are words of the highest contempt and
   undervaluing of his power; or the meaning may he, he would lay a wager
   with him he could not find men to sit on so many horses, for few were
   good horsemen in Judea, where horses were scarce." -- White.
   "He taunts Hezekiah on account of the want of cavalry. These words do
   not refer to the small number of men, but to the very small number of
   Jews who were skilled in horsemanship; for after Jotham the kings of
   Judea did not maintain any cavalry, and hence we have already seen
   (Isaiah 30, 31.) that a part of the Jews sought cavalry from the
   Egyptians." -- Rosenmuller.

   [35] "How then wilt thou turn away?" -- Eng. Ver.

   [36] Our author refers to the [8]charges contained in the 7^th verse of
   this chapter. -- Ed.

   [37] "Les idols et l'idolatrie." "Idols and idolatry."

   [38] "In Aramean. This request implies an apprehension of the bad
   effect of his address upon the multitude. Aramean corresponds very
   nearly to Syrian in latitude of meaning; but the language meant is not
   what we call Syriac, but an older form, which was probably current, as
   the French is now, at the courts and among the educated classes of an
   extensive region. Jewish is Hebrew, so called by the Jews, as the
   language of the whole British empire is called English, or as German is
   sometimes called Saxon." -- Alexander.

   [39] "I suppose Eliakim perceived the people to be frightened with big
   words, and therefore entreated him in the name of the other
   commissioners sent to treat with him, to speak no longer in the Jews'
   language, but in his own; for he was not sent to treat with the people,
   but with them who understood the Syrian tongue very well." -- White.

   [40] "Mais c'estoit temps perdu." "But it was time thrown away."

   [41] "Make [an agreement] with me [by] a present, or seek my favor by a
   present. -- Hebrews Make with me a blessing. -- Eng. Ver. ei boulesthe
   sulogethonai "if you wish to be blessed." -- Sept. "Come out to me for
   the sake of peace, and bless me, and bring me a peace-offering." --
   Jarchi. vrkh (berachah,) blessing is here figuratively used for peace;
   for since blessings commonly ran in this form, Peace to thee, to you,
   it appears that peace was called blessing. The Chaldee interpreter has
   therefore rendered it correctly, -- vdv my slm', (guabdu gnimmi
   shalma,) make peace with me." -- Rosenmuller.

   [42] "Car tonte son etude est." "For his whole study is.'"

   [43] "It has been disputed what particular land is here meant, some
   saying Mesopotamia, to which others object that it was not a
   winegrowing country. But, as Knobel observes, there its no need of
   supposing that the Assyrian's description was exactly true he may
   indeed have intended merely to promise them in general country as
   abundant as their own." -- Alexander.

   [44] "Et n'ont que faire de luy" "And have nothing to do with him."

   [45] "And (when or where was it) that they delivered Samaria out of my
   hand? ky (ki) is not an interrogative pronoun, (Who have delivered?)
   nor an interrogative particle, (Have they delivered?) but a connective
   particle, dependent upon something not expressed." -- Alexander.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 37
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 37:1-38

   1. And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his
   clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of
   the LORD.

   1. Factum est autem ut, hoc audito, rex Ezechias scinderet vestimenta
   sua, et sacco opertus veniret in domum Iehovae.

   2. And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the
   scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto
   Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

   2. Simul misit Eliacim praefectum palatii; et Sobnam cancellarium, et
   seniores sacerdotes, saccis opertos, ad Isaiam filium Amoz, prophetam.

   3. And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of
   trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to
   the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

   3. Qui dixerunt illi: Sic dicit Ezechias: Dies angustiae et
   increpationis et blasphemiae dies hic, quia filii venerunt ad partum,
   neque est vis pariendi.

   4. It may be the LORD thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom
   the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God,
   and will reprove the words which the LORD thy God hath heard: wherefore
   lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.

   4. Si forte audiet Iehova Deus tuus verba Rapsacae, quem misit rex
   Assur dominns ejus, ad maledicendum Deo viventi, et arguendum ver. bis,
   quae audivit Iehova Deus tuus. Tu ergo levabis orationem pro reitquiis
   quae adhuc extant.

   5. So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

   5. Venerunt servi regis Ezechiae ad Isaiam.

   6. And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master, Thus
   saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard,
   wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.

   6. Et dixit illis Isaias: Sic dicetis domino vestro: Sic dicit Iehova,
   Ne timeas a verbis quae audiisti quae mihi exprobrarunt servi regis
   Asstir.

   7. Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour,
   and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword
   in his own land.

   7. Ecce apponam illi ventum; audiet enim rumorem, et revertetur in
   terrain suam; et faciam ut cadat gladio in terra sua.

   8. So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against
   Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

   8. Reversus autem Rapsaces invenit regem Assur oppugnantem Lobnam.
   Audivit enim profectum a Lachis.

   9. And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is come
   forth to make war with thee. And when he heard it, he sent messengers
   to Hezekiah, saying,

   9. Audiens autem a Thirhaka rege thiopiae, egressus est, ut pugnet
   contra to; ex quo audivit, misit nuntios ad Ezechiam, dicens:

   10. Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy
   God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not
   be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.

   10. Sic dicetis Ezechiae regi Iuda: Non to decipiat Deus tuus, in quo
   tu confidis, dicens: Non tradetur Ierusalem in manum regis Assur.

   11. Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all
   lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?

   11. Ecce tu audiisti quae fecerunt reges Assur universis terris,
   quomodo vastaverunt eas; et tu liberaberis?

   12. Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have
   destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden
   which were in Telassar?

   12. An liberaverunt dii gentium, quos perdiderunt patres mei, Gozam, et
   Harum, Rezeph, et filios Edom, qui fuerunt in Bithlassar?

   13. Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king
   of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah?

   13. Ubi rex Amath, rex Arpad, rex civitatis Sepharvaiim, Hena et Ira?

   14. And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers,
   and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the LORD, and
   spread it before the LORD.

   14. Accepit Ezechias literas e manu nuntiorum, et legit eas, et
   ascendit in domurn Iehovae, et expandit eas coram Iehova.

   15. And Hezekiah prayed unto the LORD, saying,

   15. Tum oravit Ezechias ad Deum, dicens:

   16. O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest between the
   cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of
   the earth: thou hast made heaven and earth.

   16. Iehova exercituum, Deus Israel, qui habitas inter cherubin: tu ipse
   Deus solus super omnia regna terrae; tu fecisti ccelos et terrain.

   17. Incline thine ear, O LORD, and hear; open thine eyes, O LORD, and
   see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent to reproach
   the living God.

   17. Inclina Iehova aurem tuam, et audi; aperi Iehova oculos tuos et
   vide; et audi cuneta verba Sennacherib, qui misit ad exprobrandum Deo
   vivo.

   18. Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the
   nations, and their countries,

   18. Sane Iehova, perdiderunt reges Assur cunctas terras terrain,
   inquam, eorum,

   19. And have cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but
   the work of men's hands, wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed
   them.

   19. Posueruntque deos earum in ignem, quoniam non sunt dii, sed opus
   manuno hominis, lignum, et lapis; ideo perdiderunt cos.

   20. Now therefore, O LORD our God, save us from his hand, that all the
   kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the LORD, even thou only.

   20. Et nunc Iehova Dens noster, serra nos e mann ejus; ut cognoscant
   omnia regna terrae quod tu Iehova es solus.

   21. Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith
   the LORD God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against
   Sennacherib king of Assyria:

   21. Tunc misit Isaias filius Amoz ad Ezechiam, dicens: Sic dicit Iehova
   Deus Israel; Quoniam me precatus es de Sennacherib rege Assur;

   22. This is the word which the LORD hath spoken concerning him; The
   virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath despised thee, and laughed thee to
   scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.

   22. Hoc est verbum quod loquutus est Iehova de eo: Sprevit to,
   subsannavit to, virgo filia Sion; movit post to caput filia Ierusaleto.

   23. Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast
   thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against
   the Holy One of Israel.

   23. Quem probris affecisti? et quem contumeliose aggressus es? Super
   quem exaltasti vocem tuam, et in sublime extulisti oculos tuos? nempe,
   super sanctum Israelis.

   24. By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, By
   the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the
   mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut down the tall cedars
   thereof, and the choice fir-trees thereof: and I will enter into the
   height of his border, and the forest of his Carmel.

   24. In manu servorum tuorum exprobrasti Domino ac dixisti: Ego in
   multitudine curruum meorum ascendam in excelsa montium, ad latera
   Libani, succidam summa cedrorum ejus, electas ejus abietes; tum veniam
   ad summum extremitatis, sed sylvam ejus campestrem, (vel, planitiei
   ejus.)

   25. I have digged, and drunk water; and with the sole of my feet have I
   dried up all the rivers of the besieged places.

   25. Fodiam, et bibam aquas; exsiccabo planta pedum meorum cunctos lacus
   obsidionis.

   26. Hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient
   times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou
   shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities into ruinous heaps.

   26. Annon audiisti quod a longinquo tempore fecerim eam; a diebus
   antiquis formaverim ipsam? Nunc vero adducerem earn, ut sit in
   desolationem, in acervos ruinarum, quemadmodum urbes munitas.

   27. Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed
   and confounded: they were as the grass of the field, and as the green
   herb; as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted before it be
   grown up.

   27. Nam incolae earurn manu fuerunt mutilati, territi et confusi sunt;
   facti sunt tanquam gramen agri, olus viride, herba tectorum, quae ante
   maturitatem exarescit.

   28. But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy
   rage against me.

   28. Sessionem tuam, exitum tuum, et introitum tuam novi, et iracundiam
   tuam contra me.

   29. Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult, is come up into mine
   ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy
   lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

   29. Quoniam iratus es contra me; ideo tumultus tuns ascendit in auras
   mens. Itaque ponam hamum (vel, circulum) meum in narem tuam, et framum
   meum in labia tua; et reducam to per viam ubi venisti.

   30. And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such as
   groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the
   same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and
   eat the fruit thereof.

   30. Hoc autem erit tibi signum: Comedes hoc anno quae sponte nascuntur,
   secundo etiam sponte provenientia, in tertio vero anno seminabiris et
   metetis, et plantabitis vineas, et comedetis fructum earurn.

   31. And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again
   take root downward, and bear fruit upward:

   31. Et adjiciet quod servatum erit e domo Iuda, quodque residuum erit,
   radicem jacere deorsum, et fructum proferre seorsum.

   32. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape
   out of mount Zion: the zeal of the LORD of hosts shall do this.

   32. Nam e Ierusalem egredientur reliquiae, et quod serratum erit e
   monte Zion. Zelus Iehovae exercituum hoc faciet.

   33. Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Assyria, He
   shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
   before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.

   33. Propterea sic dicit Iehova de rage Assur: non ingredietur urbem
   hanc, neque projiciet illuc sagittam, et non occupabit eam clypeo
   munitus, neque fundet contra earn ballstam.

   34. By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not
   come into this city, saith the LORD.

   34. Per viam qua venit revertetur, neque ingredietur urbem hanc dicit
   Iehova.

   35. For I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and for
   my servant David's sake.

   35. Et protector ero super hanc urbem, ut servem eam, propter me et
   propter David servum meum.

   36. Then the angel of the LORD went forth, and smote in the camp of the
   Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they
   arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

   36. Et egressus angelus Iehovae percussit in castris Assyriorum centum
   octaginta quinque millia; et cum mane surrectum esset, ecce omnes
   cadavera mortuorum.

   37. So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and
   dwelt at Nineveh.

   37. Tum profectus abiit, et reversus est Sennacherib rex Assur, et
   habitavit in Nineve.

   38. And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch
   his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the
   sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia: and Esarhaddon his
   son reigned in his stead.

   38. Et accidit quum adoraret in templo Nisroch deum suum (vel, dei
   sui,) Adrammelech et Sarrezer filii ejus percusscrunt eum gladio,
   fugeruntque in terram Armeniae, et regnavit Essaradon filius ejus pro
   eo.


   1. And it came to pass. The Prophet declares that the only hope of
   safety that was left to the pious king was to bring his complaints
   before God as a righteous judge; as it is said in the Psalm, that

   "in the same manner as servants or handmaids, when they are injured,
   look to the protection of their master or mistress, so the eyes of
   believers are fixed on the assistance of God." --
   (Psalm 123:2.)

   Thus, when Jerusalem appears to be completely ruined, Hezekiah, being
   bereft of earthly assistance, betakes himself to the protection of God,
   and thus acknowledges that there is no other remedy for heavy
   distresses. Hence also the grace of God shone more brightly, so that it
   was evidently miraculous, when the pious king was rescued from the jaws
   of that lion. We ought, therefore, to observe this circumstance, that
   we may better understand the great excellence of the work of God. Here
   we are also taught what we ought to do in the most desperate
   circumstances, not to be indolent or sluggish in supplicating the
   assistance of God, who himself invites us to come to him. We must not
   tremble or despair, but, on the contrary, ought to be stimulated by the
   necessity which presses upon us to seek his aid; as we see what
   Hezekiah did, who immediately betook himself to the temple in the same
   manner as to a place of safety, that he and all his people might take
   refuge under the shadow of God.

   That King Hezekiah rent his clothes. He likewise adds the outward
   expressions of repentance, the "rending of the clothes and wearing
   sackcloth," sprinkling of ashes, and other things of the same kind; for
   these were the ordinary signs of repentance, when, under the weight of
   any calamity by which they were afflicted, they confessed their guilt
   before God and implored pardon from him. Wonderful is the modesty of
   the holy king, who, after having performed so many illustrious works,
   and after having been adorned by the excellence of so many virtues,
   does not hesitate to prostrate himself humbly before God; and, on the
   other hand, wonderful is his courage and the steadfastness of his
   faith, in not being hindered by the weight of so heavy a temptation
   from freely seeking God by whom he was so severely smitten. Scarcely do
   we find one man in a hundred who does not murmur if God treats him with
   any degree of severity, who does not bring forward his good deeds as a
   ground of complaint, and remonstrate that he has been unjustly
   rewarded. Other men, when God does not comply with their wishes,
   complain that their worship of God has served no good purpose.

   We perceive nothing of this kind in Hezekiah, who, though he is
   conscious of possessing uncommon piety, does not shrink from a
   confession of guilt, and therefore if we desire to turn away God's
   anger, and to experience his favor in adversity, we must testify our
   repentance and sincerely acknowledge our guilt; for adversity does not
   fall out to us by chance, but is the method by which God arouses us to
   repentance. True, indeed, sackcloth and ashes will be of little avail,
   if they be not preceded by the inward feelings of the heart; for we
   know that hypocrites are abundantly liberal in the use of ceremonies;
   but as we have formerly said, the Holy Spirit justly commends those
   exercises, when they are directed to their proper object. And indeed it
   was a proof of uncommon piety and modesty, that the pious king and the
   whole nation excited themselves in this manner to fear God, and that he
   made a voluntary acknowledgment of guilt in a form attended by wretched
   filthiness; for we know how unwilling kings are to let themselves down
   from their rank.

   2. And he sent Eliakim. This message was not intended merely to invite
   Isaiah to join with him in lamentation, but to request some consolation
   from his doctrine. And indeed to no purpose shall prayers be poured
   into the air, if they do not rest on the word of God. Thus we see that
   unbelievers are exceedingly noisy in their prayers, and yet they flee
   from God by despising or disregarding his promises. It was therefore a
   proof of sincere piety in Hezekiah, that, while he was earnestly
   employed in prayer, he at the same time added a confirmation of his
   hope, that he might not yield to temptation.

   To Isaiah, the son of Amos the Prophet. He follows the method appointed
   by God, when he wishes to hear God speaking by the mouth of "the
   Prophet." (Deuteronomy 18:15; Malachi 2:7.) Though he relies on God
   alone, he does not reject the testimony of a mortal man; and therefore
   not without reason does he expressly add the designation Prophet; for
   he sends to Isaiah, that he may be confirmed by some new prediction,
   and names him, not as a private individual, but as the servant of God,
   whose duty it was to soothe the pious king by some consolation.

   There are therefore two remedies that deserve our attention, by which
   we are soothed in affliction. First, we ought to call on God to deliver
   us; and, secondly, we ought to consult the prophets, at least, if we
   can obtain them, that they may bring us some comfort out of the word of
   God; for it is their duty to encourage and comfort the afflicted by
   promises, and if they fail to do so, still abundant consolation is
   communicated to us from the word. And we ought to consult the prophets,
   who were appointed, not only for their own age, but also for posterity
   and for every age; for although the men are dead, yet their books
   survive; their doctrine lives and shall never die. We shall never,
   therefore, be destitute of true remedies, if we do not reject them;
   but, in a word, we ought always to consult God.

   It may be asked, "Was not Hezekiah abundantly supplied and fortified by
   the promises of God? Was it not a sign of distrust to seek new promises
   from the Prophet?" I reply, it ought not to be ascribed to unbelief or
   distrust, that he seeks a new promise; for, being conscious of his
   weakness, he does not scruple to ask new confirmations. The flesh
   always excites us to distrust, and therefore we ought not to despise
   additional aid; on the contrary, we ought always to seek every kind of
   assistance, by which we may resist various temptations; for on all
   sides Satan attacks and besieges us in such a manner that, if we are
   not strongly fortified, we shall scarcely be able to escape his snares
   and devices till the end. Although, therefore, we have been taught by
   the word of God that he will assist us in adversity, yet when we are
   engaged in any arduous contest, it is proper that we should again and
   again ask at the mouth of the Lord, and seek new confirmations for the
   purpose of strengthening our faith. There are indeed no prophecies of
   the same kind that are given to us in the present day; but we ought to
   apply to our use the general prophecies, which were also written for
   our benefit. (Romans 15:4.)

   As to the reason why Hezekiah sent ambassadors, and did not himself go
   to Isaiah, it was obviously because he was praying in the Temple; for
   the circumstance, that all the elders and counsellors were clothed with
   sackcloth, shews clearly that the mourning was general; and it is
   probable that prayers were publicly offered by the command of the king.
   Yet it ought to be observed, that the Prophet did not remain at home
   for his own ease or pleasure, but by his absence God intended to try
   the faith of the pious king.

   4. If perhaps Jehovah thy God will hear. Hezekiah appears to doubt
   whether, or not the Lord is willing to hear him; for the particle 'vly
   (ulai) is translated perhaps, and this is the meaning which it
   frequently bears in Scripture. But it ought to be observed that
   believers, even though they know with certainty that the Lord will
   assist them, yet, in consequence of being perplexed by the difficulty
   of the case, often speak in this manner. Hezekiah had reasons for
   hesitating, if we look at the matter itself; but when he turns his eyes
   to the word, he is made certain as to the will of God, so that he
   ceases to tremble. But as it is impossible that the flesh should not
   retard believers by making them walk in a halting and staggering
   manner, [46] they sometimes accommodate their language to the present
   appearances of things.

   It may also be observed, in other passages of Scripture, that the
   saints, even while speaking of what was certain, spoke in this manner;
   for Peter, in exhorting Simon, says,

   "If perhaps this thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee."
   (Acts 8:22.)

   He does not advise Simon to tremble and hesitate in prayer; for such a
   supplication would have been vain; but he points out the heinousness of
   the offense; that he may strike his mind more forcibly, and may at
   length constrain him to rouse himself that he may approach God with
   true repentance. This word perhaps, therefore, does not imply doubt,
   but is equivalent to an expression which we commonly use, if it be
   possible, when we venture to hope and promise to ourselves something.
   And Hezekiah did not speak as if God were deaf to the words of the
   ungodly, or as if anything escaped his notice; but because it was a
   fixed principle in his heart that "God is near to all that truly call
   upon him," (Psalm 145:18,) he determines to strive against despondency,
   and arms himself by prayer; and because he does not expect to gain the
   conquest without difficulty, he says, If perhaps. [47] Besides, he
   mentions two kinds of hearing, which in some measure removes the
   difficulty.

   If perhaps Jehovah, thy God shall hear the words which Jehovah thy God
   hath heard. At first sight there is some apparent contradiction in
   these words; but the manner of speaking is highly appropriate, because
   Hezekiah was assuredly and beyond all controversy convinced that
   nothing is hidden from God; only he argues with himself on this point,
   whether or not, God determines to call in question the blasphemy of
   this filthy dog; because frequently he delays and conceals vengeance
   for a time, and thus seems to shut his eyes and overlook it. In short,
   taking for granted that

   "all things are open and manifest to God," (Hebrews 4:13,)

   he only asks with earnestness whether or not God actually shews that he
   is so highly offended by the blasphemies of Rabshakeh that he
   determines not to allow them to remain unpunished. In a word, he wishes
   God to hear effectually, that is, by restoring those things which were
   scattered and confused, and shewing himself to be a judge; for then do
   we know that he actually sees and observes all things. In this manner
   Hezekiah asks, "Hath not the Lord heard the blasphemies of Rabshakeh,
   to take vengeance on them, and to shew that he hath a regard to the
   glory of his name?"

   Jehovah thy God. By calling him "the God of Isaiah," Hezekiah does not
   mean that there is only one man who worships God, nor does he exclude
   himself from the number of the godly; but because prayers flowed from
   doctrine, the pious king wished to speak in commendation of the
   ministry of the Prophet, and to testify that he was a true servant of
   God. That relation is somewhat more extensive; for all believers call
   on God, and, on the other hand, God reckons them among his people; but
   God is reckoned in a peculiar manner to be the God of Isaiah and Paul,
   because they have a special calling. In a word, these words expressly
   contain praise and commendation of Isaiah's calling.

   Thou wilt therefore lift up a prayer. This is the second reason why
   Hezekiah sent messengers to Isaiah; namely, that he also would pray
   along with others. Hence we learn that it is the duty of a prophet, not
   only to comfort the afflicted by the word of the Lord, but also to
   offer his prayers for their salvation. Let not pastors and ministers of
   the word, therefore, think that they have fully discharged their duty,
   when they have exhorted and taught, if they do not also add prayer.
   This indeed is what all ought to do; but Hezekiah sent to Isaiah in a
   particular manner, because he ought to lead the way to others by his
   example. Besides, "to lift up a prayer" is nothing else than "to pray,"
   but the mode of expression deserves attention; for it shews how our
   feelings ought to be regulated when we pray. Scripture everywhere
   enjoins us to "lift up our hearts to heaven," (Lamentations 3:41;) for
   otherwise we would have no fear of God. Moreover, our stupidity is so
   great that we are immediately seized by gross imaginations of God; so
   that if he did not bid us look to heaven, we would choose rather to
   seek him at our feet. "To lift up a prayer," therefore, is to pray in
   such a manner that our hearts may not grovel on the earth, or think
   anything earthly or gross about God, but may ascribe to him what is
   suitable to his majesty, and that our warm and earnest affections may
   take a lofty flight. In this sense it is said in the Psalm,

   "Let my prayer come up before thee as incense,
   and as the evening sacrifice." (Psalm 141:2.)

   For the remnant that is still left. When he desires that prayer should
   be offered "for the remnant of the people that was left," this
   circumstance was fitted powerfully to move the Lord; not that he is
   moved after the manner of men, but he acts towards us in this manner,
   and accommodates himself to our weakness. Thus when our affairs are
   brought to such an extremity that we are not far from destruction, we
   ought to spread our misery before God, that our minds may receive some
   consolation; for God declares that he hath regard to "the poor and
   afflicted." (Psalm 22:24.) And the nearer we appear to be to
   destruction, so much the more warmly and earnestly ought we to implore
   that he would render assistance to us, as we see here that Hezekiah did
   when matters were desperate.

   5. And the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah. As the Prophet
   formerly related that the pious king had no other refuge than to
   consult the mouth of the Lord, so he now shews that he did not consult
   in vain; for he received the consolation which he desired. Instructed
   by this example, if we seek relief from him by pouring our cares and
   anxieties into the bosom of God, our hope shall never be disappointed;
   and although there will not always be prophets in the world, such as
   Isaiah was, yet he will come forth seasonably to render assistance in
   an appropriate manner.

   6. Thus saith Jehovah. Isaiah begins by saying that he gives the reply
   in the name of God, and expressly declares that the oracle comes from
   God, both because prophets ought always to beware of bringing forward
   anything of their own, and because in so difficult a matter the
   authority of God was needful. In this manner also, the Prophet shewed
   that he met the prayers of the pious king. Even false prophets, indeed,
   boast of the name of God, but falsely. Isaiah was truly the organ of
   the Holy Spirit, and therefore he has a right to mention the holy name
   of Him that sent him.

   Fear not. When he bids him "not fear," he exhorts Hezekiah to be of a
   courageous or, at least, a calm disposition. Whenever we hear this
   word, let us be reminded that we are enjoined to cultivate that peace
   which faith produces in our hearts; for all who trust in God, and
   expect from him deliverance from their distresses, rise superior to all
   fears by the exercise of patience, so that even in the midst of
   affliction they have peace. Besides, in order that the pious king may
   continue cheerfully to expect a joyful issue, he plainly declares that
   God conducts his own cause which he has undertaken to defend, because
   he cannot permit wicked men unpunished to dishonor his name without
   making it appear at length that he is a righteous judge. [48]

   The servants of the king of Assyria. By calling them servants, he
   presents in a stronger light the baseness of the action; for although
   the king himself had spoken in this manner, still it would have been
   intolerable that the Lord should be despised and so shamefully attacked
   by a mortal man. Hence it might easily be concluded that much less
   would he endure to be so highly insulted by "servants," [49] and
   therefore the rank of the person increases the heinoushess of the
   attack.

   7. Behold, I will bring a wind upon him. Others translate it, "I will
   put my Spirit in him," as if the Prophet were speaking of a secret
   influence of the heart; but that is a forced interpretation. It is a
   highly appropriate metaphor that there is in the hand of God a wind or
   whirlwind to drive Sennacherib in another direction. To compare wicked
   men to "straw or chaff,' (Psalm 1:4) is a mode of expression frequently
   employed in Scripture, because God easily drives them wherever he
   thinks proper, when they think that they are standing very firm. The
   commotion that arose in the kingdom of Sennacherib is compared by the
   Prophet to a "wind" or "storm" which drove him out of Judea, and then
   he shews that the Lord will find no more difficulty in repelling that
   enemy than if he wished to move straw or chaff; and the very same thing
   might be said of all tyrants, however powerful.

   For he shall hear a report. The words "and he shall hear" are evidently
   added for the sake of explanation, and therefore I have chosen to
   interpret them as assigning a reason, "For he shall hear." [50] This is
   the wind by the raising of which Sennacherib was suddenly driven away;
   for a report which he heard about the kings of Egypt and Ethiopia
   constrained him to return to his own country.

   And I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land. This means
   as if he had said, "He now annoys and harasses others, and endeavors to
   extend widely the limits of his empire; but I will raise up enemies to
   him, in the very bosom of his own land, who shall discomfit him." Some
   expound it to mean the land of Israel, but that is an excessively
   forced interpretation; for he speaks of the land of the king of Assyria
   himself, and there is an implied contrast, "He who subdued other men's
   cities and kingdoms shall not be able to defend his own country, but
   shall be destroyed and perish in it."

   8. And Rabshakeh having returned. He now declares how Rabshakeh,
   without doing anything, returned to his king, not to the same place
   where he had left him; for he understood that he had raised the siege
   of Lachish, and had departed into Egypt for the purpose of attacking
   Libnah. Some think that this city is Pelusium, others choose rather to
   assign it to Judea. It is, indeed, probable that, in consequence of a
   report that reached him about the approach of enemies, he moved his
   camp towards Egypt, that by meeting them he might prevent them from
   advancing. Though God restrained the violence of the tyrant by a new
   war, in order to give some relief to the Jews, yet he did not wish to
   conquer the tyrant by the hand of man, but only to shew openly and, as
   it were, to display on a theater his unconquerable pride; because, even
   when he was in great danger, he did not cease to vomit out the same
   blasphemies, as we shall soon see.

   9. And hearing concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia. From what follows
   we may conjecture the reason why the king of Assyria suddenly departed
   from Judea; for the kings of Egypt and Ethiopia had formed a league
   with each other against Sennacherib, because they saw that his power
   was becoming excessive, and that his invasion of other countries had no
   limit, and therefore they readily concluded that, unless they opposed
   his violence at an early period, they also would be in imminent danger
   from him. These kings did not intend to provide for the safety of Judea
   at their own loss, but looked to themselves; for so great power
   possessed by one individual is commonly and deservedly viewed with
   suspicion by other princes and nations. They therefore act wisely in
   joining their forces and meeting him early; for separately they would
   easily have been subdued and destroyed. For this reason these two kings
   took arms together, in order to repel the power and violence of that
   tyrant.

   He sent messengers to Hezekiah. The king of Assyria, being involved in
   so hazardous a war, "sends messengers to Hezekiah," to induce him by
   terrors and threatenings to surrender; for tyrants are maddened by
   ambition and by a false opinion of their own greatness, and therefore
   imagine that their words, the report of their name, and even their
   shadow, will strike terror into all men. Entangled in a hazardous war,
   he thinks of subduing Judea, from which he had been compelled to
   withdraw, ashamed of not having continued the siege, but perhaps
   thinking that he will gain in his absence what he could not accomplish
   by his presence. But the Lord miraculously assisted his people who
   appeared to be very near destruction. And, first, in order to restrain
   the violence of this tyrant, he presented hinderances and obstructions,
   from which he could not so speedily extricate himself; just as if one
   should "lay a bridle on the mouth or a hook on the nose" of a wild and
   savage beast, as the Prophet will afterwards say. (Isaiah 37:29.) His
   rage and cruelty, indeed, are not abated, but are restrained so that
   they can do no harm.

   We see the same thing in the present day. How many cruel tyrants would
   wish that the Church of God were destroyed! What schemes are employed
   for the accomplishment of it! How diversified are the plans which they
   form! What forces do they assemble from every quarter! But when they
   think that they will accomplish anything, the Lord suddenly raises up
   enemies against them, sometimes even brings them to fight with each
   other, and turns against themselves that cruelty which they wished to
   exercise against the children of God. Yet they go on in their cruelty,
   and cease not to attempt this or that; as this Sennacherib, though he
   is surrounded by difficulties, ceases not to annoy Hezekiah, and
   addresses him from his royal throne, as if he were a despicable slave,
   and commands him as if he were his vassal, and even to God himself
   addresses insolent and opprobrious language, and goes beyond his agent
   Rabshakeh in arrogance; for, although Rabshakeh's words had the same
   meaning, still this man, in a more impudent manner, and, as we may say,
   with more open mouth reviles God.

   10. Let not thy God deceive thee. How shocking is this blasphemy, to
   speak of God the Author of truth, and to accuse him of falsehood and
   deceit, as if he actually imposed on his people! What is left to God
   when his truth is taken away, for nothing is more absolutely his own?
   God extorted this word from the wicked man, although he formerly
   pretended to revere some deity; for such impiety, as we have formerly
   said, God does not permit to remain any longer concealed.

   Saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered. This quotation of the words
   uttered by God himself, that "Jerusalem would be preserved," has led
   some to conjecture that Isaiah's prediction had been disclosed to the
   king of Assyria by the traitor Shebna. But there is no need of such
   conjectures; for the Assyrian knew well that Hezekiah placed his hope
   in God, and was not ignorant of the promises which were made both to
   him and to David,

   "This is my rest; here will I dwell for ever and ever."
   (Psalm 132:14.)

   Not that he gave himself any trouble about heavenly oracles, but
   because every person knew and talked of them, and the Jews gloried in
   them wonderfully, and often boasted of the assistance and protection of
   God in opposition to their enemies.

   These promises, therefore, the tyrant meets by this blasphemy, -- "Let
   not thy God deceive thee." And thus he exalts himself against God, as
   if God were not sufficiently powerful to defend Jerusalem, and as if
   his own power were greater, not only than all the power of men, but
   even than the power of God himself. He endeavors to prove this by
   examples, because he has vanquished nations which were under the
   protection of other gods, and draws an argument from the power of his
   ancestors, -- "They conquered the gods of other nations, and I am far
   superior to my ancestors; therefore the God of Israel will not conquer
   me."

   Thus do wicked men commonly exalt themselves more and more in
   prosperity, so that at length they forget that they are men, and not
   only claim for themselves, but even think that they surpass, Divine
   Majesty. Setting aside all distinction between right and wrong,
   satisfied with the mere power of doing injury, they glory in their own
   crimes and those of their ancestors, and egregiously flatter themselves
   on the ground of their being descended from robbers and infamous men;
   for frequently the most powerful of monarchs is the best entitled to be
   called the rich son of a great robber. This tyrant does not consider
   whether it was in a right or a wrong manner that so many countries came
   into the power of his ancestors; for they have no regard to justice or
   injustice, when they aim at greatness; it is enough for them if in any
   way, either lawful or unlawful, they can bring others under their yoke.
   Thus they think that they are at liberty to do whatever they can. They
   hold by that proverb, (ei adiketeon turannidos peri adiketeon) "if
   justice ought to be violated, it ought to be violated for the sake of
   reigning;" and this vice was not peculiar to a single age, but even now
   we feel it to be excessive.

   11. Behold, thou hast heard. Here we ought to observe a twofold
   comparison; for he compares Hezekiah to other kings of Judah who
   preceded him, because he was inferior to them, and yet they were
   vanquished by the kings of Assyria; and Sennacherib, on the other hand,
   having obtained greater power than all the rest, is more daring and
   insolent. It followed, that Hezekiah could not resist him. The other
   comparison is that of the kings of Assyria, and Sennacherib himself,
   with the idols of the nations; for if the idols could not protect the
   nations that adored them, consequently neither will the God of Israel
   defend the nation by which he is adored.

   When we thus read that singular assaults of temptations were directed
   against the faith of Hezekiah, let us prepare ourselves for the contest
   by being equipped with the same armor. Even while leisure is granted to
   us, let us endeavour to fortify ourselves early, in order that, when we
   come into such a field of battle, we may fight courageously. And if
   Satan taunt us with the destruction of many nations, we must attend to
   the difference of our condition; because, although we are liable to
   similar calamities, still we have assured hope of our salvation, of
   which they are destitute.

   12. Gozan. This place is mentioned in 2 Kings 17:6, and 18:11. We may
   infer that it was a town in Media, though some think that it was
   situated elsewhere; but it is enough that, with regard to Jerusalem, it
   lay in an easterly direction. Haran is often mentioned in Scripture.
   Pliny places this town in Arabia; but it is more generally believed to
   have been in Mesopotamia, and this is confirmed by the journeyings of
   Abraham, who came to it along with his father, after having left his
   native country Chaldaea. (Acts 7:24; Genesis 11:31.) It is called
   Charrae, in the plural number, by heathen historians, who also mention
   that Crassus and his son were killed there.

   14. Hezekiah took the letters. The Prophet now shews what kind of
   refuge Hezekiah had amidst so great calamities. He immediately went
   into the Temple, to lament before the Lord the calamity which: he could
   not remove, and to "cast upon him" (Psalm 55:22) his grief and his
   anxieties. [51] Nor was this a blind or confused lamentation, but the
   pious king wished to move God by his tears and complaints to render
   assistance. We are taught by his example that, when we are sore
   pressed, there is nothing better than to east our burden into the bosom
   of God. All other methods of relief will be of no avail, if this single
   method be wanting.

   And spread them before Jehovah. In "spreading the letters before the
   Lord," he does not do this as if the Lord did not know what was
   contained in the letters, but God allows us to act in this manner
   towards him in accommodation to our weakness Neither prayers, nor
   tears, nor complaints make known to God what we need; for he

   "knows our wants and necessities before we ask anything
   from him." (Matthew 6:8.)

   But here we ought rather to consider what is necessary for us, that is,
   that God should manifest that he knows the blasphemies of adversaries,
   and that they who have uttered them will not remain unpunished. The
   reason and design, therefore, why Hezekiah "spread before the Lord the
   letters" of the wicked tyrant was this, that he might excite his own
   earnestness, and inflame his own ardor, in prayer.

   15. Then Hezekiah prayed to God, saying, O Jehovah of hosts. Because
   Sennacherib was the agent employed by Satan to shake the faith of
   Hezekiah, he defends himself by this rampart, that God possesses
   infinite power; for, by bestowing on God those lofty praises, he
   undoubtedly encourages himself to confidence in supplication. That out'
   prayers may not be unsuccessful, we ought always to hold it as certain
   that God "is the rewarder of all who seek him." (Hebrews 11:6.) It was
   especially necessary for the pious king, that he might boldly and
   undauntedly remove the obstruction by which Satan had attempted to stop
   the progress of his confidence, to believe that although wicked men
   mock and undervalue the power of God, still it remains undiminished.
   The heroic, courage of the pious king appeared by not only contending
   with a wicked king in maintaining the power of God, but by exalting it
   in his own heart and appealing to God as the witness of his inward
   feelings. Accordingly, before forming any prayer, he overturns the
   delusions by which Satan had endeavored to shake his courage.

   16. Thou alone art God over all the kingdoms of the earth. Not only
   does he assert God's almighty power, but likewise maintains the
   authority which he exercises over the whole world. And these statements
   are made by the pious king for the purpose of strengthening himself in
   the faith which he entertained about the providence of God, by which he
   governs the world and every part of it. All believers ought above all
   to believe this, that they may not think that they pray in vain. Nor
   would the prayer of the king have had so much efficacy if he had only
   said, "Incline thine ear, O Lord," or something of that sort, as when
   he believes that the Lord takes care of his works. He persuades himself
   that God will undertake that cause. If it belongs to God to rule and
   govern the whole world, he will not permit this tyrant to act in this
   insolent manner without restraining his insolence; for Sennacherib
   claims for himself what belonged to God, and at length would not pass
   unpunished.

   The statement, that all the kingdoms of the earth are under the power
   and authority of God, applies especially to the present subject. Yet
   while this title always belongs to God alone, that he "rules over all
   kingdoms," Still the Prophet does not deny that kings also, and
   princes, and magistrates hold their dominion, but so as to be subject
   to God, and to owe to him all their power and authority. In like
   manner, when Paul asserts that government belongs to God alone, (1
   Timothy 6:15,) he does not overthrow princes and magistrates, but shews
   that all, how great and powerful soever they may be, depend on God
   alone, that they may not imagine themselves to be his equals or
   companions, but may acknowledge him as their Lord and Prince. Thus will
   kings, therefore, retain their authority, if they keep an intermediate
   position between God and men, and do not wish to rise higher.

   Thou hast made heaven and earth. Hezekiah draws the same inference from
   creation itself; for it is impossible that God, who is the Creator of
   heaven and earth, should forsake his work; on the contrary, he governs
   by his providence the human race, which is the chief part of the world.
   It would be absurd to confine creation within such narrow boundaries as
   if it were a proof of a sudden and transitory exercise of the power of
   God; but we must extend it to perpetual government. Hence it is evident
   that tyrants who wish to rule at their pleasure rob God of his honor,
   and therefore are justly punished for their insolence.

   O Jehovah of hosts, God of Israel, who dwellest between the Cherubim.
   Here are other titles employed by Hezekiah for the confirmation of his
   faith. And, first, by calling him "Jehovah of hosts," he again extols
   his power. But when he adds "God of Israel," he brings him near, and on
   familiar terms; for it was no ordinary token of love to take that
   nation under his protection. Such is also the import of "sitting
   between the cherubim;" as if he had said, "Thou hast here placed thy
   seat, and promised that thou wilt be the protector of those who call
   upon thee before the ark of the covenant. Relying on this promise, I
   flee to thee as my guardian."

   Hezekiah had in view, I have no doubt, the form of the ark, which was
   surrounded by two cherubim. Others interpret Cherubim to mean angels,
   as if it were said, that God reigneth in heaven and sitteth among the
   angels. But this interpretation is unsuitable; for he is said to "sit
   between the cherubim," on account of the form of the ark, which was
   constructed in this manner. (Exodus 25:18.) We know that it was a
   symbol of the presence of God, though his power was not confined to it;
   and Hezekiah, by mentioning it, intended to express his firm belief
   that God was present with him, and had designed to gather a people to
   himself by spreading, so to speak, his wings over them. There being a
   wide distance between God and us, Hezekiah embraced that token of
   adoption. Yet there was nothing gross or earthly in his conceptions of
   God, as superstitious men would desire to bring him down from heaven,
   but, satisfied with the promise which he had received, he expresses his
   firm belief that we do not need to go far to seek the grace of God.

   This mode of expression, therefore, deserves our attention, and teaches
   us, that while we gradually ascend to heaven by the light of the word
   which leads the way, still, in order to obtain assistance, we must not
   think of God as absent; for he has chosen his dwelling in the midst of
   us. Since his majesty far exceeds heaven and earth, we must not limit
   him within the capacity of our understanding; and yet, as he has
   revealed himself to us by the word, we may comprehend him in proportion
   to the small ability and measure of our understanding, not that we may
   bring him down from his heavenly throne, but that our understandings,
   which are naturally feeble and sluggish, may approach to him by
   degrees; for it is proper that we should strive to approach to his
   loftiness, since he invites us by the Word and sacraments. If we are
   skillful interpreters, the spiritual knowledge of God will always
   flourish among us; we shall not give the name of God to stones, or
   wood, or trees; there will be nothing earthly or gross in our
   conceptions of him; but the nearer he comes down to us, the more
   earnestly shall we labor to make a proper use of those aids which he
   holds out, that our minds may not grovel on the earth; since God
   accommodates himself to our weakness for no other reason than that the
   sacraments may serve to us the purpose of ladders, [52] which
   superstition abuses for a contrary purpose.

   17. incline thine ear, O Jehovah. From these words we conclude how
   great was the perplexity of Hezekiah; for the earnestness that pervades
   the prayer breathes an amazing power of anguish, so that it is easily
   seen that he had a struggle attended by uncommon difficulty to escape
   from the temptation. Though his warmth in prayer shews the strength and
   eminence of his faith, yet at the same time it exhibits, as in a
   mirror, the stormy passions. Whenever we shall be called to sustain
   such contests, let us learn by the example of the pious king to combat
   our passions by everything that is fitted to strengthen our faith, so
   that the very disturbance may conduct us to safety and peace, and that
   we may not be terrified by a conviction of our weakness, if at any time
   we shall be powerfully assailed by fear and perplexity. It is, indeed,
   the will of the Lord that we shall toil hard, and sweat and shiver; for
   we must not expect to gain the victory while we repose in indolence,
   but after diversified contests he promises to us a prosperous issue,
   which he will undoubtedly grant.

   But why does Hezekiah demand that God should listen? Does he think
   float he is asleep or does not hear? By no means; but in a matter of
   such difficulty we frequently speak in such a manner as if we thought
   that God was absent or did not attend to our afflictions. He shews that
   he was oppressed by so great perplexity that he almost thought that God
   had forsaken him; that is, according to the eyes of the flesh; for if
   he had not by the eyes of faith beheld God as present, he would have
   lost courage.

   Open thine eyes, O Jehovah, and see. It is as if Hezekiah had prayed
   that the assistance of God, which he had long kept in his heart
   committed to the guardianship of hope, would be actually and publicly
   manifested; and therefore he prays that Jehovah would "open his eyes
   and see;" that is, would shew that he cares about these matters.
   Hezekiah shews plainly what was the subject about which he was most
   anxious, namely, that God would revenge the insults offered to him; for
   although he was deeply affected by anxiety about his kingdom and
   people, yet he set a higher value on the glory of God than on all other
   sources of uneasiness. The advancement of that glory ought, indeed,
   above all things, to move and impress our hearts, and the more
   especially because we know that it is closely connected with our
   salvation.

   Thus Hezekiah here represents this tyrant as an enemy of God, who
   dishonors him by reproaches and curses because Jerusalem glories in his
   name and protection, and concludes that God cannot forsake the city
   which he hath undertaken to defend, without at the same time abandoning
   his own name. Since, therefore, God in his infinite goodness chooses to
   connect our salvation with his glory, we ought to lay held on those
   promises for the purpose of strengthening our hearts, that although the
   wicked, while they reproach God and pour and vomit out the venom of
   their breast, harden themselves in the vain hope that they shall not be
   punished, still there will not be a syllable which the Lord does not
   hear, and which he does not at length call to account.

   18. and 19. Truly, O Jehovah. Here Hezekiah begins to distinguish
   between the false gods and the true God, which we also ought to do very
   carefully. Wicked men, who have no light, indulge in some confused
   imaginations about God, which quickly pass away, so that they think
   that there is no God, or care nothing about him. [53] But God does not
   wish that his people shall be moved by a slight and passing opinion,
   but that he shall be acknowledged by them as the true God, who drives
   away all superstitions by the brightness of his power. [54] It is not;
   enough, therefore, that we believe in something which heathens imagine
   to be a deity, but we must believe in God in such a manner as to
   distinguish him from pretended gods, and to separate truth from
   falsehood; and, indeed, when he has once shone into our hearts, those
   false religions which formerly occupied our minds immediately give way.

   This doctrine ought to be the more carefully held, because many persons
   rest satisfied with dark speculations, and think that it is enough if
   they acknowledge some deity. They evidently do not know whether they
   ought to worship the God of the Mahometans or of the Jews; and fly in
   the air, so that, as the saying is, they neither touch heaven nor
   earth. Nothing can be more destructive than this imagination; for it
   mingles and confounds idols with God, whose majesty does not hold its
   due rank if it does not reign in solitary grandeur over the ruins of
   all the false gods. Thus the beginning of true piety is, that from the
   whole multitude of false gods we shall wisely distinguish that one God
   to whom we ought to be entirely devoted.

   For they are not gods, but the work of the hands of man, wood and
   stone. By two arguments Hezekiah shews that "they were not gods;"
   first, because they consisted of matter, [55] and secondly, because
   they were formed by the hands of men. Nothing can be more absurd than
   for a man to assume the right to create a god, not only because he had
   a beginning, while God is eternal, but because not even for a single
   moment does he subsist by his own power. Let the whole world collect
   all its strength into a single man, [56] he will not even be able to
   create a fica. What presumption is it, therefore, that every mortal man
   shall make for himself either one god or many! [57] Since, therefore,
   there is nothing in us but what is frail and fading, we shall never be
   able to produce a deity.

   Besides, it is in the highest degree absurd to attempt, as an exercise
   of skill, to frame some deity out of matter which is corruptible and
   devoid of feeling, as if "wood or stone," whenever it received a shape,
   began to be a god. In this manner, therefore, all the superstitions
   that men have ever invented are speedily overturned; for the existence
   of those gods can be found nowhere but in their own brains, and,
   indeed, all that they have of themselves contrived is condemned as
   empty and false.

   20. And now, O Jehovah our God. At the conclusion of his prayer, the
   pious king now rises above that fear with which he had struggled; for
   the aids by which he had hitherto fortified himself undoubtedly
   encouraged him boldly to add this short clause. Although God does not
   always deliver his people from temporal evils, yet as he had promised
   that he would be the protector of the city, Hezekiah could firmly
   believe that all the efforts of that wicked tyrant, which were directed
   to the destruction of that city, would be fruitless.

   May know that thou alone art Jehovah. When he pleads it as an argument
   with God that the deliverance of the city will be an occasion of
   promoting his glory, we conclude that nothing is more desirable than to
   make his name glorious in every possible way; and this is even the
   chief design of our salvation, from which we are not at liberty to
   depart, if we desire that God should be gracious to us. Hence we
   conelude that those men are unworthy of his assistance, who, satisfied
   with their own salvation, disregard or forget the reason why God
   chooses to preserve them. Not only do they dishonor God by this
   ingratitude, but they likewise inflict grievous injury on themselves,
   by separating those things which God had joined; for in saving his
   people he glorifies his name, which must be, as we have already said,
   our highest consolation. Besides, Hezekiah does not only desire that
   the God of Israel shall hold a certain rank, but that all idols shall
   be abolished, and that he shall reign alone; for at that time many
   idolaters would have allowed him to be worshipped along with others,
   but, since he does not admit companions, every deity framed by the hand
   of man must be destroyed, that He may hold the undivided sovereignty.

   21. Then Isaiah sent to Hezekiah. This shews the result of the prayer;
   for, as soon as matters have come to an extremity, God suddenly holds
   out his hand to assist the pious king by the Prophet Isaiah. (2 Kings
   19:20.) Not that he immediately stretches out his arm to drive away the
   enemies, but he promises deliverance by the mouth of the Prophet, and
   thus calls even now into exercise the faith of his servant. Isaiah
   undoubtedly could not of himself render any assistance, and therefore
   it would have been foolish for him to promise this or that, if Hezekiah
   had not been convinced that God had sent him. Thus, until God should
   give a manifestation of his power, he rested satisfied with this
   consolation.

   Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel. Here we are taught that we ought
   always to ask at the mouth of God, if we wish to obtain any alleviation
   in our anxieties and distresses; for if we reject the doctrine which he
   communicates to us by the hand of faithful teachers, we are utterly
   unworthy of receiving any consolation. Fed and nourished by it, we
   ought to make continual progress, and to seek from it new
   confirmations, that new remedies may be constantly found for new
   distresses, and that we may never be destitute of consolation even
   amidst the sharpest afflictions; for even they whose resources and
   means of defense are most extensive cannot be too abundantly supplied
   with this doctrine. In Hezekiah a striking instance of faith and
   steadfastness is here exhibited; and yet the Lord does not merely
   comfort him once or only by a single prophecy, but confirms him by many
   prophecies, in order that we, who are far removed from such
   steadfastness, may know that we need many and various aids, to give
   uninterrupted support to our faith.

   Since thou hast prayed to me. In the sacred history (2 Kings 19:20) the
   word I have heard, is used; and consequently in that passage 'sr
   (asher) is a relative pronoun; but here, as in many other passages, it
   is introduced either for the sake of explanation or in assigning a
   reason. [58] To supply the word I have heard, as some commentators do,
   is harsh and unnatural; and the sentence flows on in unbroken
   connection, when God declares that he grants it as an answer to the
   prayers of Hezekiah, that he will frustrate all the efforts of the
   tyrant, and restrain his violence and rage; as if he had said, that
   God's answer corresponded to the prayers of the pious king. And,
   indeed, whoever addresses prayers to him will at length experience how
   ready he is to answer; but very frequently he is silent, and offers no
   consolation from his word, because amidst our distresses we are dumb.

   Concerning Sennacherib king of Assyria. The prediction amounts to this,
   that there is no reason why Hezekiah, under a consciousness of
   destitution and weakness, should faint or despair, when he sees the
   insolence of this haughty tyrant; because God will interpose between
   them. Sennacherib having offered those insults to the wretched Jews,
   God declares that he takes this cause into his own hands, because the
   affront was directed against himself. By these words he shews that he
   will take vengeance, when his grace is despised by unbelievers; and he
   advises believers not to be greatly distressed on account of their
   being despised by the world, provided that their weakness finds
   assistance ready prepared in heaven.

   22. The virgin daughter of Zion. There is greater emphasis in this
   address to the whole Church than if he had said the same tiring to
   Hezekiah as a private individual; for this circumstance heightens the
   baseness of treating with scorn the defencelessness of a wretched
   people, as if the aid of heaven had been of no avail. Thus he censures
   the blindness of Sennacherib, in disregarding God and haughtily
   despising an afflicted Church. Cities are frequently called daughters.
   (Psalm 9:14.) Sometimes also, as we have formerly seen, delicate cities
   are called virgins. (Isaiah 1:8, and 23:12.) But here he intended to
   express the weakness of the city of Jerusalem, because she was like an
   orphan and destitute virgin, who was insulted by this base ruffian and
   infamous robber; while God, as the father to whom this insult is
   offered, declares that he knows well what are the schemes of that
   wicked man, and what is the condition of the whole of Judea.

   23. Whom hast thou reproached? In the former verse he describes the
   fact, such as it might be seen and beheld by all; but now he raises
   their minds higher, by shewing that this tyrant insults not only
   Jerusalem but God himself. Let this passage be brought to our
   remembrance, whenever we see ourselves exposed to the taunts and
   insolence of wicked men; for, though we have no armor, and though no
   one undertakes our defense, and though our weakness prompts our enemies
   to growing insolence, yet the Lord is near and will defend us as with
   an ample shield, for they who fight against us wage war with the living
   God. Nor were these words spoken merely for the sake of a single age,
   but on the contrary, as this promise is perpetual,

   "I will be thy God and thy shield,"
   (Genesis 15:1, and 17:7,)

   "I will be a friend to thy friends, and an adversary to thy
   adversaries,"
   (Genesis 12:3; Exodus 23:22,)

   so the less strength that is left to us, let us be more fully convinced
   that the power of God is close at hand. Since therefore the Lord hath
   entered into covenant with us on the condition of undertaking our
   cause, let us not doubt that he will actually fulfill it, and will shew
   that the insults which are offered to us are offered to himself. In a
   word, he is joined to us in such a manner that he wishes all that
   belongs to him and to us to be in common.

   Besides, those reproaches which Sennacherib had thrown out against the
   Church God applies to himself, in order to shew that wicked men are
   greatly mistaken when they are proud of their greatness, as if they
   would escape punishment for treading on the Church, because she is
   lying at their feet. We know that they treat with contempt the
   providence of God; and especially when they see believers groaning
   under the yoke, they think them unworthy of receiving assistance from
   God, who therefore rises up and testifies that the contempt shewn to
   his poor flock grieves him as much as if his majesty were openly
   dishonored. Although, therefore, enemies think that we are forsaken by
   God when they see us destitute of earthly resources, and on that
   account commit grosser outrage, as if we were given to them for a prey,
   yet, on the other hand, God declares that our salvation is dear and
   precious to him.

   Against whom hast thou raised thy voice? The Prophet employs a variety
   of terms in describing the disdain and insolence of this haughty man,
   as one who in speech, in face, in gesture, in his eyes, and, in short,
   in the whole attitude of his body, was absolutely intolerable; for
   tyrants, having such an opinion of themselves, assume such airs and
   look down on every one else as if they had fallen down from heaven.

   Against the Holy One of Israel. At length he adds, that, although the
   affairs of the nation are at a low ebb, still God, under whose
   protection they are placed, remains in heaven as powerful as ever, he
   thus censures the madness of Sennacherib in judging of a nation from
   earthly appearances, and not considering that they were dedicated and
   consecrated to God. In order, therefore, that we may remain safe
   through the power of God: and that his arm may give us seasonable aid,
   we must be his Israel; which will be the case if, relying on his word,
   we

   "recline under the shadow of his wings." (Psalm 36:7.)

   24. By the hand of thy servants. This also heightens the baseness and
   cruelty of the insult, for it is harder to bear reproaches from a
   servant than from his master, the insult being rendered more grievous
   by the meanness of the person. Renee also proud and insolent men, in
   order to render their threatenings more galling and offensive, boast
   that they will do this or that by one of their servants or footmen, for
   the purpose of testifying more strongly their contemptuous feelings
   towards those whom they hate. The Prophet therefore intended to
   represent more strongly the baseness of the blasphemy by this
   circumstance, that Sennacherib had not only vomited it out of his own
   mouth, but had employed "his servant" Rabshakeh to utter scornful
   language against the holy name of God.

   I will ascend the heights of the mountains, the sides of Lebanon. What
   he now repeats as having been spoken by Sennacherib, some understand to
   relate generally to former victories which he had gained, and by which,
   as we have already said, he had vanquished many nations. But I choose
   rather to take a more simple view, and to interpret it as relating to
   the present siege. Perceiving almost the whole of Judea subjected to
   his power, having taken possession of the hills which surrounded that
   country on all sides, he swells with insolence as if he had gained a
   complete victory, and threatens that he will take within his grasp
   those battlemerits and Mount Lebanon, with its cedars and firs and
   ether attractions; as if he had said that nothing shall hinder him from
   taking possession of the bulwarks, castles, and best fortified places,
   and wielding the whole of Judea at his pleasure. Thus do tyrants,
   though they acknowledge that war is doubtful, still dream of having in
   their power the successful results of battles.

   25. I shall dig and drink water. The tyrant still goes on to boast of
   his strength, and threatens that e will bring so powerful an army that
   by means of their numbers he will dry up all the fountains and rivers.
   Yet, when he says, "With the sole of my feet I shall dry up all the
   lakes of the siege," by the lakes of the siege [59] some understand the
   fountain of Siloah, and the cisterns and pools of which the besieged
   Jews could not be deprived without being consumed by thirst. And,
   indeed, in the former clause he appears to say that, though the whole
   country were dry, still he does not dread a scarcity of water, because
   his vast military forces will be abundantly able to dig wells. In the
   second clause he adds, that he will have at his command the means of
   drying up all the waters of the city, so as to slay the Jews by thirst.
   In short, he means that Jerusalem will be unable to resist the siege,
   and will not be able to stand out any longer, but must immediately
   surrender. But while wicked men thus vaunt, God sits in heaven, from
   which he will at length execute judgment against them; for this
   narrative of the Prophet is intended to lead us to consider the
   stupendous judgment of God against that tyrant.

   26. Hast thou not heard? The greater part of commentators explain this
   verse as if the Lord declared that nothing was now done, or had
   formerly been done by this tyrant, which he had not foretold by the
   mouth of the Prophet, and thus affirmed that he was the author of those
   things. But I explain it in a different manner, which is, that
   Jerusalem will be preserved by the assistance of God, because he is the
   protector of it.

   That I made it long ago. For the sake of giving greater emphasis, he
   suppresses the name of the city, and employs the demonstrative pronoun
   it, as if all other cities had been of no value in the sight of God.
   [60] Others view the pronoun it as referring to the deliverance which
   depended on the secret decree of God; but whoever examines judiciously
   the design and words of the Prophet, will acknowledge that it rather
   denotes Jerusalem. God had complained that he was dishonored by base
   reproaches; and yet, in repeating the words of Sennacherib, he
   mentioned only "Lebanon" and the adjacent country. In order now to shew
   that under the name "Lebanon" war has been declared against himself, he
   affirms, as in many other passages of Scripture, that Jerusalem was
   founded by his own hand and built by his direction, and therefore that,
   until he was conquered, Sennacherib could not overthrow it.

   This doctrine is found everywhere, and frequently repeated in the
   Scriptures, (Psalm 48:8; 67:5; 78:69; Isaiah 14:32,) and contains a
   remarkable consolation, by which the godly may be sustained amidst the
   severest afflictions that can befall them; and that consolation is,
   that they will continually be under God's protection, because he has
   elected them. He employs this argument, "I have founded the Church, and
   therefore the salvation of the Church shall always be my care; because
   I will not leave unfinished the work which I have begun, but will carry
   it forward to perfection." In short, the Lord testifies that he defends
   and preserves his work, because it involves his honor and our
   salvation. Yet he is called "the maker of the Church," in a different
   sense from that in which he is commonly called the Creator of heaven
   and earth; for we are his peculiar work, "his workmanship, (to poiema,)
   created anew by his Spirit," as Paul speaks, and as we have formerly
   explained on other passages. [61] This work is, therefore, more
   excellent than the whole creation of the world; that no one may ascribe
   it to his own exertions or power that he has been adopted into the
   Church of God; for it is not without good reason that we are called
   "his workmanship."

   It may be asked, "Why does the Lord say that he formed Jerusalem from
   ancient days? for there were other cities far more ancient." I reply,
   this must not be viewed as referring to the outward form or structure
   of the city, but to that eternal decree by which he chose it to be his
   dwelling-place; for although it was declared, even when the ark was
   built, "This is my rest, here will I dwell," (Psalm 132:14;) and again
   by Moses,

   "Wherever I shall record my name, I will come to thee and will bless
   thee," (Exodus 20:24;)

   yet it had been ordained by God long before. "We were chosen," as Paul
   also informs us,

   "before the foundations of the world were laid,"
   (Ephesians 1:4;)

   and James declares that

   "we were begotten by the word of truth, that we might be as it were the
   first-fruits of all the creatures." (James 1:18.)

   He will, therefore, preserve us above all creatures, and will never
   allow us to perish; and indeed, for the same reason that Christ is
   called "the firstborn of every creature," (Colossians 1:15) "the
   Church, which is his body," (Ephesians 1:22, 23,) possesses the highest
   honor and dignity in the whole world. I leave to the Rabbins their
   dreams, that God created the Messiah and Jerusalem with a throne of
   glory before he created heaven and earth. But we must maintain this
   doctrine, that God will be the faithful guardian of his Church, because
   he has deigned to prefer her to the whole world.

   And should I now bring it to be desolation? Others take these words in
   a different sense. I acknowledge that the Prophet's words are in the
   past tense, Now have I brought and placed it; but as the change of
   tenses is frequent in the Hebrew language, the Prophet, after having
   said that God is the founder of his Church, and that it is the most
   illustrious of all his works, undoubtedly argues from it that it is
   impossible that he shall involve his Church in the same ruin as
   ordinary things. We must therefore read it as a question, "Shall I now
   bring it?" or, "Shall I now have brought it?" As if he had said,
   "Should I allow it to be ruined, like other cities that have been
   destroyed and razed?" [62] For he compares Jerusalem to other cities
   which had been overthrown by the king of Assyria, and subjected to his
   power, that no one may think that the tyrant can so easily overturn it;
   because it holds a different position from other cities which have been
   destroyed and levelled with the ground. It ought not therefore to be
   compared even to the best fortified cities, for they quickly fall with
   their earthly strength; but the Church, though small and feeble, has a
   firm and solid foundation.in the election of God, and cannot be
   overturned by any billows or tempests.

   We see wonderful changes that have often taken place throughout the
   whole world, republics subverted, empires overthrown, very powerful
   nations subdued, their name extinguished, and their glory effaced.
   Where is now the majesty of the Roman Empire? Where is the grandeur of
   that nation which was mistress of the whole world? If there are any
   remains of it, (and they are few,) do they not aid the wretched bondage
   of that detestable monster, Antichrist, whose tyranny is exercised over
   the whole world? Where is now the liberty of Rome? Where is the beauty
   of that illustrious republic? May not Rome be justly called the
   workshop of iniquity, and the lodginghouse of every crime?

   But amidst those frightful changes, the Lord declares that he will
   assist Jerusalem, that is, his Church, and that although amidst those
   changes she may be afflicted and tossed in various ways, yet she shall
   stand erect, or at least the shaking and oppression which she may
   suffer shall not hinder her from being renewed and multiplied from age
   to age by various resurrections. Although there are not always in the
   world the same members of the Church, yet it is the same body joined to
   the same head, that is, Christ. The Lord will therefore defend his
   city, and will cause

   "the children of his servants to continue, that their seed may be
   established for ever." (Psalm 102:28.)

   27. For their inhabitants were maimed. [63] Here the Prophet expresses
   more fully what he had formerly glanced at briefly, that we ought not
   to judge of the condition of the Church from the stability of this
   world; for although fortified cities are taken, and the strongest men
   lose courage and fall into the hands of their enemies, yet the Church
   shall stand and flourish, because it does not rest on its own strength,
   and has its foundation not on the earth but in heaven. There is thus an
   implied contrast between fortified cities, which alarmed and
   terrorstruck inhabitants are unable to defend, and the Church of God,
   which rests on his grace alone, and therefore resists every attack, so
   that it never fails; for the Church refers everything to God alone,
   from whom she receives the commencement of life, uninterrupted
   strength, perseverance, every part of salvation, and every blessing.

   Hence we learn that all fortresses are of no avail, if the hand of the
   Lord do not assist. All human strength will be broken and decay, if it
   be not supported by his power; castles, bulwarks, and the most powerful
   armies will be of no use without him. This is expressed more fully by
   the following metaphors,

   Like the grass of the field and the green herb. It is of importance
   that believers should be led to admire the wonderful grace which God
   exercises towards them, that they may not envy the earthly wealth
   possessed by irreligious men. Although their power be dazzling and
   magnificent, yet he shews that they are like "the green herb and the
   grass," which indeed flourish for a time, but quickly wither. He dwarfs
   them still more by another metaphor which he adds,

   The grass of the housetops. It is indeed lofty and seen by all, but the
   more elevated its position, it is the nearer to the heat, and withers
   more quickly, and is of no use whatever; and it is said also in the
   psalm, that

   "they who pass by do not bless it." (Psalm 129:8.)

   Though the enemies of the Church [64] are high, and as it were exalted
   to heaven, though they flourish and have abundant wealth, yet they
   quickly fall. In like manner, therefore, as the corn which lies on the
   ground at our feet is more valuable than the unfruitful herb that grows
   on the housetops; so the Lord shews that the low condition of his
   servants is far more desirable than that of those who, leaning on their
   own strength, vaunt themselves above others, and boast against God
   himself. [65]

   Which withereth before it is ripe. Some think that this is a fourth
   comparison, but I think that the Prophet added it for the sake of
   exposition; as if he had said, that grass of this kind withers before
   it come into the stalk, that is, before it is fully ripe; in the same
   manner as it is said in the psalm, "Before it is grown up, it
   withereth." (Psalm 129:6.)

   28. I know thy sitting down and thy rising up. He returns to the
   insufferable pride of that tyrant, who claimed everything for himself,
   as if he had not been subject to any one, and dared to despise God as
   compared to himself, and to load him with reproaches. He rebukes that
   man's pride and insolence, "But I know thy sitting down." This being
   the cause of the fierceness of wicked men, that they think that no one
   is above them, and that they are not even subject to the providence of
   God, he shews that they can absolutely do nothing except so far as he
   permits them. By sitting down, and rising up, are here denoted
   deliberations, plans, and schemes. Wicked and irreligious men enter
   into various deliberations how they may be able to oppress and destroy
   the people of God; but to whatever hand they turn, and which way soever
   they pursue, they will accomplish nothing without the will of God. The
   providence of God restrains them, and drives them hither and thither,
   so that frequently, contrary to their intention, they are conducted to
   a very good end, as God thinks fit, to whom it peculiarly belongs to
   "direct the steps of men." (Proverbs 16:9.)

   And thy indignation against me. He warns Sennacherib that he is well
   aware of his rage, and declares that, while wicked men storm on the
   earth, he preserves calm silence, and laughs at their madness; and
   because Sennacherib was furious, and thought that he would not be
   punished for it, the Prophet expressly adds this, that believers may
   not think that this is new or unknown to God, or that he pays no
   attention to them.

   29. Because thou wast angry against me. The more furiously wicked men
   rise up against God, and the more outrageous the violence by which they
   are actuated, so much the more is he wont eventually to set himself in
   opposition to them. For a time, indeed, he permits them to domineer and
   to have everything that they wish, but after long forbearance he
   restrains them, and, as it were, puts a bridle on their neck, that they
   may not imagine that they have everything in their power. Sennacherib
   was a remarkable instance of this, for in his rage against God, the
   more insolently he vaunted, the heavier did he find the wrath of God to
   be against him; which all wicked men ought also to expect.

   Therefore will I put my hook (or, my ring) in thy nose. This is
   pleasant mockery of stupidity and wantonness; as if he had said, "I see
   how it is, by treating thee mildly and gently, I would gain nothing;
   for thy rage is insatiable. But since thou canst not be tamed, I will
   curb thee like a savage beast." And in this manner he declares more
   plainly, that God not only sees and knows what is proposed or contrived
   by wicked men, but also subdues and restrains their fierceness in such
   a manner, that he drags them reluctantly where ever he pleases, as one
   would lead a wild beast held by a bridle or a ring. chch (chach) [66]
   is translated by some a hook, but I have preferred to translate it a
   ring; because a hook is used for catching fishes, and would not so well
   apply to a beast.

   Sennacherib was compelled to return by the way by which he came,
   because, while he was revolving the project of subduing every part of
   Judea and Egypt, he hastily, without having accomplished anything, took
   the speediest method of returning, which he would net have done of his
   own accord, if God had not drawn him back by unseen methods.

   30. And this shall be a sign to thee. He now directs his discourse to
   Hezekiah and the whole nation; for he did not address Sennacherib as if
   he expected him to listen, but in order that, by contemptuously mocking
   at the absent tyrant, he might more powerfully stimulate the minds of
   believers to stronger confidence. If he had simply said, "Take courage,
   Hezekiah; though Sennacherib is insolent, yet in due time I will
   restrain him;" that discourse would have been less impressive, than
   when he addresses the tyrant, and, by thundering against him,
   encourages believers to despise his presumption. [67] Accordingly, the
   speech directed to the tyrant is now followed by a seasonable address
   to Hezekiah and the nation, and a promise of deliverance to them; not
   only that he will rescue them from the jaws of a savage beast, but also
   that Hezekiah shall enjoy a peaceful reign, and that the rest of the
   people shall have everything necessary for leading a prosperous and
   happy life. Thus he enlarges on the benefit derived from the
   deliverance in such a manner as to shew that he intends, not in one way
   only, but in a variety of ways, to promote the interests of his people;
   for not only does he once and instantaneously rescue them from dangers,
   but largely and bountifully bestows his kindness upon them, so that the
   fruit is seen long afterwards.

   But there is an apparent impropriety in putting as "a sign" an event
   which occurred later than the deliverance itself; for if he intended to
   encourage the besieged to entertain favorable hopes, he ought to have
   made some exhibition beforehand, instead of relating what he would do
   afterwards. [68] I reply, there are two kinds of signs. Some go before
   the event, and lead us to it as by the hand; while others follow for
   the purpose of confirming the event, that it may be more strongly
   impressed upon our minds, and may never be effaced from our
   remembrance. For instance, when the Lord brought back his people out of
   Egypt, he gave many signs to Moses beforehand; but he also appointed
   another that should be after the deliverance,

   "You shall sacrifice to me three days afterwards."
   (Exodus 3:12, 18.)

   The design was, that they should not forget so great a blessing, but
   should give thanks to God after having received this additional favor.
   It is a sign of this nature which Isaiah here describes; and certainly
   it tends greatly to confirm our faith, to place before our eyes the
   uninterrupted course of God's favours towards us, that we may consider
   how various they are.

   When the enemy had been repelled, there was danger from famine, which
   most commonly comes after war; for the wasting and pillaging of the
   fields must have been followed by great scarcity of provisions. Amidst
   so great scarcity as seemed likely to ensue, the Lord promises that
   there will be no lack of food, and holds out this as a very evident
   sign of deliverance, in order to convince them the more that he will be
   the author of the deliverance, or, at least, to fix it more deeply on
   their hearts. This was indeed incredible, and exceeded all expectation
   and belief; but it was necessary that the faith of Hezekiah and of the
   people should be excited in such a manner that, after having heard of
   so great kindness, they might be more ready to hope well, and next,
   that the event might shew that those illustrious works of God could not
   be ascribed to chance.

   The meaning therefore is, "After having driven out the enemy, God will
   restrain him so that he cannot bring fresh troops, and thou shalt
   peacefully possess thy country; he will also supply thee with food and
   nourishment, so that thou shalt be in want of nothing." But because, as
   usually happens, they had consumed a large portion of the crop, and
   destroyed a part of it, and because they who were besieged or fugitives
   had it not in their power to attend to agricultural labors, he promises
   that they shall have food without sowing till they sow on the third
   year.

   31. And that which shall be preserved of the house of Judah. He follows
   out the former statement; for he declares that the Lord will deliver
   Jerusalem so as not to east away his care of her afterwards, but will
   be her savior to the end. And indeed all the blessings that the Lord
   bestows upon us are a sign and testimony of continued kindness towards
   us, that we may know that we shall never be forsaken by him. But here
   we ought chiefly to remember what we formerly remarked, that the
   defense of Jerusalem belonged to God, because he had chosen it to be
   his sanctuary, and because the Messiah would proceed from it.

   And that which shall be left. phlyth (peletah) literally signifies
   deliverance; but here it is a collective noun for "men delivered," in
   the same manner as in other passages, "captivity" is put for
   "captives." (Psalm 14:7, and 53:6; Jeremiah 29:14.) And it is not
   without reason that he promises increase to a small remnant; for
   although the siege had been raised, still the people, being greatly
   diminished, had slight cause of joy, and full restoration could
   scarcely be expected by so small a number of persons. For the purpose
   of soothing this grief, therefore, he declares that the land will be
   full of inhabitants, as if a very abundant harvest would fill the
   granaries which had formerly been empty.

   Nor was it merely the desolation of the land of Judah that might have
   discouraged the hearts of believers or pierced them with sorrow, but
   likewise that greater diminution which arose from the ten tribes being
   led into captivity. (2 Kings 15:29, and 17:6.) Although they have been
   thus cut down, Isaiah declares that the Lord will cause them to recover
   their former condition, and a vast multitude to spring up; for the Lord
   permits his people to be thus diminished and brought very low, that his
   glory may afterwards be illustriously displayed in their deliverance.
   What he accomplished at that time ought also to be expected in the
   present day; so that in proportion as we see the strength of the Church
   weakened and brought low, we may be more fully convinced that. God has
   in his power the means of multiplying a small number; for this
   restoration must not be measured by our powers of judging.

   Shall strike root downward. He declares that there will be so great
   desolation that it shall seem as if the Church had been uprooted, and
   had utterly perished; and indeed the destruction of the kingdom of
   Israel was a very sad spectacle of cutting off. But the Prophet says,
   that there shall be such an increase that the tree which had been
   nearly torn up shall "strike its roots" deep; for although the Church
   does not make professions of towering greatness, as is commonly done by
   the rulers of this world, yet the Lord imparts a secret vigor which
   causes it to spring up and grow beyond human expectation. Let us not be
   terrifled, therefore, when no roots are seen, or when we think that
   they are dead; for he hath promised that he will cause it to "strike
   root downwards."

   And bear fruit upwards. This is added, because the Church does not only
   flourish like grass, (which was formerly said of the condition of the
   wicked, [69] ) but brings forth abundant fruit; and thus the Lord
   completes in her what he hath once begun.

   32. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant. Formerly by the
   metaphor of a root and of fruits he foretold the deliverance of the
   Church; he now declares the same thing without a figure. He alludes to
   the siege by which a small number of people, who had been left in the
   city, were shut up as in a prison and reduced to very great straits; he
   says that they shall now go out, and that the whole country shall be
   open to them, and that they shall be at liberty to move wherever they
   please without fear. The going forth is thus contrasted with the narrow
   limits within which the trembling Jews had been forced by the dread of
   enemies to confine themselves. Yet by this word he expresses not only
   liberty to go out, but the increase of the nation, which had been
   reduced to a small number. When not only was Judea again covered by a
   multitude of men, but from the remnant there sprung vast multitudes who
   were spread over the various countries of the world, this could not
   have been done, unless out of that small number the Lord had created
   not merely a single nation, but many nations.

   The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will do this. Not only does he contrast
   "the zeal of God" with the purposes of men, in order to extol the
   excellence of the work, but he states that it is sufficient for every
   purpose, that God may give an astonishing demonstration of his power.
   At first sight, as we have said, the thing was incredible; there were
   obstacles on every side, and no means of relief; and therefore he
   declares that God regards his Church with such fervent love, that he
   does not hesitate to work in an extraordinary manner for promoting her
   salvation. The same mode of expression was employed by him on a similar
   occasion. (Isaiah 9:7.)

   33. Therefore thus saith Jehovah. He now returns to the deliverance of
   which he had formerly spoken; for God proraised, first, that he would
   drive out Sennacherib; secondly, that he would grant food and
   nourishment for the sustenance of the people, though the country had
   been wasted and pillaged; and, thirdly, that he would cause flint small
   number to grow into a vast multitude. Having made these declarations,
   he returns to the first, because without it all the rest might appear
   to be useless; that is, if the people were not rescued from the hands,
   of that tyrant.

   He shall not enter into the city. God threatens that he will be as a
   fortress, to hinder him from "entering into the city," and that he will
   even meet him, so as to hinder him from coming nearer or fighting
   against it; for he says that he shall not cast an arrow nor a balister.
   I think that in this passage sllh (solelah) denotes a balister, or some
   such machine for throwing darts, rather than a mound; for "mounds" are
   not thrown or poured.

   34. By the way that he came shall he return. We have formerly explained
   what it is to return by the same way, that is, to depar without having
   accomplished anything, as we commonly say, (Il s'en est retourne comme
   il est venu,) "he returned as he came," when nothing has been
   accomplished, and the efforts are unsuccessful. To confirm this, he
   adds, that "thus hath the Lord spoken;" for as soon as he "who cannot
   lie" (Titus 1:2) hath spoken, we ought to embrace and kiss his word, as
   if the result were rendered certain by the removal of every
   obstruction.

   35. And I will be a protector. This is the reason of the preceding
   statement, why Sennacherib should not enter into the city; because the
   Lord will protect it. The Prophet therefore bids Hezekiah and the whole
   nation turn their eyes towards God, because the sight of that tyrant
   was so alarming that they might tremble at it. In like manner, if we
   now contemplate the power of our enemies, we shall be overpowered by
   fear, and there will scarcely be any room for hope; but we ought to
   look directly to God, and embrace his promises, by which we are
   defended as by a shield; and since God is sufficiently powerful to
   restrain a mortal man, to him ought we to turn our eyes; for this
   promise must not be limited to that time, but ought to be extended to
   all times. Yet the expression used by the Prophet is more extensive,
   and conveys fuller meaning; for God affirms that he will be the
   guardian and protector of the city; that is, because he had pledged
   himself to defend it. Hence he infers that it will be preserved,
   because God's protection renders its preservation certain.

   For my own sake. When he says that he will do this "for his own sake,"
   he calls on Hezekiah and all believers to remember his gracious
   covenant For the Jews, though often and severely chastised, had
   obstinately provoked the wrath of God against them, and therefore
   deserved not only that he should deprive them of all assistance, but
   that he should execute against them the highest examples of dreadful
   vengeance. In order therefore to prevent them from despairing, he shews
   that God will be their defender, not because he finds any cause in
   them, but rather because he looks to himself first, that he may adhere
   firmly to his purpose, not to cast away the posterity of Abraham which
   he adopted, not to abolish religious worship, not to blot out the
   remembrance of his name on the earth by destroying his sanctuary; and,
   secondly, not to expose his name to the jeers and blasphemies of the
   nations. And these words contain an implied reproof which that nation
   ought to have felt to be severe, and justly; because the good king had
   more difficulty in pacifying them than in repelling the enemy; for they
   distrusted, and stormed, and thought that no hope of safety was left
   for them. The Lord, therefore, did not look at the merits of the people
   or of any other person, but only had regard to his own glory; for the
   contrast which is expressed by Ezekiel must here be understood, "Not
   for your sakes, O house of Israel, will I do this, but for my own
   sake." [70] (Ezekiel 36:22.) Now, since we have the same argument to
   plead in the present day, let us not hesitate to make use of this
   shield against our sins, "Though we most highly deserve a thousand
   deaths, yet it is enough for God to look to his goodness and
   faithfulness, that he may fulfill what he hath promised." Though it is
   of no advantage to hypocrites that God is the continual protector of
   his Church, yet the elect will always have this as a very safe refuge,
   that although they bring nothing of their own to appease the wrath of
   God, yet since God, moved by nothing else than his infinite goodness,
   built his Church and determined to defend it, he will never suffer it
   to perish.

   And for my servant David's sake. This is highly worthy of observation;
   for although God needed not to seek in any one but in himself the
   reason why he embraced that nation with a gracious regard, yet it is
   not without good reason that he brings forward, as a very sure pledge
   of his love, David, by whose hand he had made a covenant, and to whom
   he, had promised to be a Father. (2 Samuel 7:12.) The Prophet does not
   speak of David as a private individual, but as a holy king whose throne
   was established by the hand of God, under whose guidance the Church
   would continue to be safe, and, in short, who would be the mediator
   between God and the Church; for in this capacity he surpassed even the
   angels themselves, so far as he represented the person of Christ. His
   throne was, indeed, soon afterwards cast down, and his crown torn in
   pieces, yet this was no unmeaning confirmation, that God intended to
   protect the city for a time, because he determined not to make void
   what he had testified to David concerning the eternity of his kingdom.
   And we know that the captivity of the people did not wholly set aside
   the kingly power in the posterity of David till at length Christ came,
   who on this account is called David in other passages. (Jeremiah 30:9;
   Ezekiel 37:24; Hosea 3:5.)

   This shews the great absurdity of the Papists in alleging that it is
   through the merits of the saints that God pardons us; for here the case
   of David is widely different from that of other saints, on account of
   the promise which had been made to him. He might have named Abraham, or
   any other person, who possessed no small authority in the Church; but
   since he was now speaking of the preservation of the Church, and of the
   eternity of the kingdom of Christ, he named in a peculiar manner him
   who expressly, along with others, received that promise, "This is my
   rest, here will I dwell." (Psalm 132:14.) Since therefore this passage
   has regard to the promise, and not to the person, the Papists are
   doubly foolish in thinking that it affords support to the intercession
   of the saints, which is of their own contrivance. On the contrary, what
   they plead in their own behalf absolutely contradicts their error;
   because David is here represented as the type of the only Mediator, who
   sets aside the intercessions which they have invented.

   36. And the angel of Jehovah went out. The Prophet now relates what
   happened to the Assyrian, that we may not think that the Lord spoke in
   vain. He shews, therefore, that his prediction was proved by the event,
   that it might clearly appear that God had sent him, and that he had not
   uttered anything rashly. Yet we ought not to limit so remarkable a work
   of God to a single prediction; but the authority of the Prophet was
   sustained, and his calling sanctioned, as to the whole course of his
   doctrine. He has related a singular and wellknown event which had
   recently happened, in order to prove, by means of it, to the end of the
   world, that God had spoken by his mouth.

   Where that slaughter was carried into effect by the angel is not very
   evident. The opinion generally entertained is, that it happened at the
   siege of Jerusalem; but it is also possible that it may have happened
   during the march of Sennacherib's army; that is, while he was coming to
   besiege the city. I leave that matter uncertain, because it is of
   little importance. From the context, certainly, we may clearly learn
   that the tyrant did not approach so near as to be able to throw a dare
   into the city.

   We must indeed reject that invention by which Satan, through profane
   historians, has attempted to obscure this extraordinary judgment of
   God, that, in consequence of a part of the army having been destroyed
   by a plague during the war in Egypt, Sennacherib returned into his own
   dominions. So great a number of persons dying in one night cannot be
   attributed to a plague; and the father of lies, with his wonted
   cunning, has turned aside into Egypt the blessing which God bestowed on
   his Church. The event itself cries aloud that Jerusalem was
   miraculously rescued, as it were, out of the midst of destruction;
   especially since Isaiah had already delivered that message by which God
   testified, in a manner which could not be mistaken, that God would
   bestow this deliverance on the Jews and not on the Egyptians.

   And slew in the camp ofthe Assyrians. That no one may ascribe the
   miracle to natural causes, it is expressly added, that so great a
   multitude was slain by the hand of the angel. Nor is it a new thing for
   the Lord to make use of the ministractions of angels to promote the
   safety of believers, for whose advantage he appointed all the armies of
   heaven; and it tends greatly to confirm our faith when we learn that an
   infinite number of guardians keep watch over us. (Psalm 91:11.) The
   Lord alone, indeed, is of himself able, and undoubtedly he alone
   preserves us; for the angels may be regarded as his hand, and on that
   account they are called "principalities and powers." (Romans 8:38;
   Ephesians 1:21.) But it contributes much to aid our weakness that he
   hath appointed heavenly messengers to be our defenders and guardians.
   Yet all the praise is due to God alone, of whom the angels are only
   instruments; and therefore we must beware of falling into the
   superstition of the Papists, who, by their absurd worship of angels,
   ascribe to them that power which belongs to God; an error with which we
   know that some very learned men in all ages have been chargeable.
   Whether it was done by the hand of one angel or of many angels, we
   cannot absolutely ascertain, nor is it a matter of great importance;
   for the Lord can do it as easily by one angel as by a thousand, and
   does not make use of their agency as if he needed the assistance of
   others, but rather, as we have formerly said, in order to support our
   weakness. Yet it is more probable, and agrees better with the words of
   the Prophet, that a single angel was commissioned to execute this
   judgment, as in the ancient redemption an angel passed through the
   whole of Egypt to slay the firstborn. (Exodus 12:29.) Although God
   sometimes executes his vengeance by means of evil angels, yet he chose
   one of his willing servants, that by means of him he might provide for
   the safety of the Church.

   A hundred and eighty-five thousand. That the army was so vast need not
   make us wonder, as ignorant people do, who reckon it to be incredible
   and fabulous when they are told that so great a multitude went into the
   field of battle, because we are accustomed to carry on war with much
   smaller troops. But that the case was very different with eastern
   nations, is fully testified by historians and by wellknown transactions
   of the present day. Nor ought we to be astonished at the vast forces
   which they led into battle, for they are much more capable of enduring
   heat, and toil, and hunger, and are satisfied with a much smaller
   portion of food, and do not care about those luxuries by which our
   soldiers in the present day are corrupted.

   As to the way and manner of the slaughter, this passage gives no
   definite statement. The Jews conjecture that the soldiers were struck
   by thunder, but they do so without any authority or probable evidence;
   for, being bold in contriving fables, they unwarrantably affirm as
   certain whatever comes into their mind, as if it were supported by some
   history.

   Behold, they were all dead corpses. That the slaughter was not done so
   openly as the Jews allege is very evident from this narrative, which
   states that they were lying dead. Now, if they had been struck by a
   thunderbolt, every person must have known it, and it would not have
   been omitted by the Prophet. This might serve to refute the conjecture
   of the Jews, but I choose rather to leave the matter doubtful. It is
   enough that the Lord, having determined to save Jerusalem from the hand
   of the Assyrian, cut off his army by a sudden death, without any agency
   of man.

   37. Then Sennacherib, king of Assyria, went away and returned. He now
   shows how disgraceful was the retreat of this haughty tyrant, who in
   the wishes of his heart had already devoured the whole of Judea, and
   formerly dared to pretend to be more powerful than God himself. By
   employing a variety of words to express his departure, the Prophet
   indirectly censures the shameful flight; for the repetition is not
   superfluous, "He set out, he went away, he returned." The title of king
   is added for the sake of greater disgrace. "Lo, this is the great king
   of whose power Rabshakeh boasted so highly."

   And dwelt in Nineveh. He did not come into Judea, that: he might depart
   from it in that disgraceful manner; and therefore the hand of God
   throws him back, even as straw is driven by the wind. The circumstance
   of his dwelling in Nineveh reminds us also that he had lost his courage
   as well as his forces; for he would not willingly have remained at
   rest, if despair had not held him like a chain. This means, therefore,
   that he was satisfied with his ancient domains, of which Nineveh was
   the chief city and royal residence. At a later period, when the
   Assyrians were conquered by the Chaldeans, the seat of government was
   removed to Babylon, that is, ten years after the death of Sennacherib,
   and during the reign of Esarhaddon, his successor, who is here
   mentioned, for since parricides did not want defenders, a nation torn
   by factions was easily subdued and conquered by foreign enemies.
   Availing himself of this opportunity, Merodach invaded the Assyrians,
   and subjected them to his power.

   38. While he was worshipping. Here the Jews allow themselves that
   liberty of conjecture in which they are always accustomed to indulge.
   They contrive a stow, that Sennacherib consulted an oracle, and asked
   why he could not conquer the Jews; that the answer was, that Abraham
   wished to sacrifice his son to God; that the tyrant, following that
   example, then determined to slay his son, in order to appease his god;
   and that his sons, enraged at the cruel design of their father, slew
   him in the temple of his idol. But it is unnecessary to spend time in
   such conjectures, in which the Jews display excessive impudence.

   Here it is highly important to behold, as in a picture, the unhappy
   death of tyrants, whom the Lord destroys without the agency of men,
   when everything appears about to be overthrown by their violence, and
   whom he exposes with all their power to universal scorn. Sennacherib,
   who had come into Judea with a vast army, returns home with few
   soldiers, and is led in triumph, as it were, by God as a conqueror. But
   the matter does not end here; for in the very heart of his empire, in
   the metropolis, in the temple itself, the reverence for which defended
   the meanest persons from the mob, he is slain, not by a foreign enemy,
   not by a people in a state of sedition, not by traitors, and in a word,
   not by servants, but by his own sons, that the murder may be more
   disgraceful. It ought to be observed, that those insatiable gluttons,
   who freely wallow in the blood of others, are slain by their own
   followers, and are punished by those from whom above all others they
   ought to have been safe. This is more shocking than if they had been
   put to death by strangers; but God thus punishes the cruelty of those
   who, in their eagerness to enjoy power, did not even spare the
   innocent. Even in profane historians we find various examples of this
   kind, in which we may easily behold the judgments of the Lord.

   Besides, the insatiable ambition of Sennacherib receives its just
   reward, because, while he is intent on the wide extension of his
   territories, he cannot secure the peace of his own family, by leading
   his children to live at peace; for out of his neglect of some, and
   undue attachment to others, the conspiracy arose. And not only was this
   tyrant slain, but his kingdom also was soon afterwards overthrown, as
   we have already said; and, in the meantime, that his successor might
   not dare to make any attempt against the Jews, God kept him also within
   the country by internal broils.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [46] "Tellement qu'ils ne marchent qu'en trainant les jambes ou a
   clochepied," "So that they walk only by dragging their limbs or
   limping."

   [47] "Paraventure, ou possible." "Perhaps, or possible."

   [48] "En les punissant." "By punishing them."

   [49] "The word translated servants, is not the same with that in the
   preceding verse, but strictly means young men or boys, and is so
   translated in the Targ. and Vulg. Many interpreters regard it as a
   contemptuous description, and it is so translated by Hitzig, (knappen,
   attendants.) Umbreit, (buben, boys or lads,) Henderson, (striplings,)
   and in other modern versions." -- Alexander.

   [50] akousas angelian, "having heard a message." "Havendo inteso un
   certo grido," "having heard a certain noise." -- Ital. "Uno foll etmas
   heren," "and shall hear something." -- Luth. Germ.

   [51] "Et jetter au sein d'iceluy sa tristesse et soliciltude." "And to
   pour into his bosom his grief and anxiety."

   [52] D'escheles.

   [53] "Encor qu'il y en air un." "Though there be a God."

   [54] "Dechassant par la splendeur de sa vertu toutes tenebres
   d'ignorance." "Who drives away by the brightness of his power all the
   darkness of ignorance."

   [55] "D'autant qu'ils estoyent de matire corruptible." "Because they
   were of corruptible matter."

   [56] "En un seul homme."

   [57] "Quel orgueil estce donc que le premier qui voudra mettre la main
   a la besogne se face autant de dieux que bon luy semblera!" "What
   presumption is it then that whoever shall first put his hand to the
   work shall make as many gods as he thinks proper!"

   [58] That is, it means either since or because. -- Ed.

   [59] The rivers of besieged places. -- (Eng. Ver.)

   [60] "Comme si toutes les autres villes n'estoyent rien derant Dieu au
   pris de cesteci." "As if all other cities were nothing before God in
   comparison of this."

   [61] Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2, pp. 26 and 83.

   [62] "The marginal reading of the English version runs thus, "Hast thou
   not heard how I have made it long ago, and formed it of ancient times?
   Should I now bring it to be laid waste, and defenced cities to be
   ruinous heaps?" The coincidence with the version given by Calvin is
   striking. Was it accidental? -- Ed.

   [63] "Their inhabitants were of small power. Heb., short of hand." --
   (Eng. Ver.) "Their inhabitants are short of hand, that is, I have made
   them weak, they are ashamed and confounded. By these and the following
   expressions he shews how easily the nations were vanquished by the king
   of Assyria, when it had been so determined by Jehovah." -- Rosenmuller.

   [64] Les ennemis de l'Eglise.

   [65] "On the flat roofs of the east, if they be not carefully kept
   clean, herbage grows from seeds, which perhaps had been left there
   while they were in process of being dried, or had been brought thither
   by the wind. But in consequence of the want of soil it quickly
   withered." -- Rosenmuller.

   [66] "chh (chach) denotes a ring inserted in the nose pierced for that
   purpose, by means of which the Arabs and neighboring nations are wont
   to tame and guide buffaloes and camels, and which is so much the more
   powerful instrument in curbing the camel, that by drawing a rein which
   hangs from it on both sides, the obstinate and refractory animal is
   prevented from breathing." -- Rosenmuller.

   [67] "A ne tenir conte des menaces d'iceluy." "To pay no attention to
   his threatenings."

   [68] "Il devoit (ce semble) monstrer la vertu de bonne heure, et non
   pas declarer ce qu'il feroit apres le siege leve." "He ought (one would
   think) to have shewn his power at an early period, and not to have
   declared what he would do after the siege had been raised."

   [69] See [9]verse 28.

   [70] "Pour l'amour de mon sainct nom," "For the love of my holy name."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 38
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 38:1-22

   1. In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet
   the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD,
   Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.

   1. In diebus illis aegrotavit Ezechias usque ad mortem. Et vemt ad eum
   Isaias filius Amoz Propheta, dixitque illi: Sic dicit Iehova, Praeeipe
   quoad domum tuam; (vel, domui tuoe;) quia tu morieris, et non rives.

   2. Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the
   LORD,

   2. Tunc vertit Ezechias faciem suam ad parietem, oravitque Iehovam.

   3. And said, Remember now, O LORD, I beseech thee, how I have walked
   before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
   is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

   3. Ac dixit: Obsecro, Iehova, recordare nunc quod ambulaverim coram to
   in veritate, in corde perfecto, et recte fecerim in oculis tuis.
   Flevitque Ezechias fletu magno.

   4. Then came the word of the LORD to Isaiah, saying,

   4. Tunc factum fuit verbum Iehovae ad Isaiam, dicendo:

   5. Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy
   father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will
   add unto thy days fifteen years.

   5. Vade, et dic Ezechiae: Sic dicit Iehova Deus David patris tui:
   Audivi orationem tuam, et vidi lachrymas tuas: Ecce ego adjicio ad dies
   tuos annos quindecim.

   6. And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of
   Assyria: and I will defend this city.

   6. Et eruam to de manu regis Assur, atque urbem hane; et protector ero
   huic urbi.

   7. And this shall be a sign unto thee from the LORD, that the LORD will
   do this thing that he hath spoken;

   7. Erit autem hoc tibi signum ab Iehova, quod Iehova hanc rem facturus
   sit, de qua loquutus est:

   8. Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone
   down in the sundial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned
   ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down.

   8. Ecce ego reduco umbram graduum, quibus descendit in horologio Achaz
   per solem decem gradibus; et reversus est sol decem gradibus in
   horologio, quibus jam descenderat.

   9. The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and
   was recovered of his sickness:

   9. Scriptum Ezechiae regis Iuda, cum aegrotasset, ac convaluisset a
   morbo Suo.

   10. I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of
   the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years.

   10. Ego dixi in successione dierum meorum, vadam ad portas sepulchri;
   privatus sum residuo annorum meorum.

   11. I said, I shall not see the LORD, even the LORD, in the land of the
   living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.

   11. Dixi, Non videbo Deum, Deum in terra viventium; non aspiciam
   hominem ultra cum incolis seculi.

   12. Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent:
   I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with pining
   sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

   12. Habitatio mea discessit, et convoluta est a me, quasi tabernaculum
   pastoris; succidi quasi textor vitam meam; ab elevatione (vel macie ant
   morbo) succidet me; a die usque ad noctem conficies me.

   13. I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all my
   bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

   13. Supputabam ad auroram; sicut leo, its contrivit ossa mea; ab aurora
   ad noctem conficies me.

   14 Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove:
   mine eyes fail with looking upward: O LORD, I am oppressed; undertake
   for me.

   14. Sicut grus aut hitundo garriebam, gemeban, quasi columba.
   Elevabantur ocnli mei in sublime, Domine, vim fecit mihi, recrea me.

   15. What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath
   done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

   15. Quid loqusr? Qui dixit mihi, ipse fecit: Movebor (vel, trepidus
   incedam) omnibus diebus vitae meae in amaritudine animae meae.

   16. Lord, by these thing men live, and in all these things is the life
   of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live.

   16. Domine, etiam omnibus qui ultra eos vivent, vita spiritus mei in
   illis (nota erit,) et me quod dormire feceris, et vivificaveris me.

   17. Behold, for peace I had great bitterness: but thou hast in love to
   my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast all
   my sins behind thy back.

   17. Ecce in pace amaritudo mihi amara, et tibi placuit animam meam
   (eruere) a fovea; (vel, amasti animam meam a fovea interitns;) quia
   projecisti post tergum omnia peccata mea.

   18. For the grave cannot praise thee; death can not celebrate thee:
   they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

   18. Quoniam non infernus confitebitur tibi neque mors laudabit to; nec
   expectabunt qui in foveam descendunt veritatem tuam.

   19. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the
   father to the children shall make known thy truth.

   19. Vivens, vivens, ipse confitebitur tibi; sicur ego hodie. Pater
   filiis notam faciet veritatem tuam.

   20. The LORD was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to
   the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the
   LORD.

   20. Iehova ad me servandum; et cantica nostra cantabimus omnibus diebus
   vitae nostrae in domo Iehovae.

   21. For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it for a
   plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover.

   21. Dixit autem Isaias, Accipient massam ficuum, et adhibebunt ulceri,
   et vivet.

   22. Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the
   house of the LORD?

   22. Dixerat enim (vel, autem) Ezechias, Quod signum, quod ascensurus
   sim in domum Iehovae?


   1. In those days. The Prophet now relates that the pious king was
   violently assailed by a different kind of temptation, namely, that he
   was seized with a mortal disease and despaired of life; and not only
   so, but likewise that he suffered dreadful agony, in consequence of
   having received from God a warning of his death, as if in a hostile
   manner God had thundered on his head from heaven. At what time that
   happened, whether after the siege, or during the siege, is not very
   evident; but it is unnecessary to give ourselves much trouble on that
   subject. It may be easily inferred from the sacred history, that this
   event happened about the fourteenth year of his reign, either while he
   was invaded by the Assyrian, or after he was delivered, for he reigned
   twenty-nine years, (2 Kings 18:2;) in the fourteenth year of his reign
   the Assyrian attacked Judea, (2 Kings 18:13,) and fifteen years were
   added by the promise which is here related by the Prophet, (2 Kings
   20:6,) and this makes up twenty-nine years. Hence it appears that it
   must have been about the fourteenth year of his reign that Hezekiah was
   afflicted by this disease.

   The only doubtful point is, whether it was during the time of the
   siege, or afterwards, that he was sick. For my own part, I look upon it
   as a more probable conjecture, that he was attacked by this disease
   after the siege had been raised; for if he had been sick during the
   time of the siege, that circumstance would not have been left out by
   the Prophet, who, on the other hand, has related that Hezekiah sent
   messengers, went into the temple, spread a letter before the Lord, and
   sent for the Prophet. These circumstances do not at all apply to a man
   who was suffering heavy sickness; and if disease had been added to so
   many distresses, that circumstance would not have been omitted. In
   doubtful matters, therefore, let us follow what is more probable,
   namely, that the pious king, having been delivered from the enemy, is
   attacked by disease and is in great danger.

   Yet it is not without reason that our attention is also directed to an
   almost uninterrupted succession of events, that we may know that he
   scarcely had leisure to breathe, but, after having scarcely reached the
   shore from one ship-wreck, suddenly fell into another equally
   dangerous. Let us therefore remember that believers must endure various
   temptations, so that they are assailed sometimes by wars, sometimes by
   diseases, sometimes by other calamities, and sometimes one calamity
   follows another in unbroken succession, and they are laid under the
   necessity of maintaining uninterrupted warfare during their whole life;
   so that, when they have escaped from one danger, they are on the eve of
   enduring another. They ought to be prepared in such a manner, that when
   the Lord shall be pleased to add sorrow to sorrow, they may bear it
   patiently, and may not be discouraged by any calamity. If any respite
   be allowed, [71] let them know that this is granted for their weakness,
   but let not a short truce lead them to form a false imagination of a
   lengthened peace; let them make additional exertions, till, having
   finished the course of their earthly life, they arrive at the peaceful
   harbor.

   Even unto death. The severity of the disease might be very distressing
   to the good man. First, mortal disease brings along with it sharp
   pains, especially when it is attended by an inflammatory boil. But the
   most distressing of all was, that he might think that God opposed and
   hated him, because, as soon as he had been rescued from so great a
   calamity, he was immediately dragged to death, as if he had been
   unworthy of reigning. Besides, at that time he had no children; and
   there was reason to believe that his death would be followed by a great
   disorder of public affairs. (2 Kings 21:1.) This dread of the wrath of
   God occasions far more bitter anguish to the consciences of believers
   than any bodily disease; and if they lose their perception of the favor
   of God, it is impossible that they should not be immediately grieved.
   But God, as if he expressly intended to add oil to the flame,
   absolutely threatens death, and, in order to affect him more deeply,
   takes away all hope of life.

   For; thou shalt die, and shalt not live. The clause, thou shalt not
   live, is not superfluous, but is added for the purpose of giving
   intensity or confirmation, as if it had been said that there will be no
   hope of remedy. Men practice evasion, even though death is at hand, and
   eagerly seek the means of escape; and, therefore, that Hezekiah may not
   look around him as if he were uncertain, he is twice informed that he
   must die.

   Give charge concerning thy house, [72] or, to thy house. [73] In order
   that he may bid adieu to the world, the Prophet enjoins him speedily to
   order what he wishes to be done after his death; as if he had said, "If
   thou dost not wish that death shall seize thee, give immediate orders
   about thy domestic affairs." Here we see in passing, that the Lord
   approves of a practice which has been always customary among men,
   namely, that when they are about to die, they give orders to their
   neighbors or servants, and arrange the affairs of their family.

   Jonathan renders it, "Give up thy house to another;" but the
   construction conveys a different meaning. Every person, when he must
   depart from this life, ought to testify that he pays regard to his
   duty, and that he provides even for the future interests of his family.
   But his chief care ought to be, not about testaments and heirs, but
   about promoting the salvation of those whom the Lord has committed to
   his charge.

   2. Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall. He now relates the manner
   in which Hezekiah was affected when he received this message, that we
   may see his piety and faith. He does not break out into rage or
   indignation like unbelievers, but bears this affliction patiently. He
   does not debate with God, as if he had already endured enough of
   distresses from enemies, and ought not to be again chastised so
   severely by a new kind of afflictions. And this is true patience, not
   merely in a single instance to endure patiently any distress, but to
   persevere to the end, and always to be prepared for enduring new
   troubles, but, above all, to bow to the judgments of God in calm
   silence, and not to murmur at his severity, though it appear to be
   great; as David acknowledges that "he was dumb, because he saw that he
   had to deal with God." (Psalm 39:9.)

   And such is the import of "turning the face to the wall;" for, in
   consequence of being overwhelmed by shame and grief, as if he shunned
   the face of men, he summons up his energy, and turns wholly to God, so
   as to rely entirely upon him. The mere attitude, indeed, is immaterial;
   but it is of very great importance to us, that nothing should be
   presented to our eyes or senses which would drag us away from prayer,
   that we may pour out our desires more freely before God. We are
   naturally unsteady, and easily drawn aside; and therefore we cannot be
   too diligent in fixing our attention. If we must pray in public, we are
   restrained by shame, lest, if we manifest excessive vehemence, we
   should be thought to do so for the sake of ostentation; or we are
   afraid of falling into improper attitudes; and therefore we ought to
   remove everything that would lead us aside.

   Hezekiah, therefore, does not turn away his face, as if he were
   overwhelmed, or as if he bitterly and obstinately rejected the message
   that had been brought to him, but in this manner sharpens his eagerness
   for prayer. That he does not present his prayers openly, as when he
   formerly went up into the temple, followed by the rest of the
   multitude, (Isaiah 37:14,) is an indication of the deepest anxiety, as
   if grief had seized his whole frame. Yet it is a remarkable pattern of
   piety, that, when he has received the sentence of death, he does not
   cease to call upon God.

   These words, Thou shalt die, and shalt not live, tended not only to
   startle him, but deeply to wound and pierce his heart, as if God were
   rushing upon him in a hostile manner to destroy him. It was an alarming
   token of wrath to be thrown headlong out of life in the very flower of
   his age, and to be cast out of the world, as if he were unworthy of the
   society of men; and therefore he had to contend not only with death,
   but with hell itself and with frightful torments.

   Hence it follows that he attached to the Prophet's words more meaning
   than they actually conveyed; for, although he could not all at once
   disentangle himself, yet the Holy Spirit suggested to his dark and
   confused heart "groanings that could not be uttered." (Romans 8:26) And
   indeed it would have been a foolish message if God had not supported
   him by secret influence, when he appeared to have been slain by the
   external voice of his servant. But since he would never have aimed at
   repentance if he had been seized with despair, the slaying came first,
   and was next followed by that secret energy which dedicated the dead
   man to God.

   3. And said, I beseech thee, Jehovah. He appears here to expostulate
   with God, and to remonstrate with him about his own past life, as if he
   were undeservedly distressed; but the case is far otherwise. On the
   contrary, he strengthens and fortifies himself against a heavy and
   dangerous temptation, which might otherwise have been suggested. For
   the great severity with which the Lord chastised him might lead him to
   think that the Lord had cast off, forsaken, and disapproved him, and
   had rejected all that he had formerly done. On this account he
   strengthens and encourages himself, and declares that whatever he did
   was done by him with a good conscience. In short, he concludes that,
   although he must die, still his services have not been displeasing to
   God, that he may thus open up for himself a path to prayer and good
   hopes.

   Remember now that I have walked before thee in truth. He does not plead
   his merits against God, or remonstrate with him in any respect, as if
   he were unjustly punished, but fortifies himself against a sore
   temptation, that he may not think that God is angry with him for
   correcting the vices and removing the corruptions which prevailed
   throughout the whole of his kingdom, and especially in regard to
   religion. Yet the Lord permits his people even to glory, in some
   degree, on account of their good actions, not that they may boast of
   their merits before him, but that they may acknowledge his benefits,
   and may be affected by the remembrance of them in such a manner as to
   be prepared for enduring everything patiently. But sometimes the
   unreasonable conduct of their enemies constrains them to holy boasting:
   that they may commend their good cause to their judge and avenger; as
   David boldly meets the wicked slanders of enemies by pleading his
   innocence before the judgment-seat of God. (Psalm 7:8; and 17:2.) But
   here Hezekiah intended to meet the craftiness of Satan, which believers
   feel, when, under the pretense of humility, he overwhelms them with
   despair; and therefore we ought earnestly to beware lest our hearts be
   swallowed up by grief.

   With a perfect heart. We learn from his words what is the true rule of
   a pious life; and that is, when integrity of heart holds the first
   place, for nothing is more abhorred by God than when we endeavor to
   deceive either him or men by our hypocrisy. Although the eyes of men
   are dazzled by the splendor of worlds, yet pretended holiness, which is
   as it were a profanation of his name, provokes his anger; and, because
   "he is a Spirit," (John 4:24,) he justly demands spiritual obedience,
   and declares that he abhors "a double heart." (Psalm 12:2.) Most
   properly, therefore, does Hezekiah begin with sincerity of heart. The
   Hebrew word slm, (shalem,) which is translated perfect, means nothing
   else than integrity as contrasted with hypocrisy, which is also evident
   from the use of the word truth; as Paul affirms that

   "the end of the law is brotherly love, out of a pure heart and a good
   conscience and unfeigned faith." (1 Timothy 1:5.)

   And have done what is good in thine eyes. He brings forward also the
   fruits which spring from an upright heart as from a root, not only to
   confirm himself, but likewise to confirm others, in reference to those
   things which might have given any occasion of offense. Hezekiah
   therefore did not hesitate or waver, but wished to take away what might
   have given offense to many persons. But again, it ought to be observed
   in what manner we must regulate our life, if we desire that God shall
   approve of our conduct. We must do nothing but what is agreeable to his
   command; for, as he rejects and condemns all the pageantry of which
   hypocrites boast, so he likewise reckons of no value all the false
   worship in which foolish men weary themselves in vain, while they labor
   to obtain his favor by disregarding his word. Accordingly, Hezekiah,
   who knew that "obedience is of greater value than sacrifice," (1 Samuel
   15:22,) says not only that he ran, (which is often done in a disorderly
   manner,) but that he regulated his life in obedience to God, who alone
   is competent to judge. Hence we may conclude how great was his
   earnestness in prayer; for though he sees on every hand nothing but the
   tokens of God's anger, yet he does not cease to fly to him, and to
   exercise faith, which all believers ought earnestly and diligently to
   do amidst the heaviest afflictions.

   4. Then came the word of Jehovah. Isaiah had departed, leaving the
   sting, as the saying is, in the wound, reckoning as abandoned him on
   whom he had pronounced sentence in the name of God himself. Yet with
   what trembling uneasiness he was tormented, and even with what terror
   he was seized, may be partly learned from the song. What interval of
   time elapsed between the Prophet's departure and return we know not,
   but it is certain that the glad tidings of life were not brought until,
   after long and severe struggles, he perceived that he was utterly
   ruined; for it was a severe trial of faith that he should be kept
   plunged in darkness by the hiding of God's face. We have said that,
   while the doctrine of consolation was taken away, still the faith of
   the good king was not extinguished so as not to emit some sparks,
   because, by the secret influence of the Spirit, "groans that could not
   be uttered" (Romans 8:26) arose to God out of the gulf of sorrow. Hence
   also we conclude that, while "in the day of trouble" (Psalm 50:15) God
   heareth believers, yet the favor of God does not all at once shine on
   them, but is purposely delayed till they are sincerely humbled. And if
   a king so eminent in piety needed almost to suffer anguish, that he
   might be more powerfully excited to seek the favor of God, and, being
   almost wasted by grief, might groan from hell to God; let us not wonder
   if he sometimes permits us for a time to be agitated by fears and
   perplexities, and delays longer to bestow consolation in answer to our
   prayers.

   But it may be thought strange that God, having uttered a sentence,
   should soon afterwards be moved, as it were, by repentance to reverse
   it; for nothing is more at variance with his nature than a change of
   purpose. I reply, while death was threatened against Hezekiah, still
   God had not decreed it, but determined in this manner to put to the
   test the faith of Hezekiah. We must, therefore, suppose a condition to
   be implied in that threatening; for otherwise Hezekiah would not have
   altered, by repentance or prayer, the irreversible decree of God. But
   the Lord threatened him in the same manner as he threatened Gerar for
   carrying off Sarah, (Genesis 20:3,) and as he threatened the Ninevites.
   (Jonah 1:2; and 3:4.)

   Again, it will be objected, that it appears to be inconsistent with the
   nature of God to threaten what he does not intend to execute, and that
   it takes away from the authority of the word, and causes the promises
   and threatenings to have less weight. But what we have already said as
   to the sentence must likewise be maintained as to the form of the
   words. God threatened the death of Hezekiah, because he was unwilling
   that Hezekiah should die; and, indeed, it would have been unnecessary
   and even useless to predict it, if a remedy had not been provided. Now,
   as it was the purpose of God to humble his servant by fear and terror,
   that he might voluntarily condemn himself, and might thus escape
   punishment through prayer; so by harsh language and an absolute
   threatening of death, he intended to slay him, that, rising like a dead
   man out of the grave, he might feel that life had been restored to him.
   And thus we must suppose an implied condition to have been understood,
   which Hezekiah, if he did not immediately perceive it, yet afterwards
   in good time knew to have been added. Nor are we at liberty to infer
   from it that God used dissimulation by accommodating his discourse to
   the capacity and attainments of man; for it is no new thing if he "kill
   before he make alive." (Deuteronomy 32:39; 1 Samuel 2:6.) In order to
   prepare Hezekiah by a spiritual resemblance of death, and gradually
   form him to a new life, he keeps back a part of the discourse.

   5. Thus saith Jehovah the God of David thy father. At first, when he
   struck terror alone, he reckoned it enough to mention the bare and
   simple name of God, to whose heavenly judgmentseat he summoned him as a
   criminal; but now, when he brings consolation, he distinguishes God by
   a peculiar and honorable title in order to point out the cause and
   origin of grace; as if he had said that, from a regard to his covenant
   which he made with David, he is inclined to mercy, so that he does not
   deal rigorously with Hezekiah. (2 Samuel 7:12.) We know that nothing is
   more difficult than for hearts that have been greatly alarmed by the
   conviction of God's anger to be encouraged to entertain favorable hope,
   so as to perceive that God is reconciled to them. That confirmation was
   therefore necessary, that the pious king, who in himself was ruined,
   might know that he could be again raised up to that life from which he
   had fallen; for the prophecy concerning the eternity of that kingdom
   could not fail. Since, therefore, he fainted when he thought that he
   had no hope of living, in order that he may breathe again, he is
   reminded of a promise, which at that time was universally known, that
   kings of the seed and posterity of David would always reign over the
   elect people,

   "as long as the sun and moon should shine in the heavens."
   (Psalm 89:36, 37.)

   That was the plank which he seized, and by which he escaped shipwreck.

   David is not mentioned in this passage as a private individual, but as
   an eternal king, to whom had been committed the promise which might
   support Hezekiah; eternal, I say, not in himself, but in his blessed
   seed. Now, since that eternity was at length to be manifested in
   Christ, of whom Hezekiah along with other kings was a type, it must
   have been a solid ground of favorable hope that he was a son of David.
   [74] Whenever, therefore, we feel that our own sins hinder us from
   drawing near to God, in order that we may obtain his favor, let us
   think of this preface, that, although we have been estranged from him
   by our own fault, still he is the Father of Christ, who is our head,
   and

   "in whom our salvation always remains hidden."
   (Colossians 3:3.)

   In a word, God had lately spoken in the character of a judge, but now
   he is reconciled, and points out a Mediator who comes forth to appease
   him.

   I have heard thy prayer. Having opened the door of hope, he tells
   Hezekiah that God "has heard his prayers." This ought greatly to
   encourage us to earnestness in prayer; for, although God of his own
   accord takes a deep interest in our salvation, and anticipates us by
   his kindness, not only while we are asleep, but "before we were born,"
   (Romans 9:11,) yet, when he testifies that all the benefits which he
   bestows are granted in answer to our prayers, our negligence is
   altogether inexcusable, if, after having received such large
   invitations, we neglect to perform the duty of prayer, [75] And yet we
   must not imagine that prayers, to which God so graciously listens, are
   meritorious; but, in giving freely what he freely promised, he adds
   this as the crowning excellence of his kindness, in order more strongly
   to stimulate our faith. It is no ordinary privilege to be able to
   approach to him freely, and in a familiar manner to lay our cares in
   his bosom. If Hezekiah had not prayed, God would undoubtedly have
   secured that, in one way or another, some government of the kingdom
   should be preserved in the posterity of David; but what he would do
   from a regard to his truth, he says that he will give in answer to the
   prayers of Hezekiah, that he may acknowledge that he has obtained very
   abundant fruit from his faith which he exercised in prayer.

   And I have seen thy tears. He mentions tears as a sign of repentance,
   and likewise of warmth and earnestness; not that in themselves tears
   procure favor, or have any power of appeasing God, but because they
   distinguish sincere prayers from those which are offered in a careless
   manner.

   Behold, I add to thy days fifteen years. At length he adds that God has
   prolonged the life of Hezekiah to the extent of "fifteen years." This
   might, indeed, at first sight, appear to be absurd; for we were created
   on the condition of not being able to pass, by a single moment, the
   limit marked out for us; as Job also says, "Thou hast appointed his
   bounds which he cannot pass." (Job 14:5.) But the solution is easy.
   What is said about an extended period must be understood to refer to
   the views of Hezekiah, who had been excluded from the hope of life,
   and, therefore, must; have justly reckoned to be gain what was
   afterwards added, as if he had been raised up from the grave to a
   second life.

   6. And I will deliver thee. Those who think that Hezekiah was sick
   during the time of the siege found an argument on this, that otherwise
   this promise would appear to be superfluous. But there is little force
   in that reasoning; for the Assyrian might have recruited his forces,
   and mustered a fresh army, at a later period, for the purpose of again
   invading Judea and attacking Jerusalem. The very defeat of which we
   have now read might have been a provocation to his rage and cruelty, so
   that the Jews had good reason for being continually alarmed at any
   reports which they heard. [76] That promise, therefore, is far from
   being superfluous, because along with life it promises protection from
   the enemy, against whom he would not otherwise have been secured, and
   may be regarded as an enlargement and increase of that blessing which
   the Lord promised to Hezekiah; as in the former chapter he promised
   abundance of fruits to accompany the deliverance. (Isaiah 37:30.)

   7. And this shall be a sign to thee. The sacred history relates in the
   proper order that Hezekiah asked a sign from the Lord, (2 Kings 20:8,)
   and that it was granted to him; which the Prophet will likewise mention
   at the end of this chapter. But it is no new thing for Hebrew writers
   to reverse the order of the narrative. God gives some signs of his own
   accord, without being asked; and he grants other signs to his people
   who ask them. Signs being generally intended to aid our weakness, God
   does not for the most part wait till we have prayed for them; but at
   first he appointed those which he knew to be profitable to his Church.
   If at any time, therefore, believers wished to have their faith
   confirmed by a sign, this circumstance, being rare, ought not to be
   produced as an example. Thus, to Gideon, whom he called from the
   sheepfold to govern Israel, he gave one sign and then another, when he
   asked them, (Judges 6:17, 37, 39,) that he might be more fully
   convinced of his calling. He commonly gave, as we have said, other
   signs, in accommodation to the weakness of men; as to Adam the tree of
   life, (Genesis 2:9,) to Noah the bow in heaven, (Genesis 9:12,) and
   next the cloud and pillar of fire, (Exodus 13:21,) and the serpent of
   brass in the wilderness. (Numbers 21:8.) The same remarks apply to the
   passover, (Exodus 12:8,) and to all the sacraments, both those which
   were formerly observed, and those which have now been appointed by
   Christ, [77] and which no one asked from God.

   But it may be thought that Hezekiah insults God, by refusing credit to
   his word, when he asks a sign. I reply, we must not accuse him of
   unbelief, because his faith was weak; for we shall not find any person
   who ever had faith which was perfect and complete in every respect. In
   seeking some assistance to support his weakness, he cannot, be blamed
   on that account; for, having embraced the promise made to him by the
   Prophet, he shews his confidence in God by seeking a remedy for
   distrust. And if there had been no weakness in man, he would not have
   needed any signs; and consequently we need not wonder that he asks a
   sign, since on other occasions the Lord freely offers them.

   Yet it is proper also to observe, that believers never rushed forward
   at random to ask signs, but were guided by a secret and peculiar
   influence of the Spirit. The same thing might be said about miracles.
   If Elijah prayed to God for rain and for drought, (James 5:17, 18,) it
   does not follow that others are at liberty to do the same. We must,
   therefore, see what God permits to us, lest, by disregarding his word,
   we bargain with him according to the foolish desires of our flesh.

   8. Lo, I bring back the shadow of degrees. The sign which is here given
   to Hezekiah is the going back of the shadow on the sundial, along with
   the sun, ten degrees by which it had already gone up, [78] that is, had
   advanced above the horizon. And this sign bears a resemblance to the
   event itself, as all other signs generally do; for it is as if he had
   said, "As it is in my power to change the hours of the day, and to make
   the sun go backwards, so it is in my power to lengthen thy life." As to
   the shadow not going back as many degrees as there were years added to
   his life, that was impossible, because there were not more than twelve
   degrees on the sundial; for the day was divided by them into twelve
   hours, either longer or shorter, according to the change of the season.
   We need not, therefore, give ourselves any uneasiness about the number;
   it is enough that there is a manifest correspondence and resemblance.

   On the sundial of Ahaz. [79] Here the Jews make fables according to
   their custom, and contrive a story, that the day on which Ahaz died was
   shorter than ten hours, and that what God had justly inflicted on him
   as a punishment for his sins was reversed for the benefit of Hezekiah;
   because the shortening of one day was the lengthening of another. But
   there is no history of this, and it is entirely destitute not only of
   evidence but of probability; nor is there anything said here about the
   death of Ahaz, or about the change which took place when he died, but
   about the sundial which he had made.

   9. The writing of Hezekiah. Though sacred history gives no account of
   this writing, yet it deserves to be recorded, and is highly worthy of
   observation; for we see that Hezekiah was unwilling to pass in silence,
   or to bury in forgetfulness, so remarkable a blessing which he had
   received from God. By his example he shews what all believers ought to
   do, when God miraculously and in an unusual manner exerts his power on
   their behalf. They ought to make known their gratitude, not only to
   their contemporaries, but also to posterity; as we see that Hezekiah
   did by this song, which may be regarded as a public record. We see that
   David composed many psalms on this subject, when he had been delivered
   from very great dangers, so that he took care to celebrate till the end
   of the world what was worthy of being remembered by all ages. (Psalm
   18:2, and 27:1.) Especially, the more eminent any man is, and the
   higher the station which he occupies, the more is he bound to consider
   himself as placed by God on a theater, and enjoined to perform this
   duty. [80] Yet all men, whether they be of ordinary rank or nobles and
   great men, ought to beware of ambition, lest, while they profess to
   imitate Hezekiah and David, they magnify their own name more than the
   name of God. [81]

   10. I said in the cutting off of my days. This is a very melancholy
   song; for it contains complaints rather than prayers. Hence it is
   evident that he was oppressed by so great perplexity, that he was weary
   with groaning, and sunk in lamentations, and did not venture to rise up
   freely to form a prayer. Murmuring thus within himself, he expresses
   the cause and intensity of his grief.

   As to the cause, it might be thought strange that he had so strong an
   attachment, and so ardent a longing for this fading life, and that he
   so much dreaded death. The tendency of the first elements of heavenly
   doctrine is, that we may learn to sojourn in this world, and to advance
   swiftly towards the heavenly life. Hezekiah appears to be as warmly
   devoted to the earth as if he had never had the smallest particle of
   piety; he shuns and abhors death, as much as if he had never heard a
   word about heavenly doctrine. Now, what purpose did it serve to commit
   to writing those stormy passions which would rather prompt readers to
   the same excess than induce them to obey God? For we are too prone to
   rebellion, though there be no additional excitements of any kind.

   But when it shall be minutely, and wisely, and carefully examined, we
   shall find that nothing could have been more advantageous to us than to
   have this picture of a man overwhelmed with grief painted to the life.
   It was not the object of the good king, in proclaiming his virtues, to
   hunt for the applause of the world. His prayer was undoubtedly a proof
   both of faith and of obedience; but, as if he had been overcome by
   fear, and dread, and sorrow, he leaves off prayer, and feebly utters
   complaints. He unquestionably intended to make known his weakness, and
   thus to give a lesson of humility to all the children of God, and at
   the same time to magnify the grace of God, which had brought out of the
   lowest depths of death a ruined man.

   As to the manner in which he deplores his lot, when he is near death,
   as if he placed his existence on the earth, and thought that death
   reduced men to nothing, we must attend to the special reason. For while
   death is not desirable on its own account, yet believers ought to
   "groan continually," (Romans 8:23,) because sin holds them bound in the
   prison of the flesh. They are forbidden also to "mourn as unbelievers
   usually mourn," (1 Thessalonians 4:13,) and are even commanded to "lift
   up their heads," when they are about to depart from the world, because
   they are received into a happier life. (Luke 21:28.) Nor was the
   ancient Church under the Law destitute of this consolation; and,
   although the knowledge of a blessed resurrection was less clear, yet it
   must have been sufficient for mitigating sorrow. [82] If that impostor
   Balaam was forced to exclaim, "Let my soul die the death of the
   righteous," (Numbers 23:10,) what joy must have filled the hearts of
   believers, in whose ears resounded that voice, "I am the God of
   Abraham!" (Exodus 3:6.)

   But although with steady and assured hope they looked forward to the
   heavenly life, still we need not wonder to see in Hezekiah what David
   confesses as to himself, (Psalm 30:9,) who yet, when his time was come,
   full of days, calmly left the world. (1 Kings 2:10.) It is therefore
   evident that both of them were not assailed by the mere dread of death,
   but that they prayed with tears to be delivered from death, because
   they saw in it manifest tokens of God's anger. We ought to remember
   that the Prophet came as a herald, to announce the death of Hezekiah in
   the name of God. This messenger might naturally have plunged all the
   senses of Hezekiah into a frightful deluge of grief, so that, thinking
   of nothing but God's wrath and curse, he would struggle with despair.

   Thus the piety of Hezekiah already begins to shew itself, when, placing
   himself before the tribunal of his judge, he applies his mind to
   meditation on his guilt. And, first, there might occur to him that
   thought by which David confesses that he was tempted: "What did God
   mean by treating his servants with cruel severity and sparing profane
   despisers? (Psalm 73:3.) Next, he saw that he was exposed to the jeers
   of the wicked, by whom true religion also was basely reviled. He saw
   that it was scarcely possible that his death should not shake the minds
   of all good men; but especially, he was oppressed by God's wrath, as if
   he had been already condemned to hell and to the eternal curse. In a
   word, because our true and perfect happiness consists in having
   fellowship with God, Hezekiah, perceiving that he was in some measure
   alienated from him, had good reason for being so greatly alarmed; for
   that word, "Thou shalt die, and shalt not live," had seized his mind so
   completely, that he believed that he must die. [83] This is expressed
   by the phrase I said; for in Hebrew it does not mean merely to speak,
   or to pronounce a word, but to be persuaded or convinced in one's own
   mind. Even though hypocrites receive a hundred threatenings from God,
   still they look around them on all sides, so that if they see any
   opening by which they think that they can escape, they may mock God,
   and give themselves up to luxury and indifference. But Hezekiah, being
   a sincere worshipper of God, did not resort to subterfuges; but, on the
   contrary, believing the words of the Prophet, he concluded that he must
   prepare for dying, because it was God's good pleasure.

   In this sense he speaks of the cutting off of his days, because he
   believed that an angry and offended God had broken off the course of
   his life; for he does not merely say in the ordinary manner that his
   life is cut short by a violent disease, but recognises that undoubted
   judgment of God as the cause of "the cutting off." Now, life is "cut
   off," whether we die at the entrance of life, or in middle life, or in
   old age; but they who are hurried away in the very flower of their age
   are said to be "cut off" from life, because they appear to die too
   soon, and before they have finished their course. The case was
   different with Hezekiah; for he perceived that the remaining part of
   life was "cut off" by the sword of God, because he had provoked God's
   wrath by his offenses. Thus he complains that, as if he had been
   unworthy of enjoying it, God suddenly deprives him of life, which
   otherwise would have lasted longer. Such is the import of the phrase,
   "the residue of the years;" for although, being born mortal, we have
   reason to expect death every moment, yet since it was threatened as a
   punishment, he has good reason for saying that those years had been
   taken from him which he might have lived, if it had been the good
   pleasure of God.

   11. I said, I shall not see God. Amidst such earnest longing for an
   earthly life, Hezekiah would have gone beyond bounds, if his grief had
   not been aggravated by the conviction of God's wrath. Since, therefore,
   he is violently dragged away by his own fault, as if he were unworthy
   of enjoying the ordinary light of the sun, he exclaims that he is
   miserable, because henceforth he shall never see either God or man.
   Among believers the statement would have been regarded as liable to
   this exception, that, so long as we dwell on the earth, we wander and
   are distant from God, but that, when the entanglements of the flesh
   shall have been laid aside, we shall more closely "see God."

   In the land of the living. These words are indeed added as a,
   limitation; but in this way Hezekiah appears to limit "the seeing of
   God" to the present life, as if death extinguished all the light of
   understanding. We must therefore keep in view what I formerly remarked,
   that when he received the message of God's vengeance, it affected him
   in such a manner as if he had been deprived of God's fatherly love; for
   if he was unworthy of beholding the sun, how could he hope for what was
   of higher value? Not that hope was altogether effaced from his mind,
   but because, having his attention fixed on the curse of God, he cannot
   so soon or so quickly rise to heaven, to soothe present grief by the
   delightfulness of a better life.

   Thus it sometimes happens that godly minds are overclouded, so that
   they do not always receive consolation, which for a time is suppressed,
   but still remains in their minds, and afterwards manifests itself. Yet
   it is an evidence of piety, that, by the proper and lawful object of
   life, he shews how grievous and distressing it is to be deprived of it.
   Even to cattle it gives uneasiness to die, but they have almost no use
   for their life except to feed and eat to the full; while we have a far
   more excellent object, for we were created and born on the express
   condition, that we should devote ourselves to the knowledge of God. And
   because this is the chief reason why we live, he twice repeats the name
   of God, and thus expresses the strength of his feelings; "I shall not
   see God, God in the land of the living." [84]

   If it be objected that here we do not "see God," the answer is easy,
   that he is visible in his works; because "through the visible
   workmanship of the world," as Paul says, "his eternal power and Godhead
   are known." (Romans 1:20.) Hence also the Apostle calls this world a
   mirror of invisible things. (Hebrews 11:3.) The more nearly he
   manifests himself to be known by believers, the more highly did
   Hezekiah value that spiritual beholding; as David also says that they
   see the face of God who confirm their faith by the exercises of piety
   in the sanctuary. (Psalm 42:2; 63:2.) So far as relates to men, he
   grieves that he is withdrawn from their society, because we were born
   for the purpose of performing mutual kind offices to each other.

   12. My dwelling is departed. He proceeds in his complaints, by painting
   his life under a beautiful metaphor; for he compares it to a shepherd's
   tent. Such indeed is the condition of human life in general; but he
   does not relate so much what happens to all universally as what has
   befallen himself as an individual. The use of tents is more common in
   those countries than in ours, and shepherds often change their
   residence, while they drive their flock from one place to another. He
   does not therefore say absolutely that men dwell in a frail
   lodginghouse, while they pass through the world, but that, after he had
   dwelt at ease in a royal palace, his lot was changed, just as if "a
   shepherd's tent" were pitched for two days in one field and afterwards
   removed to another.

   I have cut off, as a weaver, my life. It is worthy of observation, that
   he indiscriminately ascribes the cause of his death, sometimes to
   himself, and sometimes to God, but at the same time explains the
   grounds; for when he speaks of himself as the author, he does not
   complain of God, or remonstrate that God has robbed him of his life,
   but accuses himself, and acknowledges deep blame. His words are
   equivalent to the proverbial saying, "I have cut this thread for
   myself, so that I alone am the cause of my death." And yet it is not
   without reason that he soon afterwards ascribes to God what he had
   acknowledged to have proceeded from himself; for although we give to
   God grounds for dealing severely with us, yet he is the judge who
   inflicts punishment. In our afflictions, therefore, we ought always to
   praise his judgment; because he performs his office when he chastises
   us as we deserve.

   From lifting up he will cut me off. Some translate mdlh (middallah)
   "through leanness," or "through sickness," and others translate it "by
   taking away." The former derive this noun from dll (dalal) which means
   "to diminish," and the latter from dlh (dalah) which means "to carry
   off by lifting up." But let my readers consider if the word "lifting
   up" be not more appropriate; for Hezekiah appears to complain that his
   life, while it tended to advance farther, was suddenly cast down; just
   as if God should cause the sun to set, while it was still ascending in
   the sky.

   From day even to night. He now adds that in a short space of time he
   was brought down; and by this circumstance again expresses the severity
   of God's wrath; because he consumes men by the breath of a moment; for
   to be laid low in a single day means that men die very rapidly.

   13. I reckoned till the dawn. Others translate it "I determined," or "I
   laid down." Here it means what we express by the ordinary phrase, (Je
   fasoye mon compte,)" I laid my account." From this verse it may be
   inferred that Hezekiah labored two days at least under the disease; for
   in the preceding verse he pronounced its severity to be so great that
   he expected immediate death. And now, when one day was past, he still
   waited till the dawn, and again, from day even to night, so that he
   said that he would die every moment. The meaning therefore is, that
   though he reached "the dawn," still through constant tossings he was
   hastening to death, because, having been struck by a terrible judgment
   of God, he cared nothing about his life; and as the Greeks, when they
   intended to say that nothing is more vain than man, said that he was
   (ephemeron) "an ephemeral animal," that is, "the creature of a day," so
   Hezekiah means by "the life of a day" that which is fading and has no
   duration.

   As a lion, so hath he broken my bones. The comparison of God to a lion
   ought not to be reckoned strange, though God is naturally "gracious,
   merciful, and kind." (Exodus 34:6.) Nothing certainly can more truly
   belong to God than these attributes; but we cannot be aware of that
   gentleness, when we have provoked him by our crimes and urged him to
   severity by our wickedness. Besides, there is no cruelty and fierceness
   in wild beasts that is fitted to strike such terror as we feel from the
   bare mention of the name of God, and justly; for the Lord's
   chastisements must have sufficient power to humble and cast us down to
   hell itself, so that we shall be almost destitute of consolation and
   regard everything as full of horror. In like manner also, we see that
   David has described these terrors, when he says that "his bones are
   numbered, his couch is moistened with tears, his soul is troubled, and
   hell is opened." (Psalm 6:3-6; 22:17; 38:6.) Thus must the godly be
   sometimes terrified by the judgment of God, that they may be more
   powerfully excited to desire his favor.

   14. As a crane, or a swallow. Hezekiah cannot satisfy himself in
   explaining the severity of his anguish. He now says that he was reduced
   so low that he could not utter an articulate voice, but muttered some
   confused sound, like persons who are almost at the point of death.
   Hence it is evident that his distress was excruciating; for the
   severity of the pain took away his voice, and his voice, he says, stuck
   in his throat; nothing was heard but indistinct groans.

   Such is the import of these metaphors of "the crane and the swallow,"
   which the Prophet employs. Still it is certain that this indistinct
   sound of the voice is nevertheless heard by God; though all our senses
   are oppressed by pain, and our throat is choked by grief, still God
   beholds our hearts and listens to godly sighs, [85] which will be even
   more powerful than plain and direct words, provided that the Spirit is
   present, who produces in us those "groanings that cannot be uttered,"
   of which Paul speaks. (Romans 8:26.) There is no believer who does not
   feel that in prayer, when his heart is oppressed by any heavy sorrow,
   he either stammers or is almost dumb.

   My eyes were lifted up on high. These words are translated by some, "My
   eyes are weakened;" but that would not agree with the phrase, "on
   high." [86] On this account we must adopt a simpler meaning, that,
   although Hezekiah's eyes were nearly worn out with weakness, so that he
   almost fainted, yet he did not cease to lift up his eyes to heaven; and
   that he never was stupified to such a degree as not to know that he
   ought to ask assistance from God. Let us therefore learn by the example
   of Hezekiah to lift up our eyes to heaven, when our hearts are
   afflicted and troubled; and let us know that God does not demand from
   us great eloquence.

   O Lord, it hath oppressed me; [87] comfort me. He confirms the
   sentiment already expressed, by immediately directing his discourse to
   God and imploring his aid. Being oppressed by the violence of disease,
   he desires that God would be present to assist him. Some render the
   words, "Be surety for me;" [88] and the verb rv (gnarab) is often used
   in this sense; but it is more appropriate to say, "Comfort me," or
   "Cheer me." Or perhaps it will be thought preferable to translate, as
   some have done, "Cause me to rest." Undoubtedly he asks comfort from
   God, that he may not sink under the violence of disease; and we ought
   to be assured of this, that the greater the weight of afflictions that
   oppresses us, the more will God be ready to give us assistance.

   15. What shall I say? This is generally supposed to be an exclamation,
   such as frequently bursts forth in a season of joy, as if he
   congratulated himself on having already obtained his wish. But I think
   differently. Hezekiah appears to proceed in his complaints; for he
   speaks as men commonly do when they are overcome by grief; "What shall
   I say? for he who said it hath also done it;" that is, "life and death
   are in his hand; it is useless for me to argue or contend with him; it
   is useless for me to complain." In the book of Job also words and
   sayings of this sort are often found. (Job 7:4.) I think that this is
   the true meaning; for Hezekiah previously looked around on all sides to
   see if any assistance appeared, and now, when he sees that he is about
   to die, and that God has threatened it, he concludes that he ought no
   longer to resist but to obey.

   Yet we ought to mark the emphatic statement, that God hath actually
   fulfilled what he had threatened by his word. They who explain it to
   mean simply, "what God said to me by the Prophet he hath fulfilled,"
   express a part of the truth, but not the whole; for Hezekiah does not
   coldly relate that he has perceived the effect of the word, but, by
   bringing forward the power of God, he cuts off every occasion to murmur
   or complain. Thus also David says, "I am dumb, because thou hast done
   it." (Psalm 39:9.) We never cease to complain until we are restrained
   by the fear of the power of God. Thus also Job, considering that he has
   to deal with God, says, "I will lay my finger on my mouth," (Job 40:4,)
   and "I will humbly make supplication to my judge." (Job 9:15.)
   Hezekiah, therefore, enjoins silence on himself on this ground, that it
   is useless to contend with God.

   At the same time, he means that he has no hope of life, because the
   Lord gives actual demonstration that it was a serious threatening; and
   hence he infers that he gains nothing, because there are no means of
   evasion. This sentiment, it is true, proceeds from despair; because in
   this manner, thinking that God is his enemy, he shuts the door against
   his prayers. But that in very severe distresses words of this kind
   should escape our lips, which deter us from confidence in prayer, is
   neither new nor strange, provided that, on the other hand, we rely on
   that calling upon God which the views of the flesh pronounce to be of
   no avail. There is reason to believe that the pious king labored under
   such perplexity that he fainted through weakness; but that he chiefly
   considered what I have said, that there was nothing preferable to
   silence, because that it would serve no purpose to dispute with God,
   will appear more clearly from what immediately follows.

   I shall walk trembling [89] all my life. Hence we may infer that he now
   holds out to his view the dreadful power of God, in order to dispose
   himself to true humility. As ddh (dadah) sometimes signifies "to move,"
   and sometimes "to walk softly," 'ddh (eddaddeh) is translated by some
   commentators, "I shall be moved," or "I shall be troubled," and by
   others, "I shall walk softly." For my own part, I have no doubt that it
   denotes a trembling and feeble step; for Hezekiah had been reduced to
   so great weakness that he despaired of ever afterwards recovering his
   former strength. This trembling must be attributed to fear, for it
   immediately follows, in bitterness; which means, that the sorrow which
   he had endured was so deeply rooted in his heart, that it could never
   be removed. Hence arose that weakness which he mentioned.

   'ddh (eddaddeh) is translated by the Vulgate, "I will call to
   remembrance," on which account this passage has been tortured by
   Papists to support auricular confession, but so absurdly that even old
   wives can laugh at it. But the plain meaning is, that Hezekiah does not
   speak of calling to remembrance, but of that agitation and trembling
   with which he says that he will be struck during the whole period of
   his life.

   16. O Lord, even to all who shall live after them. The concise style of
   the Prophet has given rise to various interpretations. The
   interpretation most commonly received is "O Lord, they shall live
   beyond those years, [90] " that is, "they shall lengthen their life."
   This is equivalent to saying, "When thou shalt have lengthened my life,
   thou wilt grant that others also shall enjoy the same favor." But that
   meaning does not agree with the text, and I look upon it as forced. I
   rather think that Hezekiah's meaning was this" O Lord, whosoever shall
   live beyond those years, to them also will the life of my spirit be
   known." We must therefore supply the relative 'sr, (asher,) who, as the
   Hebrew writers frequently do, and there will be nothing forced in this
   interpretation; for there can be no doubt, and nobody denies it, that
   he speaks of the years which the Lord had lengthened out to him. Thus
   he means that, this favor will be acknowledged not only by the men of
   that age, but also by posterity.

   And didst cause me to sleep, and didst make me alive. In this way he
   magnifies the greatness of the favor, because it will also be well
   known to a future age, and will continue to be engraven on the
   remembrance of all, even when Hezekiah himself is dead, and not only
   so, but will be reckoned to be a kind of resurrection. By the word
   sleep he means death, as the Scriptures frequently do. (1 Corinthians
   11:30; 1 Thessalonians 4:14; 2 Peter 3:4.) Thus he compares this mortal
   disease to death; for he was so near death that he utterly despaired of
   life.

   17. Lo, in peace ray bitterness was bitter. [91] Again, another
   circumstance aggravates the severity of the distress; for sudden and
   unexpected calamities disturb us more than those which come upon us in
   a gradual manner. The grievousness of the disease was the more
   insupportable, because it seized him suddenly while he enjoyed ease and
   quietness; for nothing was farther from his thoughts than that he was
   about to depart from this life. We know also that the saints sometimes
   rely too much on prosperity, and promise to themselves unvarying
   success, which David too acknowledges to have happened to himself, "In
   my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved; but thou didst hide thy
   face, and I was troubled." (Psalm 30:6, 7.)

   Nothing more distressing, therefore, could happen to Hezekiah than to
   be taken out of life, especially when the discomfiture and ruin of his
   enemy left him in the enjoyment of peace; for I think that Hezekiah
   fell into this disease after the defeat of Sennacherib, as has been
   already said. Amidst that joy and peace which smiled upon him, lo, a
   heavy sickness by which Hezekiah is fearfully distressed and tormented.
   This warns us that, since nothing is solid or lasting in this life, and
   since all that delights us may be speedily taken away, we ought not to
   grow sluggish in prosperity, but, even while we enjoy peace, we ought
   to think of war, and adversity, and afflictions, and, above all, to
   seek that peace which rests on God's fatherly kindness, on which our
   consciences may safely repose.

   And thou hast been pleased (to rescue) my soul from the pit. This part
   of the verse admits of two meanings. Since the verb chsq (chashak)
   signifies sometimes "to love," and sometimes "to wish," that meaning
   would not be unsuitable, "It hath pleased thee to deliver my soul." But
   if nothing be understood, the style will be equally complete, and will
   flow not less agreeably, "Thou, O God, didst embrace my soul with favor
   and kindness, while it was lying in the grave." [92] It is well known
   that "soul" means "life;" but here the goodness of God is proclaimed,
   in not ceasing to love Hezekiah, even when he might be regarded as
   dead. In this way the copulative particle must be translated But.

   For thou hast cast behind thy back all my sins. By assigning the
   reason, he now leads us to the fountain itself, and points out the
   method of that cure; for otherwise it might have been thought that
   hitherto he had spoken of nothing else than the cure of the body, but
   now he shews that he looks at something higher, namely, that he had
   been guilty before God, but by his grace had been forgiven. He affirms,
   indeed, that life has been restored to him, but reckons it of higher
   value that he has been reconciled to God than a hundred or a thousand
   lives. And, indeed,

   "it would have been better for us never to have been born" (Matthew
   26:24)

   than by living a long life to add continually new offenses, and thus to
   bring down on ourselves a heavier judgment. He therefore congratulates
   himself chiefly on this ground, that the face of God smiles cheerfully
   upon him; for to enjoy his favor is the highest happiness.

   At the same time he declares that all the distresses which God inflicts
   upon us ought to be attributed to our sins, so that they who accuse God
   of excessive severity do nothing else than double their' guilt; and he
   does not only condemn himself for one sin, but confesses that he was
   laden with many sins, so that he needed more than one pardon. If, then,
   we sincerely seek alleviation of our distresses, we must begin here;
   because when God is appeased, it is impossible that it can be ill with
   us; for he takes no pleasure in our distresses. It often happens with
   us as with foolish and thoughtless persons, when they are sick; for
   they fix their attention on nothing but (sumptomata) symptoms or
   accidental circumstances, and the pains which they feel, and overlook
   the disease itself. But we ought rather to imitate skillful physicians,
   who examine the causes of disease, and give their whole attention to
   eradicate those causes. They know that outward remedies are useless,
   and even hurtful, if the inward cause be unknown; for such remedies
   drive the whole force of the disease inward, and promote and increase
   it, so that there is no hope of cure.

   Hezekiah therefore perceived the cause of his distress, that is, his
   sins; and when he had received the forgiveness of them, he knew that
   punishment also ceased and was remitted. Hence we see how absurd is the
   distinction of the Papists, who wish to separate the remission of
   punishment from the remission of guilt. But Hezekiah here testifies
   that punishment has been remitted to him, because guilt has been
   remitted.

   We ought carefully to observe the form of expression which Isaiah
   employs, thou hast cast behind thy back; for it means that the
   remembrance of them is altogether effaced. In like manner, a Prophet
   elsewhere says that God

   "casteth them into the depths of the sea." (Micah 7:19.)

   It is likewise said in another passage, that he casteth them away

   "as far as the east is distant from the west."
   (Psalm 103:12.)

   By these modes of expression God assures us that he will not impute to
   us the sins which he has pardoned; and if, notwithstanding of this, he
   chastise us, he does it not as a judge, but as a father, to train his
   children and keep them in the discharge of their duty. Papists are
   mistaken in dreaming that punishments contain some kind of
   satisfaction, [93] as if God exacted vengeance, because he would not
   bestow a free pardon. But when God chastises his people, he promotes
   their future advantage.

   18. For hell shall not confess thee [94] When he says that he would not
   have celebrated the praises of God, if his life had been taken away, he
   promises that he will be thankful and will keep it in remembrance, and
   at the same time declares that the highest and most desirable advantage
   that life can yield to him is, that he will praise God. But although it
   is a sign of true piety to desire life for no other reason than to
   spend it in the unceasing praises of God, yet Hezekiah appears to
   employ language which is too exclusive; for the death of believers
   declares the glory of God not less than their life, and, being after
   death perfectly united to God, they do not cease to proclaim his
   praises along with the angels. Again, another question arises, "Why was
   Hezekiah so eager to avoid death and so earnestly desirous of an
   earthly life?" And though even this second question were answered,
   still the reader will likewise call to remembrance, that this terror
   was not produced by death alone, for the same Hezekiah, when his life
   was ended, did not resist, but willingly yielded to God; but that the
   pious king, when he had been struck by God's wrath, grieved only on
   this account, that by his sins he had excluded himself from life, as if
   he would never afterwards enjoy any favor or blessing.

   On this also depends the answer to the first question; for we need not
   wonder if the pious king, not only supposing that he must depart out of
   life, but thinking that death is the punishment of sins and the
   vengeance of God, groan and weep that he is condemned as unworthy of
   devoting himself to the advancement of the glory of God. All who have
   been struck by this thunderbolt are unable, either living or dead, to
   celebrate the praises of God, but, being overwhelmed with despair, must
   be dumb. In the same sense also David says,

   "In death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave who shall
   praise thee?" (Psalm 6:5.)

   And the whole Church says,

   "The dead shall not praise thee, nor those that go down into silence."
   (Psalm 115:17.)

   The reason is, that they who are ruined and lost will have no ground of
   thanksgiving.

   Yet it ought likewise to be observed that the saints, when they spoke
   in this manner, did not consider what kind of condition awaited them
   after death, but, under the influence of the pain which they now felt,
   looked only at the end for which they were created and preserved in the
   world. The chief object of life, as we said a little before, is that
   men should be employed in the service of God; and with the same design
   God protects his Church in the world, because it is his will that his
   name shall be celebrated. Now, he who sees himself cast down, because
   he does not deserve to be reckoned, or to hold a place, among the
   worshippers of God, does not calmly and attentively, consider what he
   shall do after death, but, under the darkening influence of grief, as
   if after death all the exercise of piety would cease, takes from the
   dead the power of praising God, because the glory of God appears to be
   buried along with the witnesses of it.

   19. The living, the living, he shall confess thee. He does not include
   all men without exception; for many live, who yet extinguish the glory
   of God by their ingratitude, as far as lies in their power, and
   undoubtedly have nothing farther from their thoughts than that they
   were born to praise God. But he simply declares that men, so long as
   God supports them in this life, may justly be regarded as the lawful
   heralds of his glory, when he invites them, by his kindness, to the
   discharge of that office. And this contrast shews that the statement
   which he made a little before, that "in death or in the grave there is
   no remembrance of God," is a general declaration, that they who would
   willingly be employed in praising God are deprived of this favor, when
   they are driven out of the world.

   As I do this day. He solemnly declares that he will be one of the
   witnesses of the glory of God, and thus gives a manifest indication of
   gratitude towards God; for he declares that he will not be forgetful,
   but will continually give thanks to God, and will make known the favor
   which he has received; and that not only to the men of his own age, but
   also to posterity, that they too may celebrate those praises and adore
   the author of so great a favor.

   The father shall make known to the sons thy truth. Hence we ought to
   learn a useful lesson, that children are given to men on the express
   condition, that every man, by instructing his children, shall endeavor,
   to the utmost of his power, to transmit the name of God to posterity;
   and, therefore, the fathers of families are chiefly enjoined to be
   careful in this respect, that they shall diligently mention the
   benefits which God has bestowed on them. By the word truth he means
   that faithfulness which God exercises towards his people, and all the
   testimonies of his grace by which he proves that he is true.

   20. Jehovah to save me. [95] He acknowledges that he was delivered, not
   by the aid or industry of men, but solely by the kindness of God. The
   rendering given by some, "It belongs to the Lord to save me," does not
   express enough, and appears to be more remote from the literal meaning;
   for he praises not only the power of God, but also the work by which he
   hath given an evident proof of it. In a word, he contrasts God's
   keeping with the death to which he had been sentenced; because, having
   formerly dreaded him as a severe judge, he now avows him as his
   deliverer, and leaps with joy. [96]

   And we will sing our songs. For the reason now stated, he not only
   prepares himself for singing in token of gratitude, but also calls on
   others to join and accompany him in this duty, and on this account
   mentions the Temple, in which the assemblies of religious men were
   held. Had be been a private individual and one of the common people,
   still it would have been his duty to offer a public sacrifice to God,
   that he might encourage others by his example. Much more then was the
   king bound to take care that he should bring others to unite with him
   in thanksgiving; especially because in his person God had provided for
   the advantage of the whole Church.

   All the days of our life. He declares that he will do his endeavor that
   this favor of God may be known to all, and that the remembrance of it
   may be preserved, not only for one day or for one year, but as long as
   he shall live. And indeed at any time it would have been exceedingly
   base to allow a blessing of God so remarkable as this to pass away or
   be forgotten; but, being forgetful, we continually need spurs to arouse
   us. At the same time, he takes a passing notice of the reason why God
   appointed holy assemblies. It was, that all as with one mouth might
   praise him, and might excite each other to the practice of godliness.

   21. And Isaiah said Isaiah now relates what was the remedy which he
   prescribed to Hezekiah. Some think that it was not a remedy,
   becausefigs are dangerous and hurtful to boils; but that the pious king
   was warned and clearly taught by this sign that the cure proceeded from
   nothing else than from the favor of God alone. As the bow in the sky,
   [97] by which God was pleased to testify that mankind would never be
   destroyed by a flood, (Genesis 9:13,) appears to denote what is
   absolutely contrary to this; (for it makes its appearance, when very
   thick clouds are gathering, and ready to fall as if they would deluge
   the whole world;) so they think that a plaster, which was not at all
   fitted for curing the disease, was purposely applied by the Prophet, in
   order to testify openly that God cured Hezekiah without medicines. But
   since figs are employed even by our own physicians for maturing a
   pustule, it is possible that the Lord, who had given a promise, gave
   also a medicine, as we see done on many other occasions; for although
   the Lord does not need secondary means, as they are called, yet he
   makes use of them whenever he thinks proper. And the value of the
   promise is not lessened by this medicine, which without the word would
   have been vain and useless; because he had received another
   supernatural sign, by which he had plainly learned that he had received
   front God alone that life of which he despaired.

   22. Now, Hezekiah had said. Some explain this verse as if this also had
   been a sign given to Hezekiah, and therefore, view it as connected with
   the preceding verse, and look upon it as an exclamation of
   astonishment. But it is more probable that in this passage the order
   has been reversed, as frequently takes place with Hebrew writers, and
   that what was spoken last is related first. Isaiah did not at the
   beginning say that Hezekiah had asked a sign, though the sacred history
   (2 Kings 20:8) attests it; and therefore he adds what he had left out
   at the proper place.

   That I shall go up. He means that it will be his chief object
   throughout his whole life to celebrate the name of God; for he did not
   desire life for the sake of living at ease and enjoying pleasure, but
   in order to defend the honor of God and the purity of his worship. Let
   us therefore remember that God prolongs our life, not that we may
   follow the bent of our natural disposition, or give ourselves up to
   luxury, but that we may cultivate piety, perform kind offices to each
   other, and frequently take part in the assembly of the godly and the
   public exercises of religion, that we may proclaim the truth and
   goodness of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [71] "S'ils ont quelque loisir de reprendre haleine." "If they have any
   leisure to draw breath."

   [72] "Set thine house in order. Heb., Give charge concerning thy
   house." -- Eng. Ver.

   [73] Quoad domum taam, vel, domui tuae.

   [74] "Puis qu'il estoit ills et successeur de David." "Since he was a
   son and successor of David."

   [75] "Si nous ne daignons ouvrir la bouche pour prier." "If we do not
   deign to open our mouth in prayer."

   [76] "Quand on leur apportoit nouvelles de l' ennemi." "When news were
   brought to them about the enemy."

   [77] "Tant sous le vieil que sous le nouveau testament." "Both under
   the Old and under the New Testament."

   [78] This is evidently an oversight, but the author's reading is
   "ascenderat." which corresponds to the French version, "qu'il estoit
   monte" In Calvin's [10]version, prefixed to the commentary on this
   chapter, yrdh (yaradah) is correctly rendered "descenderat," that is,
   "had gone down." -- Ed

   [79] See [11]Note at the end of this volume -- Ed.

   [80] "Doit considerer et savoir que ce que fait ici Ezechias, luy est
   enjoint en cas semblable." "Ought to consider and know that what
   Hezekiah does here is enjoined on him in a similar case."

   [81] "The conjecture of Grotius, that Isaiah dictated the psalm, or put
   it into Hezekiah's mouth, is perfectly gratuitous. That Hezekiah should
   compose a psalm is not more strange than that he should make a
   collection of proverbs. (Proverbs 25:1.) It would have been far more
   strange if one so much like David, in character and spirit, had not
   followed his example in the practice of devotional composition." --
   Alexander.

   [82] "Pour adoucir la tristesse des fideles de ces tempsla." "For
   soothing the grief of the believers of that age."

   [83] "Qu'il faisoit son conte de mourir." "That he laid his account
   with dying."

   [84] "yh yh (Yahh Yahh) is not an error of the text for yhvh (Yehovah)
   (Houbigant,) but an intensive repetition similar to those in verses 17,
   19. Or the second may be added to explain and qualify the first. He did
   expect to see God, but not in the land of the living." -- Alexander.

   [85] "Et exauce les souspirs faits en foy." "And listens to sighs
   heaved in faith."

   [86] The sense of "lifting-up" belongs not to dll (dalal) but to dlh
   (dalah) Jerome adopted the sense of "weakened," and brought out the
   meaning by a supplement, in which he has been followed by almost all
   modern commentators. "My eyes were weakened (looking) on high." This
   rendering has been almost literally adapted in diodati's Italian
   version. "I mici occhi erano scemati (riguardando) ad alto." Professor
   Alexander translates thus, "My eyes are weak (with looking) upward, or,
   on high.)" -- Ed.

   [87] "Le mal m' oppresse." "Disease oppresses me."

   [88] "Undertake for me; rescue me out of the hand of the angel of
   death, and answer for me, to deliver me. The word signifies answering,'
   or, as we say, suretiship;' as in that passage, Answer (or, be surety)
   for thy servant for good. (Psalm 119:122.)" -- Jarchi. "Or, contend for
   me, undertake my cause; for thus, according to Jarchi, svq (gnashuk)
   must be translated, if we read it with Sin, (not Schin,) as he appears
   to have done; and in the Hebrew copy which I have used the point is on
   the left horn of the letter." -- Breithaupt.

   [89] I shall go softly. -- Eng. Ver.

   [90] Outre ces ans-ci.

   [91] "Behold, for peace I had great bitterness," or, "On my peace came
   great bitterness." -- Eng. Ver.

   [92] "Thou hast loved my soul, from the pit of destruction. (This
   exactly agrees with our authors marginal reading.) "We have here
   another instance of pregnant construction, to love from, that is, so to
   love as to deliver from. This sense is expressed in the English Bible
   by a circumlocution." -- Alexander.

   [93] "Satisfaction ou recompenses." "Satisfaction or compensations."

   [94] "For the grave cannot praise thee." -- Eng. Ver.
   "For the grave shall not confess thee." -- Alexander.

   [95] "Le Seigneur m'a delivre." "The Lord hath delivered me."

   [96] "The obvious ellipsis in the first clause may be variously filled
   with came, hastened, commanded, was ready, be pleased,' or with the
   verb is,' as an idiomatic periphrasis of the future, is to save' for
   will save." -- Alexander.

   [97] "L'arc en la nuce." "The bow in the cloud."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 39
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 39:1-8

   1. At that time Merodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon,
   sent letters and a present to Hezzekiah: for he had heard that he had
   been sick and was recovered.

   1. Tempore illo misit Merodach Baladan, filius Baladan, rex Babel, ad
   Ezechiam literas et munus, ex quo audieret eum aegrotasse, et
   convaluisse

   2. And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his
   precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the
   precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was
   found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his
   dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

   2. Laetatus est autum de iis Ezechias, et ostendit illis domum thesauri
   sui, argentum et aurum et aromata, unguentum pretiosum, et omne
   armamentarium suum, et quicquid inveniebatur in thesauris suis: non
   fuit res ulla, quam non ostenderit Ezechias in domo sua, totoque regno
   suo.

   3. Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him,
   What said these men? And from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah
   said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from Babylon.

   3. Tum venit Isaias propheta ad regem Ezechiam, dixitique illi: Quid
   dixerunt viri isti? Et unde venerunt ad te? Respondit Ezechias, E terra
   longinqua venerunt ad me, e Babel

   4. Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah
   answered, All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing
   among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

   4. Tunc dixit: Quid viderunt domi tuae? Et dixit Ezechias: Cuncta quae
   domi meae sunt viderunt; nec res ulla est, quam non illis ostenderim in
   thesauris meis.

   5. Then Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the LORD of hosts:

   5. Tunc ait Isais Ezechiae: Audi verbum Iehovae exercituum.

   6. Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house and that
   which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be
   carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.

   6. Ecce dies veniunt, ut tollatur in Babylonem quicquid est domituae,
   et quicquid recondiderunt patres tui ad hunc usque diem; nec residuum
   quicquam manebit, dicit Iehova.

   7. And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget,
   shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the
   king of Babylon.

   7. E filiis tuis qui egressi fuerint ex te, quos genueris, tollent;
   eruntque eunuchi in palatio regis Babel.

   8. Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the LORD which
   thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth
   in my days.

   8. Dixit Ezechias Isiae: Bonus est sermo Iehovae quem pronumtiasti. Et
   dixit: Saltem erit pax et stabilitas in diebus meis.


   1. At that time. Some think that this was the first king of the Chaldee
   nation; for his father, Baladin, had held the government over the
   Babylonians without the title of king. This Merodach, therefore, after
   having reigned twelve years, subdued the Assyrians, and made them
   tributaries to the Chaldeans; for it is a mistake to suppose that the
   war was begun by Nebuchadnezzar. It is indeed possible that he
   completed the subjugation of them; but it is probable that already they
   were half subdued, so that nothing else remained than to establish the
   royal power gained by the victory of his predecessor.

   Sent letters and a present to Hezekiah Although the Prophet simply
   relates that messengers were sent, yet it is of importance to observe
   that this was done craftily by the Babylonian, in order to flatter and
   cajole Hezekiah. He was at this time threatening the Assyrians, whom he
   knew to be justly disliked by the Jews on account of their continual
   wars; and therefore, in order to obtain Hezekiah as an ally and
   partisan in the war which was now waging against him, endeavors to
   obtain his friendship by indirect methods. The mind of the good king
   was corrupted by ambition, so that he too eagerly accepted the false
   blandishments of the tyrant, and swallowed the bait.

   The pretence was, to congratulate Hezekiah on having recovered from his
   disease. And yet sacred history appears to assign another reason, which
   was, that Merodach was induced by a miracle. (2 Chronicles 32:31.)
   There is certainly no doubt that the report of that prodigy, which took
   place when the sun went back, was yew widely spread; and it might have
   produced an impression on many nations. Yet it can hardly be believed
   that a heathen had any other object in view than to draw Hezekiah into
   his net; but since, by a remarkable sign, God had shewn that he cared
   for the safety of Hezekiah, and since wicked men commonly apply to a
   base purpose all the proofs of God's favor, Merodach thought that, if
   he could obtain the alliance of Hezekiah, he would carry on war under
   the protection and favor of heaven. [98]

   The consequence was, that he sent messengers to Hezekiah with presents,
   for the sake of expressing his good-will; for he wished to obtain his
   favor, believing that his friendship would be useful and advantageous
   to him; and his intention was, to make use of him afterwards against
   the Assyrians, to whom he knew well that the Jews entertained a deadly
   hatred. Such are the designs of kings and princes, to transact their
   affairs by fraud and craftiness, and bysome means to gain as many
   allies as possible, that they may employ their exertions against their
   enemies

   2. And Hezekiah was glad The Prophet performs the part of the
   historian; for he merely relates what Hezekiah did, and will afterwards
   explain why he did it; that is, that Hezekiah, blinded by ambition,
   made an ostentatious display to the messengers; while he censures an
   improper kind of joy, which afterwards gave rise to an eager desire of
   treating them in a friendly manner.

   Any person who shall barely read this history will conclude that
   Hezekiah did nothing wrong; for it was an act of humanity to give a
   cheerful and hospitable reception to the messengers, and to shew them
   every proof of good-will; and it would have been the act of a barbarian
   to disdain those who had come to him on a friendly visit, and to spurn
   the friendship of so powerful a king. But still there lurked in his
   heart a desire of vain ostentation; for he wished to make a favorable
   display of himself, that the Babylonian might be led to understand that
   this alliance would not be without advantage to him, and might
   ascertain this from his wealth, and forces, and weapons of war. He
   deserved to be reproved on another ground, that he directed his mind to
   foreign and unlawful aid, and to that extent denied honor to God, whom
   he had recently known to be his deliverer on two occasions; for
   otherwise the Prophet would not have censured this act so severely.

   This is a remarkable example; and it teaches us that nothing is more
   dangerous than to be blinded by prosperity. It proves also the truth of
   the old proverb, that "it is more difficult to bear prosperity than
   adversity;" for when everything goes on to our wish, we grow wanton and
   insolent, and cannot be kept in the path of duty by any advices or
   threatenings. When this happened to Hezekiah, on whom the Prophet had
   bestowed the high commendation, that "the fear of God was his
   treasure," (Isaiah 33:6,) we ought to be very much afraid of falling
   into the same dangers. He is carried away by idle boasting, and does
   not remember that formerly he was half-dead, and that God rescued him
   from death by an extraordinary miracle. Formerly he made a solemn
   promise that he would continually celebrate the praises of God in the
   assembly of the godly, (Isaiah 38:20,) and now, when he sees that his
   friendship is sought, and that a powerful monarch sends to salute him,
   he forgets God and the benefits which he had received from him. When we
   see that this good king so quickly falls and is carried away by
   ambition, let us learn to lay upon ourselves the restraint of modesty,
   which will keep us constantly and diligently in the fear of God.

   3. Then came Isaiah the Prophet He continues the same narrative, but
   likewise adds doctrine. Although he does not say that God had sent him,
   yet it is certain that he did this by the influence of the Holy Spirit
   and by the command of God; and, therefore, he bestows on himself the
   designation of the Prophet, by which he intimates that he did not come
   as a private individual, but to perform an office which God had
   enjoined on him, that Hezekiah might clearly see that he had not to
   deal with a mortal man.

   Now, when he says that he came, we ought to infer that he was not sent
   for, but was allowed to remain quietly at home, while Hezekiah was
   making' a boastful display of his treasures; for prophets are not
   usually invited to consultations of this sort. But formerly, while he
   was weighed down by extreme distress, while Rabshakeh insulted him so
   fiercely, and uttered such daring blasphemies against God, he sent, to
   Isaiah, and requested him to intercede with God, and to soothe his
   anguish by some consolation. (Isaiah 37:2, 3, 4.) Thus in adversity and
   distress the prophets are sought, but in prosperity are disregarded or
   even despised; because they disturb our mirth by their admonitions, and
   appear to give occasion of grief. But Isaiah came, though he was not
   invited; and in this we ought to observe and praise his steadfastness,
   and are taught by his example that we ought not to wait till we are
   sent for by men who need the discharge of our duty, when they flatter
   themselves amidst the heaviest distresses, and bring danger on
   themselves either by levity, or by ignorance, or even by malice; for it
   is our duty to gather the wandering sheep, and we ought to do this
   diligently, even though we be not requested by any person.

   Though Hezekiah may be justly blamed for having been corrupted by the
   flatteries of the king of Babylon so as not to ask counsel of God, yet
   it is a manifestation of no ordinary modesty, that he does not drive
   away or despise the Prophet, as if he had found fault without reason,
   but replies gently, and at length receives calmly and mildly a very
   severe reproof. It would have been better that he had, from the
   beginning, inquired at the mouth of God, as it is said in the psalm,

   "Thy commandments are the men of my counsel,"
   (Psalm 119:24;)

   but, having committed a mistake, it was his next duty to receive
   submissively the remedy for the fault.

   What did those men say? The Prophet does not immediately inflict on him
   the pain of a severe reproof, but wounds him gently, so as to lead him
   to a confession of his sin; for Hezekiah flattered himself, and thought
   that all was going well with him, and, therefore, needed to be
   gradually aroused from his slothfulness. Still these words gave a sharp
   wound; as if he had said, "What have you to do with those men? Ought
   you not to keep at the greatest distance from a plague so contagious?"
   He likewise inquires about the contents of the message, in order to
   make Hezekiah ashamed of not having perceived the deceit that was
   practiced on him; for there is reason to believe that he would not have
   censured the congratulation, if there had not been some poison mingled
   with it, but he points out those snares in which the Babylonians wished
   to entangle him.

   And yet it is evident from the reply, that Hezekiah was not yet struck
   by that gentle reproof; for he is still on good terms with himself, and
   boasts that those men came from a distant country, from Babylon. There
   is reason to believe that Isaiah was not ignorant of that country, so
   that Hezekiah did not need to express the distance in such magnificent
   language; but he boasts in this manner, because he was under the
   influence of ambition. It was therefore necessary that he should be
   more keenly pressed, and that sharper spurs should be applied.

   4. Then he said. Isaiah proceeds in his indirect admonition, to see if
   Hezekiah shall be moved by it and displeased with himself. But still he
   does not succeed, though it can hardly be believed that the king was so
   stupid as not to feel the punctures of the spur; for he knew that the
   Prophet had not come, as persons addicted to curiosity are wont to do,
   for the purpose of hunting out news; and he knew also that the Prophet
   had not come to jest with him, but to state something of importance.
   However that may be, we ought to put a favorable construction on his
   mild reply; for he does not break out against the Prophet, but modestly
   confesses the state of the fact, though he does not yet acknowledge
   that he has sinned, or at least is not brought to repentance; for he
   does not judge of his sin from that concealed disposition. Ambition
   deludes men so much, that by its sweetness it not only intoxicates but
   drives them mad, so that, even when they have been admonished, they do
   not immediately repent. When, therefore, we see the godly Hezekiah
   struck with such stupidity as not to perceive that he is reproved, or
   at least not to be stung by it so as to know himself, we ought
   carefully to guard against so dangerous a disease.

   5. Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah. From this judgment of God we perceive
   that the sin of Hezekiah was not small, though common sense judges
   differently; for since God always observes the highest moderation in
   chastising men, we may infer from the severity of the punishment that
   it was no ordinary fault, but a highly aggravated crime. Hence also we
   are reminded that men judge amiss of words or actions, but that God
   alone is the competent judge of them. Hezekiah shewed his treasures.
   Had they been heaped up, that they might always lie hidden in the
   earth? He received the messengers kindly. Should he have driven them
   away? He lent an ear to their instructions. But that was when the rival
   of the Assyrian voluntarily desired his friendship. Ought he to have
   rejected so valuable an advantage? In a word, so far as appearances go,
   we shall find nothing for which an apology may not be offered.

   But God, from whom nothing is hidden, observes in Hezekiah's joy,
   first, ingratitude; because he is unmindful of the distresses which
   lately pressed him down, and, in some respects, substitutes the
   Chaldeans in the room of God himself, to whom he ought to have
   dedicated his own person and all that he possessed. Next, he observes
   pride; because Hezekiah attempts too eagerly to gain reputation by
   magnificence and riches. He observes a sinful desire to enter into an
   alliance which would have been destructive to the whole nation. But the
   chief fault was ambition, which almost entirely banishes the fear of
   God from the hearts of men. Hence Augustine justly exclaims, "How great
   and how pernicious is the poison of pride, which cannot be cured but by
   poison!" For he has his eye on that passage in one of Paul's Epistles,
   in which he says that "a messenger of Satan had been given to buffet
   him, that he might not be puffed up by the greatness of revelations."
   (2 Corinthians 12:7.) Hezekiah was unshaken, when all was nearly
   ruined; but he is vanquished by these flatteries, and does not resist
   vain ambition. Let us, therefore, attentively and diligently consider
   what a destructive evil this is, and let us be so much the more careful
   to avoid it.

   Hear the word of Jehovah of hosts Being about to be the bearer of a
   harsh sentence, he begins by saying that he is God's herald, and a
   little afterwards, he again repeats that God has commanded him to do
   this, not merely for the purpose of protecting himself against hatred,
   [99] but in order to make a deep impression on the heart of the king'.
   Here again we see his steadfastness and heroic courage. He does not
   dread the face of the king, or fear to make known his disease, and to
   announce to him the judgment of God; for although, at that time as well
   as now, kings had delicate ears, yet, being fully aware that God had
   enjoined this duty upon him, he boldly executes his commission, however
   much it might be disliked. Prophets were, indeed, subject to kings, and
   claimed nothing for themselves, unless when it was their duty to speak
   in the name of God; and in such cases there is nothing so lofty that it
   ought not to be abased before the majesty of God. And if his object had
   been to gain the good graces of his prince, he would have been silent
   like other flatterers; but he has regard to his office, and endeavors
   to discharge it most faithfully.

   6. And nothing shall be left It is proper to observe the kind of
   punishment which the Lord inflicts on Hezekiah; for he takes from his
   successors those things of which he vaunted so loudly, in order that
   they may have no ground for boasting of them. Thus the Lord punishes
   the ambition and pride of men, so that their name or kingdom, which
   they hoped would last for ever, is blotted out, and they are treated
   with contempt, and the remembrance of them is accursed. In a word, he
   overthrows their foolish thoughts, so that they find by experience the
   very opposite of those inventions by which they deceive themselves.

   If it be objected that it is unreasonable, that the sacking of a city
   and the captivity of a nation should be attributed to the fault of a
   single man, while the Holy Spirit everywhere declares (2 Chronicles
   36:14-17) that general obstinacy was the reason why God delivered up
   the city and the country to be pillaged by the Babylonians; I answer,
   that there is no absurdity in God's punishing the sin of a single man,
   and at the same time the crimes of a whole nation. For when the wrath
   of the Lord overspread the whole country, it was the duty of all to
   unite in confessing their guilt., and of every person to consider
   individually what he had deserved; that no man might throw the blame on
   others, but that every man might lay it on himself. Besides, since the
   Jews were already in many ways liable to the judgment of God, he justly
   permitted Hezekiah to fail in his duty to the injury of all, that he
   might hasten the more his own wrath, and open up a way for the
   execution of his judgment. In like manner we see that it happened to
   David; for Scripture declares that it was not an accidental occurrence
   that David numbered the people, but that it took place by the fault of
   the nation itself, whom the Lord determined to punish in this manner.

   "The anger of the Lord was kindled against the nation, and he put it
   into the heart of David to number the people." (2 Samuel 24:1.)

   Thus in this passage also punishment is threatened against Hezekiah;
   but his sin, by which he provoked God's anger, was also the vengeance
   of God against the whole nation.

   7. Of thy sons It might be thought that this was far more distressing
   to Hezekiah, and therefore it is put last for the sake of heightening
   the picture. Even though any calamity spread widely in a nation, it is
   commonly thought that kings and their families will be exempted, as if
   they were not placed in the same rank with other men. When he
   understood, therefore, that his sons would be made captives and slaves,
   this must have appeared to him to be exceedingly severe. Hence again we
   may learn how much God was displeased with Hezekiah for seeking aid
   from earthly wealth, and boasting of it in the presence of wicked men,
   when God by a dreadful example punishes it as an unpardonable crime,
   that Hezekiah made an ambitious display of his wealth in presence of
   unbelievers.

   8. Good is the word of Jehovah From this reply we learn, that Hezekiah
   was not a stubborn or obstinately haughty man, since he listened
   patiently to the Prophet's reproof, though he was little moved by it at
   the commencement. When he is informed that the Lord is angry, he
   unhesitatingly acknowledges his guilt, and confesses that he is justly
   punished. Having heard the judgment of God, he does not argue or
   contend with the Prophet, but conducts himself with gentleness and
   modesty, and thus holds out to us an example of genuine submissiveness
   and obedience.

   Let us therefore learn by the example of the pious king' to listen with
   calmness to the Lord, not only when he exhorts or admonishes, but even
   when he condemns and terrifies by threatening just punishment. When he
   says that "the word of God is good," he not only gives him the praise
   of justice, but patiently acquiesces in that which might have been
   unwelcome on account of its harshness; for even the reprobate have
   sometimes been compelled to confess their guilt; while their rebellion
   was not subdued so as to refrain from murmuring against their Judge. In
   order, therefore, that God's threatenings may be softened to us, we
   must entertain some hope of mercy, otherwise our hearts will always
   pour forth unavailing bitterness; but he who shall be convinced that
   God, when he punishes, does not in any degree lay aside the feeling of
   a father's affection, will not only confess that God is just, but will
   calmly^ and mildly bear his temporary severity. In a word, when we
   shall have a powerful conviction of the grace of God, so as to believe
   that he is our Father, it will not be hard or disagreeable to us to
   stand and fall according to his pleasure; for faith will assure us that
   nothing is more advantageous to us than his fatherly chastisement.

   Thus David, having been very severely reproved by Nathan, humbly
   replies, "It is the Lord, let him do whatever is right in his eyes;"
   [100] for undoubtedly the reason why he is dumb is, not only because it
   would be of no use to murmur, but because he willingly submits to the
   judgment of God. Such is also the character of Saul's silence, when he
   is informed that the kingdom shall be taken from him. (1 Samuel 28:20.)
   But because it is only punishment that terrifies him, and he is not
   moved by repentance for his sin, we need not wonder if he be full of
   cruelty within, though apparently he acquiesces, because he cannot
   resist, which otherwise he would willingly do, like malefactors who,
   while they are held bound by chains or fetters, are submissive to their
   judges, whom they would willingly drag down from the place of authority
   and trample under their feet. But while David and Hezekiah are "humbled
   under the mighty hand of God," (1 Peter 5:6,) still they do not lose
   the hope of pardon, and therefore choose rather to submit to the
   punishment which he inflicts than to withdraw from his authority.

   Which thou hast spoken. It is worthy of notice that he acknowledges not
   only that the sentence which God has pronounced is just, but that the
   word which Isaiah has spoken is good; for there is great weight in this
   clause, since he does not hesitate to receive the word with reverence,
   though it is spoken by a mortal man, because he looks to its principal
   Author. The freedom used by Isaiah might undoubtedly be harsh and
   unpleasant to the king; but acknowledging him to be the servant of God,
   he allows himself to be brought to obedience. So much the more
   insufferable is the delicacy of those who are offended at being
   admonished or reproved, and scornfully reply to teachers and ministers
   of the word, "Are not you men as well as we?" As if it were not our
   duty to obey God, unless he sent angels from heaven, or came down
   himself.

   Hence also we learn what opinion we ought to form concerning fanatics,
   who, while they pretend to adore God, reject the doctrine of the
   prophets; for if they were ready to obey God, they would listen to him
   when he spoke by his prophets, not less than when he thundered from
   heaven. I admit that we ought to distinguish between true and false
   prophets, between "the voice of the shepherd (John 10:3, 5) and the
   voice of the stranger;" but we must not reject all without distinction,
   if we do not wish to reject God himself; and we ought to listen to
   them, not only when they exhort or reprove, but also when they condemn,
   and when they threaten, by the command of God, the just punishment of
   our sins.

   At least [101] there shall be peace The particle ky (ki) sometimes
   expresses opposition, but, here it denotes an exception, and therefore
   I have translated it at least; for Hezekiah adds something new, that
   is, he gives thanks to God for mitigating the punishment which he had
   deserved; as if he had said, "The Lord might have suddenly raised up
   enemies, to drive me out of my kingdom; but he now spares me, and, by
   delaying, moderates the punishment which might justly have been
   inflicted on me." Yet this clause may be explained as a prayer, [102]
   expressing Hezekiah's desire that the punishment should be delayed till
   a future age. But it is more probable that what the Prophet had said
   about the days that were to come, Hezekiah applied for soothing his
   grief, to encourage himself to patience, because sudden vengeance would
   have alarmed him still more. This exception, therefore, is highly
   fitted to induce meekness of spirit, "At least God will spare our age."
   But if any person prefer to view it as assigning a reason, "For there
   shall be peace," [103] him enjoy his opinion.

   Peace and Truth. Some think that 'mt, (emeth,) Truth, denotes the
   worship of God and pure religion, as if he were thanking God that, when
   he died, he would leave the doctrine of godliness unimpaired. But I
   consider it to denote "permanency," or a peaceful condition of the
   kingdom; if it be not thought preferable to view it as denoting, by the
   substitution of one word for another, that there will be certain and
   long-continued prosperity.

   But it may be thought that Hezekiah was cruel in taking no care about
   posterity, and not giving himself much trouble about what should happen
   afterwards. Such sayings as, (emou thanontos gaia michtheto puri,)
   "When I am dead, let the earth be committed to the flames," that is,
   "When I am dead, all are dead;" and other sayings of the same kind,
   which are now in the mouths of many swine and Epicureans, are profane
   and shocking. But Hezekiah's meaning was quite different; for, while he
   wished well to those who should live after him, yet it would have been
   undutiful to disregard that token of forbearance which God gave by
   delaying his vengeance; for he might have been led by it to hope that
   this mercy would, in some degree, be extended to posterity.

   Some reply that he rejoiced at the delay, because

   "we ought not to be anxious about to-morrow, seeing that sufficient for
   the day is its own affliction." (Matthew 6:34.)

   But this does not apply to the present passage; for Hezekiah does not
   disregard posterity, but, perceiving that God moderates the punishment
   by forbearance, he gives thanks to God, as we have already said; for
   although this punishment awaited a future age, still it was his duty to
   acknowledge the present favor. And indeed we ought to labor most for
   our own age, and to pay our chief regard to it. The future ought not to
   be overlooked; but what is present and immediate has stronger claims on
   our services; for we who live at the same time are bound by God with a
   stronger tie, in order that, by mutual intercourse, we may assist each
   other, as far as shall be in our power. It ought likewise to be
   observed that, while the Lord had formerly promised a lengthened life
   to hezekiah, when he was very near death, there was now strong reason
   to fear that he would again cut short his life on account of that sin.
   When he is informed that the promise is ratified, he gives thanks to
   God, and bears more patiently the calamity which was to come, though he
   felt it to be grievous and distressing.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [98] "Que la guerre qu'il entreprendoit de faire auroit heureuse issue,
   et seroit benite du ciel." "That war which he carried on would have a
   successful result, and would be blest of heaven."

   [99] "Non pas que pour crainte d'estre mal voulu, il se descharge sur
   le Seigneur." "Not that, through fear of bringing ill-will on himself,
   he throws the blame on the Lord."

   [100] Our author, quoting from memory, relates the words, not of David
   to Nathan, (2 Samuel 12:12,) but of Eli to Samuel. (1 Samuel 3:18) --
   Ed.

   [101] "For there shall be peace." -- Eng. Ver.

   [102] "Au moins qu'il y ait paix." "At least let there be peace."

   [103] Car il y aura paix.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 40
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 40:1-31

   1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.

   1. Consolamini, consolamini populum meum, dicit Deus rester.

   2. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her
   warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath
   received of the LORD'S hand double for all her sins.

   2. Loquimini secundum cor Ierusalem, et clamate ad eam, quod impleta
   sit militia ejus, quod remissa sit iniquitas (vel, miseria) ejus,
   quoniam accepit e manu Iehovae duplicia in onmibus peccatis suis.

   3. The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way
   of the LORD, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.

   3. Vox clamans in deserto: Parate viam Iehovae; Dirigite in solitudine
   semitam Deo nostro.

   4. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be
   made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places
   plain:

   4. Omnis vailis exaltabitur, et onmis mons et collis humiliabitur; et
   erit praeruptum in rectitudinem, et loca confragosa in planiciem.

   5. And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see
   it together: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

   5. Et revelabitur gloria Iehovae, videbitque omnis caro pariter, quod
   os Iehovae loquutum sit.

   6. The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is
   grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:

   6. Vox dixit (vel, dicebat): Clama. Et dixi, Quid clamabo? Omnis caro
   herba, et omnis gratia ejus quasi flos eampi.

   7. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the
   LORD bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.

   7. Exaruit herba, emarcuit flos, quia spiritus Iehovae sufflavit in co.
   Sane herba est populus.

   8. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God
   shall stand for ever.

   8. Arescit herba, emarcet flos. At sermo Dei nostri stabit in aeternum.

   9. O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high
   mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice
   with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah,
   Behold your God!

   9. Ascende in montem excelsum, annuntiatrix Sion; attolle fortiter
   vocem tuam, annuntiatrix Ierusalem. Attolle, ne timeas. Die civitatibus
   Iuda: Ecce Deus rester.

   10. Behold, the Lord GOD will come with strong hand, and his arm shall
   rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.

   10. Ecce Dominus Iehova in robore veniet; et brachium ejus sibi potens.
   Ecce merces ejus cure co, et opus ejus coram ipsius facie.

   11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs
   with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
   that are with young.

   11. Sicuti pastor gregem suam pascet, brachio suo colliget agnos, sinu
   suo portabit, foetus suaviter ducet.

   12. Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted
   out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a
   measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a
   balance?

   12. Quis mensus est pugillo suo aquas, et coelos palma mensus est, et
   comprehendit tribus digitis pulverem terrae, et appendit montes in
   statera, et colles in trutina?

   13. Who hath directed the Spirit of the LORD, or, being his counsellor,
   hath taught him?

   13. Quis erudivit Spiritum Iehovae, aut consilio eum instruxit, et eum
   docuit?

   14. With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him
   in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him
   the way of understanding?

   14. A quo petlit consilium, ut eum moneret? et docuit eum semitam
   judicii, erudivit scientia, et viam prudentiae ostendit ei?

   15. Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as
   the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very
   little thing.

   15. En gentes quasi gutta situlae, et quasi pulvisculus trutinae
   reputantur; en insulas quasi rein minimam tollit.

   16. And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof
   sufficient for a burnt offering.

   16. Nec Libanus sufficeret ad incendium, nec bestiae ejus ad
   holocaustum.

   17. All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him
   less than nothing, and vanity.

   17. Omnes gentes quasi nihilum sunt corameo, et praeipso reputantur
   minus quam nihil, et quod non est.

   18. To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare
   unto him?

   18. Cui igitur similem fecistis Deum, aut quam similitudinem
   ordinabitis ei?

   19. The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it
   over with gold, and casteth silver chains.

   19. Artifex parat sculptlie, aurifaber aurum aptat illi, et catenas
   argenteas (conflat) aurifaber.

   20. He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree
   that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a
   graven image, that shall not be moved.

   20. Pauper oblationi eligit lignum quod non putrescat; artificem
   peritum quaerit sibi qui sculptlie praeparet, ne moveatur.

   21. Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you
   from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the
   earth?

   21. An nescitis? An non audistis? An non vobis annuntiatum est ab
   initio? An non edocti estis a fundamentis terrae?

   22. It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the
   inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the
   heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:

   22. Is sedet super gyrum terrae, cujus habitatores sunt vehti locustae,
   extendit coelum ut cortinam; expandit, inquam, quasi tentorium, ut
   inhabitetur.

   23. That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the
   earth as vanity.

   23. Redigit potentes in nihilum, gubernatores terrae quasi non slut.

   24. Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown: yea,
   their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow
   upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them
   away as stubble.

   24. Perinde ut non plantati, perinde ut non sati, perinde acsi non
   radix in terra stirps eorum. Etiam dum sufflat in eos arescunt, et
   turbo quasi stipulam aufert eos.

   25. To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the Holy
   One.

   25. Et cut assimilabitis me, ut similis sim? dicit Sanctus.

   26. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these
   things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by
   names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power;
   not one faileth.

   26. Tollite in sublime oculos vestros, et aspicite quis creaverit ea
   producens ad numerum exercitum eorum; omnibus nominatim acclamabit; a
   magnitudine virium et robore fortitudinis nullum deficiet (vel,
   deerit).

   27. Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid
   from the LORD, and my judgment is passed over from my God?

   27. Quare dices, Iacob, et loqueris Israel? Abscondita est via mea ab
   Iehova, eta Deo meo judicium meum transit.

   28. Hast thou not known, hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God,
   the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither
   is weary? there is no searching of his understanding.

   28. An non scivisti? An non audiisti (quod) Deus seculi sit Iehova, qui
   fines terrae creavit? Non laborat, nec lassitudine fatigatur; et non
   est investigatio intelligentiae ejus.

   29. He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he
   increaseth strength.

   29. Dot lasso virtutem, et cui nihil est virium robur suppeditat.

   30. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall
   utterly fall:

   30. Fatigantur adolescentes et lassantur; juvenes cadendo cadunt.

   31. But they that wait upon the LORD shall renew their strength; they
   shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary;
   and they shall walk, and not faint.

   31. At expectantes Iehovam vires novas colligent; sustollent alas ut
   aquibe; current, nec fatigabuntur; ambulabunt, nec deficient.


   1. Comfort ye. The Prophet introduces a new subject; for, leaving the
   people on whom no favorable impression was made either by threatenings
   or by admonitions, on account of their desperate wickedness, he turns
   to posterity, in order to declare that the people who shall be humbled
   under the cross will experience no want of consolation even amidst the
   severest distresses. And it is probable that he wrote this prophecy
   when the time of the captivity was at hand, that he might not at his
   departure from life leave the Church of God overwhehned by very
   grievous calamities, without the hope of restoration. Though he
   formerly mingled his predictions with threatenings and terrors for this
   purpose, yet he appears to have contemplated chiefly the benefit of
   those who lived at that time. What will afterwards follow will relate
   to the future Church, the revival of which was effected long after his
   death; for he will next lay down a perpetual doctrine, which must not
   be limited to a single period, and especially when he treats of the
   commencement and progress of the reign of Christ. And this prophecy
   must be of so much the greater importance to us, because it addresses
   us in direct terms; for, although it may be a spiritual application of
   what goes before, so as to be doctrine that is common both to the Jews
   and to us, yet, as he leaves the Jews of that age, and addresses
   posterity down to the end of the world, it appears to belong more
   especially to us.

   By this exhortation, therefore, the Lord intended to stir up the hearts
   of the godly, that they might not faint, amidst heavy calamities.
   First, he addresses the Jews, who were soon after to be carried into
   that hard captivity in which they should have neither sacrifices nor
   prophets, and would have been destitute of all consolation, had not the
   Lord relieved their miseries by these predictions. Next, he addresses
   all the godly that should live afterwards, or that shall yet live, to
   encourage their heart, even when they shall appear to be reduced very
   low and to be utterly ruined.

   That this discourse might have greater weight, and might mere
   powerfully affect their minds, he represents God as raising up new
   prophets, whom he enjoins to soothe the sorrows of the people by
   friendly consolation. The general meaning is, that, when he shall have
   appeared to have forsaken for a time the wretched captives, the
   testimony of his grace will again burst forth from the darkness, and
   that, when gladdening prophecies shall have ceased, their proper time
   will come round. In order to exhibit more strongly the ground of joy,
   he makes use of the plural number, Comfort ye; by which he intimates
   that he will send not one or another, but a vast multitude of prophets;
   and this he actually accomplished, by which we see more clearly his
   infinite goodness and mercy.

   Will say. First, it ought to be observed that the verb is in the future
   tense; and those commentators who render it in the present or past
   tense both change the words and spoil the meaning. Indircetly he points
   out an intermediate period, during which the people would be heavily
   afflicted, as if God had been silent. [104] Though even at that time
   God did not cease to hold out the hope of salvation by some prophets,
   yet, having for a long period cast them off, when they were wretchedly
   distressed and almost ruined, the consolation was less abundant, till
   it was pointed out, as it were with the finger, that they were at
   liberty to return. On this account the word comfort must be viewed as
   relating to a present favor; and the repetition of the word not only
   confirms the certainty of the prediction, but applauds its power and
   success, as if he had said, that in this message there will be
   abundant, full, and unceasing cause of joy.

   Above all, we must hold by the future tense of this verb, because there
   is an implied contrast between that melancholy silence of which I have
   spoken, and the doctrine of consolation which afterwards followed. And
   with this prediction agrees the complaint of the Church,

   "We do not see our signs; there is no longer among us a prophet or any
   one that knows how long." (Psalm 74:9.)

   We see how she laments that she has been deprived of the best kind of
   comfort, because no promise is brought forward for soothing her
   distresses. It is as if the Prophet had said, "The Lord will not suffer
   you to be deprived of prophets, to comfort you amidst your severest
   distresses. At that time he will raise up men by whom he will send to
   you the message that had been long desired, and at that time also he
   will show that he takes care of you."

   I consider the future tense, will say, as relating not only to the
   captivity in Babylon, but to the whole period of deliverance, which
   includes the reign of Christ. [105] To the verb will say, we must
   supply "to the prophets," whom he will appoint for that purpose; for in
   vain would they have spoken, if the Lord had not told them, and even
   put into their mouth what they should make known to others. Thus there
   is a mutual relation between God and the prophets," whom he will
   appoint for that purpose; for in vain would they have spoken, if the
   Lord had not told them and even put into their mouth what they should
   make known to others. Thus there is a mutual relation between God and
   the prophets. In a word, the Lord promises that the hope of salvation
   will be left, although the ingratitude of men deserves that this voice
   shall be perpetually silenced and altogether extinguished.

   These words, I have said, ought not to be limited to the captivity in
   Babylon; for they have a very extensive meaning, and include the
   doctrine of the gospel, in which chiefly lies the power of
   "comforting." To the gospel it belongs to comfort those who are
   distressed and cast down, to quicken those who are slain and actually
   dead, to cheer the mourners, and, in short, to bring all joy and
   gladness; and this is also the reason why it is called "the Gospel,"
   that is, good news, [106] Nor did it begin at the time when Christ
   appeared in the world, but long before, since the time when God's favor
   was clearly revealed, and Daniel might be said to have first raised his
   banner, that believers might hold themselves in readiness for
   returning. (Daniel 9:2.) Afterwards, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi,
   Nehemiah, Ezra, and others, down to the coming of Christ, exhorted
   believers to cherish better and better hopes. Malachi, the last of them
   that wrote, knowing that there would be few prophets, sends the people
   to the law of Moses, to learn from it the will of God and its
   threatenings and promises. (Malachi 4:4.)

   Your God. From this passage we learn what we ought chiefly to seek in
   the prophets, namely, to encourage the hopes of godly persons by
   exhibiting the sweetness of divine grace, that they may not faint under
   the weight of afflictions, but may boldly persevere in calling on God.
   But since it was difficult to be believed, he reminds them of the
   covenant; as if he had said that it was impossible for God ever to
   forget what he formerly promised to Abraham. (Genesis 17:7.) Although,
   therefore, the Jews by their sins had fallen from grace, yet he affirms
   that he is their God, and that they are his peculiar people, both of
   which depended on election; but, as even in that nation there were many
   reprobates, the statement implies that to believers only is this
   discourse strictly directed; because he silently permits unbelievers,
   through constant languishment, to be utterly wasted and destroyed. But
   to believers there is held out an invaluable comfort, that, although
   for a time they are oppressed by grief and mourning, yet because they
   hope in God, who is the Father of consolation, they shall know by
   experience that the promises of grace, like a hidden treasure, are laid
   up for them, to cheer their hearts at the proper time. This is also a
   very high commendation of the prophetic office, that it supports
   believers in adversity, that they may not faint or be discouraged; and,
   on the other hand, this passage shews that it is a very terrible
   display of God's vengeance when there are no faithful teachers, from
   whose mouth may be heard in the Church of God the consolation that is
   fitted to raise up those who are cast down, and to strengthen the
   feeble.

   2. Speak ye according to the heart of Jerusalem. Here God commands his
   servants the prophets, and lays down the message which he wishes them
   to deliver publicly, when believers shall be called to change their
   strain from mourning to joy. And yet he does not exhort and encourage
   them to the cheerful and courageous discharge of their office, so much
   as he conveys to the minds of believers an assured hope that they may
   patiently endure the irksomeness of delay, till the prophets appear
   with this glad and delightful message. To speak to the heart [107] is
   nothing else than "to speak according to the wish or sentiment of the
   mind;" for our heart abhors or recoils if any sad intelligence is
   communicated, but eagerly receives, or rather runs to meet, whatever is
   agreeable. Now, in consequence of the people having been apparently
   rejected, nothing could be more agreeable than a reconciliation [108]
   which should blot out all offenses. By a figure of speech in which a
   part is taken for the whole, Jerusalem, as is well known, denotes the
   Church.

   And cry to her. The word cry means that the promise of this grace will
   be open and manifest, so as to resound in the ears of all and be
   understood; for if prophets only muttered or spoke indistinctly, the
   belief of this consolation would be doubtful or weak, but now that they
   publish it boldly and with open mouth, all doubts are removed.

   That her warfare is accomplished. This is the desirable message, that
   the Lord determines to put an end to the warfare of his people. I
   consider ky (ki) to be used for introducing an explanation. Some think
   that tsv'h, (tzebaahh,) which we have translated "her warfare," simply
   denotes "time," as if it had been said, "her time is accomplished."
   [109] Others think that it expresses the time of visitation, but this
   is incorrect; for among the Hebrews it literally denotes a time
   previously appointed and set apart for lawful work or labor. (Numbers
   4:23.) But here unquestionably the metaphor is taken from the discharge
   of soldiers; for it means that the end and issue of their vexations is
   at hand, and that God does not wish to harass his people continually,
   but to set a limit to their afflictions. He therefore compares the time
   of the captivity in Babylon to a righteous warfare, at the end of which
   the soldiers, having obtained an honorable discharge, will return home
   to enjoy peace and quietness.

   That her iniquity is pardoned. This means that God is so gracious to
   them that he is unwilling to treat them with the utmost severity. These
   words, therefore, assign a reason; for, as physicians, in curing
   diseases, first remove the causes from which diseases arise, so does
   the Lord deal with us. The scourges by which he chastises us proceed
   from our sins; and therefore, that he may cease to strike, he must
   first pardon us; and consequently, he says that there will be an end of
   punishments, because he no longer imputes sin. Others think that vnh
   (gnavonahh) means "her misery," and that it denotes that her misery is
   ended. This meaning also is highly appropriate, and thus the Prophet
   will make the same announcement in two ways; for to finish her warfare,
   and to put an end to her miseries, mean the same thing. Yet we must
   hold this principle, that God ceases from inflicting punishment when he
   is appeased, so that pardon and the forgiveness of sins always come
   first in order, as the cause. But the word nrtsh (nirtzah) demands, in
   my opinion, the former meaning; as if he had said, that God has been
   appeased in such a manner that, having pardoned and forgiven their
   sins, he is ready to enter again into a state of favor with his people.

   Double for all her sins. This passage is explained in two ways. Some
   say that the people, having deserved a double punishment, have obtained
   a double favor; and others, that they have received enough of
   punishment, because God is unwilling to exact more. The former
   interpretation, though it contains an excellent and profitable
   doctrine, does not agree with the text, and must therefore be set
   aside; and it is evident that the Prophet means nothing else than that
   God is abundantly satisfied with the miseries which have befallen his
   Church. I could have wished, therefore, that they who have attacked
   Jerome and other supporters of this interpretation, had been more
   moderate; for the natural meaning belongs to this interpretation, and
   not to the more ingenious one, that the Lord repays double favor for
   their sins. The general meaning is, that God is unwilling to inflict
   more severe or more lengthened punishment on his people, because,
   through his fatherly kindness, he is in some sense displeased with the
   severity.

   Here the word double denotes "large and abundant." It must not be
   imagined that the punishments were greater than the offenses, or equal
   to them; for we ought to abhor the blasphemy of those who accuse God of
   cruelty, as if he inflicted on men excessively severe punishment; for
   what punishment could be inflicted that was sufficiently severe even
   for the smallest offense? This must therefore relate to the mercy of
   God, who, by setting a limit to the chastisements, testifies that he is
   unwilling to punish them any more or longer, as if he were abundantly
   satisfied with what had gone before, though that nation deserved far
   severer chastisements. God sustains the character of a Father who,
   while he compassionates his children, is led, not without reluctance,
   to exercise severity, and thus willingly bends his mind to grant
   forgiveness.

   3. A voice crying in the wilderness. He follows out the subject which
   he had begun, and declares more explicitly that he will send to the
   people, though apparently ruined, ministers of consolation. At the same
   time he anticipates an objection which might have been brought forward.
   "You do indeed promise consolation, but where are the prophets? For we
   shall be in a wilderness,' and whence shall this consolation come to
   us?" He therefore testifies that "the wilderness" shall not hinder them
   from enjoying that consolation.

   The wilderness is employed to denote metaphorically that desolation
   which then existed; though I do not deny that the Prophet alludes to
   the intermediate journey; [110] for the roughness of the wilderness
   seemed to forbid their return. He promises, therefore, that although
   every road were shut up, and not a chink were open, the Lord will
   easily cleave a path through the most impassable tracts for himself and
   his people.

   Prepare the way of Jehovah. Some connect the words "in the wilderness"
   with this clause, and explain it thus, "Prepare the way of Jehovah in
   the wilderness." But the Prophet appears rather to represent a voice
   which shall gather together those who had wandered and had, as it were,
   been banished from the habitable globe. "Though you behold nothing but
   a frightful desert, yet this voice of consolation shall be heard from
   the mouth of the prophets." These words relate to the hard bondage
   which they should undergo in Babylon.

   But to whom is that voice addressed? Is it to believers? No, but to
   Cyrus, to the Persians, and to the Medes, who held that people in
   captivity. Having been alienated from obedience to God, they are
   constrained to deliver the people; and therefore they are enjoined to
   "prepare and pave the way," that the people of God may be brought back
   to Judea; as if he had said, "Make passable what was impassable." The
   power and efficacy of this prediction is thus held up for our applause;
   for when God invests his servants with authority to command men who
   were cruel and addicted to plunder, and who at that time were the
   conquerors of Babylon, to "prepare the way" for the return of his
   people, he means that nothing shall hinder the fulfillment of his
   promise, because he will employ them all as hired servants. Hence we
   obtain an excellent consolation, when we see that God makes use of
   irreligious men for our salvation, and employs all the creatures, when
   the case demands it, for that end.

   A highway for our God. When it is said that the way shall be prepared
   not for the Jews, but for God himself, we have here a remarkable proof
   of his love towards us; for he applies to himself what related to the
   salvation of his chosen people. The Lord had nothing to do with
   walking, and had no need of a road; but he shews that we are so closely
   united to him that what is done on our account he reckons to be done to
   himself. This mode of expression is frequently employed elsewhere, as
   when it is said that God "went forth into battle with his anointed,"
   (Habakkuk 3:13,) and that "he rode through the midst of Egypt," (Exodus
   11:4,) and that he lifted up his standard and led his people through
   the wilderness. (Isaiah 63:13.)

   This passage is quoted by the Evangelists, (Matthew 3:3; Mark 1:3; Luke
   3:4,) and applied to John the Baptist, as if these things had been
   foretold concerning him, and not unjustly; for he held the highest rank
   among the messengers and heralds of our redemption, of which the
   deliverance from Babylon was only a type. And, indeed, at the time when
   the Church arose out of her wretched and miserable condition, her mean
   appearance bore a stronger resemblance than the Babylonish captivity to
   a "wilderness;" but God wished that they should see plainly, in the
   wilderness in which John taught, the image and likeness of that
   miserably ruinous condition by which the whole beauty of the Church was
   injured and almost destroyed. What is here described metaphorically by
   the Prophet was at that time actually fulfilled; for at an exceedingly
   disordered and ruinous crisis John lifted up the banner of joy. True,
   indeed, the same voice had been previously uttered by Daniel,
   Zechariah, and others; but the nearer the redemption approached, the
   more impressively could it be proclaimed by John, who also pointed out
   Christ with the finger. (John 1:29.) But because, in the midst of a
   nation which was ignorant and almost sunk in stupidity, there were few
   that sincerely grieved for their ruinous condition, John sought a
   wilderness, that the very sight of the place might arouse careless
   persons to hope and desire the promised deliverance. As to his denying
   that he was a Prophet, (John 1:21,) this depends on the end of his
   calling and the substance of his doctrine; for he was not sent to
   discharge apart any continued office, but, as a herald, to gain an
   audience for Christ his Master and Lord. What is here said about
   removing obstructions, he applies skilfully to individuals, on this
   ground, that the depravity of our nature, the windings of a crooked
   mind, and obstinacy of heart, shut up the way of the Lord, and hinder
   them from preparing, by true self-denial, to yield obedience.

   4. Every valley shall be exalted. He confirms and asserts the preceding
   statement; for he shews that no difficulties can prevent the Lord from
   delivering and restoring his Church whenever he shall think fit. These
   words might with propriety be rendered in the imperative mood, "Let
   every valley be exalted," [111] so as to be placed in immediate
   connection with the command which God gives by his prophets to prepare
   and level the way for himself; but it makes hardly any difference in
   the meaning. Let us be satisfied with understanding the Prophet's
   design, "that, although many and formidable difficulties are started to
   hinder the salvation of the Church, still the hand of God will be
   victorious and will prevail."

   And every mountain and hill shall be laid low. It ought to be observed
   that many obstructions always arise whenever God makes provision for
   our deliverance, or wishes to aid the afflicted; and although his glory
   is more fully displayed by these obstructions, yet we suffer no loss;
   for we behold more clearly his wonderful power when no strength, or
   efforts, or contrivances of men can prevent him from gaining his
   object. He conducts his people through "mountains" and steep places in
   such a manner as if the road were perfectly level; and by the words
   mountains and hills, the Prophet undoubtedly intends to denote
   metaphorically obstructions of every kind; for Satan attempts in every
   way to hinder our salvation. When we come, therefore, to spiritual
   redemption, these words undoubtedly include both internal and external
   obstacles, -- lusts and wicked desires, ambition, foolish confidence,
   and impatience, which retard us wonderfully, but the Lord will break
   them all down; for when he stretches out his hand, nothing can restrain
   or drive him back.

   5. And the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed. He means that this work
   of redemption will be splendid, so that the Lord will shew that he is
   the Author of it, and will illustriously display his majesty and power.
   This, indeed, is very openly manifested in all places and in all
   events, but he promises that he will do this especially in protecting
   and delivering his Church, and not without good reason; for the
   deliverance of the Church, from its commencement down to the coming of
   Christ, might be called a renewal of the world. [112] And because the
   power of God, which he had formerly been accustomed to display, was
   almost extinguished, so that scarcely the slightest traces were
   discernible, as it is said in the Psalm, "We do not see our signs,"
   (Psalm 74:9;) this was a very seasonable warning, that a new and
   striking demonstration is promised, by which they may perceive that God
   has in his power various methods of giving relief, even when he
   conceals them for a time.

   And all flesh shall see. He now heightens the miracle by an additional
   circumstance, that it will be known not only in Judea, but in foreign
   and distant countries; for by these words "All flesh shall see," he
   means that there will be no nations that do not see clearly that the
   return of the people is a heavenly work, and that God did not speak in
   vain by the Prophet. Thus he censures the unbelief of men, who never
   rely on the promises of God, and who treat as fables whatever is said
   by the prophets, till by beholding the actual fact they are constrained
   to yield.

   That the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken. Here we are taught what is the
   true method of correcting our unbelief; that is, to be employed in
   meditating on the promises of God, and to have our faith strengthened
   by all the proofs of them which he exhibits. Thus it is proper to join
   doctrine with experience; for since the sight of God's works would
   produce little impression on us, he first enlightens us by the torch of
   his word, and next seals the truth of it by the actual accomplishment.

   6. The voice said, Cry. He now describes a different "voice" from that
   of which he formerly spoke; for hitherto he had spoken about the
   "voice" of the prophets, but now he means the "voice" of God himself
   commanding the prophets to cry. Although the voice of the prophets is
   also the voice of God, whose instruments they are, (for they do not
   speak of themselves,) (2 Peter 1:20, 21,) yet this distinction is
   necessary, that we may know when the Lord commands, and when the
   prophets and ministers execute his commandments. There is also a
   beautiful comparison between the two "voices," that we may receive with
   as much reverence what the prophets utter as if God himself thundered
   from heaven; for they speak only by his mouth, and repeat as
   ambassadors what he has commissioned them to declare. Besides, this
   preface gives notice that the Prophet is about to speak of something
   highly important; for, although he everywhere testifies that he
   faithfully delivers from hand to hand what he has received from God,
   yet, in order to obtain closer attention, he states that the voice of
   God has expressly enjoined the mode of speaking which he shall employ.
   Such is also the import of the word Cry, as if he had said that he must
   proclaim this commandment in a clear and loud voice, that it may make
   the deeper impression.

   And I said, What shall I cry? The addition of this question has great
   weight; for the Prophet means that he does not break forth at random,
   and boast of what he appeared to have heard in a confused manner; but
   that he received clear and undoubted instruction, after having waited
   for it with composure. Besides, from the fact itself we may learn that
   there is nothing here that is superfluous, because two chief points of
   heavenly doctrine were to be briefly handled; that, although man is
   smoke and vanity, and all his excellence is deceitful and fading, yet
   believers have the best reason for glorying, because they seek
   salvation not from themselves; and that, although they are strangers on
   the earth, (Hebrews 11:13,) yet they possess heavenly happiness,
   because God unites himself to them by his word; for by renouncing
   ourselves we are led to desire the grace of God. The Prophet knew,
   indeed, what he ought to say; but by this question he intended to make
   a stronger impression on their minds, in order to shew that he and all
   the other servants of God are constrained by necessity to utter this
   sentiment, and that they cannot begin to teach in any other manner,
   though they should put a hundred questions and inquiries; as indeed
   they will gain nothing by choosing to adopt any other method.

   As to the word Cry, I have no objection to view it as denoting both
   boldness and clearness; because prophets ought not to mutter in an
   obscure manner, but to pronounce their message with a distinct voice,
   and to utter boldly and with open mouth whatever they have been
   commanded to declare. Let every one, therefore, who is called to this
   office constantly remember and believe, that he ought to meet
   difficulties of every sort with unshaken boldness, such as was always
   manifested both by prophets and by apostles.

   "Wo to me," says Paul, "if I do not preach the gospel; for necessity is
   laid on me."
   (1 Corinthians 9:16.)

   All flesh is grass. First, it ought to be observed, that he does not
   speak merely of the frailty of human life, but extends the discourse
   farther, so as to reduce to nothing all the excellence which men think
   that they possess. David indeed compares this life to grass, (Psalm
   103:15,) because it is fading and transitory; but the context shews
   that the Prophet does not speak only of the outward man, but includes
   the gifts of the mind, of which men are exceedingly proud, such as
   prudence, courage, acuteness, judgment, skill in the transactions of
   business, in which they think that they excel other animals; and this
   is more fully expressed by that which immediately follows --

   All the grace of it. Some translate chsdv (chasdo) "his glory;" others,
   "his kindness;" but I have preferred the word "grace," by which I mean
   everything that procures honor and esteem to men. Yet a passive
   signification may also be admitted; as if the Prophet had said, that
   all that is excellent and worthy of applause among men is the absolute
   kindness of God. Thus David calls God "the God of his kindness," (Psalm
   59:10, 17,) because he acknowledges him to be the author of all
   blessings, and ascribes it to his grace that he has obtained them so
   largely and abundantly. It is indeed certain that chsd (chesed) here
   denotes all that is naturally most highly valued among men, and that
   the Prophet condemns it for vanity, because there is an implied
   contrast between the ordinary nature of mankind and the grace of
   regeneration.

   Some commentators refer this to the Assyrians, as if the Prophet, by
   extenuating their power and wealth, and industry and exertions, or
   rather by treating these as they had no existence, freed the minds of
   the Jews from terror. They bring out the meaning in this manner, "If
   you are terrified at the strength of men, remember that they are flesh,
   which quickly gives way through its own weakness. But their error is
   soon afterwards refuted by the context, in which the Prophet expressly
   applies it to the Jews themselves. We ought carefully to observe that
   man, with his faculties, on account of which he is accustomed to value
   himself so highly, is wholly compared to a flower. All men are fully
   convinced of the frailty of human life, and on this subject heathen
   writers have argued at great length; but it is far more difficult to
   root out the confidence which men entertain through a false opinion of
   their wisdom; for, if they imagine that they have either knowledge or
   industry beyond others, they think that they have a right to glory in
   them. But he shews that in man there is nothing so excellent as not to
   fade quickly and perish.

   As the flower of the field. The Prophet seems, as if in mockery, to add
   a sort of correction; for a flower is something more than grass. It is,
   therefore, an acknowledgment, that, although men have some shining
   qualities, like flowers in the fields, yet the beauty and lustre
   quickly vanish and pass away, so that it is useless for them to flatter
   or applaud themselves on account of this idle and deceitful splendor.

   7. The grass is withered. This might be understood to relate to the
   beauty of the fields, which is spoiled by a single gust of wind, as it
   is said, (Psalm 103:16,) "As soon as the wind passeth over it, it is
   gone;" for we know that the wind is called "the Spirit of God" in other
   passages. But I am more inclined to think that the metaphor is adapted
   to the present subject; for otherwise the application of it would be
   somewhat obscure. The Prophet therefore explains what object he has in
   view, by saying that men, with all their glory, are nothing else than
   grass; theft is, because the Spirit of God will quickly carry them away
   by a single breath.

   Because the Spirit of Jehovah hath blown upon it. The meaning may be
   thus explained, "However illustrious are the gifts with which men are
   endowed, yet as soon as the Spirit of God shall blow upon them, they
   shall feel that they are nothing." For the false confidence with which
   they intoxicate themselves springs from this source, that they do not
   appear before God, but, in order to indulge freely in flattering
   themselves, creep into places of concealment. That they may no longer
   deceive themselves by a foolish delight in falsehood, the Prophet drags
   them into the presence of God, and admits that apparently they
   flourish, when they have been withdrawn from God; but as soon as the
   Lord has breathed upon them, all their strength and beauty perish and
   decay.

   But it may be thought that he assigns to "the Spirit of God" an office
   which is greatly at variance with his nature; for it belongs to him "to
   renew by his power the face of the earth." (Psalm 104:30.) On the other
   hand, if the Lord withdraw his Spirit, all is reduced to nothing. Here
   Isaiah asserts what is exceedingly different, and appears to contradict
   David. But there is no absurdity in saying that all things are renewed
   by the power of the Spirit, and again, that what formerly appeared to
   be something is reduced to nothing; for we are nothing but in God, and,
   in order that we may begin to be something in him, we must first be
   convinced, and made thoroughly to know, that we are vanity. Therefore
   does the Lord breathe upon us, that we may know that of ourselves we
   are nothing.

   Surely the people is grass. The Prophet added this, that all might know
   that he was not speaking of foreigners, but of that people which
   gloried in the name of God; for the Jews might have thought that they
   were more excellent, and held a higher rank than other men, and that on
   this account they ought to be exempted from the common lot. He
   therefore addresses theta expressly and by name, that they may not
   claim anything for themselves above others; as if he had said, that
   they would act wisely if, through a conviction of their poverty, they
   should cast away all confidence in themselves. In a word, the Prophet,
   after having mentioned consolation, shews in what way men must be
   prepared to receive it; for they are not capable of it till they have
   formerly been reduced to nothing. Our hardness must therefore be
   softened, our haughtiness must be east down and laid low, our boasting
   must be put to shame, and our hearts must be subdued and humbled, if we
   wish to receive with any advantage the consolations which the prophets
   bring to us by the command of God.

   8. The grass withereth. This repetition is again added for the purpose
   of bringing to nought the glory of the flesh, but at the same time
   contains within itself a highly valuable consolation, that God, when he
   has cast down his people, immediately raises up and restores them. The
   context therefore runs thus: "The grass indeed withereth and perisheth,
   but the word of the Lord endureth for ever." After having learned how
   empty and destitute we are of all blessings, how transitory and fading
   is the glory of the flesh, the only consolation left for us, that we
   may be raised up by the word of the Lord, as by an outstretched hand,
   is, that we are frail and fading, but that the word of the Lord is
   durable and eternal, and, in a word, that the life which we need is
   offered to us from another quarter.

   But the word of our God shall stand for ever. This passage comprehends
   the whole Gospel in few words; for it consists of an acknowledgment of
   our misery, poverty, and emptiness, that, being sincerely humbled, we
   may fly to God, by whom alone we shall be perfectly restored. Let not
   men therefore faint or be discouraged by the knowledge of their
   nakedness and emptiness; for the eternal word is exhibited to them by
   which they may be abundantly supported and upheld. We are likewise
   taught that we ought not to seek consolation from any other source than
   from eternity, which ought not to be sought anywhere else than in God;
   since nothing that is firm or durable will be found on the earth.
   Nothing is more foolish than to rest satisfied with the present state,
   which we see to be fleeting; and every man is mistaken who hopes to be
   able to obtain perfect happiness till he has ascended to God, whom the
   Scripture calls eternal, in order that we may know that life flows to
   us from him; and indeed he adopts us to be his children on this
   condition, to make us partakers of his immortality.

   But this would be of no avail, if the manner of seeking him were not
   pointed out; and therefore he exhibits the word, from which we must not
   in any respect turn aside; for if we make the smallest departure from
   it, we shall be involved in strange labyrinths, and shall find no way
   of extricating ourselves. Now, the word is called eternal, not merely
   in itself, but in us; and this ought to be particularly observed,
   because otherwise we could obtain no consolation. And thus Peter, a
   faithful expounder of this passage, applies it to us, when he says that
   "we are regenerated by this incorruptible seed, that is," says he, "by
   the word which is preached." (1 Peter 1:23, 25.) Hence we infer, what I
   mentioned a little before, that life is prepared for the dead who shall
   come thirsting to the fountain that is exhibited to them; for the power
   which is hid in God is revealed to us by the word.

   9. Ascend on the high mountain. He proceeds with the same subject; for
   the Lord, having formerly promised that he would give prophets who
   should soothe the grief and fear of the people by promises, now
   commands that this consolation shall be more widely spread; because it
   is his pleasure to diffuse his grace throughout the whole of Judea.

   Lift up thy voice aloud, O Jerusalem. Formerly he had given to
   Jerusalem, and Zion the hope of this joyful message; now he commands
   that the same voice shall be spread and shall be heard through other
   cities, and, for this reason, gives orders that the loud voice shall be
   lifted up, and proclaimed from a lofty place. Although by the words
   "Zion" and "Jerusalem" he means the same thing, yet the repetition is
   emphatic; for he shews that one city excels all other cities, for no
   other reason than because God hath chosen it to be his sanctuary.

   That bringest tidings. He gives to the city this appellation, because
   there the priests and Levites were instructed according to the
   injunctions of the Law, that they might be the teachers of the whole
   people, and by their labors might spread the doctrine of salvation.
   (Malachi 2:7.) Yet we ought carefully to observe this commendation
   which God bestows on his Church, that it may not be without a clear
   mark of distinction; for an assembly in which the preaching of heavenly
   doctrine is not heard does not deserve to be reckoned a Church. In this
   sense also, Paul calls it (1 Timothy 3:15) "the pillar and foundation
   of the truth;" for although God might have governed us by himself, and
   without the agency of men, yet he has assigned this office to his
   Church, and has committed to it the invaluable treasure of his Word.
   For the same reason it will be called in another passage, "the mother
   of all believers." (Isaiah 54:1; Galatians 4:26.) Hence it follows that
   nothing is more absurd and wicked than for dumb idols to boast of the
   name of the Church, as is done in Popery.

   We are likewise taught, that the Church has not been instructed by God,
   in order that she may keep her knowledge hidden within herself, but
   that she may publish what she has learned. Besides, he commands that
   grace shall be freely and boldly proclaimed, that prophets and teachers
   may not speak with timidity, as if it were a doubtful matter, but may
   shew that they are fully convinced of the certainty of those things
   which they promise, because they know well that "God, who cannot lie,"
   (Titus 1:2,) is the Author of them. He enjoins the witnesses of his
   grace to proceed from Zion, that they may fill with joy the whole of
   Judea.

   Behold your God! This expression includes the sum of our happiness,
   which consists solely in the presence of God. It brings along with it
   an abundance of all blessings; and if we are destitute of it, we must
   be utterly miserable and wretched; and although blessings of every kind
   are richly enjoyed by us, yet if we are estranged from God, everything
   must tend to our destruction. From this circumstance it ought also to
   be remarked, that nothing is more opposite to faith than to estimate by
   the present appearances of things what God declares by his prophets,
   who at that time must have been struck dumb, had they not raised their
   views above the world, and thus, through the power of unshaken boldness
   and perseverance, dared to draw others along with them, that they might
   cherish good hopes when matters were at the worst. And indeed when
   wicked men and wickedness prevail, the greater the terror that is
   spread all around, and the greater the seeming wretchedness of the
   Church, the more ought we to extol the grace of God, and to point out
   his presence to believers. [113]

   10. Behold, the Lord Jehovah. He adorns this short sentence by many
   words, because some explanation was needed; and he again uses the word
   Behold for the sake of certainty, in order to impart greater confidence
   to the hearts of good men. Thus he shews more clearly how great
   advantage they derive from the presence of God. And first, he says,
   that he will come with strength, and that strength not unemployed, but
   accompanied by such an effect as we shall perceive.

   And his arm shall be powerful to him [114] lv (lo), which we have
   translated to him, is translated by others of himself; or, perhaps, it
   will be thought preferable to translate it, "He is powerful, or reigns
   for himself." The meaning is, that God is sufficient for himself, and
   does not need the assistance of any one.

   Behold, his reward is with him, and his work before his face. By the
   repetition of the words "reward" and "work," he states more clearly
   what has been already expressed; for it is very customary with Hebrew
   writers to express the same thing in two different ways. "Reward" does
   not here denote what is due to merits, but the justice of God, by which
   he testifies that he is a rewarder to all who truly and sincerely call
   upon him. (Hebrews 11:6.) That this is the signification of the word
   skr (sachar) is known to all who are moderately acquainted with the
   Hebrew language. The meaning may be thus summed up: "God will not come
   to be beheld by us as unemployed, but to display his power, and to make
   us feel it;" and thus, instead of the word "work," the word "effect"
   would not be inapplicable. Many persons attempt an ingenious exposition
   of these words, and enter into childish discussion about the words
   "work" and "reward," as if the "work" were a merit on which a "reward"
   is bestowed. But nothing was farther from the view of the Prophet; for
   he repeats the same thing, as we have already said, and declares the
   result of the coming of the Lord, from which believers will derive the
   highest advantage.

   11. As a shepherd. In this verse he declares what is the nature of that
   work of the Lord; for since he works in various and, indeed, in
   innumerable ways, the hearer might have been kept in suspense as to the
   work which God intended to accomplish; and thus the general doctrine
   would have been less efficacious in exciting hope. Though he does not
   describe every part, yet he states in a few words that God has
   determined to protect and guard his Church. On this account he compares
   him to "a shepherd;" and under this designation he expresses his
   infinite love towards us, when he does not refuse to stoop so low as to
   perform towards us the office of "a shepherd." In other passages, and
   even a little before, (Isaiah 34:2, etc.,) he described himself as
   armed with terrible power for the defense of his people, and a little
   after this he repeats the same statement; but here he ascribes to him a
   more amiable character, that believers may sweetly repose under his
   protection.

   He will feed his flock. Now, although by the word "flock" he describes
   an elect people, whom he had undertaken to govern, yet we are reminded
   that God will be a shepherd to none but to those who, in modesty and
   gentleness, shall imitate the sheep and lambs. For this reason we ought
   to observe the character of the flock; for he does not choose to feed
   savage beasts, but lambs. We must therefore lay aside our fierceness,
   and permit ourselves to be tamed, if we wish to be gathered into the
   fold of which God promises that he will be the guardian.

   He will carry them in his bosom. These words describe God's wonderful
   condescension; for not only is he actuated by a general feeling of
   regard to his whole flock, but, in proportion to the weakness of any
   one sheep, he shews his carefulness in watching, his gentleness in
   handling, and his patience in leading it. Here he leaves out nothing
   that belongs to the office of a good shepherd; for the shepherd ought
   to observe every sheep, so as to treat it according to its capacity;
   and especially they ought to be supported, if they are exceedingly
   weak. In a word, God will be mild, kind, gentle, and compassionate, so
   that he will not drive the weak harder than they are able to bear.

   12. Who hath measured? After having spoken of God's friendly care in
   defending his people, he now proclaims his power, and bestows upon it
   all possible commendations, which, however, would produce less
   impression upon us, if we did not attend to the Prophet's design. At
   first sight, ignorant readers would think that the Prophet crowds
   together unfinished sentences, which would be absurd. But if we look at
   his object, he adorns the power of God by a seasonable and elegant
   discourse, which is a true support of our faith, that we may not
   hesitate to believe that he will do what he has promised. Not without
   reason does Paul say that Abraham did not hesitate, because he believed
   that God who had promised was able to perform what he had said. (Romans
   4:20, 21.) In the same sense also he testifies of himself in another
   passage,

   "I know whom I have believed; God is able to keep what I have committed
   to him."
   (2 Timothy 1:12.)

   Such is also the import of those words of Christ,

   "My Father who gave you to me is greater than all."
   (John 10:29.)

   Since, therefore, we ought continually to strive against distrust, and
   since Satan attacks us by various contrivances, it is of great
   importance that the promises of God should be believed by us, to give
   to his power the praise which it deserves. Now, because the restoration
   of the people was beyond belief, it was necessary that godly minds
   should he raised above the world, that they might not view the grace of
   God as limited to human means.

   We see that the Prophet does not merely teach that God is the Creator
   of heaven and earth, but applies to the present subject all that he
   relates concerning God's infinite power; and in like manner it is
   fitted for our guidance. When any adversity befalls us, our salvation
   is hidden, and, as if a cloud had come between, the power of God is
   concealed; we are held in astonishment, as if the Lord had forsaken and
   overlooked us. Let us not, therefore, think that the Prophet speaks of
   some ordinary matter; for if this conviction of the power of God were
   deeply seated in our hearts, we would not be so much alarmed, and would
   not be disturbed by any calamity whatever. On this power, as we have
   said, Abraham leaned, that he might cordially embrace what was
   otherwise incredible; and, accordingly, Paul affirms (Romans 4:18) that
   "he hoped against hope;" for he believed that God was able to do what
   he had said, and did not waver or stagger in his mind. We are thus
   taught to raise our eyes above this world, that we may not judge by
   outward appearances, but may believe that what God hath spoken will
   come to pass; because all things are at his disposal.

   While this conviction is necessary for all, I have said that the Jews
   had very great need of it; for they were pressed hard by very powerful
   enemies, they had no means of escape and no hope of freedom, and
   nothing was to be seen on every hand but a large and frightful
   wilderness. In vain, therefore, would consolation have been offered to
   them, had they not, at the suggestion of the Prophet, raised their
   minds to heaven, and, disregarding the appearances of things, fixed
   their whole heart on the power of God.

   When he names "measures," which are used by men in very small matters,
   he accommodates himself to our ignorance; for thus does the Lord often
   prattle with us, and borrow comparisons from matters that are familiar
   to us, when he speaks of his majesty; that our ignorant and limited
   minds may better understand his greatness and excellence. Away, then,
   with all gross conceptions of God; for his greatness far exceeds all
   creatures, so that heaven, and earth, and sea, and all that they
   contain, however vast may be their extent, yet in comparison of him are
   nothing.

   13. Who instructed the Spirit of Jehovah? What the Prophet had formerly
   taught concerning the Lord's goodness and power he now adds concerning
   his wisdom. And we ought to observe the connection; for, us carnal
   sense wickedly limits the power of God to human means, so it improperly
   subjects his inscrutable counsel to human reasonings. Till God be
   exalted above all creatures, many difficulties present themselves to
   interrupt the course of his works; and, therefore, if we form a
   judgment according to our own opinion, various scruples will
   immediately arise. Thus, whenever we do not see how God will do this or
   that, we doubt if it will take place; because what surpasses our reason
   appears to be impossible. Consequently, as we ought to contrast the
   power of God with our weakness, so our insolence ought to be repressed
   by his incomparable, wisdom.

   By inquiring who guided or directed the Spirit of God, he means that
   God had no need of a teacher, to go before and inform him about things
   unknown. Spirit here denotes reason, judgment, or understanding; for he
   borrows a comparison from the nature of men, that he may more fully
   accommodate himself to them; and I do not think that this ought to be
   understood as denoting the essential Spirit of God.

   14. From whom took he counsel? The Prophet expresses the same thing in
   many ways; that we may know that nothing is more foolish than man,
   [115] when he ventures to lift himself up into heaven, to examine or
   judge by his own ability the works of God. In these words, therefore,
   Isaiah intended to repress more and more the insolence and rashness of
   men. Paul quotes this proof for the same purpose, to deter us from
   judging of the unsearchable counsel of God; for God does not wish us to
   inquire concerning his wisdom but in a sober and becoming manner.
   (Romans 11:34.) There is one difference, that Paul affirms that the
   spiritual mystery of the gospel cannot be fathomed by the human
   understanding, while the Prophet pronounces a commendation, in general
   terms, on the providence of God. But on both points we ought to learn
   humility, and to bring all our senses captive to obedience. All the
   reason or understanding that we have is mere darkness, till we have
   been enlightened by Christ.

   15. Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket. If we wish to
   understand the Prophet's meaning, and to read these words with
   advantage, we must (as I remarked a little before) understand his
   design. He does not celebrate the greatness of God in a detached
   manner, but extols it with the utmost possible adaptation to the
   present subject, that Israelites may know that this shield alone is
   sufficient to protect them, and that they will have no reason to dread
   the efforts, or rage, or violence of the world, if God be reconciled to
   them, and that they may thus learn to betake themselves to God's
   protection; for if they were not fully convinced of this, there would
   arise at every moment various causes of despair. Isaiah thus continues
   the subject, when he says that all nations and peoples are nothing when
   compared with God; for, by simply breathing on them, he will scatter
   like small dust all the inhabitants of the earth. In consequence of our
   being excessively prone and foolishly ingenious in devising reasons of
   distrust, we imagine that everything that Satan does for the purpose of
   hindering our salvation blocks up the path of God. For the purpose of
   correcting this error, the Prophet declares that all the creatures are
   nothing before God, and that all the nations resemble small and
   inconsiderable drops of water. Hence we infer that nothing can be more
   contrary to reason than to exalt creatures for the sake of diminishing
   the power of God, which is high above all, and ought to be so
   acknowledged.

   16. And Lebanon would not be sufficient. That is, "If we must sacrifice
   to God according to what he deserves, neither the whole of Lebanon, nor
   the beasts that graze upon it, would be sufficient for a sacrifice." By
   various forms of expression he dwells largely on this power of God,
   that men, being convinced of it, may care nothing about creatures and
   all their might. Yet the Prophet appears to speak expressly of the
   worship of God, in order to lead readers to cherish deeper reverence
   for him; as if he had said, "Will you dare to measure by your own
   judgment the power of God, whom you will not be prepared, for
   worshipping aright, even though you should amass all the beasts and all
   the wood that are on Lebanon?" Hence some infer that no man can entitle
   himself to the favor of God by sacrifices. This, indeed, is true; but
   we ought, as has been already said, to consider the design of the
   Prophet, who, for the purpose of encouraging the Jews to cherish
   stronger confidence, shews that in comparison of God all things are
   nothing.

   17. All nations. He repeats what he had said, that it is in the power
   and at the disposal of God to destroy "all nations," whenever he shall
   think proper; and that, even while they remain in their present
   condition, they are reckoned as nothing before him. But it may be
   thought absurd for him to say, that "the nations are nothing," since
   God created them, that they might be something. I reply, this is said
   by comparison; for the depravity of the human mind is such that it
   obscures the divine majesty, and places above it those things which
   ought to have been subject to God; and, therefore, when we come to that
   contest, we may boldly declare that everything that is compared with
   God is worthless. Nor does Isaiah speak merely about the nature of men,
   such as it was created by God; but his aim is to abase and restrain
   their pride, when they venture to exalt themselves against God. We know
   that we cannot subsist but in God, in whom alone, as Paul declares, "we
   live, and move, and are." (Acts 17:28.) Nothing is more vain than man;
   and, as David says,

   "If he be laid in the balance with vanity, he will be found to be even
   lighter than vanity." (Psalm 62:9.)

   In the same manner does Isaiah affirm that "the nations" are not only
   "nothing," but "less than nothing." in order to exhibit more fully
   their feebleness and vanity. [116]

   18. To whom then have ye likened God? The Jews were in great danger
   from another temptation; for there was reason to believe that the
   Assyrians and Babylonians would not have obtained so many victories
   without their assistance; and hence they might naturally conclude, "Of
   what avail is it to us to have a peculiar manner of worshipping God
   which differs from other nations; for our enemies fight under the favor
   and protection of heaven, while we are not cheered by any assistance
   from the God whom we worship?" Neither can there be any doubt, that the
   captives were taunted by unbelievers, as is evident from other
   passages. (Psalm 137:3; Lamentations 2:15.) That true religion may not
   be ruined among the Jews on account of the calamity which they had
   sustained, God rises up, and proclaims that a grievous injury is done
   to him, if believers, discouraged by adversity, turn aside to the idols
   and superstitions of the Gentiles. Thus he confirms them in the faith
   of the promises, that they may not sink under the weight of the
   punishments which they endure.

   The Prophet, as we formerly suggested, does not address merely the men
   of his own age, but posterity, who would have a still severer contest
   with the mockeries of the nations whose captives they were, and
   likewise with bad examples and customs; for when, in consequence of
   being mingled with heathen nations, they daily beheld many corruptions
   of piety, it was more difficult for them steadily to persevere. That
   they might not entertain any foolish notion that high prosperity
   attended the worshippers of false gods, the Prophet meets this error,
   and reminds them that God, whom they and their fathers worshipped,
   ought not to be compared with the gods of the Gentiles; for these were
   made by men, and were composed of gold or silver, wood or stone; but
   God created all things; and therefore that the highest injury is done
   to God, not only by comparing his majesty with things of no value, but
   even by not, placing him far above all the angels and everything that
   is reckoned divine.

   When Paul employs this passage (Acts 17:29) as a proof against
   idolaters, or at least quotes the words of the Prophet, he does not
   wrest them from their true meaning. He infers, indeed, from them that
   to frame any image of God is exceedingly wicked, while the Prophet, in
   guarding the Jews against distrust, at the same time condemns the
   superstitions of the Gentiles, and declares that it is inconsistent
   with the nature of God to be represented by painting or by any kind of
   likeness. This shews clearly that Paul's doctrine fully agrees with it;
   for the Prophet, after having shewn that the power of God is infinite,
   since he holds all things in his fist, at length concludes, "To whom
   then will ye liken me? for no image that is formed will have any
   likeness or resemblance to me."

   Or, what resemblance will you appoint to him? This is a useful
   doctrine, and worthy of observation; for were there nothing more than
   this single passage, it would be perfectly sufficient for refuting the
   inventions by which Papists deceive themselves, when they think that
   they have a right to represent God by outward figures. The Prophet
   declares that it is impossible to frame out of dead matter an image
   which shall have any resemblance to the glory of God. He openly rejects
   idols, and does not even speak of the worship of them, but affirms that
   to manufacture and set them up before God is wicked and abominable. The
   Scripture is full of such proofs. Moses warned a people prone to this
   vice,

   "Thou sawest no image or shape in the mountain, thou only heardest a
   voice. See then and beware that thou be not led astray so as to frame
   for thyself any image."
   (Deuteronomy 4:12, 15.)

   In order to know God, therefore, we must not frame a likeness of him
   according to our own fancy, but we must betake ourselves to the Word,
   in which his lively image is exhibited to us. Satisfied with that
   communication, let us not attempt anything else of our own. Other ways
   and methods, such as idols and images, teach us vanity and falsehood,
   and not truth, as Jeremiah beautifully says, "The wood is the
   instruction of vanities," (Jeremiah 10:8,) and Habakkuk, "His graven
   image is falsehood." (Habakkuk 2:18.) When the Lord sometimes compares
   himself to a lion, a bear, a man, or other objects, this has nothing to
   do with images, as the Papists imagine, but by those metaphors either
   the kindness and mercy of God, or his wroth and displeasure, and other
   things of the same nature, are expressed; for God cannot reveal himself
   to us in any other way than by a comparison with things which we know.
   In short, if it were lawful to frame or set up an image of God, that
   would be a point of resemblance to the gods of the Gentiles, and this
   declaration of the Prophet could not be maintained.

   19. The carver prepares a graven image. As public opinion has great
   force, and everything that pleases the multitude passes for a law, the
   Prophet fortifies believers against this error. These words therefore
   convey an anticipation, that the Jews may not be terrified when they
   see the Gentiles laboring with all their might to make idols, for in
   this way they deceive and ensnare each other. But he attacks the
   madness of the whole world, [117] on this ground, that all are impelled
   by such outrageous zeal to the practice of superstition, and every man
   is his own instructor in the formation of idols.

   20. The poor chooseth for his offering wood that will not rot. He
   concludes that no class of men is free from that crime, that the rich
   and poor alike are guilty and condemned; for the rich make their gods
   of gold or silver, and the poor of wood which they had selected. Hence
   he shews that all men are carried away by strange madness, and that
   even though they have not the means, still they desire to have
   something excellent for the worship of their gods. Men wish to enjoy
   the presence of God, and this is the beginning and source of idolatry;
   for God is not present with us by an idol, but by his word and by the
   power of his Spirit; and although he holds out to us in the sacraments
   an image both of his grace and of spiritual blessings, yet this is done
   with no other intention than to lead us upwards to himself. Yet the
   Prophet censures the folly of men, who are so blind as to labor with
   excessive industry and ingenuity in highly adorning their idols.

   21. Do ye not know? After having ridiculed the stupidity and madness of
   the Gentiles, the Prophet turns to the Jews; for we are all prone to
   superstition, and thus we easily fall into it when any example is
   placed before our eyes. In consequence of mixing with the Babylonians
   during their captivity, the Jews were constrained to behold daily the
   basest examples of idolatry, and might be led away to wicked imitation.
   Isaiah therefore anticipates this at an early period, and warns them
   not to be carried away by the sight of such things.

   He asks, "Have they not been taught, and have they not learned who is
   God?" The greater part of commentators think that all the questions
   here put are a repetition of the same truth, namely, that the creation
   of the world shews clearly that nothing can be more inconsistent than
   to seek God in wood and stone, silver and gold. But we may infer from
   the context that there are two clauses. Had he proceeded in his
   expostulation with the Gentiles, he would have brought forward no other
   witnesses than heaven and earth. But because he addresses the Jews who
   had been plainly taught by the Law, he brings forward direct arguments
   to refute them, drawn both from the order of nature and from the voice
   of God. And, first, he puts the question in general terms, "Do ye not
   know?" Next, he adds two methods by which they ought to have
   distinguished between the true God and the false gods. The former is
   drawn from the hearing of the Word, and therefore he expressly says,
   "Hath it not been told you? Have ye not heard?"

   The latter method is borrowed from that magnificent theatre [118] in
   which the glory of God shines above and below. If the discourse had
   been addressed to foreigners and heathens, he would have been satisfied
   with this second demonstration, as we see that Paul also was; for,
   having to do with the inhabitants of Lystra, to whom no knowledge of
   heavenly doctrine had been conveyed, he employs none but natural
   arguments, that "God, by giving rain and sunshine, did not leave
   himself (amarturon) without witness." (Acts 14:17.) But when the
   Prophet spoke to the Jews about true godliness, it would have been
   improper for him to pass by the Law, which rendered them doubly
   inexcusable if, by neglecting it, they profaned themselves with
   unbelievers; for they had been convinced not only by the sight of their
   eyes, but also by the hearing of their ears, which God beat incessantly
   by the preaching of his Law. Since, therefore, from their mother's womb
   they had sucked along with the milk the true knowledge of God, and had
   been taught by their fathers through a long succession of generations,
   the Prophet justly argues that they will be exceedingly ungrateful and
   wicked, if such assistance produce no good effect upon them.

   Hath it not been told you from the beginning? The phrase, from the
   beginning, or "long ago," conveys the idea that not only had they been
   educated from childhood in the pure worship of God, but during a
   succession of ages there had been largely enjoyed by that nation a
   doctrine which would not suffer them to go astray, provided that they
   were attentive; as if he had said, "Ye have not any new God, but the
   same God who revealed himself from the beginning to Abraham, Moses, and
   the rest of the fathers." And indeed it yields no small confirmation,
   that the doctrine which had been continued among believers during so
   many ages must have been ancient. Not that antiquity alone is
   sufficient for establishing the certainty of faith, (for, on the
   contrary, the Gentiles might easily have objected, that their
   superstitions were not less ancient,) but since "from the beginning"
   the authority of the Law had been abundantly ratified, and God had
   testified that it came from him, long experience added no small
   confirmation, when they knew that their ancestors had delivered to
   posterity a form of religion which they could not throw away without
   receiving the stamp of base apostasy. Such a commencement, therefore,
   and such progress quickly remove all doubt. It is one and the same
   faith that has been held by us and by our fathers, for they and we have
   acknowledged the same God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
   same word, the same promises, and the same end, have been exhibited to
   all believers.

   From the foundations of the earth. This is figurative language, in
   which a part is taken for the whole; for a part of the world is put;
   for the whole world. God has exhibited this world as a mirror to men,
   that by beholding it they may acknowledge his majesty, so that it is a
   lively image of invisible things, as Paul explains at great length in
   the first chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. Their ignorance is
   therefore "without excuse;" for they cannot allege that they do not
   know God who has revealed himself in so many ways. (Romans 1:20.) And
   indeed men sin more through insolence and pride than through ignorance;
   for they despise God who manifests himself openly and speaks plainly,
   and their attention is occupied with creatures, and with the most
   trifling matters. Has such contempt any title to be excused? Do they
   not deserve to be blinded, and to adore their own inventions instead of
   God, which we see has happened to almost all? Such punishment is
   unquestionably just and due to so great pride. And if to that knowledge
   which we obtain through the creatures there be likewise added the
   doctrine of the word, we are much less excusable. Isaiah has therefore
   joined both kinds of knowledge, in order to shew that the Jews ought to
   be doubly condemned, if they did not place confidence in God, after
   having received instruction concerning his power and goodness.

   22. It is he that sitteth. He pursues the same subject, though in a
   different manner, and extols the glory and power of God. Why he does so
   we have already in some measure explained. It is because we are so
   prone to distrust, that the very smallest occasion makes us waver; and
   therefore the Prophet is constrained to repeat the same thing in many
   ways, that he may keep our weak and inconstant hearts in the exercise
   of confidence in God. Formerly he spoke of the creation of the world,
   but now he comes to the continual government of it; for God did not
   only for a single moment exert his power for creating the world, but he
   manifests his power not less efficaciously in preserving it. And this
   is worthy of observation; for our minds would be little impressed by
   knowing that God is the creator of the world, if his hand were not
   continually stretched out for upholding it in existence. By the word
   sitteth the Prophet means, that the earth does not remain firmly and
   permanently in its place any further than as it is upheld by the power
   of God; for "sitting" is a metaphorical term which denotes
   "government."

   The inhabitants of which are as locusts. By comparing the inhabitants
   of the earth to locusts, he reminds us that God cannot be confined
   within such narrow boundaries, because "even the heavens (1 Kings 8:27)
   do not contain him;" that we may learn, whenever we mention God, to
   conceive nothing earthly or human as belonging to his incomprehensible
   glory. Besides, this metaphor shews how ridiculous is the blindness of
   men when they claim anything for themselves; for they gain by their
   boastings just as much as if some small creatures, such as locusts,
   would elevate themselves by leaping; but they must immediately fall
   back on the earth.

   Spreadeth it out as a tent. David also employs the same form of
   expression, (Psalm 104:2,) and both speak of the aspect and spreading
   out of the heavens with respect to us; for they do not mean that God
   spreads out the heavens, that he may dwell in them, but rather that
   there may be given to us a place of habitation under them; for while
   the earth sustains, the heavens cover us, so that we have a dwelling
   close and covered on all sides.

   But it may be thought that these metaphors detract greatly from the
   dignity of the subject of which the Prophet discourses, while his
   object is to commend and exalt it to the utmost of his power. What is a
   curtain? What is a tent? I reply, these metaphors tend nevertheless to
   exalt the subject; for it is as if he had said, "that it is as easy for
   God to spread out heaven, as for a man to spread out a curtain." And he
   leaves to every person to consider how great is the difference between
   heaven and a curtain, and what is their size, which any person may
   easily understand. Lastly, there is an implied contrast between
   tabernacles or houses [119] which men are long, and laboriously, and at
   great expense employed in building, and yet which hardly rise to a
   hundred feet, and the immeasurable height of the heavens spread out by
   an instantaneous act of the will of God, which makes abundantly
   manifest how great and how excellent a workman he is.

   23. He bringeth the mighty to nothing. He proceeds in extolling the
   providence of God, by which he governs the whole world, but more
   especially mankind. Already and but a little ago he had begun to remark
   that God did not create the world, so as afterwards to allow it to be
   governed by chance, but that he undertakes the preservation of it, and
   keeps it under his power and authority; but as he deigns to look more
   closely at mankind, so the Prophet selects this department, that by
   means of it he may extol God's providence. The sum of what he says is,
   that God's government extends far and wide, so that he directs and
   governs everything according to his pleasure; but he shews, (what was
   also highly advantageous to be known,) that even in the life of men
   striking proofs of the immediate exercise of the power of God are
   visible, and, not even satisfied with the general doctrine, he brings
   forward one class which ought still more to arouse our attention.

   The governors of the earth as if they were not. [120] Anything that
   happens to the undistinguished mass of common people is despised and
   passed by as unworthy of being observed; but when kingdoms and
   monarchies, or men of high rank, fall from their elevation, it seems as
   if the earth had been shaken; and the Prophet skilfully avails himself
   of such proofs to arouse us. It might, indeed, be supposed that princes
   and magistrates are exempted from the common lot, and are not subject
   to the ordinary miseries of men; for by their splendor they dazzle the
   eyes and understandings of all men. But their lustre is entirely
   dimmed; and therefore the Prophet especially mentions them, and
   declares that the Lord "bringeth them to nothing." And if the hand of
   God is so powerful against nobles and princes, what must we think of
   the common people? Will he not also treat the ordinary crowd according
   to his pleasure, and drive them wherever he thinks fit? Will he not
   either give or take away from them, whenever he pleases, both strength
   and courage?

   24. It is as if they had not been planted. Though the particle 'ph
   (aph) signifies also, yet in this passage it may be more appropriately
   rendered "so that;" and thus the plain meaning will be, "So that you
   may say that they were not planted or sown." It is an amplification of
   what he had formerly said, for he shews that the princes are totally
   destroyed and rooted out, so that no trace of them is left, any more
   than if they had never existed. So long as they remain in prosperity,
   they appear to be so strong as to be beyond the possibility of being
   thrown down by any adverse event, [121] but such changes happen as blot
   out their name and remembrance, so that you would say that they had
   never existed; and we see that this has happened not only to men but
   even to very flourishing kingdoms.

   Since, therefore, great downfalls are so many tokens of God's dreadful
   power, let us learn not to lean on earthly and deceitful supports, but,
   whatever may be the amount of our riches or strength, let us depend on
   him. God does not, as heathen men babble, turn about this world like a
   ball, as if he took pleasure in this game; but whenever any person is
   highly elevated, he never ceases from insolent boasting till he is
   thrown down headlong, so that the judgments of God are always manifest.
   We are also reminded by it, that it is wrong to ascribe to fortune or
   to any other cause the various events that happen; for God was not an
   instantaneous Creator, that would immediately abandon the charge of his
   work, but incessantly applies his hand, so that nothing is done but by
   his will and pleasure. Seeing that various changes thus happen in the
   world, seeing that those things which were thought to be firm and
   stable are transitory and fading, let us turn our minds to that supreme
   providence of God.

   Even while he bloweth on them. Hence he shows how light and trivial
   before God are those things which commonly dazzle our eyes and fill us
   with amazement; for we cannot think of any great king without being
   perfectly alarmed and stupified. But he shows that kings and princes
   are like stubble before God, by whose breath they are driven, as by a
   whirlwind, at any instant that he pleases. We are therefore taught that
   we ought never to be overwhelmed by the sight of any creature, so as
   not to render to God the honor and glory that are due to him. This
   ought to have been carefully considered by the Jews, who would have
   thought that that monarchy of the Babylonians, whose captives they
   were, would never be destroyed, and that they could not be rescued out
   of their hands, if they had not called to remembrance this doctrine,
   that nothing in this world is so durable that it may not be dissolved
   by the breath of God. That they may not despair of their salvation, the
   Prophet reminds them that God, as soon as he shall be pleased to
   thunder from heaven, will crush all that strength in their enemies that
   terrifies them, so that it shall vanish away.

   25. And to whom will ye liken me? He repeats the former statement,
   (verse 18,) by which he said that the Lord would not suffer himself to
   be likened to idols; that the Jews might not in any degree detract,
   from his power, on account of their having been so long held captive in
   the hand of unbelievers, or think that idols are anything on account of
   the prosperity of their worshippers, whom they were compelled to serve;
   for, by reasoning in this manner about the power of the true God and of
   idols, they would have compared him with idols. On this account he
   repeats, as it were in indignation, "To whom will ye liken me?" as if
   he had said, "Will you rob me of my majesty by your comparisons?" For
   although men have various thoughts of God, and transform him according
   to their fancy, yet he continues to be like himself, for he does not
   change his nature on account of the inventions of men.

   Saith the Holy One. He appropriately applies to God the term Holy, by
   which title he indirectly blames or accuses the Jews of base
   ingratitude, if, as they have been set apart by him, they do not
   sanctify him in return. No holiness will be found in the gods of the
   Gentiles; they are the mere inventions of men. A grievous injury
   therefore is done to God, and he is basely degraded from his rank, when
   idols are brought into collision with him, and when it becomes a
   subject of debate if they can do more than God himself.

   26. Lift up your eyes on high. The Prophet appears to linger too long
   on this subject, more especially because it presents no obscurity; for
   he repeats by many statements what is acknowledged by all, that God's
   wonderful power and wisdom may be known from the beautiful order of the
   world. But we ought to observe what I have already said, that we are so
   wicked and ungrateful judges of the divine power, that we often imagine
   God to be inferior to some feeble man. We are more terrified frequently
   by the empty mask of a single man [122] than we are strengthened by all
   the promises of God. Not in vain, therefore, does the Prophet repeat
   that God is defrauded of his honor, if his power do not lead us to warm
   admiration of him; nor does he spend his labor in what is superfluous,
   for we are so dull and sluggish that we need to be continually aroused
   and excited.

   Men see every day the heavens and the stars; but who is there that
   thinks about their Author? By nature men are formed in such a manner as
   to make it evident that they were born to contemplate the heavens, and
   thus to learn their Author; for while God formed other animals to look
   downwards for pasture, he made man alone erect, and bade him look at
   what may be regarded as his own habitation.

   This is also described beautifully by a poet: [123] "While other
   animals look downwards towards the earth, he gave to man a lofty face,
   and bade him look at heaven, and lift up his countenance erect towards
   the stars." [124] The Prophet therefore points out the wickedness of
   men who do not acknowledge what is openly placed before their eyes
   concerning God, but, like cattle, fix their snout in the earth; for,
   whenever we raise our eyes upwards, with any degree of attention, it is
   impossible for our senses not to be struck with the majesty of God.

   And see who hath created them. By mentioning the stars, he states more
   clearly that the wonderful order which shines brightly in the face of
   the heavens preaches loudly that there is one God and Creator of the
   world; and all who shall observe, that amidst the vast number and
   variety of the stars, so regular an order and course is so well
   maintained, will be constrained to make this acknowledgment. For it is
   not by chance that each of the stars has had its place assigned to it,
   nor is it at random that they advance uniformly with so great rapidity,
   and amidst numerous windings move straight forwards, so that they do
   not deviate a hairbreadth from the path which God has marked out for
   them. Thus does their wonderful arrangement shew that God is the Author
   and worker, so that men cannot open their eyes without being
   constrained to behold the majesty of God in his works.

   Bringing out by number their army. Under the word army he, includes two
   things; their almost infinite number, and their admirable arrangement;
   for a small number of persons do not constitute an army, and not even a
   considerable number, if there be not also numerous companies. Besides,
   it is not called an "army," when men are collected together at random,
   and without any selection, and in a confused manner, or when they
   wander about in a disorderly state, but where there are various classes
   of officers, who have the charge of ten, or a hundred, or a thousand
   men, [125] and where the ranks are drawn up and arranged on a fixed
   plan. Thus the wonderful arrangement of the stars, and their certain
   courses, may justly be called an "army."

   By the word number he means that God always has this "army" at his
   command. In an army the soldiers may wander, and may not be immediately
   collected or brought back to their ranks by the general, though the
   trumpet sound. But it is otherwise with God. He always has his soldiers
   in readiness, and that "by number;" that is, he keeps a reckoning of
   them, so that not one of them is absent.

   He will call to all of them by name. The same expression occurs, (Psalm
   147:4,) and in the same sense. Some explain it to mean that God knows
   the number of the stars, which is unknown to us. But David and Isaiah
   meant a different thing, that is, that God makes use of the stars
   according to his pleasure; as if one should command a servant, calling
   him to him by name; and the same thing will afterwards be said of
   Cyrus, whose labors and service the Lord employed in delivering his
   people. (Isaiah 45:1.) In a word, it denotes the utmost submission and
   obedience, when he who is called instantly answers to his name.

   By the greatness of his strength. Those who explain the preceding
   clause to mean that the Lord knows the number of the stars, are also
   mistaken in supposing that by giving them their names is meant their
   power and office. Others explain it, that there is not a star that has
   not its own power and energy, because the Lord gave to them those
   qualities they would always possess. But others connect these words
   with yqr', (yikra,) "he shall call;" as if he had said, "The Lord is so
   powerful that all the stars listen to his commands." But a meaning
   which appears to me to be more appropriate is, that God is so powerful,
   that, as soon as he has issued an order, all the armies of the stars
   are ready to yield obedience. In this we have an extraordinary proof of
   his power, when those highly excellent, creatures unhesitatingly submit
   to him, and by executing his orders testify that they acknowledge him
   to be their Author.

   Not one shall be wanting. The word 'ys (ish) is applied by Hebrew
   writers not only to men and women, but also to other animals, and even
   to inanimate objects, as in a former passage, (Isaiah 34:16,) when,
   speaking of the birds that should occupy those splendid abodes, he said
   that "not one should be wanting," he used the word 'ys(ish). [126]
   These words commend to us the power of God, that we may know that there
   is nothing in heaven or in earth that does not depend on his will and
   pleasure. Nothing, therefore, can be more shameful or unreasonable than
   to compare him to idols, which are as worthless as anything can
   possibly be. [127]

   27. Why wilt thou say? The Prophet now expostulates either with the
   Jews, because they were almost overcome by despair, and did not look to
   the promises of God, by which they ought, to have supported their
   minds; or he makes provision for posterity, that they may not sink
   under any distresses however long continued. The verbs are in the
   future sense, which might also be explained by the subjunctive mood,
   Why wouldst thou say? For Isaiah justly infers front the preceding
   statement, that the chosen people, whatever may happen, ought to wait
   patiently for God, till he give assistance in due time. He argues from
   the less to the greater: "Since God keeps every part of the world under
   his authority, it is impossible that he shall forsake his Church." Yet
   it is probable that at that time there were heard among the people
   complaints, by which they murmured against God, as if he did not care
   about their salvation, or were slow in rendering assistance, or even
   shut his eyes and did not see their distresses. The fault which is now
   corrected is, that they thought that God did not care about them; as
   usually happens in afflictions, in which we think that God has forsaken
   us, and exposed us for a prey, and that he takes no concern about the
   affairs of this world. [128]

   O Jacob and Israel! By these names he calls to their remembrance the
   Lord's covenant, which had been ratified by promises so numerous and so
   diversified; as if he had said, "Dost thou not think that thou art that
   people which God hath chosen peculiarly for himself? Why dost thou
   imagine that he who cannot deceive does not attend to thy cause?"

   My way is hidden from Jehovah. He employs the word way for "condition"
   and cause," and hidden, for "disregarded" or "unknown;" for if God
   delay his assistance for a short time, we think that his care does not
   extend to us. Some explain it differently, that is, that the people are
   here reproved for thinking that they would not be punished for sinning,
   and they think that this sentiment resembles such as, "The wicked man
   hath said in his heart, There is no God." (Psalm 14:1.) But the
   Prophets meaning unquestionably was, "Thinkest thou, O Israel, that the
   Lord taketh no concern about thine affairs?" For he exclaims against
   the distrust of the people, and chides them sharply, that he may
   afterwards comfort them, and may show that the Lord will continually
   assist his people whom he hath undertaken to defend.

   And my judgment passeth away from my God. The word judgment confirms
   our interpretation of the preceding clause; for "judgment" is implored
   in affliction, when we are unjustly oppressed, or when any one does us
   wrong; and God is said to favor and undertake "judgment," or "our
   right," when, after having known our cause, he defends and guards us;
   and he is said to pass by it, when he overlooks us, and permits us to
   be devoured by our enemies. It is as if he had said, that the Jews act
   unjustly in complaining that God has disregarded their cause and
   forsaken them; and by that reproof he prepares them for receiving
   consolation, for they could not receive it while their minds were
   occupied with wicked or foolish thoughts. It was therefore necessary
   first to remove obstructions, and to open up the way for consolation.

   28. Hast thou not known? He repeats the same statement which he had
   formerly made, that the people who had been carefully taught in the
   school of God were inexcusable for their slothfulness, and chides them
   sharply for not having profited more by the doctrine of the Law, and by
   the other means which God had bestowed in addition to that knowledge
   which they possessed in common with the Gentiles. The word know, which
   is more general, is put first; because by many miracles and other
   proofs God had manifested his glory. Next, he asks, Hast thou not
   heard? As if he had said, "If thou hast profited nothing by being
   taught by actions and by word that God is never unemployed, it is
   evident that thou are excessively unteachable."

   That Jehovah is the God of eternity. The Prophet calls him "eternal,"
   and thus distinguishes him from all idols, which endure but for a time,
   and were made by men; and truly, if this were deeply seated in our
   hearts, there would no longer be any room for distrust; for if God is
   eternal, he never changes or decays, eternity being uniformly attended
   by this quality, that it is never liable to change, but always remains
   the same. Since the Jews did not sufficiently believe these things,
   though they had often "heard" them, the Prophet intended to arouse them
   by this reproof, in order to shew that they will be doubly guilty
   before God, if, after having been taught both by his numerous benefits,
   and by the word, they do not render the honor and glory which are due
   to him.

   And is not wearied by weariness, and there is no searching of his
   understanding. Here the Prophet makes two statements; first, that God
   is not wearied in doing good; and, secondly, that no man can explore
   his wisdom. In the former clause he shews that, nothing will hinder God
   from continuing to exercise his kindness; for he is not like men whose
   resources are exhausted by giving frequently, or who are wearied by
   continually bestowing new favors, or who repent of their generosity.
   His kindness is never exhausted; if he was kind to the fathers, he will
   be not less kind and bountiful to posterity. As to the allegation, that
   God very often acts differently from what we think to be best for us,
   the Prophet meets it by saying that his purpose is incomprehensible,
   and warns us that we ought not to murmur, though he does not all at
   once comply with our wishes; because nothing is better adapted to
   cherish our hope than this sobriety, which leads us to consider how
   marvellously God works in preserving us, and thus to submit to his
   secret counsel.

   29. He giveth power to the faint. The Prophet now applies to the
   present subject the general statements which he made; for we have said
   that his intention was to give warmer encouragement to the people, and
   to lead them to cherish better hope. Because the Jews were at that time
   weakened and destitute of all strength, he shews that on this account
   it belongs to God to give assistance to those who were thus exhausted
   and weakened. He therefore magnifies the power of God on this ground,
   that they may conclude and believe that they ought not to doubt of
   their salvation so long as they enjoy his favor. It was indeed to the
   people who were held captive in Babylon that the Prophet looked; but we
   ought also to apply this doctrine to ourselves, that whenever our
   strength shall fail, and we shall be almost laid low, we may call to
   remembrance that the Lord stretches out his hand "to the faint," who
   are sinking through the want of all help. But first, we must feel our
   faintness and poverty, that the saying of Paul, "The power of God is
   made perfect in our weakness," (2 Corinthians 12:9,) may be fulfilled;
   for if our hearts are not deeply moved by a conviction of our weakness,
   we cannot receive seasonable assistance from God.

   30. The youths are wearied and faint. By this comparison the Prophet
   illustrates more powerfully what he had formerly said, that the
   strength which God imparts to his elect is invincible and unwearied;
   for men's strength easily fails, but God's strength never fails. It is
   indeed certain that all the vigor which naturally dwells in us proceeds
   from God; but since men claim as their own what God has bestowed
   generally on all, the Prophet thus distinguishes between the strength
   of men which appears to be born with them, and that strength by which
   God peculiarly supports his elect; for God's kindness, which is
   diffused throughout all nature, is not sufficiently perceived. And thus
   by "men's strength" he means that which is generally possessed by
   mankind, and by "God's assistance," he means that by which he
   peculiarly assists us after our strength has failed; for the Prophet
   speaks of the grace of God which is cormmonly called supernatural, and
   says that it is perpetual, while men can have nothing in themselves but
   what is fading and transitory; that by this mark he may distinguish
   between the Church of God and the rest of the world, and between
   spiritual grace and earthly prosperity.

   And the young men by falling fall. In the former clause he made use of
   the word nrym, (negnarim,) youths, but now he adds vchrym, (bachurim,)
   which means not only that they were "young men," but also that they had
   been selected. [129] The repetition of the same statement may be
   supposed to refer particularly to age, though he means that they were
   persons of the choicest vigor and in the prime of life. With this
   design he recommends that excellent privilege which God bestows on his
   children in preference to other men; that they may be satisfied with
   their lot, and may bear no envy to earthly men, [130] for that strength
   of which they boast. In a word, he shews that men are greatly deceived
   if they are puffed up by confidence in their own strength, for they
   immediately sink and faint.

   He appears to allude to what happens every day, that the stronger any
   person is, the more boldly does he attempt what is exceedingly
   difficult, and the consequence is, that they who are naturally more
   robust seldom live to be old men. They think nothing too hard or
   difficult, they attempt everything, and rashly encounter all dangers;
   but they give way in the middle of their course, and suffer the
   punishment of their rashness. The same thing befalls those who are
   proud of any gift which God has bestowed on them, and are full of
   confidence in themselves; for all that they have received from God is
   reduced to nothing, or rather turns to their ruin and destruction; and
   thus they are justly punished for their insolence.

   31. But they that wait for Jehovah. Hebrew writers employ the phrase,
   "exchanging strength," [131] to denote "gathering new strength," and
   thus "being restored." The Prophet therefore shews, that godly persons,
   who shall hope in God, will not be deficient in strength; and he
   confirms what he formerly said,

   "In rest and silence shall be your strength." (Isaiah 30:15.)

   We must not become agitated, or throw ourselves forward rashly, but
   "wait" patiently. In this passage, therefore, waiting means nothing
   else than patience. Violent men dash themselves to pieces by their own
   eagerness, but the vigor of godly men, though it has less display, and
   often appears to lie buried while they calmly "wait for" God's
   assistance, is refreshed and renewed. We must therefore return to the
   saying of Paul, that

   "the power of God is made perfect in our weakness."
   (2 Corinthians 12:9.)

   We must, therefore be fully convinced of our weakness, that we may
   yield to the power of God. The Jews, who were oppressed by that cruel
   captivity, had great need of this doctrine; but for us also, during
   this wretchedly ruinous condition of the Church, it is exceedingly
   needful.

   They shall raise their wings as eagles. It is generally believed that
   the Prophet uses this phrase in the same sense that the Psalmist says,

   "Thy youth shall be renewed like that of the eagle."
   (Psalm 103:5.)

   It is certain that the "eagle" is very long-lived as compared with
   other birds.

   Aristotle and Pliny affirm that it never dies of old age, but of
   hunger; that is, that when the upper part of the beak becomes too
   large, it cannot take food into its mouth, and for a long time subsists
   entirely on what it drinks. One Zaadias, as all Jews are audacious in
   constructing fables, pretends that the eagle flies upward into the
   region that is near the sun, and approaches the sun so closely, that
   its old wings are burned, and other new ones grow in their place; but
   this is utterly absurd and fabulous. The Prophet means that they who
   trust in the Lord will be vigorous, like eagles, till the most advanced
   old age. But seeing that eagles fly higher than other birds, by which
   they shew remarkable swiftness, which has also given rise to the
   proverb, "An eagle among the clouds," this passage may be understood to
   denote not only long life, but also strength and agility; so that
   Isaiah, after having shewn that their strength is recruited, adds that
   they are more vigorous, and ascend to a great height. Such is also the
   import of what follows, --

   They shall run and shall not be weary. It is as if he had said, that
   the Lord will assist them, so that they shall pursue their course
   without any molestation. It is a figurative expression, by which he
   intimates that believers [132] will always be ready to perform their
   duty with cheerfulness. But it will be said, "There are so many
   troubles which we must endure in this life; how then does he say that
   we shall be exempt from weariness?" I reply, believers are indeed
   distressed and wearied, but they are at length delivered from their
   distresses, and feel that they have been restored by the power of God;
   for it happens to them according to the saying of Paul,

   "While we are troubled on every side, we are not overwhelmed; we are
   perplexed, but are not in despair; we suffer persecution, but are not
   forsaken; we are cast down, but are not destroyed."
   (2 Corinthians 4:8, 9.)

   Let us therefore learn to flee to the Lord, who, after we have
   encountered many storms, will at length conduct us to the harbor; for
   he who hath opened up a path, and hath commanded us to advance in that
   course in which he hath placed us, does not intend to assist us only
   for a single day, and to forsake us in the middle of our course,
   (Philippians 1:6,) but will conduct us to the goal.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [104] "Comme si Dieu n'en cust rien veu." "As if God had not at all
   seen it."

   [105] "Qui comprend en soy le regne de Christ jusqu' a la fin du
   monde." "Which includes the reign of Christ till the end of the world."

   [106] Evangile, c'est a dire Bonne nouvelle.

   [107] "Selon le coeur;" "according to the heart." Our author employs
   both "secundum cor" and "ad cor." -- Ed.

   [108] "La reconciliation avec Dieu." "The reconciliation with God."

   [109] Que nons avons traduit Guerre, pour "le temps," comme s'il estoit
   dit Son temps est accompli.

   [110] "Au chemin d'entre Iudee et Babylone." "To the road between Judea
   and Babylon."

   [111] "Grotius supposes the command at the beginning of the chapter to
   be still continued, (Let every valley, etc.,) and the latest German
   writers give the same construction of this verse, although they make a
   new command begin in the one preceding. The form of the following verb
   vhyh, (vehayah,) though not incompatible with this explanation, rather
   favors the strict interpretation of the future, which is, of course, on
   general principles to be preferred." -- Alexander.

   [112] "Un renonvellement incroyable, ou seconde creation du monde." "An
   incredible renewal or second creation of the world."

   [113] "A ceux qui la veulent contempler en foy." "To those who wish to
   behold it by faith."

   [114] "With strong (hand), or, against the strong." -- Eng. Ver.
   "Against the strong one, that is, against (foreign) nations to punish
   them." -- Jarchi. Vitringa gives the same version, though with a
   different explanation, and quotes the authorities of Junius and
   Piscator, while he states that all the ancient interpreters, among whom
   he enumerates the Septuagint, Jerome, and the Chaldee Paraphrast,
   render the phrase with strength. -- Ed.

   [115] "Que l'homme est plus beste que los bestes mesmes." "That man is
   more a beast than the beasts themselves."

   [116] The ambiguous use of the word "vanity," and of the corresponding
   term in the Latin language, "vanitas," is avoided by our author's
   version; "and in comparison of him they are reckoned less than nothing,
   and what is not." -- Ed.

   [117] "Il s'esleve d'une saincte colere alencontre de la folie
   desesperee des hommes." "He rises in holy wrath against the desperate
   folly of men."

   [118] "De ce beau theater du monde." "From that beautiful theater of
   the world."

   [119] Les maisons.

   [120] "He maketh the judges of the earth as vanity." -- Eng. Ver. "The
   judges (or rulers) of the earth like emptiness (or desolation) he has
   made." -- Alexander.

   [121] "Que le vent d'adversite ne les puisse abattre." "That the wind
   of adversity cannot throw them down."

   [122] "L'apparence d'un ver de terre." "The appearance of a worm of the
   earth."

   [123] "Par un poete profane." "By a heathen poet."

   [124]   "Pronaque quum spectent animalia caetera terram,
   Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
   Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus." Some readers will,
   perhaps, thank me for a translation of the above passage into French
   rhyme, taken from the French version of this Commentary. -- Ed. "Et
   neantmoins que tout autre animal
   Iette toujours son regard principal
   En contre bas, Dieu a Phomme a donne
   La face haute, et luy a ordonne
   De regarder l'excellence des cieux,
   Et d'eslever aux estoilles ses yeux."

   [125] "Mais celle ou il y aura des sergens de bande, capitaines,
   colonels et autres conducteurs." "But where there shall be serjeants of
   companies, captains, colonels, and other officers."

   [126] In the passage referred to, although not 'ys (ish) but the
   feminine form 'sh (ishshah) is used, this does not invalidate our
   author's argument. -- Ed.

   [127] "Qui sont plus vaines que la vanite mesme." "Which are more vain
   than vanity itself."

   [128] "Et qu'il ne se soucie des choses de ce monde."

   [129] "Men in full vigor, picked men, in military language." -- Stock.

   [130] "Aux enfans de ce monde." "To the children of this world."

   [131] "The phrase translated they shall gain new strength,' properly
   means they shall exchange strength;' but the usage of the verb
   determines its specific meaning to be that of changing for the better,
   or improving. The sense is therefore correctly given in the English
   Version (they shall renew their strength')." -- Alexander.

   [132] Les fideles.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 41.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 41:1-29

   1. Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their
   strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near
   together to judgment.

   1. Tacete mihi insulae; et colligant populi vires; accedant, tunc
   loquentur; pariter ad judicium accedamus.

   2. Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his
   foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he
   gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.

   2. Quis excitavit ab oriente justitiam, vocavit eum ad pedem suum,
   dedit coram co gentes, et reges subjugavit; dedit quasi pulverem gladio
   ejus, et quasi stipulam propulsam arcui ejus?

   3. He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not
   gone with his feet.

   3. Persequutus est cos; evasit in pace, semita qua non ingressus est
   pes ejus.

   4. Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the
   beginning? I the LORD, the first, and with the last; I am he.

   4. Quis designavit, et fecit, vocans nationes ab initio? Ego Iehova
   prius, et cum novissimis ego idem.

   5. The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid,
   drew near, and came.

   5. Viderunt insulae et timuerunt; extremi fines terrae expaverunt,
   accesserunt, et venerunt.

   6. They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his
   brother, Be of good courage.

   6. Quisque proximo suo opem tulit, et fratri suo dixit, Sis strenuus.

   7. So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth
   with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the
   sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

   7. Confortavit faber conflatorem, malleo percutiens tundentem vicissim,
   et dixit, Bonum hoc ad plumbaturam; firmavitque clavis, ut non
   moveretur.

   8. But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed
   of Abraham my friend.

   8. At tu Israel servus meus, Iacob quem elegi, semen Abrahae amici mei.

   9. Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee
   from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I
   have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

   9. Quoniam apprehendi to ab extremitatibus terrae, ab eminentiis ejus
   vocavi to, ac dixi tibi, Servus meus es tu, elegi to, et non repudiavi
   to.

   10. Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy
   God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
   thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

   10. Ne timeas, quoniam ego tecum sum; non terrearis, quoniam ego Deus
   tuus sum, qui to corroboro, adhuc (vel, utique) opem tibi feram, adhuc
   to sustentabo dextera justitiae meae.

   11. Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed
   and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with
   thee shall perish.

   11. Ecce pudefient et erubescent omnes qui to provocant; erunt quasi in
   nihilum, et peribunt qui tecum litigant.

   12. Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that
   contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing,
   and as a thing of nought.

   12. Quaeres cos, nee invenies; qui contendunt tecum erunt quasi
   nihilum, et qui tecum belligerantur, quasi consumptio.

   13. For I the LORD thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee,
   Fear not; I will help thee.

   13. Quoniam ego Iehova Deus tuus, apprehendens dextram tuam, ac dicens
   tibi, Ne timeas, ego tibi opitulabor.

   14. Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee,
   saith the LORD, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

   14. Ne timeas, vermis Iacob, mortui Israel; ego auxiliabor tibi, dicit
   Iehova, et redemptor (vel, vindex) tuus, Sanctus Israelis.

   15. Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having
   teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt
   make the hills as chaff.

   15. Ecce posui to in traham; ut tribula nova habens dentes, triturabis
   montes et comminues, et colles in pulverem rediges.

   16. Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
   whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, and
   shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

   16. Ventilabis eos, et ventus toilet, et turbo sparget eos. Tu vero
   exultabis in Iehova, in Sancto Israel gloriaberis.

   17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their
   tongue faileth for thirst, I the LORD will hear them, I the God of
   Israel will not forsake them.

   17. Egeni et pauperes quaerent aquas, quae non apparent; lingua eorum
   siti exarebit. Ego Iehova exaudiam cos; ego Deus Israelis non descram
   eos.

   18. I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of
   the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry
   land springs of water.

   18. Aperiam in editis cacuminibus flumina, et fontes in media planitie;
   desertum ponam in stagna aquarum, et terram vastam in scaturigines
   aquarum.

   19. I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah-tree, and the
   myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and
   the pine, and the box tree together:

   19. Dabo in deserto cedrum, spinum, myrtum, et pinum; ponam in
   solitudine abietem, ulmum, et popu-lure sired.

   20. That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together,
   that the hand of the LORD hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel
   hath created it.

   20. Itaque videant, et cognoseant, cogitent, et intelligant simul, quod
   manus Iehovae fecerit hoc, et Sanctus Israelis creaverit istud.

   21. Produce your cause, saith the LORD; bring forth your strong
   reasons, saith the King of Jacob.

   21. Adeste cansae vestrae, dicit Iehova; afferte firmamenta vestra,
   dicit rex Iacob.

   22. Let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let them
   shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and
   know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.

   22. Adducant, et annuntient nobis quae ventura sunt; priora quae
   fuerunt nuntient, et apponemus cor nostrum; et sciemus novissima eorum;
   et quae ventura sunt praedicate nobis.

   23. Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that
   ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and
   behold it together.

   23. Nunciate quae futura sunt in posterum, ut sciamus vos deos esse;
   quin benefacite, ant malefacite, ut enarremus, et videanus (vel,
   mire-mur) pariter.

   24. Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an abomination
   is he that chooseth you.

   24. Ecce vos estis ex nihilo, et factura vestra ex nihilo;
   abominationem elegit in vobis (homo.)

   25. I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the
   rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon
   princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.

   25. Excitavi ab aquilone, et venit; ab oriente solis vocabit in nomine
   meo; et veniet ad principes, quasi ad lutum, et tanquam figulus
   calcabit lutum.

   26. Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and
   beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that
   sheweth, yea, there is none that dcclareth, yea, there is none that
   heareth your words.

   26. Quis nuntiavit ab initio, ut cognoscamus? Jam ante, et dicemus,
   justus. Utique non est annuntians; utique non audire faciens; utique
   non audiens verba vestra.

   27. The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will give
   to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.

   27. Primus Sioni, Ecce, ecce ipsi; et Ierosolymae nuntium dabo.

   28. For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them, and there was
   no counsellor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.

   28. Aspexi, nec nullus erat; de istis inquisivi, et nullus erat
   consiliarius; interrogavi cos, nec responderunt verbum.

   29. Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing; their molten
   images are wind and confusion.

   29. Ecce onmes vanitas, et defectus opera; eorum; ventus et chaos
   simulachra eorum.


   1. Be silent to me, [133] O islands. Though the Prophet's discourse
   appears to be different from the former, yet he pursues the same
   subject; for, in order to put the Jews to shame, he says that he would
   have been successful, if he had been called to plead with unbelievers
   and blind persons. Thus he reproves not only the sluggishness, but the
   stupidity of that nation, "to whom God had been so nigh" and so
   intimately known by his Law. (Deuteronomy 4:7.) Yet we need not wonder
   that the people, overtaken by many terrors, trembled so that they
   scarcely received solid consolation; for we have abundant experience
   how much we are alarmed by adversity, because amidst; this depravity
   and corruption of our nature, every man labors under two diseases. In
   prosperity, he exalts himself extravagantly, and shakes off the
   restraint; of humility and moderation; but, in adversity, he either
   rages, or lies in a lifeless condition, and scarcely has the smallest
   perception of the goodness of God. We need not wonder, therefore, that
   the Prophet dwells so largely on this subject, and that he pursues it
   in many ways.

   He gives the name of islands to the countries beyond the sea; for the
   Jews, having no intercourse with them, gave to all that lay beyond the
   sea the name of "islands;" and therefore he addresses not only the
   nations which were at hand, but likewise those which were more distant,
   and requires them "to keep silence before him." But of what nature is
   this silence? Isaiah describes a kind of judicial pleading which the
   Lord is not unwilling to enter into with all nations. He demands only
   that he shall be heard in his own cause, and that there shall be no
   confusion or disorder in the proceedings, which would be altogether at
   variance with a court of justice. On this account he commands the
   Gentiles to keep silence, that, when this has been done, he may openly
   plead his cause; for the order of a court of justice demands that every
   person shall speak in his turn; for, if all should cry aloud together,
   there must be strange confusion. [134]

   This reminds us, that the reason why we do not think with so much
   reverence as we ought concerning the power and goodness and wisdom and
   other attributes of God, is, that we do not listen to him when he
   speaks. Men roar and murmur against God; some, swelling with their
   pride, openly despise his word; while others, through some kind of
   slothfulness, disregard him, and, in consequence of being buried in
   earthly delights, take no concern about aspiring to the heavenly
   kingdom. Even now we perceive with what insolence and rebellion many
   persons speak against God. How comes it that Papists are so obstinate
   and headstrong in their errors, but because they refuse to listen to
   God? for if they would listen to him in silence, the truth would
   speedily convince them. In a word, the Lord shews by these words that
   he will be victorious, if men listen to him attentively. He does not
   wish that they shall listen to him in a careless manner, as unjust and
   corrupt judges, having already determined what sentence they shall
   pronounce, are wont to do; but that they shall examine and weigh his
   arguments, in which they will find nothing but what is perfectly just.

   It may be asked, "Does the Prophet now exhort the Gentiles to hear?" I
   reply, these things relate chiefly to the Jews; for it would be long
   before this prophecy would reach the Gentiles. But this discourse would
   be fitted more powerfully to remove the obstinacy of the Jews, when he
   shows that the Gentiles, though they were estranged from him, would
   speedily acknowledge his power, provided only that they chose to listen
   to him in silence. There is greater weight and force in these words
   addressed directly to the "islands" themselves than if he had spoken of
   them in the third person.

   And let the people collect their strength. The Lord defies all the
   Gentiles to the contest, and in a contemptuous manner, as is commonly
   done by those who are more powerful, or who, relying on the goodness of
   their cause, have no doubt about the result. "Let them collect their
   strength and league against me; they will gain nothing, but I shall at
   length be victorious." As we commonly say, "I disdain them, (Je les
   despite.) Even though they bend all their strength both of mind and of
   body, still they shall be conquered; all I ask is, that they give me a
   hearing." By these words he declares that truth possesses such power
   that it easily puts down all falsehoods, provided that men give
   attention to it; and, therefore, although all men rise up to overwhelm
   the truth, still it will prevail. Consequently, if we are led astray
   from God, we must not throw the blame on others, but ought rather to
   accuse ourselves of not having been sufficiently attentive and diligent
   when he spoke to us; for falsehoods would not have power over us, nor
   would we be carried away by any cunning attempt of Satan to deceive us,
   or by the force of any attack, if we were well disposed to listen to
   God.

   As to his assuming the character of a guilty person, in order that he
   may appear and plead his cause before a court of justice, it may be
   asked, "Who among men will be competent to judge in so hard and
   difficult a cause?" I reply, there is nothing said here about choosing
   judges; the Lord means only, that he would be successful, if impartial
   judges were allowed to try this cause. He cannot submit either to men
   or to angels, so as to render an account to them; but, for the purpose
   of taking away every excuse, he declares that victory is in his power,
   even though he were constrained to plead his cause; and, consequently,
   that it is highly unreasonable to dispute among ourselves, and not to
   yield to him absolute obedience; that we are ungrateful and rebellious,
   in not listening to him, and in not considering how just are his
   demands. And, indeed, though nothing can be more unreasonable than for
   mortals to judge of God, yet it is still more shocking and monstrous,
   when, by our blind murmuring, we condemn him before he has been heard
   in his own defense.

   2. Who shall raise up righteousness from the east? This shews plainly
   what is the design of the Prophet; for he intends to assure the Jews
   that they will be in no danger of going astray, if they choose to
   follow the path which he points out to them. And this is the reason why
   he mentions Abraham; for he might have enumerated other works of God,
   but selected an example appropriate to his subject; for, having been
   descended from Abraham, whom God had brought out of Chaldea amidst so
   many dangers, they ought also to have hoped that he would equally
   assist them; since his power was not diminished, and he is not wearied
   by acts of kindness. [135] Because it was difficult for captives and
   exiles, while they were at a great distance from their native country,
   to hope for a return, he exhorts them by a similar example to cherish
   favorable hopes. Having been scattered throughout Chaldea and the
   neighboring countries, they thought that the road which led homeward
   was shut up against them on account of numerous obstructions. But from
   the same place Abraham their father had traveled into Judea. (Genesis
   11:31, and 12:1.) Could not he who conducted one poor, solitary man,
   with his father, his nephew, and his wife, safe and sound amidst so
   ninny dangers, be the leader of his people in the journey? Since,
   therefore, God had called Abraham out of his native country, and
   delivered him from all distresses, this fact drawn from the family
   history ought to have made a deeper impression on his children, that
   the departure of their father Abraham might be a pledge or mirror of
   their future deliverance from Babylon.

   When he calls Abraham righteousness, he does so, not for the purpose of
   extolling the man, but of shewing that God had assigned to him a
   character which belonged to the whole condition of the Church; for he
   was not called as a private individual, but the demonstration of God's
   eternal justice which was given in his calling is common to all
   believers; as if he had said, that in his person the Church had once
   been delivered, in order that he might confidently believe that his
   salvation and the justice of God would be alike eternal. And indeed in
   a single individual we behold the calling of believers, and a sort of
   model of the Church, and the beginning and end of our salvation. In
   short, Abraham may be regarded as a mirror of the justice of God, so
   far as it shines in the affairs of this world. This word is used for
   the sake of amplification, (pros auxesin); for to "raise up
   righteousness from the east," where everything had been corrupted and
   polluted by the most abominable superstitions, was an astonishing work
   of God. If, therefore, such a display of God's goodness and power had
   once been given, why ought; they not to expect the same or a similar
   display in future?

   Called him to his foot. [136] Some interpret this as meaning that
   Abraham, wherever he went, called on the name of the Lord; for as soon
   as he came into any country, he erected an altar to God, that he might
   offer sacrifice upon it. (Genesis 12:7, and 13:18.) This is indeed
   true, but I interpret it differently, that the Lord was the leader in
   the journey to Abraham, who followed him step by step; for when he was
   commanded to depart, no particular country was pointed out to which he
   should go; and thus when he set out he knew not either how far, or in
   what direction he should travel, but God kept him in suspense till he
   entered into the land of Canaan. (Genesis 12:1; Acts 7:3.) When Abraham
   had been called, he immediately appeared, and though he was uncertain
   as to his journey, he listened to the mouth of God, and was satisfied
   with having God for his leader. On this account the expression is
   appropriate, that he followed him "to his foot," because he surrendered
   himself to God to be a footman, like obedient and submissive servants
   who follow the footsteps of their master, though they are uncertain
   whither he is leading them.

   Gave nations before him. This means that although the good man might be
   afflicted and tormented every moment by many anxieties, yet God removed
   every obstruction that could annoy him. Moses does not enumerate all
   the difficulties which Abraham encountered at his departure, but any
   person may conclude that this journey could not be free from very great
   annoyances; for it was impossible for him, when he set out, not to draw
   upon himself the hatred of the nation, and to be universally condemned
   as a madman for leaving his native land, and relations, and friends,
   and wandering to an unknown country. After having come into the land of
   Canaan, he had to do with wicked and cruel men, with whom he could not
   be agreed, because he was entirely opposed to their superstitions. What
   Moses relates shews plainly enough that Abraham was never at rest, and
   yet that wicked men durst not attempt to do anything against him; so
   that when he wished to purchase a sepulcher from the children of Heth,
   they offered it to him freely and for nothing, and acknowledged him to
   be a man of God and a prince. (Genesis 23:6.)

   And subdued kings. The Prophet illustrates the grace of God, by shewing
   that he did not spare even kings, so as to make it evident that he was
   a faithful protector of his servant or vassal Abraham. The history of
   the four kings whom he vanquished and routed is well known, (Genesis
   14:14, 15,) and might be extended to Pharaoh, (Genesis 12:17,) and
   Abimelech, (Genesis 20:3,) who are also mentioned in Psalm 105:14,
   where this subject is handled; for they were chastised because they
   dared to "touch the Lord's Anointed." (Psalm 105:15.) But strictly it
   denotes that victory which he obtained over four kings, (Genesis 14:14,
   15,) who had carried off his nephew Lot, with all that belonged to him;
   for it is very evident from the context that the Prophet does not speak
   of kings or nations that had been soothed, but of armed enemies that
   had been violently made to pass under the yoke.

   As dust to his sword. Lastly, he magnifies the ease with which that
   victory was gained, and thus expresses the highest contempt by
   comparing those kings to dust and stubble; for he subdued them without
   exposing himself to danger. At the same time he reminds us that this
   ought not to be ascribed to the power of man, but to the assistance of
   God; because it is not by human power that victory can be so easily
   gained.

   3. He pursued them. The Prophet again commends, by the greatness of the
   victory, the extraordinary kindness of God. It is of the highest
   importance that he obtained it in a country which was unknown to him;
   for it is difficult and hazardous to pursue enemies in unknown
   countries; and how great is the value of a knowledge of places is
   plainly shewn by history, and daily experienced by those who carry on
   war. That was no obstacle to Abraham; and hence it is still more
   evident, that he was led and assisted by the hand of God to conduct his
   followers courageously.

   4. Who hath appointed? Although Isaiah has exhibited in this passage
   nothing more than the example of Abraham, yet he undoubtedly intended
   to remind the people of all the benefits which the fathers had received
   in ancient times; as if he had said, "Call to remembrance what is your
   origin, whence I raised up your father Abraham, by what path I led him;
   and yet this was not the termination of my favors, for since that time
   I have never ceased to enrich you with every kind of blessings." When
   he asks therefore who he is, he does not speak merely of a single
   performance, but adds other benefits, which followed at various times,
   and which the people ought also to remember.

   Calling the nations from the beginning. This must relate to the
   constant succession of ages. In the Hebrew language dvr (dor) means not
   only "an age," or the duration of human life, but the men who lived at
   that time. Thus one generation is distinguished from another, as
   fathers from their children, and grandchildren from their grandfathers;
   for posterity will call us the former generation, and will call our
   ancestors a generation more remote and ancient. Again, because any one
   age would consume mankind, if it were not renewed by offspring, the
   Prophet shows that God multiplies men by an uninterrupted course, so
   that they succeed each other. Hence it follows, that he presides over
   all ages, that we may not think that this world is governed by chance,
   while the providence of God is clearly seen in the succession of ages.
   But because, in consequence of various changes, the world appears to
   revolve by blind impulse, the Prophet declares by these words that
   those manifold events were known "from the beginning"' of the world,
   which amounts to this, that amidst that variety which time brings, God
   reigns, and accomplishes by a uniform course what he decreed from the
   beginning.

   I Jehovah. At length he asserts more plainly that God is the author of
   these blessings, that Abraham conquered enemies, (Genesis 14:16,) that
   he lived among wicked men without suffering harm, that he put kings to
   flight, (Psalm 105:14,) that the Lord avenged him, when Abimelech
   (Genesis 20:18) and also Pharaoh (Genesis 12:17) had violently seized
   his wife. Besides, he shows that it ought to be ascribed to him, that
   other blessings of various kinds had been bestowed on every generation;
   for his power had been manifested not only to the race of Abraham, but
   to the whole world.

   Am the first, and likewise with the last. This relates not only to the
   eternity of essence, but to the government which he exercises on earth;
   as if he had said, that God does not grow old by any length of time,
   and never will surrender his authority; for he does not sit unemployed
   in heaven, but from his throne, on the contrary, he regulates the
   affairs of this world. But although the world put in his place an
   innumerable crowd of gods, yet he declares that he sustains no loss,
   because he will always continue to be like himself.

   5. The isles saw, and feared. He now shows the excessive ingratitude of
   the world, which, after having perceived the works of God, still
   continued in the same blindness to which it had been formerly
   abandoned. A little before, he had said that he would easily gain a
   victory, if they would only listen to him; and now he adds, that the
   Gentiles knew his power, and yet were rebellious and obstinate. The
   consequence is, that they are altogether inexcusable; because the
   majesty of God was abundantly revealed, if they had not chosen to shut
   their eyes of their own accord. [137] In order, therefore, to take away
   the excuse of ignorance even from the most distant nations, he says
   that they trembled at the sight of his works, and yet returned
   immediately to their natural dispositions, so as to be entangled by
   many errors and superstitions. There is an elegant allusion in the two
   verbs r'v vyyr'v, (rau veyirau) which cannot be expressed in the Latin
   language; but the general meaning is, that they not only were
   eyewitnesses, but also were so deeply convinced, that fear was awakened
   in them by what they knew.

   The farthest boundaries of the earth trembled. It might be objected,
   that the blessings which God bestowed on Abraham could not be
   celebrated throughout the whole world, so as to be known to foreign
   nations. But, as we have said, although Abraham alone was mentioned by
   him, yet he intended also to bring to remembrance other instances of
   his kindness which their fathers experienced, that these might lead
   them to entertain better hope; for not only did he bring Abraham out of
   Chaldea, but he rescued all his posterity from the bondage of Egypt,
   (Exodus 13:16,) and put them in possession of the land of Canaan. He
   says therefore, that the Gentiles had experience of his power when he
   delivered and preserved his people, that they might know that he is the
   only true God; for amidst so many miracles his power was clearly and
   manifestly displayed. In short, he declares that the Gentiles were
   terrified by the wonderful power of God, when he delivered his people;
   for wicked men, when they hear something of that power, are every day
   terrified and filled with amazement, because they perceive that God is
   their enemy.

   Drew near and came. This expression, drew near, is interpreted by some
   to mean, that unbelievers observed more closely the works of God; for,
   when we wish to perceive anything more accurately, we approach nearer.
   Others refer it to the king of Sodom, "who went out to meet Abraham."
   (Genesis 14:17.) But those interpretations are unsuitable, and indeed
   have nothing to do with the subject.

   6. Every one brought assistance to his neighbor. What now follows
   agrees well with what goes before, if you connect this verse with the
   last clause of the former verse, "They drew near, they were assembled,
   every one assisted his neighbor;" so that the meaning is, "Although the
   islands saw and knew my works, so that they trembled at them, yet they
   assembled in crowds to make a league among themselves." Why? That they
   might encourage each other to frame new gods, and might confirm each
   other more and more in their blindness. He therefore aggravates the
   guilt of the Gentiles by saying, that "every one assisted his
   neighbor;" and indeed whoever shall make careful inquiry will find that
   this is the source of all superstitions, that men by mutual consent
   darken the light brought to them from heaven. But although the Lord
   here expostulates with idolaters, yet he does it for the sake of the
   Jews, that they may not fall into the impiety of the Gentiles, or
   permit themselves to be turned aside from God and from sincere faith.
   [138] On this account he brings forward the ingratitude of the
   Gentiles, that the Jews may not imitate it, but may remain steadfast in
   the true worship of God.

   And said to his neighbor, Be courageous. Here we see, as in a mirror,
   how great is the wickedness of men, who profit nothing by considering
   the works of God, and are even rendered more rebellious, and harden
   themselves more and more; for they choose of their own accord to be
   blind, and to shut their eyes against the clearest light, rather than
   to behold God who manifests himself before their eyes. To blindness is
   added rage, in consequence of which they rise up against God, and do
   not hesitate to wage war with him for defending their superstitions; so
   that this vice is not idol worship but idol madness. Isaiah describes
   this madness by saying, "Be bold, act courageously;" for he means that
   men have entered into a base conspiracy, by which they naturally
   encourage and inflame each other to the worship of idols, and to drive
   away the fear of God which his power might have led them to entertain.

   7. The workmen encouraged the founder. This verse is explained in
   various ways, and indeed is somewhat obscure; and even the Jewish
   writers are not agreed as to the meaning of the words. I see no reason
   why chrs (cherish) should be here understood to mean simply a
   carpenter, for it means any kind of workman. [139] The word mhlyq,
   (mahalik,) which means one that strikes, is generally rendered in the
   accusative case; I prefer to render it, in the nominative case. phm
   (pagnam) [140] is generally translated anvil, and by others a smaller
   hammer; but; as it sometimes signifies by turns, that interpretation
   appears to agree best with the context; for the Prophet means that
   workmen, by beating "in their turn," mutually excite each other,
   because by being earnestly employed in the same work, they grow warm,
   and each of them urges and arouses the other, to perform in the
   shortest time what they have undertaken. In short, he describes the
   rebellion and madness of idolaters, by which they excite each other to
   oppose God.

   From this passage and from all histories it is manifest that this vice
   was not peculiar to a single age, and at the present day we know it by
   experience more than is desirable. We see how men, by mutual
   persuasion, urge one another to defend superstition and the worship of
   idols; and the more brightly the truth of God is manifested, the more
   obstinately do they follow an opposite course, as if they avowedly
   intended to carry on war with God. Since religion was restored to
   greater purity, idols have been multiplied and set up in hostility to
   it in many places; pilgrimages, masses, unlawful vows, and, in some
   cases, anniversaries, have been more numerously attended than before.
   During that ancient ignorance there was some kind of moderation; but
   now idolaters, as if they had been seized by madness, run about, and
   are driven by blind impulse. There is nothing which they do not attempt
   in order to prop up a trifling superstition and tottering idols. In a
   word, they join hands, and render mutual aid, in order to resist God.
   And if any person wish to throw back the blame on his brother, he will
   gain nothing; for it adheres to every one in such a manner that it
   cannot in any way be removed. All are devoted to falsehood, and almost
   avowedly devise methods of imposture, and, trusting to their great
   numbers, each of them places himself and others above God. They excite
   each other to the worship of idols, and burn with such madness of
   desire that nearly the whole world is kindled by it.

   8. But thou, Israel, art my servant. He now shews how unreasonable it
   is to confound the people of Israel with the heathen nations, though
   all have lifted up a standard and agree in error, and though the whole
   world be abandoned to impostures; for, since by a calling of free grace
   God had chosen and set them apart, they ought not to have given
   themselves up to the same rage. This is a remarkable passage, and
   teaches us that we ought to be satisfied with our calling, so as to be
   restrained from the pollution of this world. Though corruptions abound,
   and though we indulge freely in every kind of iniquity, yet we ought to
   be restrained by this consideration, that we are God's elect, and
   therefore we are not at liberty to go beyond bounds like Gentiles, and
   ungodly men. "Such were some of you," says Paul,

   "but now you have been washed, now you have been sanctified by the name
   of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." (1 Corinthians 6:11.)

   Indeed, nothing is more unreasonable than that we should wander like
   blind men in darkness, when the sun of righteousness hath shined upon
   us. We ought therefore to consider our calling, that we may follow it
   with all zeal and industry, and, "walking as becomes the children of
   light," (Ephesians 5:8,) may shun that manner of life to which we were
   formerly habituated. For this reason he calls Israel his servant; not
   that the Israelites deserved anything on account of their obedience,
   but because he had set them apart for himself; and accordingly, for the
   same reason he adds --

   Jacob, whom I have chosen. This is a remarkable commendation of
   undeserved favor; as if he had said, "You are indeed my servants, not
   through your own merit, but through my bounty; for by my election I
   have prepared and formed you to be my peculiar people." In short, he
   reminds them that it was not by their own industry that they obtained
   the honor of being called God's servants, and that they did not differ
   from others so as to excel them in any respect, but that it was because
   it so pleased God, who has a right to select this or that person
   according to his pleasure. Yet at the same time he explains what is the
   design of our election, namely, that we may serve God. "He hath chosen
   us," as Paul says, "that we may be holy and unreprovable before him."
   (Ephesians 1:4.) The object to be gained by election is, that they who
   were the slaves of Satan may submit and devote themselves unreservedly
   to God.

   The seed of Abraham. This is added in the third place, in order to
   inform us that election depends on the promise of God; not that the
   promise goes before the election, which is from eternity, but because
   the Lord has bestowed his kindness from a regard to the promise; for he
   said to Abraham,

   "I am thy God and the God of thy seed." (Genesis 17:7.)

   This favor has therefore been continued to posterity, and on account of
   the promise the Lord took peculiar care of that people, as Paul also
   declares that "to them belonged the testament, the promise, and the
   giving of the Law." (Romans 9:4.) Hence also they were called "that
   holy nation," (Exodus 19:6,)

   "God's sacred inheritance, and a priestly kingdom."
   (1 Peter 2:9.)

   My friend. It was an extraordinary honor which the Lord bestowed on
   Abraham, when he called him his friend. To be called "the servant of
   God" is high and honorable; for if it be reckoned a distinguished favor
   to be admitted into the family of a king or a prince, how much more
   highly should we esteem it, when God accounts us as his servants and
   members of his family? But, not satisfied with that, he bestows on him
   even a higher honor, and adorns him with the name of "friend." What is
   here said about Abraham relates to all believers; and Christ declared
   more plainly, "Now I call you not servants, but ye are my friends; for
   servants know not their Lord's will, but to you have been revealed
   secret and divine mysteries, and hence you may know my friendly and
   kind disposition towards you." (John 15:15.) Having therefore obtained
   from God so great an honor, we ought to remember our duty, that the
   more abundantly he has testified his kindness towards us, we may the
   more earnestly and with deeper reverence worship him continually. But
   we ought always to remember that Abraham was God's friend on no other
   ground than that of adoption; as Moses also says that the Jews enjoyed
   their high rank merely through the good pleasure of God, "because God
   loved their fathers." (Deuteronomy 4:37, and 7:6-8.)

   9. For I have taken thee from the end of the earth. Isaiah continues
   the same subject; for we know by experience how necessary it is that
   consolations be repeated when adversity presses upon us; so that it is
   not wonderful that the Prophet dwells so largely on this subject. But
   from one person, Abraham, he passes to the whole nation, mentioning the
   benefits which all of them have received from God. The relative 'sr
   (asher) [141] appears to me to be here put for an illative particle;
   for he assigns the reason why the people ought to be courageous amidst
   adversity. It is because they have formerly experienced his kindness,
   and consequently ought to cherish equally favorable expectations for
   the future. "The ends of the earth" may be understood in two ways;
   either that the people were brought from a distant country, of which
   Abraham was a native, or that God, who embraces within his dominion the
   utmost boundaries of the world, deigned to stretch forth his hand to
   none but a single people.

   From its eminences have I called thee. 'tsylym (atzilim) has been
   generally translated "eminences." Others prefer to take it in the
   masculine gender, as meaning "princes" or "nobles," in a sense not very
   different from the other; for the Prophet extols the grace of God,
   because, passing by very illustrious nations, he has adopted to himself
   a mean and obscure people. Others refer it to the kingdom of Egypt,
   from which the Jews were brought out; for we know how great was the
   renown of that people, and how far superior to other nations they
   reckoned themselves to be in learning, antiquity, nobility, and many
   other accomplishments.

   But I interpret it differently; for I refer it to the election of the
   people, who were chosen out of the midst of other nations far superior
   to them; and therefore I consider m (mem) to mean "from," or "more
   than," so that there is a comparison between the Jews and other
   nations. In like manner also, Moses shews that they were not elected,

   "because they were more or better than other nations, (for they were
   far fewer,) but because the Lord loved them, and determined to keep the
   covenant which he had sworn to their fathers." (Deuteronomy 7:7, 8.)

   Again, he says,

   "Not for thy righteousness, or the uprightness of thy heart, dost thou
   come to possess the land." (Deuteronomy 9:5.)

   Thus, while they were far less than other nations, still they were
   elected; and this shews the greatness of the love of God, and that
   there was no reason why, after having received blessings so numerous
   and so great, they should afterwards distrust so kind a Father.
   Besides, he adds, that a proof of this favor was given to the people in
   the Law; as if he had said that it was not hidden, but, on the
   contrary, was engraven on public tables, when God made a covenant with
   them by giving them the Law; for God did not wish that they whom he had
   taken to be his own people should wander hither and thither, but bound
   them to himself by a promise of salvation.

   And have not cast thee off. This last expression might be thought
   superfluous, and even unseasonable, if Jewish writers had not
   frequently employed this form of speech, which is very emphatic; for it
   denotes the firmness of election, as if he had said, "After having once
   adopted thee, I did not desert or forsake thee, though I had various
   occasions for casting thee off." So great had been the ingratitude of
   the Jews, that he might justly have rejected them if he had not
   resolved to continue to be like himself.

   What is said about them relates also to us; for the saying of Paul
   holds good, that "the gifts of God are without repentance." (Romans
   11:29.) Though he cut off the greatest part of men on account of their
   unbelief, yet he reserves some seed of adoption, that the calling may
   continue in some furrows; for the wickedness of men cannot change the
   election of God. Let us therefore remember that we have been elected by
   God on this condition, that we shall continue in his family, though we
   might justly have been abandoned.

   10. Fear not. The former doctrine having had for its aim that the
   people should rely on God, the Prophet concludes from the numerous
   blessings by which the Lord manifested his love, that the people ought
   not to be afraid. And we ought carefully to observe the reason which he
   assigns --

   For I am with thee. This is a solid foundation of confidence, and if it
   be fixed in our minds, we shall be able to stand firm and unshaken
   against temptations of every kind. In like manner, when we think that
   God is absent, or doubt whether or not he will be willing to assist us,
   we are agitated by fear, and tossed about amidst many storms of
   distrust. But if we stand firm on this foundation, we shall not be
   overwhelmed by any assaults or tempests. And yet the Prophet does not
   mean that believers stand so boldly as to be altogether free and void
   of all fear; but though they are distressed in mind, and in various
   ways are tempted to distrust, they resist with such steadfastness as to
   secure the victory. By nature we are timid and full of distrust, but we
   must correct that vice by this reflection, "God is present with us, and
   takes care of our salvation."

   Yet I will assist thee. 'ph zrtyk (aph gnazarticha) is rendered by some
   in the past tense, "Yet I have assisted thee;" but I render it in the
   future tense, "I will assist thee." I translate 'ph (aph) yet, as it is
   usually translated in many other passages. Yet it is not inappropriate
   to translate it even, and accordingly my readers are at liberty to make
   their choice. If the past tense of the verb be preferred, it will mean
   "moreover" or "also."

   With the right hand of my righteousness. Under the word
   "righteousness," Scripture includes not only equity, but that fidelity
   which the Lord manifests in preserving his people; for he gives a
   display of his righteousness when he faithfully defends his people
   against the contrivances and various attacks of wicked men. He
   therefore gives the appellation of "the right hand of righteousness" to
   that by which he shews that he is faithful and just. Hence we ought to
   draw a remarkable consolation; for if God has determined to protect and
   defend his servants, we ought not to have any terror; because "God
   cannot deny himself" (2 Timothy 2:13) or lay aside his righteousness.

   11. Lo, all shall be ashamed and blush. Here the Prophet expressly
   promises assistance to the Jews against their enemies; for if he had
   merely promised safety, without making any mention of enemies, various
   thoughts and anxieties might have arisen in their minds. God indeed
   promises that we shall be saved, but yet our adversaries prevail, and
   treat us with the utmost scorn and cruelty; where then is that
   salvation which was so freely and abundantly promised? To the general
   promise, therefore, there is likewise added this circumstance: "Though
   the enemies flourish, yet they shall at length be driven back, covered
   with shame and disgrace." Salvation is therefore promised on this
   condition, that we must, in the meantime, encounter enemies and
   maintain various contests with them, that we may not promise to
   ourselves external peace, for we must incessantly carry on war.

   12. Thou shalt seek them. That is, if thou seek them; for enemies are
   not sought, when they have been put to flight; and therefore I think
   that this future ought to be rendered as a subjunctive, "If thou seek
   them, thou shalt not find them; for they shall be destroyed and reduced
   to nothing." Here it ought to be observed that he describes two kinds
   of enemies, one, of those who attack us by open violence, the other, of
   those who attack us by words, that is, who tear us by slanders, curses,
   and reproaches, and who, as if they were defending a righteous cause,
   carry on various controversies with us, and summon us to courts of
   justice, and often accuse us of those crimes of which they have been
   guilty. But these are the stratagems of Satan, and we need not wonder
   that they who are his servants imitate their lord and master. The
   Prophet therefore mentions armed enemies who violently fight against
   the Church, and next brings forward wranglers, who annoy the Church by
   deceit and slander, and by false pretense of justice. We need not
   wonder, therefore, that such accusations are directed against us, and
   we ought not to think it strange, if many unprincipled men in the
   present day sell themselves to Antichrist to slander us; for the same
   thing happened formerly to prophets and other servants of God.

   13. For I am Jehovah thy God. The Prophet had already shewn where the
   hope of salvation ought to be placed, so as to hold out against every
   attack; that is, when we are convinced that God is our God, and is on
   our side. He now lays down the same doctrine, but in different words;
   and yet the repetition is not superfluous, for we know how easily this
   doctrine slips out of our minds, even though it be frequently repeated;
   and it was impossible to bestow excessive commendation on this promise,
   which it is so difficult to root in our hearts. Let us therefore know
   that we shall have a prosperous issue of all our contests, for the Lord
   is present with us; and whenever we are attacked by any severe contest,
   let us learn to look to Him; for if we hesitate and look hither and
   thither, we shall never enjoy peace of mind. When he calls himself our
   God, he not only mentions his power, but gives proof of his goodness,
   which he intends to exercise towards us; for it would not be enough to
   be convinced of the power of God, if we were not equally certain of his
   love; and even when we are terrified by the mention of his power alone,
   his goodness is well fitted to give us peace.

   Taking hold of thy right hand, and saying to thee. He now speaks about
   "taking hold of the hand," and about his voice; for it is of great
   importance to us to believe the signs which God has given us of his
   love, and to connect with them the doctrine which assures us of his
   eternal favor. The word saying is therefore highly emphatic; for we
   must remain in suspense till the Lord speak, whose voice alone can
   remove fear and bring peace. If, then, we desire to have composure of
   mind, and to conquer the vexations which come upon us from various
   quarters, we must pay close attention to his voice, so as never to
   withdraw our mind from it; for they who refuse to hear this voice of
   God, or do not hear it attentively, must be miserably tormented by
   continual doubt and uncertainty.

   14. Fear not, thou worm Jacob, ye dead Israel. He appears to speak of
   the Jews very disrespectfully when he calls them "a worm," and
   afterwards "dead;" but this comparison agrees better with the
   distresses of the people, and is more adapted to console them than if
   he had called them an elect nation, a royal priesthood, a holy tree
   from a holy root, and adorned them with other titles of that kind. It
   would even have been absurd to call them by those high-sounding names
   while they were oppressed by the deepest wretchedness. Accordingly, by
   the word worm he may be viewed as bewailing the disgraceful condition
   of the people, and encouraging them to cherish better hope; for he
   shews that he keeps his eye upon them, though they are mean and
   despised. It is as if he had said, "Although thou art nobody, yet I
   will assist thee, and, by restoring thee to thy former freedom, will
   cause thee to come out of thy filth and pollution."

   Some translate mtym (methim) men, which does not at all agree with the
   context. We are therefore constrained by obvious argument to translate
   it dead, for it is an exposition of the former word by repetition,
   which is very customary among Jewish writers. On this account I agree
   with Jerome, who translates it in that manner, and attaches no
   importance to the circumstance that the first syllable of mtym (methim)
   is here written with Scheva (:) instead of Tzere (..); for points so
   closely allied might easily have been interchanged. [142] The subject
   ought also to be considered; for nothing could be more foolish than to
   put "men" instead of "worms," unless perhaps it be thought preferable
   to render it "mortals."

   But, undoubtedly, God intended that this voice should be heard by
   persons most deeply afflicted, so as to reach even to the grave; for he
   promises, on the contrary, that he will be a Redeemer of "dead men."
   Besides, while the Prophet had in view his own age, he extended this
   doctrine to all the ages of the world. Whenever, therefore, we shall
   see the Church oppressed by the cruelty of wicked men, it will be our
   duty to bring these things to remembrance, that we may believe that the
   children of God, who are trodden under foot by the pride of the world,
   and are not only reckoned contemptible, but oppressed by every kind of
   cruelty and reproaches so that they are scarcely allowed to breathe,
   are held by God in the highest honor and esteem, so that they will soon
   lift up their head; and let every one of us apply this to himself, so
   that we may not be terrified by reproaches, nor by our wretchedness,
   nor by anguish, nor by death itself. Though we resemble dead men, and
   though all hope of salvation has been taken from us, yet the Lord will
   be present with us, and will at length raise up his Church even from
   the grave.

   The Holy One of Israel. By adding these words, the Prophet again
   reminds believers, as he did a little before, of that covenant by which
   Israel had been separated to be God's sacred heritage; and thus he
   imparts courage, that they may not faint or give way on account of
   their wretched condition, when they look upon themselves as "worms" and
   "dead men."

   15. Lo, I have made thee. The Prophet still speaks of the restoration
   of the Church, and promises that she will be so victorious over her
   enemies as to crush and reduce them to powder; and he declares this by
   a highly appropriate metaphor. The Jews, whom he addresses, were nearly
   crushed, but he declares that, on the contrary, they shall crush their
   enemies, so that, after having been delivered, they shall render to
   them what had been done to themselves. It was necessary that this
   should be added, for, if they had not regained new strength, they would
   always have been exposed to the unlawful passions of their enemies; and
   therefore they needed that God should give them strength to repel the
   attacks which were made upon them. Yet Isaiah at the same time declares
   that they shall be executioners of the vengeance of God.

   But it may be thought that in this way he inflames the Jews to be
   desirous of taking revenge. Now, this is quite contrary to the nature
   of the Spirit of God; and, while we are too much inclined to this
   disease, the Lord is so far from treating with forbearance these
   purposes of revenge, that in many passages he commands us to repress
   them; for he exhorts us rather to pray for our enemies, and not to take
   delight in their distresses and afflictions. (Matthew 5:44.) I reply,
   the Prophet here shews what will happen, but neither commands nor
   exhorts us to desire the destruction of our enemies. If it be again
   objected that we ought not only to expect but even to desire what the
   Lord promises, when it tends to his glory and our salvation; I
   acknowledge that this consolation tends greatly to alleviate our
   sorrows, when he promises that he will one day inflict punishment on
   enemies who have cruelly distressed us, and will render to them the
   measure which they have meted out. (Matthew 7:2.) Yet this is not
   inconsistent with the command of God, that we should be kind-hearted,
   and should pity them on account of the evils which they bring upon
   themselves, and bewail their wretched condition, instead of being led
   by cruel dispositions to rejoice in their destruction. (Matthew 5:44.)

   If we embrace this promise with that faith which we ought to cherish,
   we shall bring into subjection all the violence of the flesh, and
   consequently shall first be disposed to endure, and afterwards with
   moderate zeal shall desire the judgment of God. Accordingly, it ought
   to be our first aim to repress and lay aside every violent emotion of
   the flesh, and thus to await with an honest and sincere heart the fit
   season of the divine judgment; and that not so much from a regard to
   our private advantage as that due praise may be given to the justice of
   God. To the same purpose David wrote --

   "The righteous shall rejoice when they shall see the vengeance; they
   shall wash their feet in the blood of wicked men."
   (Psalm 58:10.)

   Not that they delight in their distresses, but because, as he
   afterwards adds, the righteous man receives his reward, and the
   righteous judgments of God are made known in the earth when the wicked
   are punished for their transgressions.

   The Jews, being by nature cruel and eager of bloodshed, seize on these
   promises after the manner of wild and savage beasts, which eagerly
   devour the prey that is offered to them, and, as soon as they smell it,
   are mad with rage. But the Lord does not wish his people to forget that
   kindness which he recommends above all things; for we cannot be his, if
   we are not guided by the same spirit, that is, by the spirit of
   mildness and gentleness. In a word, by this metaphor of "a harrow
   having teeth," he means nothing else than the wretched destruction of
   the wicked, whom the Lord will put to flight by the hand of the godly;
   and that for the purpose of comforting the godly, and not of inflaming
   them with eagerness for shedding blood.

   16. Thou shalt winnow them. The meaning is the same as in the former
   verse, but by a different metaphor; for he compares the Church to a
   sieve, and wicked men to the chaff which is driven away by the sieve
   and scattered in every direction. As if he had said, "Though for a time
   the Gentiles bruise and winnow you, yet a severer judgment awaits them;
   for by their destruction they shall be bruised and driven away like
   chaff." But we ought to observe the difference, because here believers
   are bruised for their good, for they suffer themselves to be subdued
   and placed under the authority of God; while others, who obstinately
   resist and do not suffer themselves to be brought into subjection, are
   scattered by the wind like chaff or stubble, as the Prophet tells us.
   Thus God had struck them with his flails, had bruised and trodden them,
   had winnowed and tossed them about, in order that, when the wheat had
   been well cleansed, he might gather them to himself; but the heathen
   nations he assigns as chaff to the dunghill.

   To this is added, that the victorious Church bruises some unbelievers,
   so that, being purified from their pollution, they obtain a place in
   God's barn; and thus was this prediction fulfilled, whenever by the
   agency of believers some of the Gentiles were subdued, so as to yield
   obedience to the authority of Christ; for they were never invested with
   any earthly power, so as to rule over all his enemies, but on the
   contrary they found it necessary to "possess their souls in patience."
   (Luke 21:19.) But the Lord raised them up like palm-trees bent down by
   so many burdens, so that they not only were safe and sound, but also,
   with unshaken firmness of mind, trod their enemies under their feet.

   It ought also to be observed, that Scripture is frequently accustomed
   to apply to the Church what strictly belongs to God alone. Since,
   therefore, God afflicted the ungodly Gentiles for the sake of his
   Church, he is said to have given them to be trodden under the feet of
   believers, who reaped the advantage. Whenever we read those prophecies,
   our minds ought to be raised to the kingdom of Christ, that, free from
   every wicked disposition, we may observe becoming moderation, and may
   not desire that this bruising should take place before the proper time;
   for it ought to be abundantly sufficient for us, if our Head shall at
   length prostrate his enemies under his feet, that we may share in the
   triumph of his victory.

   But thou shalt rejoice in Jehovah. When he adds that the Jews will have
   cause to rejoice in the Lord, though by this confidence he intends to
   alleviate their grief, yet at the same time he admonishes the godly to
   be modest, that they may not exult with fierceness of mind, if at any
   time it happen that they are raised up by the hand of God, and exalted
   in such a manner as to reduce their enemies under their power; for
   there is nothing to which men are more prone than to become proud and
   insolent when everything happens to their wish. They forget that they
   are men, and blot out the remembrance of God, whom they ought to have
   acknowledged as the author of all blessings. In order, therefore, to
   restrain that immoderate exultation in which the flesh always indulges,
   and by which we often suffer ourselves to be carried away, the Prophet
   adds, "in the Lord," because on him all our glory and all our joy ought
   to rest. In a word, the Prophet exhorts to gratitude, that, the more
   highly God exalts us, the more carefully ought we to repress all the
   vanity of ambition, and rejoice and glory in him alone.

   17. The needy and poor shall seek water. Here he follows out the
   subject which he had begun to handle at the beginning of the fortieth
   chapter; for he describes the wretched and afflicted condition in which
   the Jews should be in Babylon, till at length God should have
   compassion on them and render assistance. He therefore prepares them
   for enduring extreme poverty, by saying that they will be thirsty; for
   this figure of speech, by which a part is taken for the whole, is
   better adapted to express the severity of the affliction. We know that
   nothing gives men greater distress than the want of water when they are
   "thirsty."

   I Jehovah will listen to them. God declares that he will relieve them,
   when they are brought to this necessitous condition; and hence we ought
   to learn to whom this promise belongs, namely, to those who, having
   been reduced to extremity, are as it were, parched with thirst and
   almost fainting. Hence also we see that the Church does not always
   possess an abundance of all blessings, but sometimes feels the pressure
   of great poverty, that she may be driven by these spurs to call upon
   God; for we commonly fall into slothfulness, when everything moves on
   according to our wish. It is therefore advantageous to us to thirst and
   hunger, that we may learn to flee to the Lord with our whole heart. In
   a word, we need to be deeply affected with a conviction of our poverty,
   that we may feel the Lord's assistance. The Prophet unquestionably
   intended, by this circumstance, partly to illustrate the greatness of
   the favor, and partly to advise the people not to lose heart on account
   of their poverty.

   The needy and poor. We ought to observe the names by which the Prophet
   here denominates the people of God. When he calls them "afflicted and
   poor," he does not speak of strangers, but of those whom the Lord had
   adopted and chosen to be his heritage, and whom he forewarns that they
   must patiently endure some severe hardships. Hence we ought not to
   wonder if the Lord sometimes permit us almost to languish through
   hunger and thirst, since he dealt not less severely with our fathers.

   When he says that waters are nowhere to be seen, let us learn that the
   Lord, in order to try our patience and faith, withdraws from us every
   assistance, that we may lean on him alone. Thus, when we look around on
   every side, and see no relief, let us know that still the Lord will
   assist. By the expression, I will listen, he means that God does not
   assist every kind of persons, but those who pray to him; for if we are
   so slothful as to disregard his aid, it is right that we should be
   altogether deprived of it, and, on account of our unworthiness, should
   feel no alleviation.

   18. and 19. I will open rivers. He illustrates the former doctrine in a
   different manner, namely, that God has no need of outward and natural
   means for aiding his Church, but has at his command secret, and
   wonderful methods, by which he can relieve their necessities, contrary
   to all hope and outward appearance. When no means of relief are seen,
   we quickly fall into despair, and scarcely venture to entertain any
   hope, but so far as outward aids are presented to our eyes. Deprived of
   these, we cannot rest on the Lord. But the Prophet states that at that
   time especially they ought to trust, because at that time the Lord has
   more abundant opportunities of displaying his power, when men perceive
   no ways or methods, and everything appears to be utterly desperate.
   Contrary, then, to the hope and belief of all men, the Lord will assist
   his people, that we may not suffer ourselves to be driven hither and
   thither by doubt and hesitation.

   On lofty mountain tops. In order to confirm his statement more fully,
   he promises that he will perform miracles contrary to the nature and
   order of things, that we may not imagine that we should think and judge
   of these things according to human capacity, or limit the power and
   promises of God to these inferior means. [143] The Lord has sufficient
   power in himself, and needs not to borrow from any other, and is not
   confined to the order of nature, which he can easily change, whenever
   he thinks fit; for when he says that he will make waters to flow on the
   tops of mountains, and fountains in valleys, and pools in deserts, we
   know that all this is contrary to the order of nature. The reason why
   he promised these things is abundantly evident. It was that the Jews
   might not think that they were prevented from returning to Judea by
   that vast desert in which travelers are scorched by the heat of the
   sun, and deprived of all the necessaries of life. The Lord therefore
   promises that he will supply them with water, and with everything else
   that is necessary for the journey. Now, these things were fulfilled
   when the Lord brought his people out of Babylon, but much more
   abundantly when he converted the whole world to himself by Christ the
   Redeemer, from whom flow in great abundance throughout the whole world
   waters to quench the thirst of poor sinners. [144] At that time such a
   change took place as could never have entered into the imaginations of
   men.

   20. Therefore let them see and know. While God leads us by all his
   works to adore him, yet when the restoration of his Church is the
   matter in question, his wonderful power is manifested, so as to
   constrain all to admire him. As we have seen elsewhere, and as he will
   afterwards repeat frequently, when he brought back his people from
   banishment, he gave a proof fitted for being remembered in all ages, as
   he declares in this passage that he will do. But because we are either
   sluggish or careless in considering his works, and because they quickly
   pass away from our view in consequence of our giving so little
   attention to them, he repeats the same statement in many forms. We give
   our attention to vain and useless matters, instead of admiring these
   works of God; and if at any time they excite our admiration, yet we
   quickly forget them, because we are speedily led aside to different and
   very unimportant matters. The Prophet therefore arouses us, in order to
   shake off our slothfulness, and to quicken and direct all our senses to
   understand the power of God. On this account he places in the first
   rank looking, which produces certain knowledge, and next adds thought,
   which more fully and abundantly confirms the knowledge.

   It is uncertain whether the Prophet speaks of the Jews, who were the
   citizens of the Church, or of foreigners; but in my opinion we may view
   it as having a general meaning, that in the restoration of the Church
   the hand of God will be visible even to very remote Gentiles, so that
   all shall be constrained to admire the work of God. Yet it is certain
   that the Persians and Medes, after having conquered the Jews, were
   singularly astonished when they heard those passages from the prophets,
   and especially when they beheld the accomplishment of them before their
   eyes; for they knew that such things could not be performed by men,
   though they were not converted to God.

   21. Plead your cause. There was also a necessity that this should be
   added to the former doctrine; for when we associate with wicked men,
   they pour ridicule on our hope and charge us with folly, as if we were
   too simple-minded and credulous. Our faith is attacked and frequently
   shaken by jeers such as the following, "These people hang on the
   clouds, and believe things that are impossible and contrary to all
   reason." Since, therefore, the Jews, in their captivity, would hear
   such mockeries, it was of importance that they should be fortified by
   these warnings of the Prophet; and in order to give greater weight to
   this address, he comes forth of his own accord, for the sake of
   inspiring confidence, and challenges the Gentiles themselves, charging
   them to bring forward everything that could support their cause, as is
   usually done in courts of justice.

   Saith the king of Jacob. When he calls himself "the king of Jacob," he
   defies all idols, and shews that he undertakes the cause of his people,
   so as to be at length acknowledged to have vindicated his glory by
   delivering those who were unjustly oppressed. And yet the godly needed
   to possess a strong faith; for what was the aspect of the kingdom, when
   they were captives and so severely oppressed? This was also the reason
   why he formerly (verse 14) called them "the worm Jacob" and "dead men."
   But they comforted their hearts by that promise by which he formerly
   said that their root was concealed under ground, when he compared the
   people to a tree that had been cut down.

   "A branch shall spring from the stock of Jesse, and a sprout from his
   roots shall yield fruit." (Isaiah 11:1.)

   They beheld by the eyes of faith that kingly power which lay concealed;
   for it could not be seen by the bodily eyes or comprehended by the
   human understanding.

   22. Let them bring them forth. Not only does he attack idolaters, but
   he bids them bring forward the gods themselves along with them; as if
   he had said, "Whatever may be their ingenuity, they will not be
   advocates able to defend so bad a cause." Here we see God sustaining
   the character of an advocate, and speaking in the name of the whole
   nation; for he does not wish to be separated from his Church, which he
   therefore confirms and fortifies against the mockeries of wicked men,
   and other contrivances by which they attack our faith. We ought
   therefore to be of good cheer, when God undertakes our cause, and comes
   forth publicly against idolaters, and, armed with his invincible truth,
   rises up against the idols and puts to silence their vanity.

   In this manner he shews, that by his word he has most abundantly armed
   his elect for certain victory, so that they ought not to hesitate to
   attack and join battle with all unbelievers; and indeed whoever has
   profited, as he ought, by heavenly doctrine, will easily repel all the
   tricks of Satan by steadfast and victorious faith. It is true, indeed,
   that our faith begins with obedience; but submissiveness, by which we
   place our senses in obedience to God, goes before understanding, in
   such a manner that it illuminates our minds by certain knowledge. And
   by this mark the true religion is distinguished from superstitions, for
   it is regulated by a rule which is not doubtful and cannot deceive.
   Idolaters are indeed exceedingly proud of their errors, but all their
   obstinacy proceeds from stupidity, madness, or fanatical violence; for
   if they would soberly and calmly attend to sound doctrine, that pride
   by which they obscure the light of truth would speedily give way.

   It is far otherwise with the godly, whose faith is indeed founded on
   humility, but is not rashly led away by foolish and inconsiderate zeal,
   for it has for its guide and teacher the Spirit of God, that it may not
   go astray from the sure light of the word. Accordingly, when there is
   no rule to distinguish, as the Prophet declares, it is absolute
   superstition. Now, since nothing ought to be rejected at random,
   believers say, "Bring them forth, and we will give our heart to them;"
   not that they whom God has taught ought still to be ready to turn to
   either side, but because superstitious persons can bring forward no
   argument but what is ridiculous. Again, therefore, he points out the
   distinction between stupid obstinacy and true faith, which has its
   foundation in the word of God, so that it can never fail.

   And let them tell us what is to come. We must now inquire by what
   arguments the Prophet maintains the majesty of God; for God claims for
   himself Almighty power and foreknowledge of all things, in such a
   manner that they cannot be ascribed to another without the most
   shocking blasphemy. Hence it is concluded that these things are
   peculiar to the Godhead, so that whoever it be that knows all things
   and can do all things, is justly believed to be God. In this manner,
   therefore, the Prophet now argues, "If the idols which you worship be
   gods, they must know all things, and be able to do all things; but they
   can do nothing either in prosperity or in adversity, and they know
   nothing that is past or that is future; and therefore they are not
   gods."

   Here arises a difficult question. In the writings of heathen authors we
   find many predictions which they received from the oracles of their
   gods, which might lead us to believe that Apollo, Jupiter, and others,
   foreknew future events, and consequently were gods. I reply, first, if
   we consider what was the nature of those oracles which are reported to
   have been uttered by idols, we shall find that they were all obscure
   and doubtful, like that which was given to Pyrrhus, [145] --

   "Aio to AEacida Romanos vincere posse,"

   or that to Croesus, --

   "Croesus Halym penetrans magnam pervertet opum vim." [146]

   By embarrassing ambiguities of this sort did Satan torture the minds of
   men; so as to send away in uncertainty those who were the victims of
   that imposture.

   But we must also believe what Paul teaches, that Satan has received
   power of giving effect to error, that he may deceive all the ungodly
   men who willingly give themselves up to his delusions. (2 Thessalonians
   2:11.) Thus, when they consulted Satan, "the father of falsehood,"
   (John 8:44,) it was not wonderful that they should be deceived under
   the pretense of truth; but it was a most righteous reward of their
   ingratitude. We see that Satan was freely permitted to increase, by
   means of the false prophets, the blindness of Ahab, who took pleasure
   in such delusions. (1 Kings 22:22.) Equally just was it that heathen
   nations, having alienated themselves from the true God, should be
   caught by idle snares, and even drawn to destruction. And here it is
   superfluous to pursue the argument on which Augustine bestows so much
   toil and pains, how far the devils approach to the heavenly angels in
   foreknowledge; for the cause must be sought in something else than in
   their nature. Thus, in ancient times, by giving to wicked teachers the
   opportunity of practising deception, God revenged the crimes of his
   people, not that they excelled in the gift of understanding, but so far
   as they were adapted to this purpose, they freely exercised the
   permission which was granted to them.

   So far as relates to God himself, though his foreknowledge is
   concealed, and is even a deep abyss, yet he plainly enough revealed it
   to the elect people, so as to distinguish himself from the multitude of
   false gods. Not that he foretold everything by his prophets; for the
   curiosity of men is insatiable, and it is not advantageous to them to
   know everything; but because he concealed nothing that is profitable to
   be known, and by many remarkable predictions shewed, as far as was
   necessary, that he takes a peculiar care of the Church; as Amos says,

   "Shall there be any secret that God doth not reveal to his servants the
   prophets?"
   (Amos 3:7.)

   This privilege was wickedly and shamefully abused by the Jews, who
   universally made traffic of their trivial predictions among the
   Gentiles. But the truth always shone so brightly in the heavenly
   oracles, that all who guarded against snares clearly perceived by means
   of it that the God of Israel, and he alone, is God. So far were the
   idols from demonstrating their foreknowledge, that believers, who had
   been taught in the school of God, could no more be deceived by them,
   than a person who had the proper use of his eyes could be made to
   mistake black for white at noon-day. Much less could they ascribe power
   to the idols, since it was evident from the predictions which were
   daily uttered, that God alone directs both prosperity and adversity.
   The Assyrian conqueror rendered thanks to his idols; but God had
   previously forewarned the Jews what would happen, and had even shewed
   plainly that he armed that wicked man for the purpose of executing his
   vengeance.

   23. Do good, or do evil. It must not be supposed that to do evil
   denotes, in this passage, to commit injustice, which is contrary to the
   nature of God; but it means to inflict punishment, and to send
   adversity, which ought to be ascribed to the providence of God, and not
   to idols or fortune. In this sense it is very frequently found in
   Scripture.

   "Is there evil in a city which the Lord hath not done?"
   (Amos 3:6.)

   In like manner Jeremiah accuses the people of not acknowledging God to
   be "the author of good and of evil." (Lamentations 3:38) By "evils" of
   that kind, therefore, such as wars, pestilence, famine, poverty,
   disease, and others of the same kind, the Lord punishes the sins of the
   people, and wishes to be acknowledged as the author of them all. Now,
   Isaiah does not bring forward all the examples and arguments by which
   God could be distinguished from idols, for that would have required a
   very long discourse; but he is at present satisfied with those which
   would give a short and yet clear demonstration; for he has not yet
   concluded his argument.

   24. Lo, ye are of nothing. He now mocks at idols, in order to confirm
   the godly in the belief and worship of one God, when by the comparison
   they see that those who worship idols are miserably deceived and blind.

   And your work is of nothing. Work must here be taken in a passive
   sense, as if he had said that it is a vain imagination, a contrivance
   of no value. But it may be thought that Isaiah speaks inaccurately,
   when he says that idols are of nothing, for they are composed of gold,
   or silver, or brass, or stone, or other materials. The solution is
   easy, for Isaiah did not look at the material, but at the quality, that
   is, the notion of divinity which men erroneously attribute to them.
   Superstitious people do not adore wood, or brass, or metal, viewed in
   themselves, but the majesty which they foolishly attach to the idol;
   [147] and this undoubtedly is nothing else than a vain imagination.
   Hence also Paul, in like manner, declares that "an idol is nothing;"
   for what reality can be ascribed, or what name can be given, to a mere
   image (1 Corinthians 8:4.)

   He hath chosen abomination in you. Some translate abomination in the
   nominative case, and suppose the meaning to be, that the men who choose
   the idols are abominable; but I think that the meaning is different.
   The verb hath chosen, appears to me to be used indefinitely, as the
   grammarians call it, and in that manner it is often used in other
   passages of Scripture; for when the Prophets speak of the generality of
   men, and relate any common or ordinary occurrence, they do not employ a
   substantive. I consider the meaning therefore to be, that men cannot
   frame idols without at the same time framing abomination. This is a
   remarkable passage for abhorring idols and the presumption of men who
   make them, which they cannot do without offering the highest insult to
   God. Some men think that it is amusement, but the Prophet declares it
   to be "abomination," which God cannot endure, and will not permit to be
   unpunished. The word choose points out, as with the finger, the origin
   of idol-worship; for pure religion would never have been contaminated
   by so many corruptions, if they had not dared to make gods for
   themselves according to their own caprice; and therefore it ought to be
   remarked, that all kinds of worship that are the result of "choice" are
   at variance with true godliness.

   25. I have raised him from the north. He again returns to that argument
   which he had briefly handled, respecting the foreknowledge and power of
   God, and shews that to him alone in whom these are found, the name of
   God belongs; and therefore that they are empty idols, which neither
   know nor can do anything. When he says that he "raised him from the
   north," some explain this as relating to Cyrus, and others as relating
   to Christ. But I think that here the Prophet denotes two things; for
   when he says "from the north," he means the Babylonians, and when he
   says "from the east," he means the Medes and Persians; as if he had
   said, "Two changes shall happen that are worthy of remembrance; for I
   will raise up the Babylonians, whose empire I will exalt on high, and
   next shall come the Persians, who shall become their masters."

   Though these events happened afterwards, and after a long interval, he
   shews that they were already well known to him, and appointed by his
   decree, so that the accomplishment of them is a clear proof of his
   divinity. Yet, in the former clause, he threatens punishment for the
   purpose of terrifying the Jews; in the latter he commends his mercy;
   because he testifies that both the captivity and the deliverance of the
   people will be his work, so that it is evident that both foreknowledge
   and power belong to him. Heathens make a division of various offices
   among their gods: Apollo foretells what is to come, Jupiter executes
   it, and another god does something else. But it belongs to God, not
   only to foretell or declare what shall happen, but to arrange
   everything according to his pleasure; for every divine attribute
   belongs to God alone, and cannot be ascribed to another; and this is
   the reason why he claims for himself foreknowledge and execution as
   inseparable.

   When he says that he calls him "from the north," as I suggested a
   little before, he predicts the future captivity of which at that time
   there was no expectation, because the Jews were friends and allies of
   the Chaldeans, and at the same time he prophesies concerning the
   restoration of the people who were permitted by Cyrus to return into
   their native land. Who would have thought, when matters were in that
   state, that such things could be believed? Especially since it was
   after a long interval that they followed; for they happened two hundred
   years after having been predicted by the Prophet. The Lord testifies
   that he is the author of these events, that all may know that the
   Babylonians did not attack them by chance, but that the Lord raised
   them up as scourges for chastising the Jews, and that the Persians and
   Medes did not subdue the Babylonians by their own power, but because
   they were led and prompted by the hand of God. In these words,
   therefore, he describes the greatness and power of God, and so much the
   more plainly by declaring that kings and princes, with respect to him,
   are clay. Hence we see more clearly that the Prophet had regard not
   only to his own age, but to posterity; for these things could not be
   known to the men who lived at that time, but posterity, who had actual
   experience of their accomplishment, understood them better; so that
   none could doubt that it is God alone "to whom all things are naked and
   open," (Hebrews 4:13,) and who directs everything according to his
   pleasure.

   This is a remarkable passage for establishing the full and perfect
   certainty of the oracles of God; for the Jews did not forge these
   predictions while they were captive in Babylon, but long after the
   predictions had been delivered to their fathers, they at length
   recognised the righteous judgment of God, by whom they had been warned
   in due time, and then embraced his mercy, having learned that they
   would be at length delivered by the Lord, who wished to preserve his
   Church, and whom they had found to be faithful to his promises. Hence,
   therefore, we may conclude with certainty, that Isaiah did not speak at
   his own suggestion, but that his tongue was moved and guided by the
   Spirit of God.

   And he has come. [148] When he says that "he has come," the meaning is,
   that all that has been foretold by the command of God will infallibly
   be accomplished. He speaks of a future event, and thus illustrates the
   foreknowledge of God; and when he says that God is the author of these
   events, this relates to his power and might.

   He shall call on my name. To call "on the name of God" means nothing
   else than to undertake anything in obedience to his authority. It is
   true, indeed, that nothing was farther from the intention of Cyrus than
   to be employed in the service of the God of Israel, or to follow him as
   a leader; but the event shewed that God, in a secret manner, led the
   way, so as to conduct him by successive and incredible victories to
   Babylon.

   And as a potter he shall tread the clay. This comparison is added,
   because the power of the Babylonians was so vast that it was
   universally believed that it could not be assailed, and they looked
   upon themselves as invincible. Since therefore the Babylonians,
   trusting to their resources, despised all their adversaries, and were
   elated with pride, the Prophet says, that not only they, but many
   others shall be subdued and "trodden down like the clay." In short, he
   means that the wealth of the Babylonians shall not prevent this change
   from being made, or the Medes and Persians from becoming masters of the
   empire; and, indeed, the propriety of this metaphor was clearly proved
   by the event, when Cyrus, after having conquered so many nations, and
   gained so many brilliant victories, within a short period subdued the
   whole of the East.

   26. Who hath declared from the beginning? Again the Lord attacks idols,
   after having maintained his divinity; for he asks if idolaters can
   produce anything of a similar nature to support their worship; that is,
   if they can bring forward any such instance of foreknowledge or power.
   And because beyond all controversy he could claim this prerogative for
   himself alone, he tauntingly says, "We will acknowledge that he by whom
   such things shall be done is the true God."

   We will say he is righteous. This is the literal rendering, but the
   word "righteous" has an extensive meaning, and sometimes denotes "true
   and approved;" hence the saying, "Wisdom is justified," that is,
   approved, "by her children." (Matthew 11:19.) These are then clear
   proofs of the divine majesty, which demonstrate the vanity of idols,
   because by the disposal of God alone all things are governed, and by
   the slightest expression of his will the mightiest monarchies are
   overthrown. The Lord speaks in the plural number, in order to shew that
   he does not defend his own cause, but the cause of the whole nation. He
   is, indeed, satisfied with his own eternity; but as we are weak, it is
   therefore necessary that it should be proved to us that he is God, that
   our minds may not go astray, or wander in uncertainty, but may rest
   entirely upon him; and therefore to the word is added experimental
   knowledge, that it may more fully support our faith, if it should still
   be liable to waver.

   There is none that heareth your words. He says that the idols are dumb,
   and leave their worshippers in suspense, while he kindles the torch of
   his word, to enlighten his elect people, and lead them forward to
   righteous judgment.

   27. The first to Zion. [149] In this verse God states more clearly that
   he predicts future events to the Jews, in order to encourage them to
   believe; because if prophecies had not their end and use, it would not
   in itself be of very great advantage to know future events. God
   therefore testifies that prophecies are intended by him to promote the
   faith and edification of the Church. It was necessary that this should
   be added to the former statements, that the people might know that
   those examples were exhibited, not only in order to magnify the power
   of God, but that all believers might reap advantage from it; for all
   the instances of the power and foreknowledge of God ought to be viewed
   by us in such a light as will enable us to know that he takes care of
   us, (1 Peter 5:7,) and that he does everything for promoting our
   salvation. Zion is therefore commanded to acknowledge him as the true
   and only God, not merely because he has punished their crimes, but
   because they are restored from captivity, and thus learn that God is
   reconciled to them.

   Behold! Behold! Here we must regard Mount Zion as desolate and
   uninhabited, and Jerusalem as reduced to a wilderness. Hence also
   Jeremiah represents Jerusalem as speaking in the manner that is usual
   with afflicted and distressed women. (Lamentations 1:20.) Thus the Lord
   now exhibits her as a widow and forsaken. Isaiah will afterwards arouse
   her to rejoice as a woman who had formerly been barren, and to whom the
   Lord had given new fertility for bearing offspring. (Isaiah 54:1.) At
   the same time he now declares that he will comfort Jerusalem, at a time
   when nothing was to be seen but what was melancholy and revolting in
   her hideous ruins. Now, the present message is, either that she shall
   give birth to children, though she was long a widow and desolate, or
   that they who had been scattered in distant captivity will return to
   her in vast numbers. With that desolation, therefore, we must contrast
   the restoration which was effected through Cyrus, when it is said,
   "Behold, they come;" and by the word "first," is denoted not only the
   eternal essence of God, but likewise the antiquity of the prediction.

   And I will send a messenger to Jerusalem. He now describes the manner
   in which God informs believers about future events, that is by the
   agency and ministry of the prophets. mvsr(mebashsher) is translated by
   Jerome "Evangelist," or "a bringer of good tidings;" but it literally
   means a "messenger." This makes little difference, however, as to the
   meaning; for it denotes the prophets who should bring the glad and
   cheering message of this deliverance, as God had formerly promised by
   Moses, that he would raise up, in uninterrupted succession, faithful
   ministers who should surpass all the magicians, and soothsayers, and
   diviners. (Deuteronomy 18:15.) For this reason also he formerly
   bestowed on the Church a remarkable appellation, calling her "a bearer
   of tidings," (Isaiah 40:9,) because in the Church the word of God ought
   to sound aloud.

   This tends greatly to the commendation of preaching; for the Lord does
   not descend from heaven to instruct us, but employs the ministry of his
   servants, and declares that he speaks to us by their mouth; and this
   distinguished blessing of God ought to be embraced with our whole
   heart. He had promised in the Law, as I mentioned a little before,

   "I will raise up to you a prophet from the midst of you." (Deuteronomy
   18:15.)

   He now confirms that promise, by saying that there shall never be
   wanting "messengers" to soothe the people amidst their griefs, and to
   comfort them amidst their severest afflictions. Hence also we ought to
   conclude, that there is no condition of the Church in which prophecies
   cease; that is, in which the word of God brings no alleviation of our
   distresses.

   28. I looked, and there was none. After having spoken of himself, the
   Lord returns to idols; for these are continued contrasts by which a
   comparison is drawn between God and idols. As if he had said, "I do
   these things, but idols cannot do them; they have no counsel, or
   wisdom, or understanding; they cannot give an answer to those that ask
   them, and cannot yield any alleviation to the wretched." In this
   comparison we ought to observe that he plainly shews himself to be God,
   first, by the prophets and by their doctrine, and, secondly, by his
   works in a similar manner; and that nothing of this kind is found in
   idols; from which it follows, that they are not gods, and that we ought
   to rely on him alone. Besides, the eyes of men are darkened by
   slothfulness; because they neither inquire, nor consider, nor observe.
   Thus they are stupified by idols, for they are willingly deceived;
   because they would immediately perceive the emptiness of idols, if they
   carefully applied their minds to examine them. This shews that
   idolaters cannot be excused on the plea of ignorance, for they choose
   to be blind and to wander in darkness, rather than to see the light and
   embrace the truth.

   29. Behold, they are all vanity. After having spoken of idols, he makes
   the same statement as to their worshippers; as it is also said,

   "They who make them, and all that trust in them, are like them." (Psalm
   115:8.)

   Thus he shews that all superstitious persons are full of "vanity," and
   have no judgment or reason. They cannot, indeed, believe this; for,
   inflated with pride, they look upon themselves as men of the highest
   ability, and despise us as stupid and ignorant of the affairs of men,
   when compared with themselves. With what pride do the Papists and their
   learned doctors scorn us! With what haughtiness did the Romans in
   ancient times despise the Jews! But we need not spend time on such
   pride, for in this passage God condemns them all for "vanity."

   Their works are a failure. He gives the name of "works" both to the
   images which superstitious men make for themselves, and to all false
   worship, which has no end or measure, and in which every person desires
   to be a master and teacher of religion. He pronounces all of them to be
   a "failure," that is, of no value. He declares this still more plainly,
   when he says, that they are wind and chaos, that is, confusion; for I
   explain thv (tohu) in the same sense that it has in the first chapter
   of Genesis, where Moses says that

   "the earth was at first shapeless and confused."
   (Genesis 1:2.)

   This passage against idolaters ought to be carefully studied; for they
   think that images were appointed to preserve religion, and that minds
   are kindled by the sight of them, as by the visible presence of God.
   They think that they are the books of the ignorant and unlearned, who
   cannot be instructed by the reading of the Scriptures. But the Spirit
   of God here declares that it is a confused and shapeless thing, that
   is, because it disturbs and retains in superstition the minds of men;
   and indeed all true knowledge that exists among men is choked and
   quenched by this worship of idols. In short, he teaches that all
   images, and the homage that is paid to them, and they who have made and
   follow them, are mere vanity, and that we may safely condemn them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [133] "Devant moy" "Before me."

   [134] "He alludes to the method observed in courts of judicature, where
   silence is always commanded to prevent interruption; he calls upon the
   idolatrous nations to appear at the bar with him, and see if they could
   give so convincing proofs of the divinity of their gods as he could of
   his own." -- White.

   [135] "Puisque sa force n'estoit point diminuee, ni sa beneficence
   refroidie." "Since his strength was not diminished, nor his benevolence
   cooled."

   [136] "L' a-il pas appele pour venir apres soy." "Called him to come
   after himself."

   [137] "Afin de ne la point voir." "That they might not see it."

   [138] "De la droite fiance en luy." "From proper confidence in him."

   [139] chrs (charash) denotes any kind of workman, who devotes himself
   to his work, whatever may be the material on which he is employed. It
   is employed particularly to denote a worker in iron,' (Isaiah 44:12,) a
   carpenter,' (Isaiah 44:13,) a worker in stone,' (Exodus 28:11,) and a
   worker in brass,' (1 Kings 7:14.) tsrph (tzoreph) is more definite. It
   is the participle of the verb tsrph, (tzaraph,) which signifies the
   melting and casting of metals;' and hence tsrph (tzoreph) is one who
   melts metals in the fire, purifies them from dross, separates one metal
   from another, and prepares them by the hammer. (Isaiah 41:7, and
   46:6.)" -- Rosenmuller.

   [140] "Him that striketh by turns with him.' phm (pagnam) is not here a
   noun substantive, signifying an anviI, as it has been generally
   understood, but an adverb, denoting that reciprocal action of two
   smiths on the same anvil, of which Virgil speaks. Aen. 8:452." --
   Stocks.

   [141] That is, instead of the usual and natural rendering, "whom I have
   taken," Calvin renders the clause, "because I have taken thee." -- Ed.

   [142] "As the parallelism, seems to require an analogous expression of
   contempt in the next clause, some either read mty (methe) (dead men)
   with Aquila (tethneotes), Theodotion (nekroi), and Jerome (qui mortui
   estis in Israel), or regard mty (methe) as a modification of that word,
   denoting mortals. Vitringa and Hitzig gain the same end by explaining
   it as an ellipsis for mty msphr, (methe mispar,) men of number, that
   is, few men, used in Psalm 105:12." -- Alexander.

   [143] "Aux causes secondes." "To second causes."

   [144] "Des poures pecheurs."

   [145] "Comme celuy qui fut donne a Pyrrhus."

   [146] The former of these hexameters is perhaps the finest recorded
   specimen of that intentional ambiguity which the Pythian and kindred
   oracles so successfully cultivated. It may either mean, "I say that
   thou, the son of Aeacus, canst conquer the Romans," or, "I say that the
   Romans can conquer thee, the son of Aeacus." -- Ed.

   [147] "A l'idole corruptible." "To the corruptible idol."

   [148] "And he shall come." -- Eng. Vet.

   [149] "I, saith Jehovah, am the first that has foretold by my prophets
   to the Jews those things which none of the false gods, and none of
   their prophets could foretell, the destruction of Babylon and the
   return of the banished Jews into their native country." -- Rosenmuller.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 42.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 42:1-25

   1. Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul
   delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth
   judgment to the Gentiles.

   1. Ecce servus meus, innitar illi, (vel, suffulciam ipsum) electus
   meus, in quo sibi placuit anima mea. Posui Spiritum meum super eum;
   judicium Gentibus proferet.

   2. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in
   the street.

   2. Non clamabit, neque attollet, neque audire faciet in plateis vocem
   suam.

   3. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not
   quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

   3. Arundinem quassatam non perfringet, nec linum fumans extinguet; in
   veritate proferet judicium.

   4. He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in
   the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.

   4. Non deficiet, neque frangetur, donec ponat in terra judicium; et
   legem ejus insulae expectabunt.

   5. Thus saith God the LORD, he that created the heavens, and stretched
   them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of
   it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them
   that walk therein:

   5. Sic dicit Deus (vel, potens) Iehova, creator coelorum, et expandens
   cos, dilatans terram, et germina ejus; dans flatum populo in ea
   habitanti, et spiritum ambulantibus in ea.

   6. I the LORD have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine
   hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people,
   for a light of the Gentiles;

   6. Ego Iehova vocavi to in justitia, et tenebo to manu tua; custodiam
   to, et ponam in foedus populi, in lucem Gentium;

   7. To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison,
   and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

   7. Ut aperias oculos caecorum, ut educas ex ergastulo vinctos, et e
   domo carceris sedentes in tenebris.

   8. I am the LORD; that is my name: and my glory will I not give to
   another, neither my praise to graven images.

   8. Ego Iehova; hoc nomen meum; et gloriam meam alteri non dabo, nec
   laudem meam sculptilibus.

   9. Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I
   declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.

   9. Priora ecce venerunt, et nova ego annuntio; antequam oriantur nota
   faciam vobis.

   10. Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise from the end of the
   earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles,
   and the inhabitants thereof.

   10. Cantate Iehovae canticum novum, laudem ejus ab extremo terrae; qui
   descenditis in mare, et plenitudo ejus, insulae et incolae earurn.

   11. Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the
   villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing,
   let them shout from the top of the mountains.

   11. Exclament desertum et urbes ejus, villae ubi habitat Kedar; cantent
   incolae petrae, et e vertice montium jubilent.

   12. Let them give glory unto the LORD, and declare his praise in the
   islands.

   12. Dent Iehovae gloriam, et laudem ejus in insulis annuntient.

   13. The LORD shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy
   like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against
   his enemies.

   13. Iehova tanquam gigas egredietur, et sicut praeliator zelum
   excitabit. Vociferabitur, jubilabit; super inimicos suos roborabitur.

   14. I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and refrained
   myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and
   devour at once.

   14. Tacui a multo tempore, silui et continui me; tanquam parturiens
   clamabo; vastabo, et deglutiam simul.

   15. I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs;
   and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools.

   15. In solitudinem redigam montes et coiles; omnem herbam eorum
   exsiccabo; ponam flumina in insulas, et stagna exsiccabo.

   16. And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead
   them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light
   before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto
   them, and not forsake them.

   16. Et ducam caecos per viam quam nesciebant; per semitas quas non
   noverant faciam cos ingredi; ponamque tenebras eoram els in lucca, et
   obliqua in planum, Haec (vel, Hoec verba, vel, Has res) faciam els, et
   non derelinquam eos.

   17. They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that
   trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods.

   17. Agentur retrorsum, pudefient pudore qui confidunt sculptill, et
   fusili dicunt, Vos dii nostri.

   18. Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

   18. O surdi, audite, et caeci, intenti estote ad videndum.

   19. Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent?
   who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the LORD'S servant?

   19. Quis caecus nisi servus meus? Quis surdus sicut nuntius meus quem
   mitto? Quis caecus sicut perfectus, et caecus nt servus Iehovae?

   20. Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears, but
   he heareth not.

   20. Videndo multa quae non observas; aperiendo aures, at non audiat.

   21. The LORD is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will
   magnify the law, and make it honourable.

   21. Iehova voluntarius propter justitiam snare, ut magnificet legem ac
   extollat.

   22. But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them
   snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a
   prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.

   22. At hic populus direptus est ac conculcatus; illaqueandi in
   carceribus omnes, et in speluncis abscondentur. Erunt in direptionem,
   nec erit qui liberet; in praedam, nee quisquam dicet, Redde.

   23. Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for
   the time to come?

   23. Quis in vobis auribus percipiet hoc? Quis advertet? Quis attendet
   in postcrum?

   24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the
   LORD, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his
   ways, neither were they obedient unto his law.

   24. Quis in praedam dedit Iacob, et Israel exposuit direptoribus? Nonne
   Iehova? Eo quod peccaverimus in eum, nec voluerunt ambulare in viis
   ejus, nec audierunt legem ejus.

   25. Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the
   strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he
   knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

   25. Itaque effudit super eum furorem irae suae, et robur belli,
   Inflammavit eum undique, neque advertit; exarsit in eum, neque posuit
   super cor.


   1. Behold my servant. The Prophet appears to break off abruptly to
   speak of Christ, but we ought to remember what we mentioned formerly
   [150] in expounding another passage, (Isaiah 7:14,) that the prophets,
   when they promise anything hard to be believed, are wont immediately
   afterwards to mention Christ; for in him are ratified all the promises
   which would otherwise have been doubtful and uncertain. "In Christ,"
   says Paul, "is Yea and Amen." (2 Corinthians 1:20.) For what
   intercourse can we have with God, unless the Mediator come between us?
   We undoubtedly are too far alienated from his majesty, and therefore
   could not be partakers either of salvation or of any other blessing,
   but through the kindness of Christ.

   Besides, when the Lord promised deliverance to the Jews, he wished to
   raise their minds higher, that they might look for greater and more
   valuable gifts than bodily freedom and a return to Judea; for those
   blessings were only the foretaste of that redemption which they at
   length obtained through Christ, and which we now enjoy. The grace of
   God in the return of his people would indeed have been imperfect, if he
   had not, at that time revealed himself as the perpetual Redeemer of his
   Church. But, as we have already said, the end of the captivity in
   Babylon included the full restoration of the Church; and consequently
   we need not wonder if the prophets interweave that commencement of
   grace with the reign of Christ, for that succession of events is
   mentioned in ninny passages. We must therefore come to Christ, without
   whom God cannot be reconciled to us; that is, unless we be received
   into the number of God's children by being ingrafted, into his body. It
   will be evident from what follows, that the Prophet now speaks of
   Christ as the First-born and the Head, for to no other person could the
   following statements be applied, and the Evangelists place the matter
   beyond all controversy. (Matthew 12:17-21.)

   He calls Christ his Servant, (kat exochen,) by way of eminence; for
   this name belongs to all the godly, because God has adopted them on the
   condition of directing themselves and their whole life to obedience to
   him; and godly teachers, and those who hold a public office in the
   Church, are in a peculiar manner denominated the servants of God. But
   there is something still more extraordinary, on account of which this
   name belongs especially to Christ, for he is called a "Servant,"
   because God the Father not only enjoined him to teach or to do some
   particular thing, but called him to a singular and incomparable work
   which has nothing in common with other works.

   Though this name is ascribed to the person, yet it belongs to human
   nature; for since his divine nature is eternal, and since he has always
   possessed in it a glory equal and perfectly similar to that of the
   Father, it was necessary that he should assume flesh in order that he
   might submit to obedience. Hence also Paul says,

   "Though he was in the form of God, he accounted it not robbery to make
   himself equal to God, but emptied himself, taking the form of a
   servant," etc. (Philippians 2:6.)

   That he was a servant was a voluntary act, so that we must not think
   that it detracted anything from his rank. The ancient writers of the
   Church expressed this by the word "Dispensation," by which it was
   brought about, they tell us, that he was subject to all our
   infirmities. It was by a voluntary determination that he subjected
   himself to God, and subjected himself in such a manner as to become
   also of service to us; and yet that exceedingly low condition does not
   hinder him from still continuing to possess supreme majesty. Hence also
   the Apostle says that he was "exalted above every name." (Philippians
   2:9.) he employs the demonstrative particle Behold, in order to lead
   the Jews to regard the event as having actually taken place; for the
   objects which were before their eyes might have led them to despair,
   and therefore he bids them turn away their eyes from the actual
   condition of things and look to Christ.

   I will lean upon, him, or, I will uphold him. [151] 'tmk (ethmoch) is
   interpreted by some in an active, and by others in a passive sense. If
   it be taken in a passive sense, the meaning will be, that God will
   "lean on" his Anointed in such a manner as to lay the whole charge upon
   him, as masters commonly do to their faithful servants; and it is a
   proof of extraordinary fidelity, that God the Father will deliver all
   things to him, and will put into his hand his own power and authority.
   (John 13:3, and 17:10.) Yet I do not object to the active
   signification, "I will raise him up," or, "I will exalt him," or, "I
   will support him in his rank;" for what immediately follows, I will put
   my Spirit in him, is a repetition of the same sentiment. In the former
   clause, therefore, he says, I will uphold him, and afterwards describes
   the manner of "upholding," that he will direct him by his Spirit,
   meaning by this phrase that he will assist Christ in all things, and
   will not permit him to be overcome by any difficulties. Now, it was
   necessary that Christ should he endued with the Spirit of God, in order
   to execute that divine office, and be the Mediator between God and men;
   for so great a work could not be performed by human power.

   My elect. In this passage the word Elect denotes "excellent," as in
   many other passages; for they who are in the very flower of their age
   are called chosen youths. (1 Samuel 26:2, and 2 Samuel 6:1.) Jehovah
   therefore calls him "an excellent servant," because he bears the
   message of reconciliation, and because all his actions are directed by
   God. At the same time he demonstrates his undeserved love, by which he
   embraced us all in his only-begotten Son, that in his person we may
   behold an illustrious display of that election by which we have been
   adopted into the hope of eternal life. Now, since heavenly power dwells
   in the human nature of Christ, when we hear him speak, let us not look
   at flesh and blood, but raise our minds higher, so as to know that all
   that he does is divine.

   In whom my soul is well pleased. From this passage we learn that Christ
   is not only beloved by the Father, (Matthew 3:17,) but is alone beloved
   and accepted by him, so that there is no way of obtaining favor from
   God but through the intercession of Christ. In this sense the
   Evangelists quote this passage, (Matthew 12:18,) as Paul also declares
   that we are reconciled "in the beloved" in such a manner as to be
   beloved on his account. (Ephesians 1:6.) The Prophet afterwards shews
   that Christ will be endued with the power of the Spirit, not solely on
   his own account, but in order to spread it far and wide.

   He will exhibit judgment to the Gentiles. By the word judgment the
   Prophet means a well-regulated government, and not a sentence which is
   pronounced by a judge on the bench; for to judge means, among the
   Hebrew writers, "to command, to rule, to govern," and he adds that this
   judgment will be not only in Judea, but throughout the whole world.
   This promise was exceedingly new and strange; for it was only in Judea
   that God was known, (Psalm 76:2,) and the Gentiles were shut out from
   all confidence in his favor. (Ephesians 2:12.)

   These clear proofs were therefore exceedingly needful for us, that we
   might be certain of our calling; for otherwise we might think that
   these promises did not at all belong to us. Christ was sent in order to
   bring the whole world under the authority of God and obedience to him;
   and this shows that without him everything is confused and disordered.
   Before he comes to us, there can be no proper government amongst us;
   and therefore we must learn to submit to him, if we desire to be well
   and justly governed. Now, we ought to judge of this government from the
   nature of his kingdom, which is not external, but belongs to the inner
   man; for it consists of a good conscience and uprightness of life, not
   what is so reckoned before men, but what is so reckoned before God. The
   doctrine may be thus summed up: "Because the whole life of men has been
   perverted since we were corrupted in every respect by the fall of Adam,
   Christ came with the heavenly power of his Spirit, that he might change
   our disposition, and thus form us again to newness of life.'" (Romans
   6:4.)

   2. He shall not cry aloud. The Prophet shews of what nature the coming
   of Christ will be; that is, without pomp or splendor, such as commonly
   attends earthly kings, at whose arrival there are uttered various
   noises and loud cries, as if heaven and earth were about to mingle. But
   Isaiah says that Christ will come without any noise or cry; and that
   not only for the sake of applauding his modesty, but, first, that we
   may not form any earthly conception of him; secondly, that, having
   known his kindness by which he draws us to him, we may cheerfully
   hasten to meet him; and, lastly, that our faith may not languish,
   though his condition be mean and despicable.

   He shall not lift up his voice; that is, he shall create no
   disturbance; as we commonly say of a quiet and peaceable man, "He makes
   no great noise." [152] And indeed he did not boast of himself to the
   people, but frequently forbade them to publish his miracles, that all
   might learn that his power and authority was widely different from that
   which kings or princes obtain, by causing themselves to be loudly
   spoken of in order to gain the applause of the multitude. (Matthew 8:4;
   9:30; 12:16; Mark 5:43; Luke 8:56.)

   3. A bruised reed he shall not break. After having declared in general
   that Christ will be unlike earthly princes, he next mentions his
   mildness in this respect, that he will support the weak and feeble.
   This is what he means by the metaphor of "the bruised reed," that he
   does not wish to break off and altogether crush those who are
   half-broken, but, on the contrary, to lift up and support them, so as
   to maintain and strengthen all that is good in them.

   Nor will he quench the smoking flax. This metaphor is of the same
   import with the former, and is borrowed from the wicks of lamps, which
   may displease us by not burning clearly or by giving out smoke, and yet
   we do not extinguish but trim and brighten them. Isaiah ascribes to
   Christ that forbearance by which he bears with our weakness, which we
   find to be actually fulfilled by him; for wherever any spark of piety
   is seen, he strengthens and kindles it, and if he were to act towards
   us with the utmost rigor, we should be reduced to nothing. Although men
   therefore totter and stumble, although they are even shaken or out of
   joint, yet he does not at once cast them off as utterly useless, but
   bears long, till he makes them stronger and more steadfast.

   God gave a manifestation of this meekness when he appointed Christ to
   begin the discharge of his office as ambassador; for the Holy Spirit
   was sent from heaven in the shape of a dove, which was a token of
   nothing but mildness and gentleness. (Matthew 3:16; Mark 1:10; Luke
   3:22; John 1:32.) And indeed the sign perfectly agrees with the
   reality; for he makes no great noise, and does not render himself an
   object of terror, as earthly kings commonly do, and does not wish to
   harass or oppress his people beyond measure, but, on the contrary, to
   soothe and comfort them. Not only did he act in this manner when he was
   manifested to the world, but this is what he daily shows himself to be
   by the gospel. Following this example, the ministers of the gospel, who
   are his deputies, ought to shew themselves to be meek, and to support
   the weak, and gently to lead them in the way, so as not to extinguish
   in them the feeblest sparks of piety, but, on the contrary, to kindle
   them with all their might. But that we may not suppose that this
   meekness holds out encouragement to vices and corruptions, he adds --

   He shall bring forth judgment in truth. Although Christ soothes and
   upholds the weak, yet he is very far from using the flatteries which
   encourage vices; and therefore we ought to correct vices without
   flattery, which is in the highest degree inconsistent with that
   meekness. We ought therefore to guard diligently against extremes; that
   is, we must neither crush the minds of the weak by excessive severity,
   nor encourage by our smooth language anything that is evil.

   That we may better understand who those persons are towards whom,
   following the example of Christ, we ought to exercise this mildness, we
   ought to weigh carefully the Prophet's words. He calls them "a bruised
   reed" and "smoking wick." These words do not apply to those who boldly
   and obstinately resist, nor to those who are fierce and headstrong; for
   such persons do not deserve this forbearance, but rather must be broken
   and crushed, as by the strokes of a hammer, by the severity of the
   word. While he praises meekness, he at the same time shews to whom it
   is adapted, and at what time and in what manner it ought to be
   employed; for it is not suitable to hardened and rebellious persons, or
   to those whose rage sends forth flames, but to those who are
   submissive, and who cheerfully yield to the yoke of Christ.

   The word smoking shews that he maintains and cherishes not darkness,
   but sparks, though feeble and hardly perceptible. Wherever then there
   is impiety and stubbornness, there we must act with the utmost
   severity, and exercise no forbearance; but, on the other hand, where
   there are vices that have not gone beyond endurance, yet by gentleness
   of this nature, instead of encouraging, we must correct and reform
   them; for we must always pay regard chiefly to truth, of which he
   speaks, that vices may not be concealed, and thus acquire a secret
   corruption, but that the weak may be gradually trained to sincerity and
   uprightness. These words, therefore, relate to those persons who,
   amidst many deficiencies, have integrity of mind, and earnestly desire
   to follow true religion, or, at least, in whom we see some good
   beginning. It is clearly shewn by many passages (Matthew 12:39; 22:18;
   23:13) how severely Christ deals with despisers; for he is constrained
   to employ "a rod of iron" to crush those who do not submit to be
   governed by his shepherd's crook. As he justly declares that "his yoke
   is easy, and his burden is light," (Matthew 11:30,) to willing
   disciples, so with good reason does David arm him with "a scepter of
   iron" (Psalm 2:9) to break his enemies in pieces, and declare that he
   will be wet with their blood. (Psalm 110:6, 7.)

   4. He shall not faint, nor be discouraged. The Prophet alludes to the
   preceding verse, and confirms what he formerly said, that Christ will
   indeed be mild and gentle towards the weak, but that he will have no
   softness or effeminacy; for he will manfully execute the commission
   which he has received from the Father. This is what he means when he
   says that "he shall not faint;" and in this verb ykhh (yichheh) there
   is an allusion to a former verse, in which he spoke of "smoking flax."
   Now, he shews what is the true moderation of meekness, not to turn
   aside to excessive indulgence; for we ought to use it in such a manner
   as not to swerve from our duty. Many persons wish to profit by the name
   of gentleness, so as to gain the applause and esteem of the world, but
   at the same time betray truth in a base and shameful manner.

   I remember that there were in a populous city two preachers, one of
   whom boldly and loudly reproved vices, while the other endeavored to
   gain the favor of the people by flatteries. This fawning preacher, who
   was expounding the Prophet Jeremiah, lighted on a passage full of the
   mildest consolation, and having found, as he imagined, a fit
   opportunity, began to declaim against those harsh and severe reprovers
   who are wont to terrify men by thunderbolts of words. But on the
   following day, when the Prophet changed his subject and sharply rebuked
   wicked men with his peculiar vehemence of style, the wretched flatterer
   was constrained to encounter bitter scorn by retracting the words which
   were fresh in the recollection of all his hearers. Thus the temporary
   favor which he had gained speedily vanished, when he revealed his own
   disposition, and made himself abhorred by the good and the bad.

   We must therefore distinguish between the submissive and the obstinate,
   that we may not abuse that mildness by using it on every occasion. Yet
   Isaiah declares that Christ's fortitude will be unshaken, so that it
   shall surmount every obstacle; for by these words, Till he put
   judgment, he means that the ministry of Christ will be so efficacious
   that the fruit of his doctrine shall be manifested. He does not merely
   say, "Till he shall have made known the will of his Father," but "Till
   he establish judgment," that is, as we formerly said, the proper
   exercise of government. Christ's ministry, therefore, he testifies,
   will not be unfruitful, but will have such efficacy that men shall be
   reformed by it.

   This must not be limited to the person of Christ, but extends to the
   whole course of the gospel; for he not only discharged the embassy
   committed to him for three years, but continues to discharge the same
   embassy every day by means of his servants. Yet we are reminded that it
   is impossible for us to discharge that office without being laid under
   the necessity of suffering many annoyances, and sustaining contests so
   severe and dangerous, that we shall be almost overwhelmed and ready to
   abandon everything. Still we must not desist, but persevere constantly
   in our duty, and run to the very end; and therefore the Prophet
   testifies that Christ will be so steadfast that he will pursue his
   calling to the end; and, following his example, we ought boldly to
   persevere.

   And the isles shall wait for his law. Here he employs the word Law to
   mean "doctrine," as the Hebrew word for "law" is derived from a verb
   which signifies to teach; [153] and thus the prophets are accustomed to
   speak of the gospel, in order to shew that it will not be new or
   contrary to what was taught by Moses.

   The isles. We have formerly shewn that the Hebrew writers give the name
   of isles to countries beyond the sea.

   The Prophet confirms the former statement, by which it was declared
   that Christ had been appointed not only for the Jews, but also for the
   Gentiles, though they had nothing in common with the Jewish
   commonwealth. In short, that promise relates to all nations, that the
   advantages of this restoration and reformation may be shared by every
   part of the world.

   By the word wait, he means that the elect will eagerly embrace the
   gospel offered to them; for the Lord displays in it the power of his
   election, when "they who wandered in darkness," (Matthew 4:16,) as soon
   as they hear the voice of the gospel, embrace it with the utmost
   eagerness, and although they formerly wandered, like scattered and lost
   sheep, yet hear immediately the voice of the shepherd, and cheerfully
   submit to him, as Christ himself has also spoken. (John 10:16.) Hence
   we learn that the saying of Augustine is exceedingly true, "that many
   sheep wander out of the folds, while wolves frequently dwell within the
   folds." This attention is the work of God, when men who thought that
   they were wise give up their own judgment, and have to learn the gospel
   of Christ, so as to depend entirely on this teacher.

   5. Thus saith Jehovah. He confirms what he said in the beginning of the
   chapter about the reign of Christ, that he will renew and restore all
   things; and as this might be thought to be incredible, he has here
   added a magnificent description of the power of God, by which our faith
   ought to be confirmed, especially when the outward aspect of things is
   directly contrary. On this account he brings forward clear proofs of
   the power of God, that all may be aroused by the mention of them, and
   may be convinced that he who created all things out of nothing, who
   spread out the heavens, who produced vegetation, who gave life to
   animals, and who upholds and defends all things by his power, will
   easily perform what he promises concerning the reign of Christ. These
   forms of expression remind us that we ought always to consider the
   power of God, that we may be fully convinced of the authority and
   undoubted certainty of his word; for it is not without reason that
   Isaiah makes this preface, but in order to remove every doubt, because
   nothing is too hard for God, who keeps the whole world in subjection to
   his authority; and in the following chapters he will employ similar
   modes of expression.

   h'l (hael) is rendered by some "powerful," and by others "God;" but it
   is of little consequence, for the meaning is the same; because he
   exhibits his power and majesty, and adorns him with this variety of
   titles, that we may know that he will easily restore all that is fallen
   and laid low.

   6. I Jehovah have called thee in righteousness. He again repeats the
   name of God, in which we ought to supply what he stated in the former
   verse about his power. It is generally thought that this points out the
   end of Christ's calling, that he was sent by the Father to establish
   "justice" among men, who are destitute of it so long as they have not
   Christ, and, being given up to all the corruptions of crimes and vices,
   are held captive under the tyranny of Satan. But because the word
   "righteousness" has a more extensive signification, I pass by that
   ingenious distinction; for it is not even said that he shall be called
   "to righteousness," but this phraseology ought to be viewed as
   equivalent to the adverbial expression, "righteously," or "in a holy
   manner." I rather suppose the meaning to be, that Christ was "called in
   righteousness," because his calling is lawful, and therefore shall be
   firm and secure. We know that what is not done in a proper and regular
   manner cannot be of long duration. Or perhaps it will be thought
   preferable to view it thus, that God, in appointing Christ to restore
   the Church, seeks no reason but from himself and his own righteousness;
   but it is certain that this word denotes stability, as if he had said,
   "faithfully."

   And will hold thee by thy hand. By "the holding of the hand" he means
   the immediate assistance of God; as if he had said, "I will direct and
   establish thee in the calling to which I have appointed thee. In a
   word, as thy calling is righteous, so I will defend and uphold thee, as
   if by taking hold of thy hand I were thy leader."

   I will keep thee. This word "keep" plainly shews what is the meaning of
   holding by the hand, namely, that Christ will be directed by the Father
   in such a manner that he shall have him as his protector and guardian,
   shall enjoy his assistance, and, in short, shall feel his presence in
   all things.

   And will place thee for a covenant. He now states the reason why God
   promises that he will be a guardian to Christ. Besides, the Prophet
   spoke of the Jews and the Gentiles separately; not that they differ by
   nature, or that the one is more excellent than the other, (for all need
   the grace of God, (Romans 3:23,) and Christ has brought salvation to
   all indiscriminately,) but because the Lord assigned the first rank to
   the Jews, (Matthew 10:6,) it was therefore proper that they should be
   distinguished from the others. Accordingly, before "the partition-wall"
   (Ephesians 2:14) was thrown down, they excelled, not by their merit,
   but by the favor of God, because with them in the first instance the
   covenant of grace was made.

   It may be objected, "Why is Christ appointed to a covenant which was
   ratified long before? for, more than two thousand years before, God had
   adopted Abraham, and thus the origin of the distinction was long
   previous to the coming of Christ." I reply, the covenant which was made
   with Abraham and his posterity had its foundation in Christ; for the
   words of the covenant are these, "In thy seed shall all nations be
   blessed." (Genesis 22:18.) And the covenant was ratified in no other
   manner than in the seed of Abraham, that is, in Christ, by whose
   coming, though it had been previously made, it was confirmed and
   actually sanctioned. Hence also Paul says, "that the promises of God
   are yea and amen in Christ," (2 Corinthians 1:20,) and in another
   passage calls Christ "the minister of circumcision, to fulfill the
   promises which were given to the fathers." (Romans 15:8.) Still more
   clearly does he declare that Christ is "the peace" of all, so that they
   who were formerly separated are united in him, and both they who were
   far off and they who were near are thus reconciled to God. (Ephesians
   2:17.) Hence also it is evident that Christ was promised, not only to
   the Jews, but to the whole world.

   For a light of the Gentiles. We have here another clear proof of the
   calling of the Gentiles, since he expressly states that Christ was
   appointed to be "a light" to them. He calls him a light, because the
   Gentiles were plunged in the deepest and thickest darkness, at the time
   when the Lord illuminated none but the Jews. Now, then, the blame lies
   solely with ourselves, if we do not become partakers of this salvation;
   for he calls all men to himself, without a single exception, and gives
   Christ to all, that we may be illuminated by him. Let us only open our
   eyes, he alone will dispel the darkness, and illuminate our minds by
   the "light" of truth.

   7. That thou mayest open the eyes of the blind. Here he explains more
   fully for what end Christ shall be sent by the Father, that we may see
   more clearly what advantage he yields us, and how much we need his
   assistance. He reminds all men of their "blindness," that they may
   acknowledge it, if they wish to be illuminated by Christ. In short,
   under these metaphors he declares what is the condition of men, till
   Christ shine upon them as their Redeemer; that is, that they are most
   wretched, empty, and destitute of all blessings, and surrounded and
   overwhelmed by innumerable distresses, till they are delivered by
   Christ.

   Now, though the Prophet addresses Christ himself, yet he has in his eye
   believers, that they may know that in him they ought to trust, and may
   not doubt that a remedy will be provided for all their distresses, if
   they implore his aid. God does not here enjoin Christ what he shall do,
   as if he needed to be taught or to receive commandments; but he
   addresses him for our sake, that we may know why the Father sent him;
   as he says also, (Psalm 2:7, 8,) "I will make known the decree; ask of
   me, I will give thee the Gentiles;" for in that passage the rank and
   authority of Christ are declared, that we may know that the Father has
   bestowed on him the highest authority, in order that we may more
   securely place all our hope and confidence in him.

   8. I am Jehovah. Hence infer what is the nature and extent of the
   disease of unbelief, since the Lord can hardly satisfy himself with any
   words to express the cure of it. By nature we are prone to distrust,
   and do not believe God when he speaks, till he entirely subdue our
   stubbornness. Besides, we continually fall back into the same fault
   through our levity, unless he employ many bridles to restrain us.
   Again, therefore, he returns to that confirmation of which we have
   spoken formerly, that his promises may remain unshaken.

   This is my name. hv' (hu) is sometimes taken for a substantive, so as
   to be a proper name of God; [154] but I explain it in a more simple
   manner, "It is my name," that is, "Jehovah is my own name, and cannot
   lawfully be given to any other." In a word, by this expression he seals
   all that was said about the office of Christ, and adds as it were a
   seal to the promise: "He who declareth these things testifieth that he
   alone is God, and that this name dwelleth in him alone."

   And I will not give my glory to another; that is, "I will not suffer my
   glory to be diminished, which it would be, if I were found to be false
   or fickle in my promises." He therefore declares that he will abide by
   his promises, because he wishes to vindicate his glory and preserve it
   entire, that it may not be in any respect diminished.

   This is a remarkable passage, by which we are taught that the glory of
   God is chiefly visible in his fulfillment of what he has promised. And
   hence we obtain a singular confirmation of our faith, that the Lord
   never deceives, never swerves from his promises, and nothing can hinder
   what he has once determined. But since Satan, by amazing arts,
   endeavors to obscure this glory of God, and to bestow it on men and on
   false gods, he therefore testifies that he will not permit himself to
   be regarded as fickle or deceitful in his promises.

   Nor my praise to graven images. A contrast is drawn between the only
   God and idols with reference to time; for, had not God been the
   Redeemer of his people, unbelievers would have boasted as if true
   religion had been false and useless. God therefore declares that he
   will not permit wicked men to triumph by oppressing the Church; and,
   beyond all doubt, God has hitherto spared us, and still deals so gently
   with us, in order that he may not expose his Gospel to the blasphemous
   reproaches of the Papists. We ought to draw from this a universal
   doctrine, namely, that the Lord wishes that his glory may remain
   unimpaired; for he defends and maintains it everywhere with the utmost
   zeal, in order to shew that he is exceedingly jealous of it, (Exodus
   20:5,) and does not permit the smallest part of it to be given to
   another.

   9. The former things. He now recalls to remembrance the former
   predictions, by the fulfillment of which he shews that confidence ought
   to be placed in him for the future; for what we have known by actual
   experience ought to tend greatly to confirm our belief. It is as if he
   had said, "I have spoken so frequently to your fathers, and you have
   found me to be true in all things; and yet you cannot place confidence
   in me about future events: the experience of past transactions produces
   no effect upon you, and does not excite you to do better." God's
   favors, therefore, ought to be mentioned by us in such a manner that,
   whenever our salvation lies concealed in hope, we may rest on the word
   of God, and be confirmed by it during the whole course of our life.

   Behold! they came. [155] By the adverb behold, he points out, as with
   the finger, that they had learned by experience, that God is not false,
   and did not; speak in vain by the prophets; because clear proofs openly
   testified and proclaimed the truth of God.

   Before they spring forth. [156] He distinguishes God from idols by this
   mark, that he alone knows and predicts future events, but idols do not;
   know them. As to the greater part of the responses which were given by
   the gods of the Gentiles, we have formerly seen that they were either
   false or ambiguous; for they who relied on them were often shamefully
   deceived, and this is the reward which they richly deserved. And if at
   first sight the event corresponded, this plunged them deeper in eternal
   perdition; and by the righteous judgment of God it was brought about
   that Satan imposed upon them by such delusions. Far otherwise was it
   with the sacred oracles, by which the Church, for her own advantage and
   salvation, was at one time brought to repentance, and at another time
   encouraged to entertain favorable hope, that she might not sink under
   the burden of punishments. It remains a settled principle, that all
   that God has foretold is verified by the event; for he rules and
   directs all things by his providence.

   10. Sing to Jehovah. He now exhorts the people to gratitude; for God's
   favors ought always to excite us, by the remembrance of them, to give
   thanks and to celebrate his praises. Besides, by that exhortation he
   calls believers to behold the prophecy as actually accomplished, and
   confirms those promises of which he spoke. We ought to observe this as
   the design of the Prophet, that there is no reason why believers,
   though they are severely oppressed, should give way to sorrow, but that
   good hope ought to encourage them to gladness, that they may now
   prepare to render thanksgiving.

   The subject of this song is, that Christ has been revealed to the
   world, and sent by the Father, in order to relieve the miseries of his
   Church, and to restore her to perfect order, and indeed, as it were, to
   renew the whole world. As it was difficult to believe this, the Prophet
   wished to remove every doubt, in order to fix these predictions more
   deeply in their hearts. Nor ought we to wonder that the Prophet labors
   so hard to arouse them when they were reduced to the greatest straits,
   and had no longer any hope of safety. The mere aspect of things might
   shake their faith, and even produce suspicion that all that the
   prophets had foretold was unfounded and absurd. The object, of this
   exhortation therefore is, that when affairs are utterly desperate, they
   should be cheerful and rely on these promises.

   A new song. By new he means an excellent, beautiful, and elegant song,
   not one that is ordinary or common, but a song which may arouse men to
   admiration, as relating to the extraordinary grace of God, of which
   there had never been so remarkable an example. In this sense it is also
   used in Psalm 33:3, and 96:1 New is here contrasted with what is
   Ordinary, and thus he extols the infinite mercy of God, which was to be
   revealed in Christ, and which ought therefore to be celebrated and sung
   with the highest praises. Hence we infer that each of us ought to be
   the more zealous in proclaiming the praises of God, in proportion to
   the greater number of favors which we have received. It is indeed the
   duty of all men to sing praise to God, for there is no person who is
   not bound to it by the strongest obligations; but more lofty praises
   ought to proceed from those on whom more valuable gifts have been
   bestowed. Now, since God has laid open the fountain of all blessings in
   Christ, and has displayed all spiritual riches, we need not wonder if
   he demand that we offer to him an unwonted and excellent sacrifice of
   praise.

   It ought to be observed that this song cannot be sung but by renewed
   men; for it ought to proceed from the deepest feeling of the heart, and
   therefore we need the direction and influence of the Spirit, that we
   may sing those praises in a proper manner. Besides, he does not exhort
   one or a few nations to do this, but all the nations in the world; for
   to all of them Christ was sent.

   11. Let the desert and it's cities cry aloud. While the Prophet
   includes all the parts of the world, he mentions particularly those
   which were better known to the Jews; for on the west Judea had the sea,
   and on the east the desert and Arabia. When he speaks of the tents of
   Kedar, the desert, and the rocks, he means Arabia; but it is a figure
   of speech by which a part is taken for the whole, for it includes the
   whole of the east. It is as if he had said, that from the rising to the
   setting of the sun these praises shall be heard; for God shall be
   worshipped everywhere, though formerly he was worshipped in Judea
   alone; and thus the state of affairs shall be changed, and that praise
   shall be beard in the most distant parts of the earth. [157]

   The towns where Kedar dwells. He mentions Kedar, because the Scenite
   [158] Arabians, as is well known, dwelt in tents. But he employs the
   word towns, while he is speaking of a desert; and therefore it ought to
   be remarked, that desert denotes not only the vast wilderness which lay
   between Judea and Arabia, but the more distant countries which were
   commonly designated from that part which was adjoining to them, as some
   people give the name of "mountainous" to those plains which lie beyond
   the mountains; for the common people have their attention so much
   directed to what they see close at hand, that they suppose them to
   resemble other places that are more distant. Yet the Prophet here
   exalts and magnifies the greatness of the grace of God, in reaching
   even rude and barbarous nations, whose savage cruelty was well known.

   12. Let them give glory to Jehovah. He explains what the nature of that
   shouting will be, that is, to celebrate the praises of God; for his
   goodness and mercy shall be everywhere seen; and therefore he enjoins
   them to celebrate this redemption with a cheerful voice, because the
   blessed consequences of it shall be shared by all the nations. And thus
   we are reminded to cry aloud in the present day with the greatest
   earnestness when we proclaim the praises of God, that we ourselves may
   be inflamed, and may excite others by our example to act in the same
   manner; for to be lukewarm, or to mutter, or to sing, as the saying is,
   to themselves and to the muses, is impossible for those who have
   actually tasted the grace of God.

   13. Jehovah like a giant. What Isaiah now adds is intended to surmount
   the temptations of believers. He ascribes to God strength and power,
   that they may know that they shall find in him a sure defense; for in
   adversity we are perplexed, because we doubt whether or not God will be
   able to render us assistance, especially when by delaying he appears in
   some measure to reject our prayers; and therefore the Prophet loudly
   extols the power of God, that all may learn to rely and place their
   confidence in him.

   Will go forth. The going forth that is here mentioned must be taken
   metaphorically; for God seemed to be concealed at the time when he
   permitted his people to be affiicted and oppressed without any
   appearance of aid; and therefore the word means "to come forth publicly
   for the sake of giving assistance." This is confirmed by what follows.

   And as a warrior. When he attributes to God burning indignation, with
   which he rushes forth "like a warrior" against his enemies, the
   comparisons are drawn from human feelings, and declare to us the
   powerful assistance of God, which would not otherwise make a
   sufficiently powerful impression on our minds. He therefore
   accommodates himself to our capacity, as we have often said, that we
   may know how ardently he desires to preserve us, and how much he is
   distressed by the affliction and oppression of believers, and likewise
   how terrible is his anger, whenever he girds himself for battle.

   We ought always to observe that peculiar season which the Prophet had
   in his eye, to which these predictions must be applied; for while the
   enemies were becoming more and more fierce, and were taunting a
   wretched people, it was the duty of believers to look at something
   quite different from what they beheld with their eyes, and to believe
   that God is sufficiently powerful to subdue their enemies, and rescue
   them out of their hands. Nor was it only during the captivity that it
   was of importance for them to have their sorrow alleviated by this
   promise, but almost till the coming of Christ; for they were
   continually and painfully constrained to encounter severe distresses,
   as is evident from history.

   14. I have kept silence. The Prophet meets the temptations which
   commonly give us great uneasiness, when God delays his aid. We are
   tempted by impatience, and dread that his promises are false. We reckon
   it unreasonable that God should be silent, and fall asleep, so to
   speak, while the wicked carry themselves high; that he should be cool,
   while they burn with eagerness to do mischief; and that he should wink
   at their crimes, while they keenly pursue every kind of cruelty. When
   their minds were distressed and almost overwhelmed, the Prophet wished
   to comfort them, that they might not think that God had forsaken them,
   though everything appeared to be desperate.

   For a long time. He expressly mentions "the great length of time," that
   their hearts might not languish through the tedious delay; for when
   they had been broken down by almost incessant calamities since the
   death of Jehoshaphat, it was very hard and distressing to spend seventy
   years in captivity. Nor was even this the end of their afflictions, and
   therefore they needed to be carefully admonished, that although God do
   not immediately send relief, still believers will suffer nothing by the
   delay, provided that they wait with patience. By these words he also
   rebukes unbelievers, who, trusting to his forbearance, freely indulged
   in every kind of wickedness; and therefore God declares that, although
   he has refrained and been a silent spectator, he is not on that account
   deprived of his power.

   Like a woman in labor. By this metaphor he expresses astonishing warmth
   of love and tenderness of affection; for he compares himself to a
   mother who singularly loves her child, though she brought him forth
   with extreme pain. It may be thought that these things are not
   applicable to God; but in no other way than by such figures of speech
   can his ardent love towards us be expressed. He must therefore borrow
   comparisons from known objects, in order to enable us to understand
   those which are unknown to us; for God loves very differently from men,
   that is, more fully and perfectly, and, although he surpasses all human
   affections, yet nothing that is disorderly belongs to him.

   Besides, he intended also to intimate that the redemption of his people
   would be a kind of birth, that the Jews might know that the grave would
   serve them for a womb, and that thus, in the midst of corruption, they
   might entertain the hope of salvation. Although he produced a new
   Church for himself without pain or effort, yet, in order to exhibit
   more fully the excellence of his grace in this new birth, he not
   inappropriately attributes to himself the cry of "a woman in labor."

   I will destroy and swallow at once. Because that comparison of a
   travailing woman might somewhat degrade the majesty and power of God,
   the Prophet determined to add here a different feeling. So far then as
   relates to love, he says that God resembles a mother; so far as relates
   to power, he says that he resembles a lion or a giant.

   15. I will reduce mountains and hills to a wilderness. The Prophet
   means that all the defences and military forces on which the wicked
   plume themselves shall not prevent God from setting his people at
   liberty. It was necessary that this should be added to the former
   statements; for when we see enemies exceedingly powerful, and almost
   invincible, we tremble, and do not look for God's assistance, which
   would be necessary to keep our faith strong. On this point, therefore,
   the Prophet dwells, in order to shew that no power or army whatsoever
   can resist the Lord when he wishes to deliver his people. In short, he
   shews that there shall be such a revolution, that they who formerly
   were most powerful shall be crushed, and shall gain nothing by all
   their attempts against him.

   Such appears to me to be the plain meaning of this passage, and there
   is no necessity for entering into ingenious speculations, as some have
   done, who, in an allegorical interpretation of these words, pronounce
   that by "mountains and hills" are meant cities, and by herbage the men
   who inhabit them. But there is no necessity for pursuing such
   refinements; for he simply declares that God is sufficiently powerful
   to fulfill his promises and deliver his Church, because he will easily
   surmount all the difficulties which present themselves to our eyes.
   This statement corresponds also to other predictions which we have
   formerly seen, in which the Prophet taught that as soon as God has
   determined to assist his people, his power is not limited to natural
   means, but miraculously breaks through every obstruction that appears
   to hinder his passage.

   16. And I will lead the blind. After having shewn that the strength of
   the enemies cannot prevent God from delivering his people, he proceeds
   with that consolation to which he had formerly adverted. He describes
   by the word blind those whose affairs are so difficult, and intricate,
   and disordered, that they know not to what hand to turn, or in what
   direction to flee, and, in short, who see no means of escape, but deep
   gulfs on every hand. When our affairs proceed smoothly enough, a plain
   and easy path is placed before our eyes; and, in like manner, when our
   affairs are painful and distressing, and especially when they hold out
   no hope of relief, but threaten destruction to us, and are covered with
   deep and melancholy darkness, we are blinded. When we have thus no
   means of escape, the Prophet tells us that at that very time we ought,
   especially to hope and to look for assistance from the Lord.

   It is often advantageous to us also to have no way open to us, to be
   straitened and hemmed in on every hand, and even to be blinded, that we
   may learn to depend solely on God's assistance and to rely on him; for,
   so long as a plank is left on which we think that we can seize, we turn
   to it with our whole heart. While we are driven about in all
   directions, the consequence is, that the remembrance of heavenly grace
   fades from our memory. If, therefore, we desire that God should assist
   us and relieve our adversity, we must be blind, we must turn away our
   eyes from the present condition of things, and restrain our judgment,
   that we may entirely rely on his promises. Although this blindness is
   far from being pleasant, and shews the weakness of our mind, yet, if we
   judge from the good effects which it produces, we ought not greatly to
   shun it; for it is better to be "blind" persons guided by the hand of
   God, than, by excessive sagacity, to form labyrinths for ourselves.

   And will turn darkness before them into light. When he promises that he
   will give "light" instead of "darkness," he confirms what has been
   already said; and therefore, although we see not even a ray of light in
   adversity, yet we ought not to despair of God's assistance, but at that
   very time we ought especially to embrace his promises; for the Lord
   will easily change darkness into light, make straight the crooked
   windings, and lead us into the path, that we may walk with safety. Yet
   let us perceive that these things are promised to believers alone, who
   intrust themselves to God, and allow themselves to be governed by him;
   and, in short, who have known their blindness, and willingly follow him
   as their leader, and amidst the darkness of afflictions patiently wait
   for the dawn of grace. To those only who abide by his promises does he
   stretch out his hand, and not to the wise men [159] who wish to see in
   spite of him, or who are carried headlong by unlawful schemes.

   17. They shall be driven back. This enables us to see more clearly to
   whom the former doctrine relates, for it distinguishes between the
   worshippers of God and the worshippers of idols. The Lord will be a
   leader to his own people, but, on the other hand, they who worship
   idols shall be ashamed As if he had said, that here the Lord gives us a
   choice, either to be saved by his grace, or to perish miserably; for
   all that place their hope of salvation in idols shall perish, but they
   who trust in the word of God are certain of salvation; because, though
   they often are heavily afflicted, yet he will not allow their hope to
   be put to shame in the end, but by the result will prove that he did
   not in vain lay down this distinction.

   And say to a molten image, Ye are our gods. It is certain that by these
   two marks are described all idolaters who place their hope in any one
   else than in God alone; for, although idolaters do not bow down before
   their idols, yet, by attaching divinity to them, they offer blasphemy
   to the only and true God; for the chief part of the worship of God
   consists in faith and calling upon him, both of which the Prophet here
   describes. It may be asked, Were they so stupid as to say to an image,
   "Thou art my god?" for all superstitious persons confessed that God is
   in heaven, and did not openly ascribe divinity to wood or stone. I
   reply, all idolaters ascribe to images the power of God, though they
   acknowledge that he is in heaven; for, when they flee to statues and
   images, when they make and perform vows to them, they undoubtedly
   ascribe to them what belongs to God. It is in vain for them, therefore,
   to cloak their ignorance under plausible excuses, for they reckon wood
   and stone to be gods, and offer the highest insult to God; and
   consequently, the Prophet did not employ exaggerated language, or
   falsely accuse them of being idolaters; for it is plainly testified by
   their words and speeches, when they call their idols and images gods.
   Even though they did not utter a word, their madness is openly
   manifested by their imagining that they cannot reach the hand or the
   ear of God without bowing down before images to utter their prayers.
   The object of these statements is, that all may understand that no man
   will be saved but, he who trusts in God alone.

   18. O ye deaf, hear, and ye blind. He now employs these words, "blind"
   and "deaf," in a sense different from that in which he formerly
   employed them, (verse 16,) when he metaphorically described those who
   had no understanding, and who were overwhelmed by such a mass of
   afflictions that they were blinded by their sorrow; for here he gives
   the name of blind to those who shut their eyes in the midst of light,
   and do not behold the works of God; and the name of deaf to those who
   refuse to hear him, and sink down into stupidity and slothfulness
   amidst the dregs of their ignorance. He therefore condemns the Jews for
   "blindness," or rather, in my own opinion, he condemns all men; for,
   while he directly reproaches the Jews because "in hearing they do not
   hear, and in seeing they do not see," (Isaiah 6:9; Matthew 13:13,) yet
   this applies in some measure to the Gentiles, to whom God revealed
   himself by his creatures, on whose hearts and consciences also he
   impressed the knowledge of him, and to whom he had made and would still
   make known his wonderful works. By demanding attention, he pronounces
   that there is nothing that hinders them from comprehending the truth
   and power of God, except that they are "deaf and blind." Nor is this
   unaccompanied by malice and ingratitude; for he openly instructs them
   concerning his power, and gives them very striking proofs of it; but no
   one gives attention to his doctrine or to his wonderful actions, and
   the consequence is, that they are willingly "blind." Thus the Prophet
   shews that the fault lies wholly with men in not perceiving the power
   of God.

   19. Who is blind but my servant? There are some who interpret this
   verse as if the Prophet were describing the reproaches which wicked men
   are accustomed to throw out against the prophets; for they retort on
   the Lord's servants those reproofs and accusations which they cannot
   endure. "Whom dost thou accuse of blindness? Whom dost thou call deaf?
   Take that to thyself. Who is blind but thou?" They think, therefore,
   that it is as if the Lord expostulated with the Jews in this manner; "I
   see that you reckon my prophets to be blind and deaf." But we shall
   immediately see that this interpretation does not agree with the
   context, for the Prophet afterwards explains (verse 20) why he calls
   them "blind." It is because, while they see many things, they pay no
   attention to them. Indeed, this does not at all apply to the prophets,
   and therefore let us follow the plain and natural meaning.

   Isaiah had accused all men of blindness, but especially the Jews,
   because they ought to have seen more clearly than all the rest; for
   they had not only some ordinary light and understanding, but enjoyed
   the word, by which the Lord abundantly revealed himself to them.
   Although, therefore, all the rest were blind, yet the Jews ought to
   have seen and known God, seeing that they were illuminated by his Law
   and doctrine, as by a very bright lamp. Besides, Isaiah afterwards
   addresses the Jews in this manner,

   "Arise, O Jerusalem, and be illuminated; for darkness shall be on all
   the earth, but the Lord shall shine on thee." (Isaiah 60:1, 2.)

   Because the Jews shut their eyes amidst such clear light, that is the
   reason why he addresses to them this special reproof. As if he had
   said, "In vain do I debate with those who are alienated from me, and it
   is not so wonderful that they are blind; but it is monstrous that this
   should have happened to my servants (before whose eyes light has been
   placed) to be deaf to the doctrine which sounds continually in their
   ears. For these things are so clear that the blind might see them, and
   so loud that the deaf might hear them; but in vain do I speak to them,
   for nothing can be more dull or stupid; and, instead of seeing and
   hearing better than all others, as they ought to have done, none can be
   found either more deaf or more blind."

   My messenger whom I send. From the human race universally the Prophet
   gradually descends to the Jews, and next to the priests, who were
   leading persons, and might be regarded as occupying the highest rank.
   It belonged to their once to interpret the Law, and to set a good
   example before others, and, in short, to point out the way of
   salvation. It was from "the priest's mouth" that they were commanded to
   "seek the Law." (Malachi 2:7.) The Prophet complains, therefore, that
   they who ought to have led the way to others were themselves blind.

   Some view the word servant as relating to Isaiah, and others to Christ,
   and think that he, as well as Isaiah, is accused of blindness; but this
   has nothing to do with the Prophet's meaning. Thus, he magnifies by
   comparison the complaint which he lately made about the slothfulness of
   the Jews; for they were more deeply in fault than others, but the
   heaviest blame lay on the priests who were their leaders. Let us
   therefore learn, that the nearer we approach to God, and the higher the
   rank to which we are elevated, we shall be the less excusable. For the
   same reason he applies the term perfect to those who ought to have been
   perfect; for he mentions reproachfully that perfection from which they
   had fallen by wicked revolt, and thus had basely profaned a most
   excellent gift of God. Having possessed a "perfect" rule of
   righteousness, it lay with themselves alone to follow it.

   20. Seeing many things. The Prophet himself explains what is the nature
   of this blindness of which he spoke, and shews that it is double; and
   this shews clearly that he spoke of the Jews, who by wicked contempt
   had quenched God's light. Our guilt will be double when we shall come
   to the judgment-seat of God, if we shut our eyes when he exhibits the
   light, and shut our ears when he teaches by his word. The heathen
   nations will indeed be without excuse; but the Jews and others to whom
   the Lord revealed himself in so many ways, will deserve double
   condemnation for having refused to see or hear God. We, therefore, who
   have so many and so illustrious examples set before us at the present
   day, ought to dread this judgment; for in many persons there will now
   be found not less blindness or obduracy than formerly existed among the
   Jews, and not more excusable.

   21. The Lord is well pleased. In order to aggravate still more the
   guilt of the Jews, he now shews that it was not God who prevented them
   from leading a prosperous and happy life. He had already said that the
   distresses and afflictions which they endure are the punishment of
   their blindness, which they have voluntarily brought upon themselves;
   and now he brings forward as an addition and crowning point of the
   accusation, that by their obstinacy they reject all relief.

   This passage is interpreted in various ways. Some render it, "The Lord
   hath so willed it;" others, "He is merciful;" but, for my own part, I
   have translated it, "The Lord is willing," that is, disposed and
   inclined to deliver his people, and that for the purpose of magnifying
   his Law and extolling his righteousness. Thus God assigns the reason
   why he is ready to aid those who are unworthy, that he wishes to spread
   his glory in their salvation, that in this manner his righteousness may
   be illustriously displayed, and that his Law may prevail and flourish.
   As to the heavy calamities that have come on the Jews, the reason is,
   that of their own accord they have resolved to be blind, and to bring
   afflictions on themselves, instead of obeying God; for otherwise the
   Lord would have wished to enrich and exalt them. Others view it thus,
   "The Lord wishes to magnify his Law, because he wishes to appear to be
   faithful in punishing the Jews, as he had threatened them by his Law;"
   and thus they consider "righteousness" to denote the punishment and
   vengeance which God inflicts on a wicked people.

   Others render it, "For his righteous one," and refer it to Christ; but
   they mistake the meaning of the word tsdqv, (tzidko,) and
   unquestionably he speaks of righteousness, and means that the Lord
   would willingly have displayed the magnificence of his promises, and
   would have given proofs of his righteousness in preserving his people,
   if they had not shewn themselves to be ungrateful and unworthy. Some
   think that the Lord here offers an excuse for himself, because, when
   the people whom he had adopted were exposed to so many evils, it
   appeared as if his truth were shaken, and that the Prophet intended to
   meet this calumny, for they were seized and became a prey, not because
   the Lord delights in their miseries, but because he prefers his
   righteousness to everything else.

   For my own part, I explain it simply to mean, "The Lord, for the sake
   of doing honor to his Law, was inclined to do good to his people, in
   order that his glory and righteousness might shine forth in it; but his
   people shewed themselves to be unworthy of so great a favor; and,
   therefore, by their own obduracy they made their wounds incurable."
   Besides, we ought to learn from this passage the reason why the Lord
   bestows so many favors on his Church. It is, that he may promote his
   Law, that is, that he may bring men to honor his majesty, and that his
   truth may shine more and more. When he says that the Lord is willing
   and inclined; he shews plainly that he is not induced to it by any one
   else than by himself; but he expresses it more fully, when he adds, on
   account of his righteousness; for he excludes everything that men could
   bring. Nor is the Lord prompted by any other consideration to do good,
   than because he is righteous; for no merit or worth will be found among
   men. But this reason applied especially to the Jews, whom alone he
   deigned to adopt.

   22. But this people. Isaiah now declares that it is through their own
   fault that the people are miserable and appointed to destruction,
   because they reject God, who would otherwise have been inclined to do
   good to them, and because they deliberately set aside all remedies, and
   wish for death, as is commonly the case with men who are past hope.
   Thus he excuses God in such a manner as to bring a heavy accusation
   against the people, because they have rejected him by their
   ingratitude, and have abused his fatherly kindness. Yet, as I remarked
   a little before, he mentions these things, not so much for the sake of
   excusing God, as of bringing a bitter complaint, that his countrymen
   have leagued to their destruction; because, as if on set purpose, they
   have precipitated themselves into many calamities. If, then, we see the
   Church, at the present day, in a ruinous and revolting condition, we
   ought to ascribe it to our iniquities and transgressions, by which we
   do not suffer God to do good to us.

   The copulative v (vau) is rendered by some therefore; but I have
   preferred to translate it but; for it states a contrast to that desire
   by which the Lord declared that he was prompted to defend his people,
   if they had permitted it. I choose to interpret hphch (hapheach) as a
   gerundial participle, about to be snared; for he speaks of a nation
   which was about to be led into captivity. As to vhvrym, (bahurim,) I
   think that two words, instead of one, are here used to signify in dens;
   for to translate the word young men, appears to me to be at variance
   with the context.

   They shall be made a spoil. They who interpret this as relating to the
   whole human race, who have no Savior but Christ, (John 8:36,) adduce
   nothing that corresponds to the Prophet's meaning; for he simply
   declares that the people shall perish without hope of deliverance,
   because they rejected the grace of God. Let us infer from this what
   must befall us, if we do not in due time embrace the grace of God
   offered to us. We shall certainly deserve to be deprived of all aid, to
   be exposed as a prey and a spoil, and utterly to perish.

   23. Who is there among you? Isaiah continues the same subject; for he
   means that the Jews are and will be so stupid, that they will not see,
   even when they are warned; and he expressly addresses them, because,
   while they ought to have been better educated and taught than others,
   yet they understood nothing, and did not observe the judgments of God,
   even though they were exceedingly manifest.

   Who shall hearken for the time to come? That is, who, being at length
   subdued by afflictions, repents, though it be late. We see, then, how
   this astonishment aggravates the criminality of their madness, because
   they will always refuse to be taught. Yet let us learn what is the use
   of threatenings and punishments; for God does not reprove our crimes,
   or punish us for them, as if he delighted in taking vengeance, or
   demanded some recompense, but that we may be on our guard "for the time
   to come."

   24. Who gave Jacob for a prey? These are the matters which Isaiah
   complains that the Jews did not observe; for they thought either that
   the sufferings which they endured happened by chance, or that they had
   not the same strength to resist as their fathers had, and that this was
   the reason why they were conquered by their enemies. In short, having
   their minds fully occupied with external causes, they did not at the
   same time observe the threatenings which had been so frequently
   denounced by the prophets, nor attend to the judgments of God; and
   therefore the Prophet drags them before the heavenly throne, by
   declaring that God is the author of these judgments.

   Hath not Jehovah? They could not believe that the calamities which they
   suffered proceeded from God, as the just punishment of their sins; and
   we know that there is nothing which men can now be with more difficulty
   persuaded to believe. Everybody acknowledges that God is the author of
   all things, but if you ask whether or not all adverse events are God's
   chastisements, they will be ashamed to confess it; for men are
   distracted by a variety of thoughts, and, being prejudiced by their
   opinion of fortune, turn their minds and hearts to this or that cause
   rather than to God.

   Because we have sinned against him. Isaiah next points out the cause of
   so grievous destruction, the sins of the people, which the Lord justly
   punished. In like manner, Moses had also shewn,

   "How would a thousand flee from the face of one? Doth not the Lord
   pursue you, and shut you up in the hands of the enemy?" (Deuteronomy
   32:30.)

   We wonder every day at many things which happen contrary to our
   expectation, and yet we do not acknowledge that the cause lies with
   ourselves. It is therefore necessary that we be hard pressed and
   constrained by violence to confess our fault, and consequently this
   doctrine must be often stated and repeated.

   That men may not accuse God of cruelty, the Prophet adds, that he does
   it for a just cause; for he does not rush forward [160] to inflict
   punishment, if he be not constrained by necessity, and he takes no
   pleasure in our afflictions; and, therefore, we must here observe two
   separate things. First, no evil happens to us, but from the Lord, so
   that we must not think that anything happens either by chance or by any
   external cause. Secondly, we suffer no evil whatever, but for a just
   cause, because we have sinned against God. In vain, therefore, do men
   accuse God of cruelty; for we ought to acknowledge his righteous
   judgments in the chastisements which he deservedly inflicts.

   And they would not walk in his ways. Here the Prophet aggravates the
   guilt of the Jews, but changes the person, because he formerly included
   himself along with others, as being a member of that body, and
   confessed his guilt. Not that he resembled the great body of the
   people, or approved of their crimes; but because, amidst such a huge
   mass of vices, he could not be free from being in some degree infected
   by the contagion, like other parts of the body. Because he was widely
   different from the great body of the people, he changes the person, and
   adds, "They would not;" by which he declares that such deep-rooted
   obduracy is offensive to him, so that he cannot in any way either
   conceal it or express his approbation of it; for the subject now in
   hand is not ordinary vices, but contempt and rejection of God,
   manifested by fiercely and haughtily shaking off his yoke. This is the
   reason why Isaiah excludes himself from their number.

   If these things justly befell the Jews, let us know that the same
   punishment hangs over us and the whole world, if we do not take warning
   and repent. We see how kindly the Lord invites us to himself, in how
   many ways he expresses his good-will towards us, how graciously he
   testifies that he will be reconciled, though he has been offended.
   Having now been so often and so kindly invited by God, and having
   experienced his mercy, if we refuse to listen to him, we shall
   undoubtedly feel that the ruin which they experienced belongs equally
   to all rebels.

   25. Therefore he hath poured upon him. Because the chastisements by
   which the Lord had begun, and would afterwards continue, to punish the
   Jews, were very severe, the Prophet employs metaphorical language to
   express their vehemence. He says that the Lord poureth out his fury, as
   if a thunderbolt were discharged with violence, or as if waters burst
   forth, to spread devastation far and wide on the surrounding country;
   just as, at the deluge, when

   "the flood-gates of the deep were broken up, and the windows of heaven
   were opened," (Genesis 7:11,)

   the waters burst forth with prodigious force and violence.

   And the strength of war. He next employs a different figure, that God
   assembles his forces to make war, that he may attack the people with
   unrelenting hostility. If this be supposed to mean the enemies whom the
   Lord raised up against the Jews, I do not greatly object to the
   interpretation; for it is certain that they were raised up by the
   judgment of God. What else was Nebuchadnezzar than God's scourge?
   (Jeremiah 51:20.) But, for my own part, I think that this also ought to
   be viewed as metaphorical language, meaning that "God rushes forth
   violently, like an armed enemy, and pours out his fury on the people."
   He has various ways of making war; for he chastises his people
   sometimes by famine, sometimes by war, and sometimes by pestilence; and
   therefore I think that he includes here scourges of every kind by which
   the Lord strikes his people. If we sometimes think that they are too
   harsh and severe, let us consider how heinous our sins are; for we
   shall not find that he is immoderate or excessively severe in
   inflicting punishment.

   And he gave no heed to it. Again the Prophet exclaims against that
   gross stupidity with which the Jews were struck, so that they did not
   perceive their affliction, nor raise their eyes to heaven, so as to
   acknowledge that the Lord was the avenger and author of it. [161]

   And he laid it not to heart. To "lay a thing to heart" is to consider
   attentively and diligently; for if this thought came into our minds,
   and were deeply engraven on our hearts, "God is judge, and hath justly
   punished us," we should immediately repent. At present the whole world
   is oppressed by so many calamities, that there is scarcely a spot that
   is free from the wrath of God; yet no person gives heed to it, but all
   fiercely and rebelliously contend with him; and therefore we need not
   wonder that he inflicts on men such dreadful punishment, and pours out
   his wrath on all sides, when the world opposes him with inveterate
   rebellion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [150] Commentary on Isaiah, [12]vol. 1 p. 246.

   [151] The former is found in the text of our author's version, and the
   latter in his marginal reading. -- Ed.

   [152] "Il ne fait pas grand bruit."

   [153] That is, tvrh (torah), "a law," is derived from yrh (yarah),
   which in the Hiphil conjugation, hvrh (horah), signifies "he taught."
   -- Ed.

   [154] "There is no sufficient ground for the opinion that the pronoun
   hv' (ha) is ever used as a divine name, cognate and equivalent to
   Jehovah. In this case the obvious and usual construction is entirely
   satisfactory." -- Alexander.

   [155] "By the former things he means those things which had been done
   in order to protect and deliver the Hebrew nation from the power of
   barbarians; and those things which Jehovah had foretold by his prophets
   came, that is, they happened." -- Rosenmiiller.

   [156] "That is, before they took place, as in Isaiah 43:12. The
   metaphor is taken from plants, which put forth the buds and flowers
   before their fruits are visible. (Genesis 2:5; Exodus 10:5.) The
   meaning is, that God does not foretell those things which have already
   begun to be accomplished, and which sagacious men may conjecture to be
   future; but before anything has happened, from which a conjecture may
   be formed as to future events." -- Rosenmuller.

   [157] "If these are not all parts of the same great picture, it is
   impossible to frame one. If they are, it is absurd to take the first
   and last parts in their widest sense as an extravagant hyperbole, and
   that which is between them in its strictest sense as a literal
   description. The only consistent supposition is, that sea, islands,
   deserts, mountains, towns, and camps, are put together as poetical
   ingredients of the general conception, that the earth in all its parts
   shall have reason to rejoice." -- Alexander.

   [158] The name is derived from skene (skene), "a tent," because they
   dwelt in tents. Their modern name is Saracens. -- Ed

   [159] "Non pas a ces sages mondains." "Not to these worldly wise men."

   [160] "Car il n' empoigne la verge soudainement." "For he does not
   seize the rod suddenly."

   [161] "Pour recognoistre Dieu, qui les chastioit si rudement." "To
   acknowledge God, who chastise them so severely."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 43
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 43:1-28

   1. But now thus saith the LORD that created thee, O Jacob, and he that
   formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have
   called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

   1. Et nunc sic dicit Iehova creator tuus, Iacob; fictor tuus, Israel.
   Ne timeas, quoniam redemi (to,) vocavi to nomine tuo; meus (es) tu.

   2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
   through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest
   through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame
   kindle upon thee.

   2. Quum transieris per aquas, ego tecum (ero;) in fluminibus, non
   inundabunt to. Quum transieris per ignem ipsum, non combureris; nec
   flamma ardebit in to.

   3. For I am the LORD thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I
   gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.

   3. Quoniam ego Iehova Deus tuus, Sanctus Israel, servator tuus; dedi
   pretium redemptionis true, Aegyptum, Aethiopiam, et Saba in vicem tuam.

   4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and
   I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for
   thy life.

   4. Quia pretiosus fuisti in oculis meis, honoratus es, et ego dilexi
   to. Tradam hominem in vicem tuam, et populos in vicem animae tuae.

   5. Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east,
   and gather thee from the west;

   5. Ne timeas, quia ego tecum. Ab Oriente adducam semen tuum, et ab
   Occidente colligam to.

   6. I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back:
   bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;

   6. Dicam Aquiloni, Da, et Austro, Ne prohibeas. Adducito filios meos e
   longinquo, et filias meas ab extremo terrae.

   7. Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for
   my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him.

   7. Omnes vocati nomine meo, et ad gloriam meam creavi cos; formavi eos,
   adeoque feel eos.

   8. Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have
   ears.

   8. Ut educam populum caecum, cut oculi; et surdos, quibus aures.

   9. Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be
   assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things?
   let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or
   let them hear, and say, It: is truth.

   9. Omnes gentes congregentur simul, et colligantur populi. Quis eat in
   els qui istud annuntiet: ac priora nos audire faciat? Proferant testes
   suos, justi pronuntientur; sed audiant, et dicent, Verum est.

   10. Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have
   chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he:
   before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

   10. Vos testes met, dicit Iehova, et servus meus quem elegi. Propterea
   scietis, et credetis mihi, et intelligetis quod ego sum; ante me non
   est formatus Deus, nee post me erit.

   11. I, even I, am the LORD; and besides me there is no saviour.

   11. Ego, ego sum Iehova, et nullus praeter me servator.

   12. I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there was
   no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the
   LORD, that I am God.

   12. Ego annuntiavi, et servavi, et audire feteram; et non in vobis
   alienus. Vos ergo testes mei, dicit Iehova, quod ego sim Deus.

   13. Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver
   out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it?

   13. Etiam antequam dies esset, ego eram; et non est qui e manu mea
   eruat; faciam, et quis avertet illud?

   14. Thus saith the LORD, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For
   your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their
   nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships.

   14. Sic dicit Iehova redemptor rester, Sanctus Israelis: Propter vos
   misi in Babylonem, et descendere feci. Omnes ipsi fugitivi; et
   Chaldaeorum clamor in navibus.

   15. I am the LORD, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.

   15. Ego Iehova, Sanctus rester, creator israel, Rex rester.

   16. Thus saith the LORD, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path in
   the mighty waters;

   16. Sic dicit Iehova, qui dat in mari viam, et in aquis violentis
   semitam.

   17. Which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army, and the
   power; they shall lie down together, they shall not rise: they are
   extinct, they are quenched as tow.

   17. Quum educit, currus et equus, exercitus et robur simul jacent, ut
   non surgant. Extincti sunt; sicut linum extincti sunt.

   18. Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of
   old.

   18. Ne reeordemini priorum, et antiqua ne memoretis.

   19. Behold, I will do a new thing: now it shall spring forth; shall ye
   not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in
   the desert.

   19. Ecce ego facio rem novato; jam orietur; an non earn cognoscetis?
   Hac vice (vel, utique) ponam in deserto viam; flumina in solitudine.

   20. The beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the owls:
   because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to
   give drink to my people, my chosen.

   20. Honorabit me bestia agri; dracones, et pulli struthionis; quia
   dederim in deserto aquas, flumina in solitudine, ad potandum populum
   meum, electum meum.

   21. This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my
   praise.

   21. Populum hunc creavi mihi; laudem meam narrabit.

   22. But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been weary
   of me, O Israel.

   22. Et non me invocasti, Iacob; quin fatigatus es in me, Israel.

   23. Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings;
   neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused
   thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense.

   23. Non adduxisti mihi pecus holocaustorum tuorum, et sacrificiis tuis
   non honorasti me; non feci to servire in oblatione, nec laborare in
   suffitu.

   24. Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou
   filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to
   serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.

   24. Non emisti mihi pecunia calamum, nec adipe victimarum tuarum
   inebriasti me; sed me servire fecisti in peccatis tuis, et me laborare
   fecisti in iniquitatibus tuis.

   25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own
   sake, and will not remember thy sins.

   25. Ego, ego sum qui deleo iniquitates tuas propter me; ideo peccatorum
   tuorum non recordabor.

   26. Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that
   thou mayest be justified.

   26. Reduc mihi in memoriam; judicemur simul; narra tu, ut justificeris.

   27. Thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed
   against me.

   27. Pater tuus primus peceavit, et doctores tui in me praevaricati
   sunt.

   28. Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have
   given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches.

   28. Ideo poiluam Principes sanctuarii, et ponam in execrationem Iacob,
   et Israel in opprobrium.


   1. And now thus saith Jehovah. It is hard to say whether this is a
   different discourse or the same with the former; for the Prophets,
   whose writings have come down to us, did not separate their discourses
   into distinct chapters, so as to enable us to know what they spoke each
   day. For my own part, I think it is probable that this doctrine is
   connected with the preceding; for, having formerly spoken severely
   against the Jews, and threatened destruction to them, he wished to
   moderate that severity. The Lord always cares for the godly; and
   wickedness never abounds to such an extent that he does not at the same
   time preserve his people, and provide for their safety, that they may
   not be involved in similar destruction. I think, therefore, that the
   copulative v (vau) should be viewed as disjunctive, "And yet the Lord
   will leave some consolation to the godly who shall remain."

   This passage ought to be carefully observed; for, although it may
   appear as if all had leagued for our destruction, although the anger of
   the Lord burn fiercely, and we think that we are very near destruction;
   yet, if but two or three godly persons are left, we ought not to
   despair; for Jehovah addresses them in this manner, Fear not. The
   adverb Now, which is here used, has great weight; for it means a
   present or immediate calamity, and, in short, a time when it appeared
   as if all were lost and ruined; because at that very time God does not
   cease to comfort his people, and gently to soothe their sorrows, that
   amidst the utmost despair they may preserve their hope firm and
   unshaken.

   Such is the purport of the preface, thy Creator and Maker; for
   otherwise the door would have been shut against the execution of these
   predictions. Besides, from other passages we may conclude, that the
   Lord does not here speak of universal creation, such as we share with
   the rest of men, and by which we are born mortal, but of regeneration
   to the hope of a heavenly life, on account of which we are also called
   new creatures. This is the sense in which Paul calls us "the
   workmanship of God," (Ephesians 2:10,) as on former occasions we have
   fully explained. [162] In this sense also he calls himself the Maker;
   as if he had said, that God did not "make" his Church, in which the
   brightness of his glory shone conspicuously, in order to undo so
   excellent a work. Hence we ought to observe, that the Church has
   nothing that is properly her own, but everything in which she excels
   ought to be ascribed to the gift of God.

   For I have redeemed thee. This is added as the reason of the former
   statement, and may appropriately be viewed as referring both to the
   future and to the past; for the first deliverance from Egypt gave hope
   of another deliverance to come. Although he describes a future
   deliverance from the Babylonish captivity, yet the past tense is not
   inapplicable; for God hath redeemed us to himself before the effect of
   redemption reaches us; and therefore when he wishes to testify what he
   has decreed, namely, to redeem his Church, which appeared to have
   perished, he uses with propriety the past tense.

   I have called thee by thy name. To "call by one's name" means here, to
   admit into close relationship, as when we are adopted by God to be his
   children. The reason of this mode of expression is, that God rejects
   the reprobate in such a manner that he appears to have forgotten them.
   Hence, also, the Scripture says, that "he knoweth them not." (Matthew
   7:23; Luke 13:27.) From a contrast of this sort we learn more fully
   what is meant by being "called by God." It is when he passes by others,
   and deigns to bestow on us a peculiar honor, and, from being strangers,
   to make us members of his household, and next takes us under his care
   and guardianship, so as to direct us and all our affairs. For the same
   reason he adds, Thou art mine, that believers may know that there will
   always be left a Church among the elect people, because God refuses to
   be deprived of his rightful possession. In short, he declares that they
   are his dear inheritance, of which he will never suffer himself to be
   robbed.

   2 When thou shalt pass through the waters. This is an anticipation by
   which he declares that they who rely on God's immediate assistance have
   no reason for sinking under adversity. That is stated more fully than
   in the preceding verse, because while he shews that the Church will not
   be exempt from calamities and afflictions, but must maintain a constant
   warfare, he encourages to patience and courage; as if he had said, "The
   Lord hath not redeemed thee that thou mightest enjoy pleasures and
   luxuries, or that thou mightest abandon thyself to ease and indolence,
   but rather that thou shouldest be prepared for enduring every kind of
   evils."

   By fire and water he means every kind of miseries to which we are
   liable in this life; for we must contend not with calamities of one
   kind only, but with infinitely diversified calamities. At one time we
   must "pass through wares" and at another "through fire." (Psalm 66:12.)
   In like manner the Apostle James exhorts believers not to faint when
   they "fall into various temptations." (James 1:2.) And, indeed, faith
   needs to be put to the trial in many ways; for it often happens that he
   who has been victorious in one combat has been baffled by another kind
   of temptation. We are therefore tried by afflictions, but are at length
   delivered; we are baffled by the billows, but are not swallowed up; we
   are even scorched by the flames, but are not consumed. We have, indeed,
   the same feeling of pain as other men, but we are supported by the
   grace of God, and fortified by the spirit of patience, that we may not
   faint; and at length he will stretch out his hand and lift us up on
   high. [163]

   3. For I am Jehovah thy God. He confirms the preceding statement by the
   experience of the past; for the Lord had formerly assisted his people
   in such a manner that it was reasonable and proper that believers
   should safely rely on his grace. We must always remember what we had in
   the former verse, -- "Fear not, for I have redeemed thee; I am thy
   Lord." These ought to be read unitedly and in immediate connection,
   because they have the same object; for if the Lord is our God, it
   follows that he is on our side, and therefore we shall find that he is
   our Savior. But if we wish to know by experience that he is our Savior,
   we must be a part of Israel, not in name only, but so as to give true
   evidences of godliness during the whole course of our life. This is
   therefore the foundation of our confidence, that "Jehovah is our God;"
   and hence it follows that they who do not acknowledge God to be their
   Father, and who do not rely on his kindness, are wretched, and tremble
   continually. Wicked men, indeed, indulge in mirth, and even act
   disdainfully towards God; but their indifference is intoxication and
   madness of mind, by which they are the more rapidly carried headlong to
   their destruction. To believers alone this brings the assurance, that
   he who hath chosen them wishes to be continually their God, and to
   preserve them; and therefore hath separated them to be his inheritance.

   In this sense he calls himself The Holy One of Israel, because while
   the whole human race is by nature estranged from him, he hath chosen
   his people that he might set them apart to be his own. Now, though
   external separation is of little moment, unless God sanctify the elect
   by the power of his Spirit, yet, because Israel had openly polluted
   himself, God declares that still his covenant shall not be made void,
   because he is always like himself. Besides, it is well known that the
   word holy is used in an active sense for "him who sanctifies;" and
   therefore if we wish to be certain of God's love towards us, let us
   always remember the testimony of our adoption, by which we are
   confirmed in our hearts, as by a sure pledge, and let us with all
   earnestness ask it from God.

   I have given the price of thy redemption. I make no remarks on those
   repetitions which are frequently used by the Prophet, and are customary
   in the Hebrew language; for the two phrases in this verse, I have given
   the price, and I have given instead of thee, are used by him in the
   same sense. We have said that the Prophet confirms believers by
   bringing forward earlier proofs of the grace of God; as if he had said,
   "You have already known by experience that God cares for your
   salvation; for how could it have happened that Sennacherib turned his
   forces against Egypt, Ethiopia, and other nations, but because the Lord
   spared you, and directed the attack of your enemy to another quarter?
   Since therefore he has hitherto manifested so great anxiety on your
   behalf, you have no need to be anxious about the future." Thus if at
   any time doubts arise in our minds about the providence of God, or
   about his promises, we ought to bring to remembrance the benefits which
   he has already bestowed upon us; for we shall be chargeable with
   extreme ingratitude if, after having received from God so many
   benefits, we doubt of his kindness for the future.

   But a question arises. In what sense does he call "Egypt and Ethiopia
   the price of the redemption" of the Church? for heathen men are not of
   so high value as to redeem the children of God. But the Prophet
   borrowed this mode of expression from the ordinary language of men; as
   if he had said, "The Egyptians, the Ethiopians, and the Sabeans came in
   thy room, and, as if an exchange had been made, were constrained to
   suffer the destruction to which thou wast exposed; for, in order to
   preserve thee, I destroyed them, and delivered them instead of thee
   into the hand of the enemy." But we must attend to the history. While
   Sennacherib was rushing on with his whole might against Judea, the
   Lord, by throwing over him a bridle, suddenly checked him, and
   entangled him by other wars, so that he was constrained to withdraw his
   army; and thus the Egyptians and Ethiopians were signally defeated,
   while the people of God were allowed to breathe. (2 Kings 19:28; Isaiah
   37:8.)

   We too may readily acknowledge, if we are not worse than stupid, that
   the same providence and infinite mercy of God have been manifested
   toward us, when tyrants who would have wished to destroy us, and who
   joined in opening their mouths with eagerness to devour us, are made by
   him to engage in wars against each other, and when the rage with which
   they burned against us is directed by him to another quarter; for by
   doing so he preserves us, so as to give them as the price of our
   redemption. When we see irreligious men, amidst the uproar and
   confusion of mutual wars, pause in their efforts to destroy us, while
   it is manifest that they do not pause of their own accord, let us lift
   up our eyes to heaven, and learn that God, in order to spare us,
   miraculously substitutes others in our room; for we were "like sheep
   appointed for slaughter," (Psalm 44:22;) swords were drawn on every
   hand, if he had not snatched them from the hands of wicked men, or
   given them a different direction.

   Hence we ought to draw a general doctrine, that the Lord takes such
   care of all believers (1 Peter 5:7) that he values them more highly
   than the whole world. Although, therefore, we are of no value, yet let
   us rejoice in this, that the Lord sets so high a value upon us, and
   prefers us to the whole world, rescues us from dangers, and thus
   preserves us in the midst of death. If everything were at peace with
   us, and if we had no troubles, we should not see this grace of God; for
   when a thousand deaths appear to hang over us, and when there appears
   no way of escape, and when he suddenly drives back the tyrants, or
   turns them in another direction, we then know by experience what the
   Prophet says, and perceive his invaluable kindness toward us.

   4. Because thou wast precious. Others interpret it "Thou wast
   honorable, because I raised thee to honor;" but I think that God
   assigns the reason why he gave up Egypt and Ethiopia to the enemies in
   their room. It was because he loved them, and because they were dear to
   him. It ought to be explained thus, -- "Because I loved thee, therefore
   I gave a man for thee." By these words he excludes all personal worth
   on the part of the people, that they may not boast of having obtained
   anything by their own merit; and, indeed, the cause of salvation, and
   of all the blessings which we receive, is the undeserved love of God;
   it is also the cause of all our excellence; for, if he judge of us
   according to our own qualifications, he will not value us a straw. We
   must therefore set aside every idea of merit, or of personal worth, of
   which we have none, and must ascribe everything to the grace of God
   alone. He means that this love is not of an ordinary kind when he says
   that we are "precious;" and for the same reason he calls us "his
   first-born," (Exodus 4:22,) and "his friends." (John 15:15.)

   I will give a man. Here he adds nothing new, but rather explains the
   preceding statement, and employs the word "man" collectively for "men;"
   as if he had said, "There will be no man whom God will not take away
   and destroy, in order to preserve his people; for he sets a higher
   value on a single believer than on the whole world." At the same time
   he reminds believers that they are redeemed at the expense of those who
   do not at all differ from them in origin or in nature.

   5. Fear not. When Isaiah frequently repeats this exhortation, we ought
   not to look upon it as superfluous; for we know and feel how prone we
   are by nature to distrust. Scarcely any words can express the greatness
   of the alarm by which the Church was at that time shaken. As soon as we
   begin to call in question the promises of God, our minds are distracted
   by various thoughts; we are alarmed and continually tormented by the
   greatness and diversity of the dangers, till at length we are
   stupified, and have no perception of the grace of God. Accordingly,
   before despair seize our hearts, it is not without good reason that he
   so frequently repeats I am with thee, in order that he may either
   destroy altogether or partially mitigate the fear which is seated in
   our hearts; for, when it has taken root, there is no method of curing
   it. This should lead us also to remark, that we ought not to place our
   safety in anything else than in the presence of God; for if he be
   absent, we shall either shudder with fear, or become stupid, or run
   headlong like drunkards. And yet it is not the will of God that we
   shall be so devoid of fear as to give ourselves up to slothfulness and
   indifference; but when we are informed that he is at hand and will
   assist us, cheerful confidence ought to be victorious in the midst of
   fears.

   I will bring thy seed from the east. This passage is evidently taken
   front the writings of Moses, as we said at the beginning of this
   commentary, [164] that the prophets are his interpreters, and draw
   their doctrine from his books; and therefore the Prophet applies this
   passage to that particular event which he had in view in the present
   discourse. Moses had thus foretold,

   "The Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and will have compassion on
   thee, and will turn and gather thee out of all the nations into which
   thy God hath scattered thee. Even if thou shalt be driven to the utmost
   parts of heaven, thence will thy God gather thee, and thence will he
   take thee." (Deuteronomy 30:3, 4.)

   What Moses spoke in general terms the Prophet here confirms in a
   particular instance, and again declares with a slight change of the
   words. The amount of what is stated is, that it is as difficult to
   gather a people that is not only scattered, but driven to the most
   distant countries of the world, as it is to gather ashes that have been
   scattered here and there; but that God, by his wonderful power, will
   cause those dislocated members to unite again in one body.

   6. I will say to the north. Under these four parts he includes the
   whole world, which is very customary in all languages. But Isaiah
   speaks in somewhat loftier language than Moses, because he wished the
   people to view the event as if it had actually occurred; and, to such a
   purpose those lively descriptions which may be said to place it before
   our eyes, are admirably adapted. He might, indeed, have said it in a
   single word, but this manner of address is far more forcible; for he
   represents God as commanding, with supreme authority, all the
   creatures, and every part of the world, to set his people free.

   Bring my sons. He means that not all Israel shall be gathered, but only
   that which is the true Israel; for not all who are the descendants of
   Abraham according to the flesh are true Israelites, but very many of
   them are bastards. (Romans 9:6, 7.) These belong to the true and lawful
   seed; for that vast multitude of people was not saved, but only "a
   remnant," as we saw in a former chapter. (Isaiah 10:21, 22.) There was
   a vast number of people who were carried away into captivity, but there
   were few who were brought back. Among them was preserved a seed; and
   the Lord would not suffer that seed to perish, or the covenant which he
   had made with their fathers to be broken. These things were very hard
   to be believed by the Jews, who were despised by all, and were exposed
   not only to the hatred but to the curses of almost the whole world, and
   were scarcely reckoned to belong to the number of men; and therefore
   they must have depended solely on the promises. They knew that Cyrus
   (Isaiah 45:1) would come, but who he was they were not yet able to
   conceive, for he had not yet been born; and therefore they needed to be
   armed with very excellent and steadfast faith, in order to wait for the
   Lord with unshaken confidence, while many reckoned these predictions to
   be fables. Let us learn also flora this example to look to God alone,
   so as not to doubt that he will assist us and will abide by his
   promises at the proper time.

   7. All called. Such is my interpretation of this clause, for the
   Prophet has made use of the singular number instead of the plural.
   Interpreters have mistaken the import of this mode of expression; for
   they explain it thus, "Whosoever have been called by my name, I have
   formed them to my glory." But I understand it thus, "All called," that
   is, "All shall be called by my name;" as he says in other passages, "My
   name shall be called upon them." (Genesis 48:16; Deuteronomy 28:10;
   Isaiah 4:1.) Why so? "Because I have created them, I have formed them,
   I have made them for my glory." He pursues the subject which he
   formerly handled about gathering the people into one body, though they
   have been scattered into various and distant parts of the world; as if
   he had said, "If this work appears to be incredible, you ought not to
   judge of it by the ordinary course of nature, but you ought to look to
   his power."

   By my name; that is, "under my direction;" as we have also said, in
   expounding another passage, (Isaiah 41:25,) that God is reconciled to
   us, because by the right of adoption we are accounted his people. Now,
   because the Jews were to be brought back under his guidance and
   command, and not by the power or assistance of men, he declares that
   his name will be rendered illustrious in this deliverance, in order
   that men may learn not to form their judgments from the views of the
   flesh or from natural means.

   For my glory. The Prophet adds the reason, which contains strong ground
   of confirmation; that is, that he wishes his glory to be manifested in
   them. He therefore testifies that the salvation of his people concerns
   himself, that he can no more throw away the care of his people than he
   can expose his name to reproach and disgrace, which he will never do,
   and, in a word, that his glow, of which he is the continual defender,
   is intimately connected with the salvation of his people.

   I have formed him, yea, I have made him. For the sake of amplification
   he repeats the same thing in many forms of language, that they may be
   more fully convinced that he wishes to conduct to the end the work
   which he has begun. Such is the force of the particle 'ph, (aph,) which
   means "likewise," or "even," and sometimes, as we say, "for this time."
   Accordingly, the meaning is generally supposed to be, "In like manner,
   as I have created and formed that people, so I desire to elevate them
   to a new rank, and to restore them to their ancient freedom." It may
   also be rendered and so, and, as I have said, I prefer this rendering,
   so as to mean not only that the people have nothing but from his grace,
   but that he is deeply concerned about their salvation, because he
   cannot despise his own work, a work so remarkable and excellent. This
   passage, therefore, recommends to us the extraordinary grace of God, by
   which we are not only born to be men, but likewise formed anew after
   his image.

   8. That I may bring out. The brevity of the words makes the meaning
   somewhat obscure. Some translate it thus, "I will bring out the blind,
   and him who hath eyes," that is, both the blind and them that see, both
   the deaf and them that hear. Some explain blind to mean those who have
   indeed eyes, but so dim that they cannot perceive the secrets of
   heavenly wisdom. But when I take a careful survey of the whole, I
   prefer to interpret those phrases separately. "I will bring out the
   blind, so as to restore sight to them; I will bring out the deaf, so
   that they shall recover their hearing." And thus the meaning of the
   words is, "To bring out the blind, and they shall have eyes; and to
   bring out the deaf, and they shall have ears." The people are first
   delivered, and then eyes and ears are restored to them.

   The Lord did this when he brought his people out of Babylon; but
   undoubtedly the Prophet looks farther, that is, to the kingdom of
   Christ; for at that time believers were gathered not only out of
   Babylon, but out of all places of the earth. This was seen openly and
   singularly at Peter's first sermon, when many persons from various
   countries united in the same confession of faith. (Acts 2:41.) But
   afterwards others, who appeared to be altogether strangers, united in
   the same body, and shewed that they were children of Abraham. If,
   therefore, we wish to find the full truth of this prophecy, we must
   come to Christ, by whom alone we are rescued from the bondage of the
   devil and restored to liberty. (John 8:36.) It is he who restores to us
   eyes and ears, though formerly we were by nature both blind and deaf.
   Yet it is proper to remember what I have repeatedly stated on former
   occasious, that the return of the people is closely connected with the
   renewal of the Church, which was accomplished by Christ; for what God
   began by bringing his people out of captivity he continued till Christ,
   and then brought to perfection; and so it is one and the same
   redemption. Hence it follows that the blessings which are here
   mentioned ought not to be limited to a short time.

   9. Let all the nations be gathered together. Here the Prophet, as on
   former occasions, speaks in the person of God, and bids defiance to all
   idols. It is highly necessary, and was at that time especially
   necessary, to distinguish between the true God and false gods. It is
   easy indeed to ascribe to God the glory of divinity, but it is very
   difficult to claim it for him so exclusively, that all false gods shall
   be reduced to nothing; and at that time the error regarding them had
   received greater confirmation, for at the ruin of the nation
   unbelievers applauded the gods as if they had vanquished the true God.
   The Prophet therefore suggests to believers the reply which they should
   make to the jeers of their enemies, and, although they should sally
   forth in crowds to defend their errors, enjoins the small number to
   stand firm against all their forces.

   Who is there among them to declare this? We formerly said that
   foreknowledge and power belong to God alone; for he has all things
   under his eye, and governs all things according to his pleasure; and,
   accordingly, by these two arguments he formerly proved against all the
   false gods the charge of vanity, lie now repeats the same charge, not
   to reclaim from this error the Gentiles, who did not read those
   prophecies, but to confirm the faith of the Jews, who were assured that
   they alone knew the true God. At present, indeed, this doctrine belongs
   both to Gentiles and to Jews; and not only so, but when the Jews shewed
   themselves to be unworthy, (Acts 13:46,) their privileges were extended
   to the Gentiles; but at that time Isaiah chiefly addressed the Jews,
   that, although they saw the Gentiles succeeding in everything to their
   wish, still they might abhor their idols and superstitions.

   Let them produce their witnesses. After haying summoned unbelievers to
   plead the cause of their gods, or rather, after having held it to be
   acknowledged that it was to no purpose that they spent their time in
   the worship of idols, because they had no power of predicting future
   events, he adds that there will be no witnesses to testify with truth
   that any prediction ever proceeded from false gods, and consequently
   that their cause is destitute of lawful defense. There never was a
   time, indeed, when there were not many fables told about idols, as we
   constantly hear of innumerable fables of that kind which are widely
   circulated, and the silliness with which unbelievers pour forth their
   lies is equalled by the obstinacy with which they defend them; but if
   we come to examine them, we shall find them to be supported by no
   proof, but to be absolute tricks and foolish inventions. On this
   account the Prophet willingly yields the victory, if they shall bring
   forward competent and trustworthy "witnesses." To God alone, therefore,
   this glory belongs; for he has "witnessess,"

   But let them hear. At length, as if the matter had been fully proved,
   he rises more confidently, and commands the vanquished to keep silence.
   When he bids them hear, he means that the only obstacle to their
   acknowledgment of the truth is, that they are prejudiced by their
   error, and refuse to hear God; for this contempt causes them not to
   repent, but, on the contrary, to defend their error with stubbornness.
   Now, the Lord was ready to teach if they had only been willing to hear
   him with candor; and a better teacher could not be desired, but pride
   and haughtiness will not suffer them to see the truth or to listen to
   God. They are, therefore, without excuse; for they disdainfully reject
   his public instructions, and do not assent to his doctrine. Isaiah
   justly declares that, if they gave due attention, they would be
   constrained to acknowledge it to be true; [165] and indeed all who
   shall shew themselves to be obedient will readily acknowledge that the
   truth of God is founded on a firm and solid judgment, and not on an
   uncertain and doubtful opinion.

   10. Ye are my witnesses. After having summoned the Gentiles to a
   contest, and after having proved that the stories which they circulated
   concerning their idols were false and unfounded, God now separates
   himself from the multitude of them, and produces his "witnesses," that
   he may not be thought to be of the same class with them. He justly
   boasts, therefore, that they are his witnesses, and that he has true
   witnesses; for the Jews had been instructed by heavenly oracles, as far
   as was necessary for attaining perfect certainty. Yet he indirectly
   reproaches them with ingratitude, if they do not openly declare that
   they know everything that is necessary for maintaining the glory of
   God; and, indeed, he calls them to bear witness, and adjures them not
   to cover with silence those predictions by which the true religion
   might be proved, because that would be unjustly to defraud a good cause
   of their support.

   And my servant. By the word "servant" some think that Isaiah is meant,
   but I prefer to take it collectively, for all the prophets; for there
   is a change of number. Now, this name was peculiarly bestowed on the
   prophets, whom the Lord chose for the purpose of maintaining his truth;
   and yet, in making use of the singular number, there can be no doubt
   that he looked chiefly to Christ, in whom all the prophecies are
   contained and accomplished. (John 1:45; Acts 3:24, and 10:43; Romans
   1:2, 3; Hebrews 1:1.) It is also certain that by him chiefly, as the
   highest witness, all men are convinced. Yet we ought to observe God's
   design, which I formerly mentioned, to call the Jews to be witnesses,
   that he might accuse them of ingratitude, if they did not freely utter
   what is demanded by the faith of those who, after having received
   proofs so numerous and so remarkable, could not be ignorant of the
   power and goodness of God, or call them in question without the
   greatest treachery. At the same time, he shows in general that the Lord
   hath chosen the Church, in order to bear testimony to his truth; and on
   that ground Paul calls the Church

   "the pillar and foundation of truth." (1 Timothy 3:15.)

   It is therefore the duty of the Church to defend and publish the truth,
   that it may be honored by posterity from age to age; not that the Lord
   needs this assistance, but because in this way he wishes to prove and
   establish its truth among men. Here Isaiah includes all believers, for
   this office of bearing testimony is binding on all, but especially on
   ministers, who ought to be standard-bearers, and to set an example
   before others. For this reason also they are particularly mentioned;
   but in general no man ought to be accounted a believer, who conceals
   the knowledge of God within his own heart, and never makes an open
   confession of the truth.

   Therefore ye shall know. That it may not be thought that the Lord asks
   them to bear witness about what is unknown, he adds, "Ye shall know, ye
   shall believe, ye shall understand;" and by this order of the words he
   shews that faith goes before confession. If, therefore, confession
   proceed from the top of the lips, and not from the heart, it is vain
   and useless, and is not such as the Lord demands or approves. Yet there
   is still some difficulty in the order of those words, "to know, to
   believe, to understand;" for we do not say that all who know believe,
   and, in the ordinary manner of speaking, where there is knowledge,
   there may not be faith. Besides, it is doubtful what is meant by
   "understanding," which is mentioned after faith, as if it differed from
   knowledge.

   But in this passage the Prophet shows that there is a kind of
   preparation for faith, by which God procures reverence for his word,
   when he sees that it needs such assistance. The beginning of faith,
   indeed, is humility, by which we yield our senses as captives to God;
   but because we do not embrace the doctrine offered to us with such
   certainty as is needful, God confirms us by proofs, that we may fully
   believe. Thus John relates that he and Peter "believed the Scriptures,"
   (John 20:8,) when they beheld in the grave the tokens of Christ's
   resurrection; and in another passage he says that "the disciples
   believed in Christ," when that which they had heard from his mouth was
   accomplished. (John 2:22.)

   We may therefore sum it up in this manner. "The Jews shall actually
   feel it, when their faith shall have been aided by signs to worship the
   true God." At the same time, a distinction is made between true faith
   and that credulity which lightly carries away fickle men; and God
   always bestows on his elect knowledge and judgment, that they may
   distinguish truth from falsehood. Next follows faith and firm
   certainty, so that they embrace without hesitation all that the Lord
   hath spoken; and afterwards faith kindles in our hearts more and more
   the light of understanding, and even in proportion to the progress
   which we make in it, our knowledge grows and becomes brighter. But
   these things are not done by our own judgment, but by the power of the
   Holy Spirit, so far as we are enlightened by him.

   That I am he. He means here that it is requisite, in order to faith,
   that we know who is our God, and that it is he whom we worship, and no
   other; that our minds may not foolishly waver, and go astray, and admit
   everything that shall be supported by the opinion of men. Thus, faith
   is not that which frames anything according to its own fancy, or
   thoughtlessly assents to any assertion, or doubts and hesitates, but
   that which rests on firm certainty, so that, yielding obedience to the
   one true God, it surveys as from a lofty position, and despises all
   false gods, and frees and delivers their minds from the dread of error.

   Hence we see what we ought to think of the perplexed faith of Papists;
   for they think that men who are stupid and void of understanding, who
   can scarcely utter a syllable about God, whom they know not, or of whom
   they are uncertain, are believers, provided that they profess that they
   believe what their holy mother, the Church, believes. But the Lord does
   not approve of a thing so trivial, but has united faith with
   understanding, that we may not imagine that the one can be separated
   from the other. Besides, there is no faith, unless you believe that it
   is God who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and who spoke by the
   prophets and apostles; for it will not be faith, but a vain and
   wandering imagination, if we do not believe in that God.

   Before me there was no God formed. In order to confirm still more what
   he lately said, that he is the only God, he again adds that "there was
   no other God before him." Yet l' nvtsr (lo notzar) may be taken in a
   passive sense, so as to convey a different meaning, that of a
   "creature," or "workmanship," or "work" [166] of God; but as that
   appears to be a forced sense, I willingly concur with the ordinary
   opinion, that "no other God had been formed before him." This contains
   a kind of irony, as if it had been said, that there was no other god
   that had not been made and formed by mortals, and consequently, that
   none can be compared with the eternal God.

   And after me there shalt not be. He adds that "there shall be none
   afterwards," because God always preserves his dominion entire and
   unimpaired, and does not fail through old age or length of days. His
   object is to shew that, until we rely on him, there is no faith in us.
   They who know that there is some deity, but do not understand what it
   is, continually hesitate, and entangle themselves in strange
   labyrinths. Let us, therefore, believe that he alone is God, and for
   that reason cannot permit any one to be equal to him, or to share with
   him in his majesty.

   11. I, I [167] am Jehovah. Here the Lord employs lofty language, as
   having obtained the victory. Already he had sufficiently explained in
   what manner he must be known, and had shewn that there is no God except
   himself; and now, in order to confirm this doctrine, he exclaims, "I
   alone am Jehovah, there is none besides me." This shews how dangerous
   it is to contrive anything about God out of our own fancy; for when we
   make any kind of graven image, we produce an idol instead of God. We
   ought, therefore, to embrace nothing but what has proceeded from God,
   so as not to allow ourselves any liberty on this subject. After God has
   revealed himself to us, we ought to make progress in the knowledge of
   him, and to grow and be strengthened every day; for this is the meaning
   of the repetition, I, I. [168]

   And there is no Savior besides me. That we may not suppose that his
   eternal essence only is here exhibited, but also his power and
   goodness, which he constantly exercises towards us, and by which he is
   fully revealed, he adds an epithet as a distinguishing mark, that "he
   is the only Savior." The world falls into the mistake of giving a naked
   and empty name to God, and at the same time conveying his authority to
   another, as in Popery God is indeed mentioned, but is robbed of his
   honor, when one part of it is given to St. Peter, and another to St.
   Paul, and another to St. William, and another to St. George; that is,
   his offices are distributed into so many parts, that hardly anything is
   left to him but a naked and empty name. They boast, indeed, of
   worshipping God alone; but when we come to what it belongs to God to
   do, they make as many gods as they have creatures, and distribute among
   them his power and authority. But the Lord has determined that these
   shall remain entire and uninfringed, and they cannot be conveyed to
   another without shocking blasphemy; for he alone does good to men, he
   alone defends and preserves them. The last clause of the verse
   expresses that knowledge which is derived from experience, that we may
   not seek salvation in any other than in him who its the only author of
   it. Hence we learn that the chief part of the worship of God consists
   in faith, when he is acknowledged to be the beginning and the end of
   life, when we bestow on him the title of Savior, and do not convey to
   another what he declares to belong to himself and to reside in him
   alone.

   12. I have told and have saved. This verse is a sort of recapitulation
   (anakephalaiosis) of the preceding; for Jehovah again relates that he
   foretold future events, and that he had actually accomplished what he
   foretold. To tell relates to foreknowledge, and to save relates to
   power and goodness. In a word, he means that he alone is God, who both
   knows and does all things. Although these things were spoken to the
   Jews, yet let us know that they belong to us also; for all the
   predictions that have come down to us ought to be regarded by us as so
   many proofs both of the knowledge and of the power of God, that we may
   rely on him alone.

   And there is no strange god among you. That superstitions may be
   banished, and that he may be elevated to the throne of his heavenly
   doctrine, he again mentions that he displayed his power, and gave
   tokens of his grace, without being aided by any one; and hence it
   follows, that they who shall not be satisfied with him alone, will be
   excessively ungrateful and wicked. "At the time," says he, "when ye
   worshipped no strange god, I openly and publicly displayed my power;
   and therefore it is unlawful to bestow on false gods what belongs to
   me." And yet in these words he does not so much commend the piety or
   religion of the people, as he excludes all foreign aid; as if he had
   said, that while the Jews knew no other God, the miracles wrought by
   him were so numerous and so great, that it was perfectly evident that
   none but he is God. At the same time Isaiah remarks that our unbelief
   hinders God from displaying his power amongst us. Away, then, with all
   errors and all wavering and doubtful opinions about God, if we wish to
   have experience of his power! for if we turn our minds to superstitions
   or idols, we shall undoubtedfly render ourselves unworthy of his
   assistance and kindness.

   Ye are therefore my witnesses. At length he again summons them as
   witnesses, accusing them of base and shameful ingratitude, if they
   conceal what he had abundantly made known to them; for the greater and
   more numerous the testimonies by which he has manifested to us his
   power and might, so much the more are we bound to declare them to
   others.

   13. Even before the day was. He now speaks of the eternity of God; but
   we must attend to the Prophet's design; for he who has a beginning and
   is not from himself, cannot rule by his dominion, or govern according
   to his pleasure, what he has not created. When, therefore, God declares
   that he is eternal, he reminds us that the world is his workmanship;
   for this order of nature did not spring up by chance, but proceeded
   from the wonderful purpose and wisdom of God. (Genesis 1:1.) In this
   sense he afterwards adds, --

   There is none to deliver out of my hand. Hence we shall clearly see
   that his supreme and infinite power is proved from his eternity; for if
   he were not eternal, he could neither exercise authority over all
   things, nor be the defender of his people, nor dispose of the creatures
   according to his pleasure; but since he is eternal, all things must be
   subject to his authority. To the same purpose is what he says, that no
   obstacle can prevent what he hath decreed to do, that the Jews may not
   be alarmed or dispirited by the forces or number of the enemies.

   14. Thus saith Jehovah. The Prophet shews that Cyrus will be but a
   hired soldier, to render his services to the Lord for delivering his
   people. He does not indeed name Cyrus, but speaks of the army which he
   has under his command for subduing the Babylonians. We know that this
   was accomplished by Cyrus and Darius, and that under the direction of
   God, who had foretold it long before. And not only does he speak to
   those who beheld the accomplishment of these things, but to all others
   whom the Lord wished to comfort by this hope of deliverance, of which
   they could not have formed the smallest conception. He addresses
   captives, who, having been oppressed by the cruel tyranny of the
   Babylonians, appeared to be beyond all hope of obtaining deliverance,
   and who might be apt to regard those promises as absurd, because in the
   opinion of men there was no visible hope of redemption. But we should
   yield this honor to the word, to believe what is otherwise incredible,
   that we may be encouraged to "hope against hope." (Romans 4:18.) Such
   is the power of faith, that it must not be limited to the view of
   external objects, but rise above the heavens, and reach even to God
   himself.

   For your sake I have sent to Babylon. This is highly emphatic; for,
   while Cyrus was instigated by ambition and by an insatiable desire of
   power, and while there were many causes of the war, nothing was further
   from being generally believed, than that the destruction of that
   monarchy would shake the world, so that the Jews who were at that time
   most despicable in the eyes of men, would return to their native land.
   But God testifies that he will grant easy victories to the Persians, so
   that they shall subdue the East, because he will be reconciled to his
   Church.

   For the same reason he begins by saying, that he is the Redeemer of his
   people, and the Holy One, to shew more clearly that he holds dear and
   precious those whom he has chosen to be his peculiar people. (Exodus
   19:6.) But this appears to be inconsistent with what we have formerly
   seen,

   "We to thee who plunderest, for thou shalt be exposed to plunder,"
   (Isaiah 33:1;)

   for the Lord declared that he would punish the cruelty of the
   Babylonians, and repay to them what they had deserved; but now he
   affirms that he sends the Persians to deliver his people. But these
   statements may easily be reconciled. Though the Lord punished the
   Babylonians, yet he had also a care of his people; for, as the
   providence of God extends throughout the whole world, so he takes a
   peculiar care of his Church, and, as the elect are the object of his
   special love, so he directs all things for their salvation. It is not
   without good reason, therefore, that he says that he sent, and that he
   was induced by undeserved favor to send, because he wished to be the
   Savior of his people.

   And I made them come down. For the same reason as before, he now adds
   that they shall come down at his command, because, although the
   Persians and Medes will have another object in view, yet their march
   shall be guided by heavenly impulse; and in this manner he wished to
   give an early testimony of his grace to the elect people, that they
   might not faint under many very distressing calamities. This promise
   ought therefore to have brought vast consolation to believers, that,
   although they were despised, and hated, and even abhorred by all, still
   they were dear to God; because he would at length assist them, and on
   their account would destroy the kingdom of the Babylonians.

   They are all fugitives. [169] By saying that "they shall be fugitives,"
   he shews that he will give to Cyrus such success, that the Babylonians
   shall tremble at his arrival, and in terror shall throw down their
   arms, and betake themselves to flight. It often happens that a very
   powerful prince, abundantly supplied with military preparations,
   undertakes a war, but conducts it unsuccessfully; and therefore it was
   not enough that Cyrus should be sent with a powerful army, if he were
   not also crowned with success.

   And a cry of the Babylonians in the ships. To describe more fully the
   sudden flight, he adds that there shall be "a cry or noise in the
   ships;" for they were unable to escape by land. They had, indeed, a
   very convenient river, the Euphrates, which united with the river
   Tigris, by which they might easily have escaped. Yet even in this
   respect their expectation was disappointed on account of the bed of the
   river being dried up.

   15. I Jehovah. This verse contains no statement, and only shews who it
   is that speaks, how great is his power and majesty, and, in a word, how
   warmly he loves the elect people, so as to give greater weight to the
   former promise. In short, it may be viewed as the seal of the preceding
   statement, more powerfully confirming what was formerly said, that it
   is God who makes these promises. But what God?

   Your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King. He is called Holy,
   because he has chosen and separated a people, that he might consecrate
   them to himself; for by this title he reminds them of the adoption by
   which he united them to himself in a peculiar manner, that they may
   understand that he will be their Father and Savior. And for the same
   reason we ought now to acknowledge him as our Holy One, because he has
   set us apart to be members of the Church, of which we are assured by
   our calling. The name Creator must not be viewed as referring to
   universal creation, by which unbelievers also are created, but to the
   new creation, on account of which we are also called (Ephesians 2:10)
   "his workmanship," (to poiema) as we have formerly stated, while
   expounding other passages.

   Your King. This might indeed be thought to be absurd; for not even the
   semblance of a kingdom was visible, and nothing was to be seen among
   the Jews but what was covered with shame and disgrace, in consequence
   of their having been deprived of all aid and relief. Yet there was room
   for the exercise of faith, that they might hope for the restoration of
   the kingdom, though apparently ruined and almost extinguished, and
   might acknowledge God to be their King.

   16. Thus saith Jehovah. He again repeats and confirms what was
   otherwise incredible; and, in order that this confirmation may have
   greater weight, he personates God himself.

   Who maketh a way in the sea. He reminds them of former benefits, that,
   having experienced his power and kindness, they may believe that he
   will not be less gracious for the future, nor less powerful to deliver
   them. As if he had said, "The Lord who speaks will actually shew how
   vast is the greatness of his power. Your fathers experienced it, and
   you will not experience it the less." Now, we are ungrateful to God, if
   former benefits do not lead us to entertain hope for the future; and
   especially when he intended to give a sure and striking proof of
   continual favor towards us. He brought the Jews out of Egypt on the
   express condition, that the deliverance which was accomplished should
   never be forgotten. (Exodus 13:9.)

   The Prophet therefore represents God as actually present, and declares
   that he is the same God who surmounted every obstacle by his power,
   that he might be the Redeemer of his people. At that time he opened up
   a way through the sea, (Exodus 14:21,) and afterwards through the
   mighty waters, that is, through Jordan, which the Lord dried up, though
   it was running very rapidly. (Joshua 3:16.) And these prodigious
   miracles he expressly relates, because they might think that their
   return to Judea was closed up, and that all that was promised
   concerning it was fabulous.

   17. When he bringeth out. He shows that no power or forces shall hinder
   him from delivering his people, whenever he shall think proper. The sea
   which lay between them could not prevent God from "bringing out" his
   people; but he divided its waters in the midst, and drowned the
   pursuing enemies, with their horses and chariots. (Exodus 14:28.) This
   is therefore an amplification; as if he had said, "Though the whole
   world be leagued for your destruction, and attempt, to hinder the
   deliverance of my Church, yet it will gain nothing; for not only will
   the Lord find out a way through whirlpools, when he thinks proper, but
   he will overthrow and scatter all opposing efforts, and will crush them
   so that they shall never again raise their head."

   They are quenched like flax. It is possible that he who was vanquished
   in one battle may renew his strength in another, and at length be
   victorious; but here the Lord promises a continual victory, for he
   declares that the enemies shall be subdued in such a manner that they
   shall be completely extinguished. By the metaphor of flax, he expresses
   more vividly the sudden destruction of the enemies; for flax may indeed
   burn and give light, but is immediately consumed.

   18. Remember not former things. Hitherto the Prophet shewed how great
   was the power of God in delivering the people. He now declares that all
   the miracles which God wrought in that first redemption were of little
   importance as compared with the more remarkable miracle which should
   soon be wrought; that is, that the glory of this second deliverance
   shall be so great as to throw the former into the shade. Yet he does
   not mean that the Jews should forget so great a benefit, which he had
   commanded them to publish in every age, and to inscribe on permanent
   records; for in his preface to the Law he begins in this manner,

   "I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out
   of the house of bondage." (Exodus 20:2.)

   He even enjoined parents to repeat it frequently to their children, and
   from hand to hand to deliver it to their grandchildren and to
   posterity. This must therefore be understood to be by comparison, like
   that saying' of Jeremiah,

   "Behold the days come," saith the Lord, "that it shall no longer be
   said, The Lord liveth, who brought the children of Israel out of the
   land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, who led and brought out the seed
   of the house of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the
   countries into which I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their
   land." (Jeremiah 23:7, 8.)

   In short, he shews that this latter redemption, when compared with the
   former, shall be far more illustrious. Hence it follows, that it is
   improper to limit this prediction to a small number of years; for the
   Prophet does not separate between its commencement and its progress,
   but extends the blessed consequences of their return till Christ, who,
   by his coming, actually set up the priesthood and the kingdom.

   19. Behold, I do a new thing. This shews more clearly what the Prophet
   meant in the preceding verse, for he declares that there shall be "a
   new work," that is, a work unheard of and uncommon, and which, on
   account of its greatness and excellence, shall throw into the shade the
   reputation of all other works; in the same manner as the brightness of
   the sun, when it fills heaven and earth, causes the stars to disappear.

   Now it shall arise. He means that the time shall not be long. Yet these
   things were not so speedily accomplished; but, if we look to God, four
   hundred or even a thousand years are counted as a moment before him;
   how much less ought a delay of seventy years to wear out and discourage
   them? When he adds, Shall ye not know it? this question is more
   forcible and impressive than a bare affirmation, and this form of
   question is more frequently employed by Hebrew writers than in the
   Greek and Latin languages. When he promises a way in the wilderness, he
   alludes to that wilderness which lay between Judea and Babylon; for he
   speaks of the return of the people. Accordingly to the way he adds
   rivers; for in travelling through a dry country they might have been
   parched and died of thirst. On this account, the Lord says that he will
   supply them with water and everything that is necessary for the
   journey; as if he had said, "I will furnish you with provisions, so
   that under my guidance you shall return to your native land."

   But it may be thought that the Prophet is excessive, and that his
   language is altogether hyperbolical, when he extols this deliverance in
   such lofty terms; for we read that rivers were turned into blood,
   (Exodus 7:20,) the air was covered with darkness, (Exodus 10:22,) the
   first-born were slain, (Exodus 12:29,) insects were sent forth to
   destroy the whole country, (Exodus 10:15,) and that other prodigies of
   the same kind happened in Egypt, while nothing of this sort was done in
   Babylon. What then is meant by this new redemption? This consideration
   has compelled almost all Christian commentators to interpret this
   passage as referring absolutely to the coming of Christ, in which they
   are undoubtedly mistaken; and the Jews are also in the wrong, when they
   limit it to the redemption from Babylon. Accordingly, as I have
   frequently remarked, we ought here to include the whole period which
   followed the redemption from Babylon, down to the coming of Christ.

   The redemption from Egypt may be regarded as having been the first
   birth of the Church; because the people were gathered into a body, and
   the Church was established, of which formerly there was not the
   semblance; but that deliverance is not limited to the time when the
   people went out of Egypt, but is continued down to the possession of
   the land of Canaan, which was delivered to the people, when the kings
   had been driven out. (Joshua 11:23.) We ought to take the same view of
   this new birth, (peri tautes palingenesias,) by which the people were
   rescued from Babylon, and brought back to their native land; for that
   restoration must not be limited to the departure from Babylon, but must
   be extended to Christ, during the whole of which period great and
   wonderful events undoubtedly happened. Was it not astonishing that a
   captive people, whom all despised as some contemptible slave, and who
   were even held to be accursed, should receive freedom and liberty to
   return from heathen kings; and not only so, but should be furnished
   with provisions, and with everything else that was necessary both for
   the journey and for settling at home, for rearing the city and for
   rebuilding the Temple? (Ezra 1:2.)

   But far greater events followed, when but a few persons were willing to
   return, and the greater part were so discouraged as to prefer wretched
   bondage to blessed freedom. When, in comparison of that vast multitude
   which had been carried away, a few persons returned to Judea, still
   greater obstacles arose. Conspiracies were formed, the people formerly
   abhorred became the objects of keener resentments, the work was
   interrupted, and every method was tried for putting a full stop to the
   design. (Ezra 4.) Thus it appeared as if in vain the Lord had brought
   them back, for they were exposed to dangers much greater than before.
   When the temple had been built, they did not enjoy greater peace; for
   they were hedged in on all sides by very cruel and deadly enemies, from
   whom they often sustained great hardships. They were afterwards
   afflicted by distresses, and calamities, and various persecutions, so
   that they were supposed to be struck down and overwhelmed, and utterly
   ruined. And yet, in the midst of fire and sword, God wonderfully
   preserved them; and if we consider their wretched and miserable
   condition, and the grievous persecutions of tyrants, we shall wonder
   that even a single individual of them could survive.

   In order that we may understand how great was the excellence of this
   latter redemption, and how far it excelled the former, we must:
   continue and bring it down to the time of Christ, who at length gave an
   immense addition to the former benefits. Thus, beyond all question, the
   second redemption leaves the first far behind. There is nothing forced
   in this interpretation, and it corresponds to the ordinary language of
   the prophets, who always have the Messiah for their end, and keep him
   constantly in their eye. But this will appear more clearly from what is
   related by Haggai; for, when the Temple began to be rebuilt, the old
   men, who had seen the glory of the ancient temple, mourned, and were
   not far from thinking that God had forsaken them, and that his promises
   had failed. But Haggai, in order to comfort them and to prove that the
   glory of this second would be greater than the glory of the first,
   though the structure of the building was far inferior, leads them to
   the Redeemer.

   "Thus saith the Lord of hosts," says he, "Yet once, and within a short
   time, I will shake the heavens, and the earth, the sea, and the
   continent, and all the nations; and the Desire of all nations shall
   come; and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts.
   The silver is mine, the gold is mine, saith the Lord of hosts. The
   glory of this latter house shall be greater than the glory of the
   former." (Haggai 2:6-9.)

   Thus, as Haggai brings the restoration of the Temple down to Christ,
   and refers to him its true glory; so this deliverance (for the two
   things are connected, or rather they are the same) extended even to
   Christ. Consequently, we need not wonder if it surpassed the Egyptian
   deliverance in every respect.

   20. The beast of the field shall honor me. He adorns the preceding
   statement; for, amidst such a desperate condition of affairs, it was
   proper that magnificent language should be employed in extolling the
   power of God, that words might supply what seemed to be wanting in the
   reality. The meaning is, that the power of God will be so visible and
   manifest, that the very beasts, impressed with the feeling of it, shall
   acknowledge and worship God. This prediction corresponds to the song,

   "The sea saw and fled, Jordan was driven back. The mountains leaped
   like rams, and the hills like lambs. At the face of the Lord the earth
   trembled." (Psalm 114:3, 4, 7.)

   Isaiah here ascribes the same feeling to brute animals, because by a
   secret impulse they shall be constrained to retire, so as to allow his
   people to pass safely. And yet the cause assigned is more extensive,
   that they will stand still, as if in astonishment, when they see the
   miracles. In a word, God declares that he will not suffer his people,
   in their journey homeward, to be destitute of the means of subsistence,
   but describes in exaggerated language his love toward the Jews, that by
   the height of their hope they may rise above the world. When we hear
   these statements, let us also not measure the power of God by the
   nature of things, but let us be exalted by faith above all that can be
   seen or known.

   My people, my chosen. That these wretched exiles may not be driven from
   the hope of heavenly grace and assistance, he reminds them of their
   adoption; as if he had said, that amidst this ruinous and melancholy
   condition they still continued to be the people of God, because he who
   once chose them does not change his purpose. Accordingly, whenever we
   need to be excited to cherish favorable hope, let us remember God's
   calling; for, although we are unworthy, still it ought to be reckoned
   enough that the Lord has deigned to bestow on us so great an honor.

   21. This people have I created for myself. The Prophet means that the
   Lord will necessarily do what he formerly said, because it concerns his
   glory to preserve the people whom he has chosen for himself; and
   therefore these words are intended for the consolation of the people.
   "Do you think that I will suffer my glory to fall to the ground? It is
   connected with your salvation, and therefore your salvation shall be
   the object of my care. In a word, know that you shall be saved, because
   you cannot perish, unless my glory likewise perish. Ye shall therefore
   survive, because I wish that you may continually proclaim my glory."

   When he says that he has created the people, let us learn that it
   proceeds from supernatural grace that we are the people of God; for we
   must remember that principle of which we have formerly spoken, that he
   does not now speak of the ordinary nature of men, but of spiritual
   regeneration, or of the adoption by which he separates the Church from
   the rest of the world, and that with everything that belongs to it. Let
   no one therefore ascribe his regeneration to himself or to any human
   merits; but let us acknowledge that it is entirely to the mercy of God
   that we owe so great a favor.

   They shall declare my praise. Though it is the design of the Prophet to
   shew what I have said, that his people shall be saved because it
   concerns the glory of God, yet we also learn from it, that the end of
   our election is, that we may shew forth the glory of God in every
   possible way. (Exodus 14:4, 17, 18.) The reprobate are, indeed, the
   instruments of the glory of God, but it is said to shine in us in a
   very different manner; for "he hath chosen us," says Paul, "that we
   might be holy and without blame before him through love, who
   predestinated us that he might adopt us to be his children through
   Jesus Christ, in himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,
   to the praise of the glory of his grace by which he hath made us
   accepted through the Beloved." (Ephesians 1:4-6.) Such also is the
   import of the words of Peter when he says, that we were brought out of
   darkness into the wonderful kingdom of God, that we may declare his
   perfections, (1 Peter 2:9;) and likewise the words of Zacharias,

   "That, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, we may serve him
   without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life."
   (Luke 1:74, 75.)

   This, then, is the end of our calling, that, being consecrated to God,
   we may praise and honor him during our whole life.

   22. And thou hast not called on me. He confirms by an indirect reproof
   what he said in the preceding verse, that it was not by any merits of
   his people that he was induced to act so kindly towards them. This
   deliverance, therefore, ought to be ascribed to no other cause than to
   the goodness of God. In order to prove this, he says, "Thou hast not
   called on me." Calling on the name of God includes the whole of the
   worship of God, the chief part of which is "calling upon him;" and,
   therefore, following the ordinary manner of Scripture, he has put a
   part for the whole. But in other passages the Lord plainly shews that
   calling upon him is the chief part of his worship; for, after having
   said that he despises sacrifices and outward ceremonies, he adds,

   "Call upon me in the day of trouble." (Psalm 50:15.)

   Hence also Scripture, when it speaks of the worship of God, chiefly
   mentions "calling on him;" for when Moses states that the worship of
   God had been restored, he says, "Then began men to call on the name of
   the Lord." (Genesis 4:26.)

   But thou hast been wearied of me. In this second clause I consider the
   particle ky (ki) to be disjunctive, "But rather thou hast been wearied
   of me." Others render it "Because thou hast wearied;" as if he had
   said, "Thou hast received with dislike what was enjoined on thee;"
   which amounts to nearly the same thing. As the Lord demands obedience,
   so he wishes all that worship him to be ready and cheerful; as Paul
   testifies, that "the Lord loveth a cheerful giver," (2 Corinthians
   9:7,) and they who obey reluctantly cannot be called, and are not
   reckoned by him, true and sincere worshippers. Thus, in order to show
   that the Jews have not worshipped him as they ought to have done, he
   says that they did it reluctantly. If any one choose rather to view it
   as assigning the reason, and render it thus, -- "Thou hast not called
   on me, for thou hast rendered to me no worship without regret, and what
   may be said to have been extorted from thee by violence," as it makes
   little difference in the meaning, I do not greatly object; but the
   translation which I have given appears to convey more clearly what the
   Prophet intends. Besides, the contrast contains within itself the
   assigning of a reason; and therefore, if we wish that God should accept
   of our service, let us obey him with a cheerful disposition.

   23. Theft hast not brought to me. A question arises, "Why does the
   Prophet bring this reproach against the Jews, who, it is evident, were
   very careful to offer sacrifices according to the injunction of the
   Law?" Some refer this to the time of the captivity, when they could not
   have offered sacrifices to God though they had been willing to do so;
   for it was not lawful for them to offer sacrifices in any other place
   than Jerusalem, and therefore they could not appease God by sacrifices.
   (Deuteronomy 12:13.) But I rather think that it is a general reproach;
   for at the very time when the people were sacrificing, they could not
   boast of their merits or personal worth, as if they had laid God under
   obligations in this manner; for they were wanting in the sacrifices
   which God chiefly approves, that is, faith and obedience, without which
   nothing can be acceptable to God. There was no integrity of heart,
   "their hands were full of blood," (Isaiah 1:15;) everything was filled
   with fraud and robbery, and there was no room for justice or equity.
   Although, therefore, they daily brought beasts to the temple, and
   sacrificed them, yet he justly affirms that they offered nothing to
   him. Sacrifices could not be accepted by God when they were separated
   kern truth, and were offered to another rather than to God; for he did
   not demand them in themselves, but so far as the people treated them as
   exercises of faith and obedience, Hence we infer that the Prophet says
   nothing new, but continues to exhibit the same doctrine, namely, that
   God rejects all services that are rendered in a slavish spirit, or in
   any other respect are defective.

   24. Thou hast not bought cane for me. He means the cane or calamus of
   which the precious ointment was composed, as we are informed, (Exodus
   30:23;) for the high priests, the tabernacle of the congregation, and
   the ark of the testimony, together with its vessels, were anointed with
   it he says, therefore, "Although thou buy cane for me with money, yet
   thou oughtest not to reckon that to be expense bestowed on me, as if I
   approved of it." They lost their pains in all those ceremonies, because
   they did not look to the proper end, since they did not exercise faith,
   or worship God with a pure conscience.

   And thou hast not made me drunk. This corresponds to a mode of
   expression employed in the law, in which God testifies that sacrifices
   are pleasant and delightful feasts to him; not that he took pleasure in
   the slaughter of animals, but that by these exercises he wished to lead
   his people to true obedience. He means that here, on the contrary, the
   people did not offer sacrifices in a proper manner, because they
   polluted everything with impiety; and, consequently, that he might be
   said to be hungry and faint, because they offered nothing in a right
   manner, but everything was corrupted and was without savor.

   But thou hast made me to serve with thy sins. The Prophet now
   aggravates the heinousness of that offense, by saying that the people
   not only were deficient in their duty, and did not submit to God, but
   that they even endeavored to make God submit to them, and "to serve"
   their will, or rather their lust. They who explain this passage as
   referring to Christ torture the Prophet's meaning, and therefore I
   consider this interpretation to be more natural. The Lord complains
   that men compelled him to carry a heavy burden, instead of submitting
   to him with reverence, as they ought to have done; for when we rise up
   against God, we treat him as a slave by our rebellion and insolence. He
   explains this more fully when he says, Ye have wearied me; that is,
   that God suffered much uneasiness on account of the wickedness of his
   people; for in some respects we wound and "pierce him," as the Prophet
   says, (Zechariah 12:10,) when we reject his voice, and do not suffer
   ourselves to be governed by him. Apparently he alludes to what he had
   formerly said about the weariness or uneasiness of the people in
   worshipping God; for God declares, on the contrary, that the people
   have given him great distress.

   25. I, I am he. [170] He concludes the former statement by this
   exclamation, as if he had said, that he may boast of his right, that he
   blots out the iniquities of his people, and restores them to freedom;
   for they have no merits by which they could obtain it, since they
   deserve the severest punishment, and even destruction. The same word is
   twice repeated by him, that he may more sharply rebuke the ingratitude
   of men who are wont to rob him of that honor which belongs to him
   alone, or in some way to throw it into the shade.

   He that blotteth out thy iniquities. hv' (hu) is the demonstrative
   pronoun He, used instead of a noun, as in many other passages. It is
   but a poor and feeble meaning that is attached to the words of the
   Prophet by those who think that God claims for himself the privilege
   and authority of pardoning sins, for he rather contrasts his mercy with
   all other causes, as if he declared that he is not induced by anything
   else to pardon sins, but is satisfied with his mere goodness, and,
   consequently, that it is wrong to ascribe either to merits or to any
   sacrifices the redemption of which he is the Author by free grace. The
   meaning may be summed up by saying, that the people ought to hope for
   their return for no other reason than because God will freely pardon
   their sins, and, being of his own accord appeased by his mercy, will
   stretch out his fatherly hand.

   The present subject is the pardon of sins; we must see on what occasion
   it has been introduced. Undoubtedly the Prophet means that there will
   be a freely bestowed redemption, and therefore he mentions forgiveness
   rather than redemption, because, since they had received a severe
   punishment for their sins, they must have been pardoned before they
   were delivered. The cause of the disease must be taken away, if we wish
   to cure the disease itself; and so long as the Lord's anger lasts, his
   chastisements will also last; and consequently his anger must be
   appeased, and we must be reconciled to God, before we are freed from
   punishments. And this form of expression ought to be carefully observed
   in opposition to the childish distinction of the Sophists, who say that
   God does indeed pardon guilt, but that we must make satisfaction by
   penances. Hence proceeded satisfactions, indulgences, purgatory, and
   innumerable other contrivances.

   The Prophet does not only speak of guilt, but speaks expressly of
   punishment which is remitted, because sins have been freely pardoned.
   This is still more clearly expressed by the addition of the phrase for
   mine own sake. It is certain that this limitation is contrasted with
   all merits, that is, that God pays no regard to us, or to anything that
   is in us, in pardoning our sins, but that he is prompted to it solely
   by his goodness; for if he had regard to us, he would be in some
   respects our debtor, and forgiveness would not be of free grace.
   Accordingly, Ezekiel explains the contrast,

   "Not for your sakes will I do this, O house of Jacob, but for mine own
   sake." (Ezekiel 36:22.)

   Hence it follows that God is his own adviser, and is freely inclined to
   pardon sins, for he does not find any cause in men.

   Therefore I will not remember thy sins. The Prophet added this for the
   consolation of the godly, who, oppressed by the consciousness of their
   transgressions, might otherwise have fallen into despair. On this
   account he encourages them to cherish good hope, and confirms them in
   that confidence by saying, that although they are unworthy, yet he will
   pardon their sins, and will thus deliver them. Hence we ought to draw a
   useful doctrine, that no one can be certain of obtaining pardon, unless
   he rely on the absolute goodness of God. They who look to their works
   must continually hesitate, and at length despair, because, if they are
   not deceived by gross hypocrisy, they will always have before their
   eyes their own unworthiness, which will constrain them to remain in
   doubt as to the love of God.

   When it is said that ministers also forgive sins, (John 20:23,) there
   is no inconsistency with this passage, for they are witnesses of this
   freely bestowed forgiveness. The ordinary distinction is that God
   forgives sins by his power, and ministers by their office; but as this
   distinction does not explain the Prophet's meaning, we must keep by
   what I have stated, that God not only forgives sins in the exercise of
   his authority, but that all the blessings for which we ought to hope
   flow from the fountain of his absolute bounty. Thus the Lord adorned
   the preaching of the gospel, and its ministers, in such a manner as to
   reserve the full authority for himself.

   26. Bring to my remembrance. Because the pride of men cannot be easily
   corrected, the Lord pursues this argument, and dwells much upon it, in
   order to lead the Jews to throw away all confidence in their works, and
   to make them more humble, he gives them liberty to say and argue
   whatever they please, in order to support their cause, if they do not
   acknowledge that they are vanquished. By a sort of admission in their
   favor, he bids them call to his remembrance; as if he had said, "If
   thou thinkest me to be forgetful, tell it thyself; remind me, if thou
   canst allege anything good; speak in thy turn, I shall be silent." By
   this form of expression he taunts men more than if he had stated in the
   usual way how the matter stood. He shews that it is exceedingly foolish
   in men to claim anything for themselves; for, though he gives them
   liberty of boasting, they will be found utterly unable to plead, and
   will have nothing to say in defense of their cause.

   That thou mayest be justified, that is, "In order that thou mayest gain
   thy cause, and carry off the victory, I allow thee to say whatever thou
   pleasest." This is vehement mockery, which shuts the mouths of men more
   completely than if he pronounced the sentence in his own person and
   with the authority of a judge. Yet we must also observe the design of
   the Prophet; for he found it necessary to strip the Jews of the mask of
   personal worth, that they might humbly and meekly receive the grace of
   God.

   27. Thy first father sinned. This passage is almost universally
   understood to refer to the "first parent" Adam. (Genesis 3:6.) Some
   prefer to interpret it as relating to Abraham; as if he had said,

   "You have not alone sinned, but your father Abraham himself sinned,
   though he was a man of eminent holiness." [171] (Joshua 24:2.)

   By the teachers are understood to be meant Moses and Aaron, who were
   men of extraordinary holiness, and yet sinned: "how much more you who
   are far inferior to theme" (Numbers 20:12.) That would be an argument
   from the greater to the less. But I view the matter differently; for
   under the word Father he includes not one or a few of their ancestors,
   but many. It is an interchange of the singular and plural number, which
   is very frequently employed by Hebrew writers. This reproof occurs very
   frequently in the prophets and in the Psalms; for, knowing that God
   reckoned them to be "a holy people," (Exodus 19:6,) as if this honor
   had been due to the excellence or merits of the fathers, they rose
   fiercely against God himself, and swelled with pride on account of
   their hereditary privilege. On this account the prophets in every age
   expose the crimes of the fathers; and Stephen, who followed them, says,
   that "they always resisted the Holy Spirit;" (Acts 7:51;) as if he had
   said, "You do not now for the first time begin to be wicked; long ago
   your fathers were base and infamous. From a bad crow has come a bad
   egg. But you are far worse, and exceed your fathers in wickedness; so
   that if I had looked at you alone, you would long ago have been
   destroyed and completely ruined."

   And thy teachers. [172] He now adds the teachers, in order to shew that
   the blame did not lie with the people alone; for they who ought to have
   been the guides of others, that is, the priests and the prophets, were
   the first to stumble, and led others into error. In a word, he shews
   that no class was free from vices and corruptions. "Let them now go and
   boast of their virtues, and let them produce the very smallest reason
   why I ought to protect them, except my own goodness." If it be objected
   that there is no reason why the sins of their fathers should be brought
   as an accusation against them, because it is written,

   "The soul that hath sinned shall die, and the children shall not be
   punished instead of the fathers," (Ezekiel 18:20,)

   the answer will be easy. The Lord makes the children to bear the
   punishment of the sins of the fathers, when they resemble their
   fathers; and yet they are not punished for other men's sins, for they
   themselves have sinned; and when the Lord chastises the whole body, he
   puts the fathers and the children together, so as to involve all in the
   same condemnation.

   28. Therefore I will pollute. The copulative v (vau) here means
   therefore, and the preterite tense, I have polluted, ought to have a
   future signification, though it may also be rendered in the past tense;
   but I have preferred the future, in order to apply it to the time of
   the captivity; for he directly addresses those who were to live under
   the captivity. If it be thought preferable to extend it to various
   calamities, by which God had covered his people with disgrace, and at
   the same time to connect with it their exile in Babylon, there will be
   no impropriety; and indeed it will be more appropriate to view it as a
   description of what frequently happened to them in former times, that
   they may be warned for the future, that they have no privilege which
   can defend them from receiving again with the deepest disgrace the
   punishment of their ingratitude, tie shews, therefore, the cause of
   this destruction. It was because the transgressions of the fathers and
   of the children must be punished, that is, when there was no end of
   sinning, but when they daily kindled the wrath of God against them,
   till he at length punished them.

   The Lord is said to "pollute" or "profane" his Church, when he despises
   and throws it aside as a thing of no value. In this sense the word is
   used in Psalm 89:39, and in many other passages. Having been set apart
   and sanctified by him, we dwell under his protection and guardianship,
   so long as we are holy; and in like manner when we are deprived of it,
   we are said to be "profaned," because we cease to be sacred, and are
   rendered unworthy of his protection; and he exposes as a prey to
   enemies those whom he formerly called "his anointed," and forbade men
   to "touch." (Psalm 105:15.) But it may be thought strange that the
   priests, who were Christ's representatives, should be "profaned;" and
   the reason is, that they transgressed, while they ought to have been
   "teachers" of others.

   And I will make Jacob a curse. The Hebrew word hrm, (herem,) which we
   have translated a curse, signifies "destruction," but likewise
   signifies "a curse;" and I have thought that the latter meaning is more
   appropriate to this passage, for it afterwards follows, a reproach.
   These statements are borrowed by the Prophet from Moses, whose
   description he follows so closely, that it is easy to perceive the
   style of Moses in these words, and to see that the prophets bring
   forward nothing that is new or strange. The words of Moses are:

   "And thou shalt be an astonishment, a proverb, and a by-word among all
   the nations to which the Lord shall lead thee." (Deuteronomy 28:37.)

   He therefore threatens that he will afflict the people in such a manner
   as to make them "accursed" by all; so that whoever shall wish to
   pronounce a "curse" may take it for an example, and that it may be a
   form of "cursing;" that he will expose them to the ridicule of men, so
   that they shall serve as a proverb in the mouth of all who wish to
   utter scorn; just as at the present day we see that the name of a Jew,
   though in itself honorable, is in the highest degree ignominious and
   disgraceful. The Lord pronounced those dreadful threatenings by Isaiah,
   that they might know that a punishment sufficiently severe, as compared
   with the enormity of their transgressions, could not be inflicted; that
   when the Lord should chastise them, they might not complain that the
   punishments which they endured were too severe, or think that the
   Prophet's reproofs were too sharp.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [162] See Commentary on Isaiah, [13]vol. 2, pages 83 and [14]264, and
   [15]page 132 of the present volume.

   [163] "Jusqu' ace qu'il nons esleve en haut a soy." "Till he raise us
   on high to himself."

   [164] Commentary on Isaiah, [16]vol. 1, p. 26.

   [165] "Qu'ils seroyent constrains de signer leur condamnation." "That
   they would be constrained to sign their condemnation."

   [166] The translation which Calvin mentions, but rejects, appears to
   be, "There was no creature of God." -- Ed.
   "Various attempts have been made to explain away the singular
   expression, there was no god formed before me, as a solecism, or at
   least an inaccuracy of expression; whereas nothing else could have
   conveyed the writer's meaning, in a form at once sarcastic,
   argumentative, and graphic. Instead of saying, in a bald prosaic form,
   All other gods are the work of men's hands, but I am uncreated and
   exist from all eternity,' he condenses all into the pregnant
   declaration, There was no god manufactured before me,' that is, All
   other gods were made, but none of them was made before I had a being.'"
   -- Alexander.

   [167] "Ce suis-je, ce suis-je." "It is I, it is I."

   [168] "Ce suis-je, ce suis-je." "It is I, it is I."

   [169] "All their nobles, (Heb., bars.)" -- Eng. Ver. "From the earliest
   times vrchym (barichim) has received a twofold explanation, namely,
   that of Fugitives, as in the Septuagint, and that of Bars, as in the
   Vulgate. The same question arises in the exposition of [17]chap. 15:5."
   -- Alexander.

   [170] "Ce suis-je, ce suis-je." "It is I, it is I."

   [171] Jarchi adopts this view, and paraphrases the clause thus; "Thy
   first father sinned,' that is, when he said, How shall I know that I
   shall inherit it?'" (Genesis 15:8.) This passage was not likely to have
   occurred to modern readers as the most striking fact in Abraham's
   history for proving that that eminently holy man was not absolutely
   perfect; and the selection of it is a curious specimen of Jewish
   interpretation. -- Ed.

   [172] "Thy teachers. Hebrews Interpreters." -- (Eng. Ver.)
   "Interpreters, or organs of communication, is a title given elsewhere
   to ambassadors, (2 Chronicles 32:31,) and to an interceding angel. (Job
   33:23.) It here denotes all those who, under the theocracy, acted as
   organs of communication between God and the people, whether prophets,
   priests, or rulers." -- Alexander.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 44
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 44:1-28

   1. Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen:

   1. Nunc tamen audi, Iacob, serve meus, et Israel quem elegi.

   2. Thus saith the LORD that made thee, and formed thee from the womb,
   which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun,
   whom I have chosen.

   2. Sic dicit Iehova factor tuus, et formator tuus ab utero; tibi
   auxiliabitur. Ne timeas, serve meus, Iacob, dilecte quem elegi.

   3. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
   dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
   thine offspring:

   3. Quia effundam aquas super sitientem, et flumina super aridam.
   Effundam spiritum meum super semen tuum, et benedictionem meam super
   germina tua.

   4. And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water
   courses.

   4. Et germinabunt quasi inter herbam, quasi salices juxta rivos
   aquarum.

   5. One shall say, I am the LORD'S; and another shall call himself by
   the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the
   LORD, and surname himself by the name of Israel.

   5. Hic dicet, Ego sum Iehovae; et ille vocabitur nomine Iacob; altus
   scribet manu sua, Iehovae (sum), et nomine Israel cognominabitur.

   6. Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel, and his redeemer the LORD of
   hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and besides me there is no
   God.

   6. Sic dicit Iehova, rex Israel, et redemptor ejus, Iehova exercituum:
   Ego primus, et idem novissimus, et praeter me non est Deus.

   7. And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order
   for me, since I appointed the ancient people? and the things that are
   coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.

   7. Et quis sicut ego vocabit, annunciabit hoc, et ordinabit hoc mihi,
   ex quo constitui populum seculi? Et quae pendent, et quae ventura sunt,
   illis annuncient.

   8. Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time,
   and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God besides
   me? yea, there is no God; I know not any.

   8. Ne timeatis et ne terreamini. An non ex tune audire to feci, et
   annuntiavi? Itaque vos testes mei, quod non sit Deus praeter me, et non
   sit fortis quem ignorem.

   9. They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and their
   delectable things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses;
   they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.

   9. Fictores sculptilis omnes vanitas; et desiderabilia eorum nihil
   prosunt; et testes eorum ipsi, quod non vident, nec cognoscunt; ideoque
   confundentur.

   10. Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable
   for nothing?

   10. Quis formator Dei? et quis sculptilis confiator, quod nullam ad rem
   usui est?

   11. Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed: and the workmen, they are
   of men: let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; yet they
   shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together.

   11. Ecce omnes socii ejus pudefient, et artifices ipsi sunt ex
   hominibus. Ut conveniant omnes, ac stent, pavebunt, et pudefient simul.

   12. The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth
   it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he
   is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is
   faint.

   12. Faber ferrarius limam (aut forcipem) sumet; operabitur in prunis,
   malleis formabit illud; operabitur in eo, brachio virtutis suae; etiam
   famelicus, ut deficiant rites; non bibat aquam, ut fatiscat.

   13. The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a
   line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the
   compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the
   beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.

   13. Faber lignarius extendit regulam, illud delineat filo tincto, aptat
   planulis, circino figurat; facit illud secundum formam viri, secundum
   effigiem hominis, ut sedeat in domo.

   14. He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak,
   which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he
   planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.

   14. Succidet sibi cedros, tollet ilicem et quercum; roborabitur ad
   ligna silvae; plantabit pinum, quam pluvia enutriet.

   15. Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and
   warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a
   god, and worshippeth it: he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down
   thereto.

   15. Tum erit homini in incendium; nam accipiet ex illis, et calefaciet
   se; praeterea furnum accendet, et coquet panes; Deum quoque efficiet,
   atque adorabit; finget idolum, et prosternet se coram co.

   16. He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth
   flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself,
   and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire:

   16. Partem ejus comburet igni; ex parte carnem comedet; assabit
   assaturam, et saturabitur. Deinde calefaciet se, ac dicet, Ohe
   calefactus sum, et vidi ignem.

   17. And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he
   falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and
   saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god.

   17. Reliquias ejus in Deum vertit in sculptile suum; incurvat se coram
   eo; adorat et precatur illud, dicens, Libera me, quia Deus meus es.

   18. They have not known nor understood: for he hath shut their eyes,
   that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand.

   18. Nescierunt, nec intellexerunt; quia oblevit oculos eorum, ne
   videant, et cor eorum, ne intelligant.

   19. And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor
   understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I
   have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and
   eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I
   fall down to the stock of a tree?

   19. Non redit ad cor suum, non est sensus, nec intelligentia, ut dicat,
   Partem ejus combussi igni; etiam super prunas ejus coxi panem; assavi
   carnem, et comedi; residuum ejus in abominationem vertam: coram trunco
   ligni incurvabo me?

   20. He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that
   he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right
   hand?

   20. Pascit cinerem, cor seductum inclinat eum, ut non liberet animam
   suam, neque dicat, Annon mendacium in dextera mea?

   21. Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have
   formed thee; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten
   of me.

   21. Memor esto horum, Iacob, et Israel, quia servus meus es; formavi
   to; servus meus es; Israel, ne obliviscaris mei.

   22. I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a
   cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.

   22. Delevi, ut nubem, iniquitates tuas; ut nebulam, peccata tua.
   Revertere ad me, quia redemi to.

   23. Sing, O ye heavens; for the LORD hath done it: shout, ye lower
   parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest,
   and every tree therein: for the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified
   himself in Israel.

   23. Laudate, coeli, quia fecit Iehova; jubilate, inferiora terrae;
   erumpite, montes, in laudem; silva et omnis arbor quae in ea st;
   quoniam redemit Iehova Iacob, et in Israel glorificabitur.

   24. Thus saith the LORD, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the
   womb, I am the LORD that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the
   heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself;

   24. Sic dicit Iehova redemptor tuns, et factor tuus ex utero. Ego
   Iehova faciens omnia, extendens coelos solus, expandens terrain inca
   virtute (vel, a meipso.)

   25. That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad;
   that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;

   25. Dissipans signa divinatorum, ariolos dementans, convertens
   sapientes retrorsum, et scientiam corum infatuans.

   26. That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel
   of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited;
   and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the
   decayed places thereof:

   26. Suscitans verbum servi sui, et consilium nuntiorum suorum
   perficiens; dicens Ierosolymae, Habitaberis; et civitatibus Iuda,
   Extruemini; et ruinas ejus erigam.

   27. That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers:

   27. Dicens profundo, Exsiccare, et flumina tua arefaeiam.

   28. That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my
   pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the
   temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.

   28. Dicens Cyro, Pastor meus; et omnem voluntatem meam perficiet;
   dicendo etiam Ierosolymae, Aedificaberis; et templo, Fundaberis.


   1. Yet now hear. Having a little before rebuked the transgressions of
   the people, and declared that all deserved eternal perdition, because
   both the princes and the people had polluted everything by their
   crimes, he now mitigates that severity of punishment, and comforts the
   people. In this passage I consider the particle v (vau) to mean But or
   Yet, as in many other passages. As if he had said, "Though grievous
   afflictions are about to overtake thee, yet now hear what I will do for
   thy sake." The verse must be viewed in connection with the former
   argument, because the Lord declares that he will never permit his
   people to perish altogether, though they be grievously afflicted. Hence
   infer, that God is never so angry with his Church as not to leave some
   room for mercy, as we have already seen on many occasions. The
   consequence is, that the prophets, whenever they threaten, always add
   some consolation as an abatement.

   But lest we should imagine that men have deserved it by their good
   conduct, he therefore adds, whom I have chosen; for we do not serve
   God, because we are entitled to it, or deserve it, but because he
   renders us fit by a free election. In this passage, therefore, the
   words Servant and Elect are synonymous, yet so that election comes
   first in order, and therefore David says that he was God's "servant"
   before he was born, because even from his mother's womb he had been
   received into God's family. (Psalm 22:10; 71:6; 116:16.)

   2. Thus saith Jehovah thy Maker. Though he treated the Jews harshly,
   that they might be stripped of all false confidence, and might humbly
   betake themselves to the grace of God, he now caresses them pleasantly
   by a mild and gentle discourse, that they may know that by self-denial
   they shall sustain no loss. We must therefore supply here the following
   contrasts. "Thou, Jacob, art indeed nothing in thyself, but God thy
   Maker will not despise his work; no nobleness of birth would secure
   thee against perdition, but the adoption which the Heavenly Father has
   been pleased to bestow upon thee will be abundantly sufficient for
   redeeming thee." Besides, we should keep in mind what I have often said
   already, that the Prophet does not speak of the first creation by which
   we are born to be human beings, but of the regeneration which belongs
   and is peculiar to the elect, that they may obtain a place in the
   Church of God.

   He that formed thee from the womb. This is added, that men may not
   claim anything for themselves, as if they had moved him to shew
   kindness to them. By these words he also exhibits to them a hereditary
   covenant, by which God separated them to be his inheritance "before
   they were born." (Romans 9:11.) Some think that this refers to the
   person of Jacob, because, by taking hold of his brother's foot,
   (Genesis 25:26,) he gave a remarkable proof of his election; but this
   is a forced interpretation, and therefore I give a wider signification
   to these words, namely, that the Lord was kind and bountiful to his
   people from the commencement, and cut off all merits; because by free
   grace he "formed him," and then freely bestowed on him all blessings.

   He will help thee. Some supply the relative, "Who will help thee;" as
   if he had said, "Thy Helper;" but it is better to read the clause
   separately. [173] It would be still more clear in the first person, "I
   will help thee;" but as to the substance of the meaning it makes no
   difference. The statemen t amounts to this, that he who is the Creator
   of the people will be ready to give his assistance when the proper time
   shall arrive. Let every person therefore adopt that reading which he
   thinks proper; but I have preferred to follow the simple and natural
   meaning, without supplying any word.

   O beloved! The word ysrvn (yeshurun) is explained in various ways. Some
   think that it is derived from ysr, (yashar,) which means "to be
   upright," or "to please;" others from svr, (shur,) and others from 'sr,
   (ashar.) But I rather agree with those who translate it Beloved, and
   derive it from the root ysr, (yashar.) This designation is also
   bestowed on that nation by Moses in his song; for, although some render
   it in that passage Upright, and in this passage also, the old rendering
   is more suitable, "My beloved is grown fat." (Deuteronomy 32:15.) The
   Prophet adorns his nation with these titles, that the Jews may be led
   by past benefits to entertain hope for the future. This rule ought to
   be held by all believers as perpetually binding, that, after having
   experienced the kindness of God toward them, they should likewise
   expect it for the future; for otherwise they will be excessively
   ungrateful, and will shew that they do not rely on the promises of God,
   which, when they are impressed on our hearts, undoubtedly bring peace
   and safety; not that we should be utterly devoid of fear, but that we
   should strive against all dread and distrust; and therefore he again
   repeats, --

   Fear thou not, Jacob. Such is also the import of the consolation given
   by Christ,

   "Fear not, little flock, for my Father hath good will towards thee."
   (Luke 12:32.)

   And, indeed, among the dangers which threaten death on all sides, no
   remedy is better adapted to allay terrors than that God has been
   pleased to bestow his favor upon us, so that he will save us for ever.
   By the word "Beloved," therefore, he again repeats that this depends on
   the favor and protection of God, who ascribes to himself, and entirely
   claims, all the good that existed among the people.

   3. For I will pour waters. He continues the same subject, and at the
   same time explains what will be the nature of that assistance which he
   has promised. But we ought always to keep in remembrance that these
   prophecies relate to that sorrowful and afflicted period of which he
   formerly spoke, that is, when the people, in the extremity to which
   they were reduced, might think that they were altogether forsaken, and
   that all the promises of God were vain. Isaiah meets this doubt, and
   compares the people to a dry and thirsty land, which has no moisture at
   all. By this metaphor David also describes his wretchedness. (Psalm
   143:6.) Although therefore they were worn out by afflictions, and the
   vital moisture was decayed, yet, that they might not throw away courage
   in their deepest distresses, they ought to have set before their minds
   this declaration of the Prophet. We, too, when we are brought into the
   greatest dangers, and see nothing before us but immediate death, ought
   in the same manner to betake ourselves to these promises, that we may
   be supported by them against all temptations. Yet we must feel our
   drought and poverty, that our thirsty souls may partake of this
   refreshing influence of the waters.

   I will pour my Spirit. Jehovah himself explains what he means by waters
   and rivers, that is, his Spirit. In another passage the Spirit of God
   is called "water," but in a different sense. When Ezekiel gives the
   name "water" to the Holy Spirit, he at the same time calls it "clean
   water," with a view to cleansing. (Ezekiel 36:25.) Isaiah will
   afterwards call the Spirit "waters," but for a different reason, that
   is, because by the secret moisture of his power he quickens souls. But
   these words of the Prophet have a wider signification, because he does
   not speak merely of the Spirit of regeneration, but alludes to the
   universal grace which is spread over all the creatures, and which is
   mentioned in Psalm 105:30, "Send forth thy Spirit, and they shall be
   created, and he will renew the face of the earth." As David declares in
   that passage that every part of the world is enlivened, so far as God
   imparts to it secret vigor, and next ascribes to God might and power,
   by which, whenever he thinks fit, he suddenly revives the ruinous
   condition of heaven and earth, so now for the same reason Isaiah gives
   the appellation "water" to the sudden renewal of the Church; as if he
   had said that the restoration of the Church is at God's disposal, as
   much as when he fertilizes by dew or rain the barren and almost parched
   lands.

   Thus the Spirit is compared to "water," because without Him all things
   decay and perish through drought, and because by the secret watering of
   his power he quickens the whole world, and because the barrenness
   occasioned by drought and heat is cured in such a manner, that the
   earth puts on a new face. This is still more fully explained by the
   word which he afterwards employs, Blessing.

   4. And they shall spring up. These words contain nothing more than what
   I quoted from Psalm 104:30, that, when the Spirit of God has been sent
   forth, the whole face of the earth is renewed, and those fields which
   formerly were burnt up with thirst are green and flourish, just as the
   herbs grow, after having been watered by the rains. By these metaphors
   he extends the view of this subject, and more fully shews that it is
   quite as easy for God to enlarge by additional offspring the Church,
   which was desolate, and which had been reduced to ruinous and frightful
   solitude, as to impart to the earth the power of bringing forth. Yet,
   though he does not speak of regeneration, still we may apply to it this
   statement; because he speaks of the restoration of the Church, the
   chief part of which is the new creature by which the Lord restores his
   image in the elect. This doctrine may indeed be drawn from it and more
   copiously explained, but we must first explain the Prophet's design,
   and lay open the plain and natural meaning of his words.

   5. One shall say. Hitherto the Prophet has spoken metaphorically, but
   now expresses his meaning plainly without any figure of speech. He
   shews what is the nature of that vegetation and herbage of which he
   spoke. It means that out of all nations the Lord will gather his
   people, and will bring into his Church those who were formerly
   strangers, and will raise up and enlarge his Church, which formerly
   appeared to be reduced to nothing; for all shall flock to her from
   every quarter, and shall wish to be enrolled in the number of
   believers, as it is also said,

   "Behold Philistia, Tyre, and Ethiopia; that man was born there." (Psalm
   87:4.)

   That passage, though hitherto it seemed to be obscure, through the
   mistakes of interpreters, is exceedingly well adapted to the
   illustration of this prophecy, that believers, who might have been
   terrified and ashamed on account of their diminished numbers, (for we
   know that but a small number returned from captivity,) might cherish
   hope of that illustrious and magnificent grace of Redemption which had
   been celebrated by the prophets. To meet these views, that Prophet,
   whoever he was, that was the author of the psalm, declares that the
   Babylonians and Egyptians shall be citizens of the Church, and that the
   Ethiopians and Tyrians, and those who formerly were strangers, shall
   come for the purpose of being enrolled among the people of God. "Now,"
   says he, "Jerusalem lies waste; but one day God will not only gather
   those who are scattered, but will also call others from every quarter,
   and will unite in one body those who are now at the greatest variance,
   so that they shall boast of being citizens of Jerusalem, and shall
   belong to the body of the chosen people as much as if they had been
   natives." The same thing is taught in this passage by the Prophet
   Isaiah, from whom the author of the psalm undoubtedly borrowed that
   sentiment.

   And another shall be called by the name of Jacob. The general meaning
   is, that there will be a vast assembly of men, who shall be united in
   faith and in obedience to the one true God. But as, in a registration,
   every person either pronounces or writes his own name, the Prophet,
   keeping his eye on this custom, employs the following modes of
   expression, -- "One shall write with his hand, I am God's, and shall
   take the surname of Israel; another shall acknowledge that he is God's,
   and shall be called by the name of Jacob." He describes something new
   and uncommon, for he who formerly had nothing to do with God shall
   boast that God hath adopted him. "To be called" is in this place
   equivalent to the French phrase, Se reclamer, that is, "to declare
   one's self to belong to a person;" just as formerly, when he spoke of
   women to whom the name of their husbands served for a protection, he
   introduces them as saying, "Let thy name be called on us," that is,
   "Let us be named by thy name." (Isaiah 4:1.)

   Although Isaiah appears, in this passage, to distinguish between those
   who in express terms shall declare that they belong to the people of
   God, and shall wish to be named by the name of Jacob, yet both clauses
   refer to the same persons, because to be a child of God, and to be an
   Israelite, are two things closely connected, for God determines that
   the Church shall be the mother of all his children. Yet it ought to be
   remarked, that none are the lawful citizens of the Church but those who
   submit to the government of God. If the Prophet had passed by the name
   of God and mentioned "Jacob" and "Israel," still we must have begun
   with the Head, from whom proceeds all relationship both in heaven and
   in earth; but, that there may be no remaining ambiguity, he has twice
   described this order, that none are reckoned to belong to the seed of
   Jacob but they who obey God.

   Hence we easily see what is the Prophet's meaning; for he shews that
   the Church, so long as she is destitute of the blessing of God, withers
   and gradually falls into decay; but that, when the Spirit of God has
   been poured out, she is quickened, and at length gathers strength, not
   only for recovering her former condition, but so as to grow by
   wonderful increase beyond expectation. Let us remember, however, that
   the Prophet does not speak of the order of nature, as if the new
   children of the Church were born such from the womb, because no person
   gains such high rank by his own industry; but when they who formerly
   were aliens have been regenerated by faith, he says that they will
   eagerly enrol their names, in order to testify that they are the
   children of God. Thus he describes a change which surpasses nature and
   all the conceptions of men, when out of the accursed race of Adam is
   formed a spiritual Israel.

   Some think that the Prophet here expresses the small number of
   believers, when he says, "One shall be called, another shall write;"
   but that argument has little weight, and even the context furnishes an
   easy refutation of their error. In my opinion, we should rather
   understand him to mean that the Church shall be collected in crowds out
   of various and distant nations; because God will assemble strangers
   under his authority, and will stir them up to boast sincerely, and not
   in empty words, that they belong to his people. It ought also to be
   observed, that true faith cannot stand without breaking forth
   immediately into confession; for such is the import of these four
   words, "To be called by the name of Israel, To write, To be known, To
   say, I am the Lord's;" for they who sincerely worship God ought not to
   be dumb, but to testify both by actions and by words what they carry
   inwardly in their hearts. They profess to be the servants of God, and
   glory in his name during the whole course of his life.

   6. Thus saith Jehovah. The Prophet now does nothing else than confirm
   the preceding doctrine, which was highly necessary; for the hearts of
   men, being prone to distrust, are easily dismayed by adversity, and may
   be encouraged by one or more exhortations. It was not superfluous,
   therefore, to employ many words in confirming them; because we never
   ascribe as much as we ought to ascribe to the power of God, but are
   distracted by a variety of thoughts, and are too strongly attached to
   the present state of things.

   The King of Israel, and his Redeemer. After having made use of the
   unutterable name of God, the Prophet calls him also "King" and
   "Redeemer;" because it is not enough that we perceive the power of God,
   if we are not convinced of his good-will towards us. In order,
   therefore, that his promises may produce their proper effect upon us,
   he mentions not only his glory, but also his goodness, that we may know
   that it extends to us. It might be thought absurd that he called him
   "King," while there was scarcely any people; but believers ought to
   rely on this promise, that they might behold the kingdom by faith, and
   contemplate it as future, though they did not behold it with their
   eyes. And indeed this doctrine would never have penetrated their
   hearts, when they were reduced to the greatest extremity, and were
   almost overwhelmed with despair, if the way had not been opened by'
   this preface. But when God familiarly addresses us, and declares that
   he is united to us, fairly, allured by so gentle an invitation, rises
   up out of hell itself.

   I am the first. By these words he does not assert God's eternity, but
   shews that He is always like himself, that they may hope that He will
   be to them in future what they have found him to be in the past. But
   why, it may be asked, does he speak in this manner to believers, who
   knew it well? I reply, though men believe God, yet they do not
   acknowledge him to be what he is, and sometimes ascribe less to him
   than to the creature. The Prophet, therefore, wishes that our minds
   should be pure and free from every false imagination, and that we
   should raise them to heaven, that they may be altogether fixed on God
   alone. Besides, it was necessary that the people, who had been so
   terribly distressed, should be fortified against such violent attacks,
   that they might firmly keep their ground.

   7. And who as I? Here the Lord compares himself with idols, as we have
   already seen in another passage. In the present instance the object is,
   that, when they were fiercely insulted by the Babylonian conquerors,
   they might not be discouraged, or think that their hopes were
   disappointed; for the taunts which were hurled at them by wicked men
   were exceedingly harsh and insolent. "Where is their God?" (Psalm
   79:10.) "Why does he not assist you?" Such blasphemies might shake the
   minds of believers, and disturb them in such a manner that they would
   throw away hope and confidence; and therefore the Prophet dwells more
   earnestly on this matter, in order to confirm believers more and more.
   That mournful calamity of the nation was like a dark cloud, which
   prevented believers from seeing the face of God; and in the meantime
   unbelievers danced for joy, as if the power of their gods had shone
   forth in full brightness. In order to dispel that darkness of error,
   the Prophet shows that still undoubted marks and proofs of the glory of
   God are distinctly visible, so as to distinguish him from idols; that
   is, because in due time he publicly made known what was future, that
   the Jews might recognize him to be a righteous Judge in chastisements,
   and yet might hope that he would be reconciled and gracious.

   Shall call. The word call may be taken in two senses, so as to refer
   either to foreknowledge or to action; for, as God governs all things by
   his providence, so he knows everything that is future, and gives
   evidence of his foreknowledge. It is unnecessary to give ourselves much
   trouble about the meaning of this word, for it is very evident that the
   Prophet ascribes to God both the foreknowledge and the government of
   all things. But for my own part, I rather think that it refers to
   action. "Shall there be found among the gods of the nations any one
   that can call, that is, raise up, announce, and appoint deliverers?
   Does not this plainly shew that I alone am God?" Thus he defies idols,
   to whom groundlessly men ascribe any power. By the word which he
   immediately adds, shall tell it, he magnifies the special grace of God,
   in deigning to reveal his purpose to the elect people by the prophets.

   Since I appointed the people of the age. By "the people of the age"
   some understand all nations, the singular number being used instead of
   the plural, because, as soon as the Lord multiplied the nations, he
   separated them from each other, and established that order which should
   last through future ages. Others extend it to all the creatures,
   viewing the stars as one people, the vegetable tribes as another, and
   in like manner animals as another, and so forth. But when I examine the
   matter closely, I am constrained to adopt an opposite opinion, namely,
   that the Lord speaks of his own people, and calls them: the people of
   the age," because they are preferred to all others. Other nations,
   indeed, were unquestionably more ancient. The Egyptians boasted of
   their antiquity, and so did the Arcadians and others. But Abraham was
   brought out of Mesopotamia, (Genesis 11:31; Acts 7:2,) when the
   Chaldees were in a highly flourishing condition, and lived at home a
   solitary individual, as if at his death the remembrance of him should
   quickly perish, while the neighboring countries were highly populous,
   and were eminent in other respects.

   The antiquity of Israel, therefore, ought not to be estimated from the
   number of years, or from the outward condition of things, but from the
   election of God; and hence also the foundations of Jerusalem are called
   eternal. (Psalm 78:69.) It is therefore as if he had said, "Before
   idols were framed by men, I determined that I should have a Church,
   which should last for ever." This "people," therefore, is the most
   ancient and most excellent of all, though others may come before it
   either in time or in rank; for, as all things were created for the sake
   of man, so all men were appointed to be of service to the Church; so
   that there are none, though occupying a higher eminence, that do not
   sink to a lower rank; for the Church is the body of Christ, which
   nothing can exceed in antiquity or excellence. To adopt the fables of
   the Jews, that Jerusalem was founded from the very beginning, would be
   absurd, because in this passage there is no reference to dates; but yet
   we ought to hold by this principle, that the elect people holds a
   higher rank than the heathen nations, in consequence of approaching
   more nearly to God, who is the fountain of eternity.

   Let them tell. This permission shews that it is vain for men to expect
   a revelation from idols, which, if they tell anything, delude by
   tricks, and by words of doubtful meaning, those who consult them, as we
   have already mentioned.

   8. Fear not. Isaiah now explains the reason why he formerly spoke of
   the power of God, that is, in order to confirm the faith of the people.
   From the preceding statements he draws this conclusion, -- "Since the
   Lord is so powerful, and governs all things at his pleasure, the people
   whom he hath taken under his protection ought not to fear."

   Have I not since then made thee hear? He next repeats what he had
   already said, that God not only brought assistance secretly to the
   Jews, and suddenly, as if by legerdemain, made his appearance when he
   was least expected, but kept their faith alive by many predictions,
   and, in short, gave manifest proofs of his fatherly kindness, so that
   his divinity was clearly perceived. It would be of no advantage to us
   that God knows and can do all things, if it were not also revealed how
   great concern he takes in our salvation. Although, therefore, he wishes
   that many things should be unknown to us, yet he communicates
   everything that is useful or advantageous for us to know. m'z, (meaz,)
   from then, means a long period; or, if it be thought better, it denotes
   an opportunity; for the Lord reveals his secrets to the elect, when he
   sees a fit season; but the former interpretation appears to me to be
   more simple.

   Therefore ye are my witnesses. He means what I have already remarked,
   that the people cannot plead the excuse of ignorance for not being
   satisfied with one God; for he has abundantly revealed himself to them,
   so as to give a testimony concerning himself. The object intended to be
   gained by our knowledge of the glory of God is, that we should profess
   his truth before men, as has been already said, if we do not wish to
   extinguish the light which he hath brought to us by his Spirit. Again,
   we cannot be "witnesses to God" if we are not confirmed by his truth;
   for a testimony proceeding from a doubtful opinion would be of no
   avail, and therefore we must be taught by the Word of God, so as to
   have a fixed and unhesitating hope of salvation.

   And there is no strong God. [174] In this passage, as in many others,
   he applies to God the epithet strong; for it is not enough to
   acknowledge God's eternal essence, if we do not also ascribe strength
   to him. But for this, we shall leave him nothing but a bare and empty
   name, as is done by wicked men, who with the mouth confess God, and
   afterwards ascribe his power to this and to that.

   9. The formers of a graven image. The Lord now shews, on the contrary,
   how wretched idolaters are who wander amidst their contrivances, and
   are not founded on the eternal truth of God; for they have no knowledge
   or sound understanding. As he justly pronounced the people, a little
   before, to be guilty of ingratitude, if the proofs of the grace of God
   did not encourage them to the exercise of faith, so he now arms and
   fortifies them against all the superstitions of the Gentiles.
   Unbelievers being both very numerous and very wealthy, he says that all
   are nothing, [175] and, next, that amidst all their magnificence there
   is nothing but imposture.

   And their desirable thinqs do not profit. Under the term desirable
   things, he includes not only idols, but all their worship, and the
   ornaments, honor, and obedience which foolish men render to them, and
   denotes those things by a highly appropriate name; for since the chief
   object of life is to acknowledge and worship God, (which alone is our
   principal distinction from the brutes,) we ought to prefer it to all
   things, even to the most valuable, so as to direct to him all our
   prayers, and, in a word, all the thoughts of our heart. With good
   reason, therefore, does Scripture employ this word in speaking of the
   worship of God; but here the Prophet speaks of corrupt worship and the
   mad desire of idols, by which men are hurried along; and therefore he
   says, that all that they desire or eagerly perform is vain and useless.
   Frequently, too, this "desire" is compared to the love of a harlot, by
   which men are bewitched and almost blinded, so as not to perceive their
   baseness or yield to any reason. But we have explained this under a
   former passage. (Isaiah 1:29.) [176]

   And they are their witnesses. Some explain this to mean that the idols
   bear testimony against themselves, and plainly shew how vain they are,
   so that they who do not perceive it must be exceedingly stupid. But I
   do not at all approve of that exposition, and prefer to follow those
   who refer it to the worshippers of idols, who themselves are aware of
   their being so utterly vain; for they know that they neither see nor
   understand anything. And in this passage there is a contrast between
   the testimony of the people of God and that of idolaters. The former
   will give an illustrious testimony of the glory of God from his works
   and promises and predictions; the latter will be constrained to be
   dumb, if they do not choose to bring forward contrivances which have no
   certainty whatever, and therefore are false and vain. Wicked men boast,
   indeed, of their worship with great haughtiness, and loudly applaud
   themselves; but their conscience [177] is "a witness" how uncertain and
   vain is all that they do, for they always tremble, and never find rest,
   though their obduracy leads them to violent exertions.

   They will themselves, therefore, bear testimony against their idols;
   just as, if a man were to employ an ignorant teacher, he may be a
   witness of his ignorance. In like manner they will bear witness that
   their gods neither know nor can do anything; for they see that they are
   composed of stone or wood or some other material, and that they neither
   can see nor understand anything. Thus believers alone will render a
   true testimony to their God, because he knows, directs, and governs all
   things. The rest must at length be ashamed, though now they defend
   their errors with mad eagerness; for their conscience is a witness that
   nothing but opinion and a vain imagination holds their minds captive.
   [178]

   10. Who is the maker of God? He pours ridicule on the madness of men
   who dare to frame gods; for it is a shocking and detestable thing that
   men should take so much upon them as to create God. Every person
   certainly will greatly abhor such madness; and yet men are blindly
   impelled by foolish passion to manufacture gods, and no warning
   restrains them. On the other hand, they will say that this never
   entered into any man's mind, and that injustice is done to them when
   they are accused of so great madness; just as the Papists in the
   present day say that we slander them, when we employ these arguments of
   the Prophet against them. But in vain do they rely on their sophistical
   reasonings for avoiding this charge. What the Prophet says is most
   true, that they are so mad as to think that they "make God;" for as
   soon as the stone or wood has been carved or polished, they ascribe to
   it divinity, run to it, make prayers, call upon it, and prostrate
   themselves before it, and in short, ascribe to it those things which
   they know to belong to God alone.

   Which is profitable for nothing. We ought carefully to observe this
   clause, which condemns as vain and useless all the images by which God
   is represented. Hence it follows not only that God is insulted,
   whenever his glory is changed into dead images, but that all who
   procure idols for themselves lose their pains and suffer damage.
   Papists allege that they are the books of the unlearned; but this is a
   paltry evasion, for the Prophet testifies that they are of no use
   whatever. Let them, therefore, either erase this proof from the Book of
   Isaiah, or acknowledge that images are vain and useless. Formerly he
   expressed something more, when he affirmed that nothing can be learned
   from them but falsehood. But on this subject we have said enough in the
   exposition of these passages. (Isaiah 40 and 41.)

   11. Lo, all his companions shall be ashamed. Not only does he attack
   the workers and makers of idols, but he likewise attacks generally all
   their worshippers, because they are so dull and stupid, that as soon as
   the trunk of a tree has received some new shape, they look upon it as
   containing the power of God. He means that not only shall the framers
   of idols be punished for their effrontery, but likewise all who have
   entangled themselves in the same superstitions; for it is right that
   they who share the same guilt should be subjected to the same
   punishment. Nor can they, on the other hand, plead any excuse; for they
   see that their idols, which proceeded from the hand of men, are dumb
   and vain, so far is it from being possible that they are gods.

   Though they all assemble. Whatever conspiracy may be entered into by
   wicked men, yet, when they shall come to the judgment-seat of God, they
   must be ashamed. Nor is it without cause that the Prophet threatens
   against them trembling and shame, because wicked men usually are
   haughty and insolent, and look on all other men with scorn. They boast
   of their vast numbers, as the Papists in the present day despise our
   small numbers, and swell with insolence, and with amazing presumption
   attack God and his doctrine. In this passage, therefore, Isaiah appeals
   to the consciences of wicked men; because, although they are actuated
   by the most inveterate obstinacy and rebellion, yet sometimes they are
   constrained to tremble, when they ask themselves, "What are we doing?"
   and inquire into the reason of their actions; for they have nothing
   that is firm or solid, on which they can safely rest. They are bold so
   long as they are hurried on by their rage, but when they come to
   themselves, and take some leisure for reflection, they are terrified
   and dismayed; so that we need not be alarmed at their rage and pride
   and vast numbers, for they shall quickly pass away. Let us not
   therefore be moved by the conspiracies and displays and pride and rage
   and schemes of the Papists, since we know that all those things tend to
   their shame and destruction; for the more haughtily they swell and
   exalt themselves against God, the heavier shall be their fall, and the
   deeper their disgrace.

   12. The worker in iron. With good reason does the Apostle here draw up
   a long description, in order to shake off the stupidity and madness of
   superstitious people, if they can at all be awakened, or, at least, to
   prevent the Jews from indulging in similar folly who were surrounded on
   all sides by innumerable worshippers of false gods; for he gives a
   minute and homely enumeration, which makes it exceedingly evident that
   they are frantic and outrageous, he might otherwise have condemned this
   wickedness in a single word or in a few words; but this catalogue
   points out the fact, as it were, with the finger, and places it before
   our eyes, he details the tools and labors and industry and care of
   workmen, so as almost to bring it actually before us. Men who have
   their errors deeply rooted by nature in their hearts are more deeply
   affected in this manner than by simple doctrine; for they cannot be
   roused from their lethargy but by loud and continual cries. Every part
   must be delivered to them, and broken into small fragments, and even
   chewed and put into the mouth, as they do with infants, that they may
   receive the doctrine, which would otherwise appear to them strange and
   uncommon.

   Even hungry. He describes the eagerness by which superstitious persons
   are impelled to fashion gods; for they burn with such ardor that they
   cannot observe any limit or measure. Their lust, like a gad-fly, drives
   them on, and causes them to rush forward with such fury that we may
   justly compare that zeal to the love of a harlot, as we have formerly
   said. They apply to it their whole force both of body and of mind. This
   is what he means by the arm of his strength; [179] as if he had said,
   "All the strength of their arms is applied to it; they work against
   their natural inclinations, and scarcely take as much as is necessary
   for the support of life; in a word, they spare no labor or expense to
   make the gods whom they have desired.

   Although he describes the constancy of toil, by saying that they do not
   slacken their labor when they are hungry, but endure hunger and thirst
   rather than relinquish their work, [180] yet we may appropriately
   extend the observation to all the efforts of inconsiderate zeal. We see
   how the fervent devotion, as they call it, of unbelievers, is their own
   executioner; but the more laboriously they toil for their own
   destruction, the more base and shameful is our slothfulness, by which
   we defraud God of his lawful worship.

   13. That it may abide in the house. Thus he shews the folly of such
   intense application; for their toil brings no other reward than to see
   their idols resting indolently without motion in the position which has
   been assigned to them, just, as if a sluggard were crouching over a
   fire or reclining on a couch.

   14. He shall cut down for himself: The Prophet expresses not only the
   zeal and furious eagerness of idolaters, but also their rebellion and
   obstinacy; for when he says that they cut down cedars and plant
   pine-trees, he shews that they persevere very long in their madness,
   and are not prompted by any sudden impulse to manufacture gods. "Not
   only," says he, "do they choose trees that are already grown, but they
   even plant and water and cultivate them, and wait till they have come
   to their full size, so as to be fit material for making an idol."

   When we read these things, and are instructed concerning this shocking
   madness, let us know that God lays his hand upon us, so to speak, in
   order to draw us back from it, and to keep us in true godliness;. It is
   necessary, indeed, to meet it early, lest longer delay should make the
   wound incurable; for as soon as we have been led away by foolish desire
   to the practice of false worship, there is always reason to fear that
   we shall be plunged into that whirlpool. We all carry some seed of this
   madness, which cannot in any way be rooted out, but continually buds
   and blossoms, if we are not cleansed anew by the Spirit of the Lord.

   It ought also to be remarked that, since idolaters are impelled by so
   great eagerness to worship idols, we ought to be ashamed of our
   coldness in the true worship of God. Let us be ashamed, I say, that we
   are so negligent and cold and even freezing, when the worshippers of
   idols are so ardent; and let us consider that we must render an
   account. With what rage are the Turks seized, when the question relates
   to the defense of the reveries of their prophet Mahomet, for whom they
   gladly both shed their blood and part with their life! By what rage are
   the Papists impelled to follow their superstitions! Yet we scarcely
   become warm, and sometimes extinguish the sparks of that zeal which the
   Lord has kindled in us. To this also applies that expostulation of
   Jeremiah,

   "Is there any nation that hath forsaken its gods? But my people have
   forsaken me, the fountain of living water, and have digged for
   themselves cisterns which cannot hold water."
   (Jeremiah 2:10-13.)

   This comparison, therefore, ought to be carefully observed, that we may
   not be less steadfast in defending truth than they are obstinate in
   falsehood.

   15., 16., and 17. Then shall a man use it for burning. He censures
   their ignorance in not being taught by manifest experience that a trunk
   of wood is not God, and even reproves their ingratitude in defrauding
   of the honor due to him the true God, whose power is illustriously
   displayed in the trees themselves; for the wood cannot be applied to
   various uses without bringing before our eyes the bounty of God.
   Whenever bread is baked in the oven, or flesh is seethed in the pot, or
   meat is roasted on the coals; whenever we warm ourselves, or obtain any
   advantage whatever from wood, our stupidity is inexcusable, if we do
   not consider how bountifully God hath provided for us, that we should
   not want anything necessary for us. Such is the meaning of these words
   --

   Aha! I am warm. These words express the gladness of those who, freed
   from all uneasiness and annoyance, utter what may be called the
   language of triumph. What can be more base or foolish than that men,
   while they are pleasantly enjoying God's benefits, should flatter and
   applaud themselves, and at the same time should not thank the author,
   and should even abuse his abundant wealth for the purpose of
   dishonoring him? In cooking their victuals, and in other conveniences,
   men perceive that the wood is subject to their control and devoted to
   their use; how comes it then that they bow down before a piece of wood
   that has the shape of a man? Is not God in this maimer robbed of his
   right? And when men call upon images, do they not defraud God of that
   sacrifice which he chiefly demands? Even heathen writers long ago
   laughed at this folly, that men ventured to form gods according to
   their own fancy out of corruptible matter which they formerly despised.
   Hence came that jest of Horace, "Once I was a trunk of a fig-tree, a
   useless piece of wood, when a carpenter, uncertain whether to make a
   bench or a Priapus, preferred that I should be a god; and so I became a
   god." [181] But they did not actually know the fountain of impiety,
   because they did not apply their minds to consider the goodness and
   power of One God, which is displayed in all the creatures.

   When the Prophet thus attacked the worshippers of idols, and laid open
   their stupidity and madness, they undoubtedly complained that they were
   unjustly defamed, and endeavored to cloak their errors under plausible
   pretexts, that they acknowledged that their gods were in heaven, as
   even their writings shewed, and did not mean that wood or stone is God,
   in the same manner as the Papists, in arguing against us, defend the
   same cause with them, and absolutely refuse to be condemned for such
   gross blindness. But we have already said that the Prophet does not
   confine his attention to the mere essence of God; and indeed if this be
   all that is left to God, it will be an idle phantom. He means that all
   the attributes which belong to him, his foreknowledge, power,
   government, righteousness, salvation, and everything else, remains
   unimpaired. Now, when wicked men set up statues or images, and fly to
   them for the purpose of imploring assistance, and whenever they place
   them before their eyes and address them, and think that God hears them,
   do they not wickedly connect their salvation with them? But this
   stupidity arises from their ignorance of the nature of God, which is
   simple and spiritual, but which they imagine to be gross and carnal.
   Thus their thoughts concerning him are excessively wicked, and they
   east aside and stain his glory, by making it like earthly and fading
   things. Nothing is so inconsistent with the majesty of God as images;
   and he who worships them endeavors to shut up God in them, and to treat
   him according to his own fancy. Justly, therefore, does the Prophet
   attack such corruptions, and sharply censure the mad zeal of
   superstitious persons, since nothing more detestable can be uttered or
   imagined.

   18. They have not known or understood. He concludes that it is
   impossible that men endued with reason should have fallen into this
   mistake, if they had not been altogether blind and mad; for if any
   spark of reason had remained in them, they would have seen how absurd
   and ridiculous it is to adore a part of that wood which they had
   burned, and which they had seen with their own eyes consumed and
   reduced to ashes. But when they perceive nothing, and listen to no
   arguments, they shew that they have actually degenerated into beasts;
   for the expression which Isaiah uses in reproaching them, "They have
   not known," amounts to a declaration that they are bereft of reason,
   and have lost all understanding; and although many of them undoubtedly
   were very acute and sagacious, yet in this respect there was abundant
   evidence of their brutish folly.

   For he hath smeared their eyes. The reason now assigned is not intended
   to lessen their guilt, but to shew how monstrous and detestable it is;
   for men would never be so foolish, if the vengeance of heaven did not
   drive them to "a reprobate mind." (Romans 1:28.) Here some interpreters
   supply the word "God," and others supply the words "false prophets,"
   and say that the people were blind, because the false prophets led them
   astray; for their would never have plunged into such disgraceful errors
   if they had not been deceived by the impostures of those men, their
   eyes being dazzled by wicked doctrines. Others do not approve of either
   of these significations, and it might also refer to the devil. But as a
   different exposition is more customary in Scripture, I rather adopt it,
   namely, that God hath blinded them by a righteous judgment; if it be
   not thought preferable to view it as referring to themselves, [182]
   because they voluntarily shut both their minds and their eyes; in which
   case there would be a change of number, which frequently occurs among
   Hebrew writers. I have stated, however, what I prefer; and it is
   exceedingly customary among Hebrew writers, when they speak of God, not
   to mention his name.

   In what sense God is said to blind men, and to "give them up to a
   reprobate mind," (Romans 1:28,) is evident from various passages of
   Scripture; that is, when he takes away the light of his Spirit, and
   gives a loose rein to the lust of men, so that no reasoning can
   restrain them. He likewise arms Satan with the efficiency of error, so
   that they who have refused to obey the truth do not guard against his
   snares, and are liable to be deceived by his impostures. What then can
   be left in us but the thickest darkness and gross ignorance, so that
   this tyrant, the father of lies and of darkness, ravages at his
   pleasure both within and without? for there will not be found in us any
   spark of light to dispel the clouds of error, but, impelled by a spirit
   of giddiness with which God strikes the reprobate, (2 Thessalonians
   2:11,) we shall be driven about in a strange manner at the will of
   Satan.

   And yet we must not throw on God the blame of this blindness, for he
   has always just cause, though it is not always visible to our eyes; and
   we ought not to make anxious inquiries respecting it, or search into
   his secret decree, if we do not choose to be punished for our rashness.
   But frequently the causes are well known, namely, the ingratitude of
   men and their rebellion against God, as Paul plainly shews. (Romans
   1:28.) The blinding is their just punishment, and therefore men have no
   excuse, though they pretend ignorance; for they would never have been
   entangled in such gross errors, if the Lord had not blinded them on
   account of their sins. A very convincing argument may be drawn from the
   judgments of God to the sins of men; for God is just, and never
   punishes any one without a just cause, and does not blind a man, unless
   he deserves it, and voluntarily shuts his eyes. The blame therefore
   lies with men alone, who have of their own accord brought blindness on
   themselves; and the design of the Prophet undoubtedly is to shew, that
   men who ought to have been governed by God, being naturally endued with
   some judgment, have been forsaken by "the Father of lights," (James
   1:17,) so that they become the slaves of Satan.

   19. It doth not return into their heart. He confirms the preceding
   statement, and takes away every ground of excuse, because unbelievers
   of their own accord cherish their ignorance. That men are naturally
   careful and provident in worldly matters, but altogether blind in the
   worship of God, proceeds from no other cause than that they are
   abundantly attentive to their individual interests, but are not moved
   by any anxiety about the heavenly kingdom. Hence the Prophet reproves
   them for disregarding godliness, because, after long windings,
   unbelievers do not reflect whether they are keeping the right way, or,
   on the other hand, are uselessly fatiguing themselves with wicked
   errors, [183] He shews that their slothfulness is without excuse,
   because they are so much devoted to their superstitions; for if they
   applied their mind for a short time to consider the matter, nothing
   would be more easy than to perceive that stupidity; and, since they do
   not see it, it follows that they wish to be deceived, and that they
   flatter themselves in their error. They cannot, therefore, bring
   forward any palliation or excuse for their guilt, and cannot plead
   ignorance; for they do not design to apply their mind to the labor of
   investigating truth. To "return into the heart" [184] means "to
   consider and reflect;" for no child is so ignorant as not to be a
   competent judge of such extraordinary madness. Superstitious persons
   therefore give themselves too unlimited indulgence, and do not err
   merely through ignorance; and this vice ought not to be ascribed solely
   to the first corruption of men, but to rebellion.

   20. He feedeth on ashes. This verse also confirms the preceding
   statement. To "feed on ashes" is the same thing as "to be fed with
   ashes," just as "to feed on wind" is the same thing as "to be fed with
   wind." (Hosea 12:1.) Both expressions are used, as on the other hand,
   "Thou shalt feed on truth," is put for "Thou shalt be fed with truth,"
   that is, "Thou shalt be satisfied." (Psalm 37:3.) Others interpret that
   passage, "Thou shalt administer spiritual provision," and others, "Thou
   shalt feed faithfully;" but I choose rather to adopt the former
   interpretation. [185] But here he means that men are haughty and puffed
   up, but yet that they are empty and worthless, because they are merely
   full of deceptions, which have nothing solid or lasting. With such
   pride men will rather burst than be satisfied.

   A deceived heart disposes him. Next, he again includes both statements,
   that they are blinded by deceitful lusts, so as to see nothing, and yet
   that they voluntarily and willingly surrender themselves to vain
   delusions. The Prophet dwells largely on this, in order to shew that
   nothing drives men to false and wicked worship but this, that they are
   led to it of their own accord; and therefore there is no ground for
   imputing this vice to others, since they find in themselves the
   fountain which they earnestly nourish and defend. With strange
   presumption they rise up against God, are puffed up with a false
   opinion of their superstitions, and, in a word, are swollen and ready
   to burst with pride But let us feed on the solid food of truth, and not
   allow ourselves to be led astray by any delusions.

   Not to deliver his soul. He heightens the picture by saying that they
   flatter themselves in a matter so important; for who would forgive
   negligence in that which relates to salvation? We see how eagerly every
   person labors for this transitory life; and when the eternal salvation
   of the soul is in danger, what is more intolerable than that men should
   indolently slumber, when they might save it by making exertion? A man
   is said to deliver his own soul, who by repentance rescues himself from
   the snares of the devil, in the same manner as some men are said to
   save others, when by holy warnings they bring back wanderers into the
   right way. (James 5:20.) How comes it then that idolaters rush headlong
   to their own destruction? It is because they hasten to it at full
   gallop, harden their hearts, and do not permit themselves to be drawn
   back.

   Is there not a lie [186] in my right hand? Thus he briefly points out
   the method by which men may deliver themselves from destruction. It is
   by examining their actions and not flattering themselves; for whoever
   is delighted with his error, and does not inquire if his manner of life
   be right, will never "deliver his soul." In like manner the Papists
   refuse to inquire into the reasons for their worship, and disguise that
   stupidity under the name of simplicity; as if God wished us to be
   beasts, and did not enjoin us to distinguish between the worship which
   he approves and that which he rejects, and to inquire diligently what
   is his will, so as not to approve of everything without distinction.
   Everything ought to be tried by the standard which he has laid down for
   us. If that be done, we shall easily avoid danger; but if not, let us
   lay the blame of our destruction on ourselves, because of our own
   accord we wish to perish, and do not allow ourselves to receive any
   warning, or to be brought back into the right path.

   21. Remember these things, O Jacob. He now applies to the use of the
   people what he had so often said about the superstitions and falsehoods
   of the Gentiles, by which men who are not well instructed are deceived
   in the worship of God. Nor does he write these things solely for the
   men of his own age, but chiefly for their posterity, who were to be
   carried away into Babylon, and might have been corrupted by long
   intercourse with the Babylonians, and drawn aside from the true worship
   of God, if the Lord had not laid upon them those restraints. The
   Prophet therefore exhorts them, while they were held captive, to bring
   those exhortations to remembrance, and by means of them to strengthen
   their hearts amidst those grievous calamities.

   For thou art my servant. I have formed thee. He adds this reason why
   they ought to remember these promises, and to beware of the general
   contagion of other men; for it would have been intolerable that the
   elect people, whom God had surrounded by the barriers of his Law, that
   they might be separated from others, should freely and indiscriminately
   mingle with the pollutions of the Gentiles. As if he had said, "It is
   not wonderful that the Babylonians should wander in their errors, but
   thou oughtest to be unlike them; for I have formed thee,' that thou
   mightest serve me;' I have regenerated and sanctified thee, that thou
   mightest be an heir of eternal life."

   Of this creation we have stated largely, on former occasions, that it
   relates to the renewal of the soul. Scripture frequently employs this
   argument, "Ye have been called to sanctification and not to
   uncleanness," (1 Thessalonians 4:7,) "Walk as the children of light"
   (Ephesians 5:8) "in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,"
   (Philippians 2:15,) and in other passages of the same kind. Here we
   ought to infer that we shall be doubly punished, if it shall be found
   that we have quenched by neglect or indifference the light by which the
   Lord hath enlightened us; for our criminality will be far greater than
   that of others on whom he has not bestowed a similar favor. Heathens
   shall indeed be punished, and no excuse of ignorance shall be of any
   avail to them; but far heavier shall be the punishment of those who
   shall abuse the grace of God.

   Do not thou forget me. He means that it is impossible for any who have
   once entered into the right path to be led aside from it, if they are
   not chargeable with forgetfulness of God; for error and delusions can
   never prevail, so long as the remembrance of God is rooted in our
   hearts. Let every one, therefore, who turns aside from God, and falls
   into superstition and impiety, lay the blame on his own wickedness. We
   ought thus to observe carefully the cause of apostasy, that is,
   forgetfulness of God, which gradually withdraws us from the right path,
   till we leave it altogether. Besides, he reminds them that by this
   remedy they will be secure against revolt, if they be employed in
   constant meditation; for our minds, through their sluggishness, easily
   contract rust, so to speak, which infects and corrupts all knowledge of
   God till it be entirely destroyed.

   22. I have blotted out, as a cloud, thy iniquities. The Lord promises
   to his people future deliverance; for our hearts cannot be actually
   raised towards God, if we do not perceive that he is reconciled to us.
   In order, therefore, that he may keep the people whom he hath once
   bound to himself, he adds a promise by which he comforts them, that
   they may be fully convinced that the banishment shall not be perpetual;
   for God, being a most indulgent Father, moderates his chastisements in
   such a manner, that he always forgives his children.

   When he says that "he has blotted out their iniquities," this relates
   literally to the captives who were punished for their transgressions;
   and the consequence was, that, when God was appeased, they would be
   delivered. It is a demonstration from the cause to the effect. The
   guilt has been remitted, and therefore in like manner the punishment
   has been remitted; for the Jews, as soon as they have been reconciled
   to God, are freed from the punishment which was inflicted on account of
   guilt. Yet there is an implied exhortation to repentance, that they may
   not only groan under the heavy load of chastisement, but may consider
   that they are justly punished, because they have provoked God's anger;
   and indeed, whenever God deals severely with us, we ought not merely to
   wish relief from uneasiness and pain, but we ought to begin with
   pardon, that God may no longer impute sins to us. Yet this passage
   overthrows the distinction of the Sophists, who acknowledge that guilt
   is remitted, but deny that punishment is remitted, as we have already
   explained fully in other passages.

   The metaphor of "a cloud" has the same meaning as if the Lord had said
   that he will no longer pursue them in his displeasure, [187] or punish
   them, because, when guilt has been remitted, they are reconciled; in
   the same manner as when the sky has become calm, the clouds which
   intercepted from the earth the light of the sun, are "blotted out" and
   disappear. We must therefore reject the diabolical inventions of men,
   which overthrow the whole doctrine of the forgiveness of sins, while
   they openly contradict the doctrine of the prophets.

   Return thou to me. This may be taken in two senses, either that the
   Lord exhorts the people to repentance, or that he encourages them to
   hope for deliverance; but both senses may agree well. We have said that
   it is the ordinary practice of Scripture, whenever redemption is
   mentioned, to exhort to repentance; for the Lord wishes to bring us
   back to himself in this manner, that he may render us fit for receiving
   his layouts. Besides, as the people, through their unbelief, were very
   far from cherishing the hope of salvation, it may likewise be taken for
   a confirmation, that the people may believe that they will undoubtedly
   return; as if he had said, "Though thou thinkest that I am estranged
   from thee, yet know that I will take care of thee." And I approve more
   this latter sense, and think that it agrees better with the context;
   for the Prophet labors above all things to confirm the promises of God,
   and to fix them deeply on their hearts.

   For I have redeemed thee. He commands the Jews to "return to him,"
   though their banishment stood in the way of their expecting that he
   would be a deliverer; as if he had said, "Though I appear to be
   estranged from you, yet trust; for I have determined to redeem you."

   23. Praise, O ye heavens. He now exhorts the Jews to render
   thanksgiving, not only that they may testify their gratitude, but that
   their own expectation of deliverance may be strengthened; and,
   therefore, he enjoins believers to look upon it as an event already
   accomplished, as if the Lord had already delivered them. Such modes of
   address make a deeper impression on our hearts than if the promises had
   been presented in a naked form. Since, therefore, believers might doubt
   of their salvation, because they still languished amidst their miseries
   and were almost dead, the Prophet arouses them, and not only dictates
   to them a song, that they may fulfill their vows, but shews that the
   word of God will be so great and uncommon that it shall move heaven and
   earth and the dumb creatures.

   Burst into praise, ye mountains. We might simply have interpreted it,
   "Heaven above and earth below;" but as he mentions the "mountains," he
   gives the appellation of the lower parts of the earth to places which
   are level, such as plains and valleys, that all countries, wherever
   they are situated, may be excited to praise and celebrate the name of
   God.

   For Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob. He now adds, that that work which he
   had aroused all to admire is the redemption of the Church, and declares
   that the glory of God shall shine forth in it illustriously. Besides,
   it is proper to remember what I formerly remarked, that here not only
   does he celebrate the return of the people to their native country, but
   the end is also included; for they would be "redeemed" from the
   captivity in Babylon on this condition, that God should at length
   collect under one head a Church taken out of the whole world. [188]

   24. Thus saith Jehovah. The Prophet will immediately describe in his
   own manner the strength and power of God; because the bare promises
   would have little authority and weight, if the power of God were not
   brought forward, in order to remove all doubt from our hearts. By our
   distrust and obstinacy we are wont to lessen the power and goodness of
   God, that is, to ascribe to it less than we ought; and, therefore, the
   Prophet, by remarkable commendations, which we shall soon afterwards
   see, will encourage believers to learn to hope beyond hope.

   Thy Redeemer. He begins by praising the goodness and fatherly kindness
   with which God has embraced his Church, and which he intends to
   exercise till the end; for the declaration of his power and strength
   would have little influence on us, if he did not approach to us and
   assure us of his kindness. We ought not therefore to begin with his
   majesty, nor to ascend so high, lest we be thrown down; but we ought to
   embrace his goodness, by which he gently invites us to himself. The
   name Redeemer in this passage refers to past time, because the Jews,
   who had once been brought out of Egypt, as from a gulf, by an
   incredible miracle, ought to have been strengthened by the remembrance
   of that "redemption" to expect continual advancement. (Exodus 12:51.)

   And thy Maker. He calls himself the "Maker," in the same sense which we
   formerly explained; that is, because he regenerates by his Spirit those
   whom he adopts, and thus makes them new creatures; and therefore he
   mentions, in passing, the former benefits which they had received, that
   they may conclude from them, for the future, that God will abide by his
   promises. When he added from the womb, it was in order that the people
   might acknowledge that all the benefits which they had received from
   God were undeserved; for he anticipated them by his compassion, before
   they could even call upon him. By this consolation David comforted his
   heart in very severe distresses,

   "Thou art he who brought me out of the womb; I trusted in thee while I
   was hanging on my mother's breast; I was thrown on thee from my birth;
   thou art my God from my mother's womb." (Psalm 22:9, 10.)

   Yet here he does not speak of the favor generally bestowed, by which
   God brings any human beings into the world, but praises his covenant,
   by which he adopted the seed of Abraham to a thousand generations; for
   they were not at liberty to doubt that he would wish to preserve his
   work even to the end.

   Who alone stretcheth out the heavens. Now follow the commendations of
   his power, because he has measured out at his pleasure the dimensions
   of heaven, and earth. By the word "stretcheth out" he means that he has
   in his hands the government of the whole world, and that there is
   nothing that is not subject to him; for the power of God ought to be
   united to his word in such a manner as never to be separated.

   25. Frustrating the signs. The Prophet expressly added this, because
   Babylon surpassed other nations not only in the force of arms, and in
   troops and resources, but likewise in some remarkable sagacity, by
   which she appeared to penetrate even to heaven. What injury could
   befall those who foresaw at a distance future events, and could easily,
   as was commonly supposed, ward off imminent dangers? The astrologers,
   who were celebrated among them, foretold all events; and from them
   sprung that bastard Astrology which is called Judicial, by which even
   now many persons of great abilities are led astray. They assumed the
   name of Mathematicians, in order to recommend themselves more to the
   approbation of the people. The Egyptians boasted of being the authors
   of that science, and of being the first who taught it; but let us leave
   them to settle their dispute. It is certain that the Babylonians
   practiced that art from the very commencement, and esteemed it highly,
   so that both the Greeks and the Romans gave to those astrologers the
   name of Chaldees. Since, therefore, they placed much confidence in that
   science, the Lord threatens that he will overthrow all that belongs to
   it.

   By the word signs he means the positions, conjunctions, and various
   aspects of the stars, about which Astrologers speculate; and he
   afterwards says that he maketh them mad Some take the word vdym
   (baddim) to mean lies, as if he had said that the divinations to which
   the Astrologers pretend are nothing but absolute delusions; but I
   choose rather to interpret it diviners, as we frequently find it used
   in that sense.

   It is asked, "Does he condemn the astrology of the Chaldeans
   universally, or only the abuse and corruption of it?" I reply, in this
   passage he merely condemns those signs by means of which the Chaldeans
   prophesied, and imagined that they knew future events; for the Lord
   declares that they are absolutely worthless. It was not without good
   reason that he forbade the people to consult Chaldeans, astrologers,
   diviners, soothsayers, or any other kind of fortune-tellers, and
   commanded that no one who practiced that art should be permitted to
   dwell among the people. (Deuteronomy 18:10.) Now, if any certain
   information could have been obtained from the position and aspect of
   the stars, the Lord undoubtedly would not thus have condemned that
   science. Since, therefore, he forbade it without exception, he shewed
   that it contains nothing but absolute delusion, which all believers
   ought to detest.

   But the defenders of that absurdity argue that the Lord gave the
   planets and stars "for signs." (Genesis 1:14.) Granting this principle,
   I reply, that we ought to inquire of what, things they are the "signs;"
   for we do not condemn that Astronomy [189] which surveys the courses of
   the planets, in which we ought to acknowledge the wonderful majesty of
   God. But we condemn men addicted to curiosity, who wish to learn from
   them how long any government shall last, and what shall befall this
   city or that people, or even this or that man; for they go beyond
   limits, and abuse "signs," which were not given for the purpose of
   being omens of future events. I do acknowledge that we are sometimes
   warned by heavenly signs, to see that we have provoked the Lord's
   anger, or that chastisements are hanging over our heads, but not to
   venture to give minute explanations or conclusions, or to determine
   those hidden and secret events which we have no right to search and
   explore. But above all, we ought to observe the cause and origin of
   impiety; for, as soon as that error prevails, that the life of man is
   governed by the influence of the stars;, the judgment-seat of God is
   overthrown, so that he is not the judge of the world in inflicting
   punishments, or in restoring to life by his mercy those who were
   perishing. They who think that the stars, by their irresistible
   influence, control the life of men, immediately become hardened to the
   imagination of destiny, so that they now leave nothing to God. Thus the
   tribunals of God are buried, and consequently piety is extinguished,
   and calling on God is altogether at an end.

   He calls them wise men, and speaks of their knowledge, by way of
   admission, because they boasted greatly of the title of "wisdom," when
   they uttered those things which they had learned from the stars, as if
   they had been admitted into the counsel of God; and therefore he means
   that those empty masks of "wisdom" will not hinder the Lord from
   overturning their whole estate; for all their contrivances and tricks
   shall be brought to nothing.

   26. Confirming the word. The Prophet now applies to his purpose what he
   had formerly said; for, although he spoke in general terms, still he
   had a specific object in view, to adapt to the circumstances of the
   present occasion all that he said, that the people might not be alarmed
   at that pretended wisdom of the Chaldeans, or doubt that God would one
   day deliver them. With their unfounded predictions, therefore, he
   contrasts the promises of God, that they might not imagine that that
   monarchy was free from all danger.

   The promise was this,

   "Babylon shall fall, but my people shall be restored to liberty."
   (Isaiah 21:9.)

   The Babylonians laughed at these promises, "As if we could not foresee
   by means of the stars what shall happen to us!" On this account the
   Lord says that he will confirm, that is, he will actually fulfill what
   he has promised, and will accomplish those things which could neither
   be foreseen nor imagined by those wise men. What the prophets foretold,
   wicked men treated as an empty sound which would quickly pass away.
   With this opinion he contrasts the word "confirm" or "raise up," by
   which he means that God will establish the truth of his words.

   Of his servant. By the word "servant" he means all the prophets, if it
   be not thought better to view it as chiefly denoting Isaiah, who
   announced and testified this deliverance more clearly than all others.
   But it is unnecessary to limit it to a single individual, for it
   related to them all, and he likewise calls them by the ordinary name,
   "ambassadors" or "messengers" of God, because he had sent many, in
   order to support by their common and universal consent the faith of his
   people.

   The counsel of his messengers. By the word "counsel" he means the
   decrees of God, but not every kind of decrees; for we have no right to
   inquire about his secret purposes which he does not manifest by his
   servants, but, when he reveals to us what he will do, we ought to
   receive the threatenings of the prophets with as much reverence as if
   God admitted us into the most secret recesses of the heavens. Let not
   men therefore dispute according to their fancy, after God hath spoken
   by the mouth of the prophets. In a word, he intended to recommend the
   authority of his word, which is declared to us by the ministry of men,
   as if it revealed to us the eternal purpose of God.

   Saying to Jerusalem. After having spoken in general terms, the Prophet
   applies more closely to the present subject that certainty of the
   promises of God; for otherwise the people could not have obtained any
   advantage from it; and, therefore, he expressly adds the mention of
   "Jerusalem," that they may know that it shall be restored. Thus, we
   ought chiefly to behold in this matter the power of God in determining
   to defend his Church in a wonderful manner, and to raise her from death
   to life as often as is necessary. If, therefore, we think that God is
   true and powerful, let us not doubt that there will always be a Church;
   and when it appears to be in a lamentably ruinous condition, let us
   entertain good hope of its restoration. What is here said of
   "Jerusalem" relates to the whole Church; and, therefore, if we see that
   she is in a ruinous condition, and that her cities are demolished, and
   if nothing be visible but frightful and hideous desolation, let us rely
   on this promise, that she shall at length be raised up and perfectly
   restored.

   27. Saying to the deep. This is generally considered to be an
   allegorical description of Babylon, and I certainly do not deny that it
   is included; but yet I cannot think of limiting it to Babylon, for I
   prefer to view it simply as denoting any unexpected change. He shews
   that some great revolution will be necessary, as if the people must be
   drawn out of the depths of the sea, but declares that God will easily
   surmount every obstacle, for he can easily "make the deep dry, and dry
   up the rivers." In my opinion he rather appears to allude to that
   former redemption, (Exodus 14:29,) when the Lord brought the people out
   of Egypt through the Red Sea; as if he had said, "I did this for your
   fathers, and therefore you ought to hope for the same thing from me,
   and not to imagine that a return to your native land shall be closed
   against you."

   28. Saying to Cyrus. This is a remarkable passage, in which we not only
   may see the wonderful providence of God, but which likewise contains a
   striking proof of the truth and certainty of the prophecies. Here
   "Cyrus" was named long before he was born; for between the death of
   Manasseh, by whom Isaiah was slain, and the birth of "Cyrus," more than
   a century intervened. Besides, even though he had been born, who would
   have conjectured that he should come from the most distant mountains of
   Persia to Babylon? These things ought therefore to be carefully
   observed, for they shew clearly that it was not by a human spirit that
   Isaiah spoke. No one would ever have thought that there would be a
   person named "Cyrus," who should fly from the most distant and
   barbarous countries to deliver the people of God. [190]

   As to the objection made by infidels, that those things might have been
   forged by the Jews after they were fulfilled, it is so foolish and
   absurd that there is no necessity for refuting it. The Jews perused
   those prophecies, while they were held in captivity, in order that they
   might cherish in their hearts the hope of deliverance, and would have
   been entirely discouraged, if the Lord had not comforted them by such
   promises. These records, therefore, supported the hearts of believers
   in hope and confidence; and I have no doubt that Cyrus, when he learned
   that God had appointed him to be the leader and shepherd for bringing
   back Israel, was astonished at those promises, and that they induced
   him to cherish kind feelings towards the people, so as to supply them
   with food and with everything that was necessary for their journey.
   Thus the Lord points out the person by whose hand he has determined to
   bring back his people, that they may not look around on all sides in
   perplexity.

   Even by saying to Jerusalem. This is the conclusion, by which the
   former statements are confirmed, that they may rest assured that
   "Jerusalem" shall infallibly be built, and may learn from it how dear
   and precious they are to God, when they shall see the monarchy of all
   the east transferred to the Persians. At the same time he points out
   the end for which Jerusalem was to be rebuilt, namely, that the pure
   worship of God might be restored; for he does not promise this
   restoration, that men may seek their own ease or the conveniencies of
   life, but that the Lord's people may purely and sincerely call upon him
   without any disturbance. This ought to be carefully observed, for there
   are many who value more highly their own convenience and external
   comforts than the honor and worship of God. Hence also Haggai
   complained bitterly, that all were eager to build their own houses, but
   almost all gave themselves no concern about the Temple. (Haggai 1:4.)
   But it was the will of the Lord that men should care most about his
   house, and that is the import of what the Prophet says, --

   And to the temple, Thou shalt be founded. But in the present day he
   does not thus recommend to us a temple of wood or stone, but living
   temples of God, which we are; for the Lord hath chosen his habitation
   in us. (2 Corinthians 6:16.) Such, therefore, are the temples which
   must be diligently built by the doctrine of the word, that we may lead
   a holy and righteous life, and may render to God the worship which is
   due to him; for this is the reason why the Lord wishes that there
   should be a Church in the world, that the remembrance of his name may
   not perish.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [173] "Even on the common supposition, that the words of God begin with
   the second clause, it is better to take He will help thee' as a short
   independent clause, parenthetically thrown in to complete the
   description, or to connect it with what follows." -- Alexander.

   [174] "There is no God. Heb., Rock. -- (Eng. Ver.)

   [175] "Que tous sont vanite." "That all are vanity."

   [176] Commentary on Isaiah, [18]vol. 1, p. 84.

   [177] "Ce peu qu'ils ont de conscience." "The little conscience that
   they have."

   [178] "The obscurity of this verse proceeds from too close a
   translation, which may be cleared up by this paraphrase, They that make
   a graven image are framers of a vain insignificant thing, for their
   idol can never profit them; they that make them can witness for them,
   that they see not, and have no knowledge, therefore they may be ashamed
   to worship them.'" -- White.

   [179] "The strength of his arms." -- Eng. Ver.

   [180] The lamented missionary, Mr. Williams, discovered in the Islands
   of the Pacific a superstitious practice, probably very ancient, which
   sheds light on this passage. During the manfacture of an idol, the
   workmen scrupulously abstain from food, and do not even drink water;
   which accounts for the painful exhaustion and intense thirst described
   by the Prophet Isaiah as brought on at an advanced stage of the
   operation. "Their strength faileth," and "they are faint." -- Ed.

   [181]   Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum;
   Quum faber, incertus scamnum faceretne Priapum,
   Maluit esse Deum; Dens inde ego.
   Hor. Sat. 1:8.

   [182] "Des idolatres mesmes." "To the idolaters themselves."

   [183] "Apres des erreurs et superstitions." "After errors and
   superstitions."

   [184] "The first phrase does not correspond exactly to the English Lay
   to heart,' but comprehends reflection and emotion." -- Alexander.

   [185] The Author's exposition of Psalm 37:3, and the Editor's [19]note,
   may be consulted with advantage. -- Commentary on the Psalms, [20]vol.
   2, p. 19. -- Ed.

   [186] sqr (sheker) denotes in general anything that deceives, a vain or
   deceitful thing,' which does not correspond to a man's opinion and
   expectation, but deceives and imposes upon him. Hence also (in Jeremiah
   10:14; 51:17) an idol is called sqr (sheker). -- Rosenmuller.

   [187] "A la rigueur." "Rigorously."

   [188] "Son Eglise composee de toutes les nations de la terre." "His
   Church composed of all the nations in the world."

   [189] The Latin word Astrologia has a wider signification than the
   English word Astrology; for it sometimes denotes, as it undoubtedly
   does in this instance, "Astronomy," which belongs to the lawful domains
   of calculation and science. -- Ed.

   [190] "Lequel viendroit avec une merveilleuse vistesse." "Who should
   come with amazing swiftness."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 45.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 45:1-25

   1. Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I
   have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins
   of kings, to open before him the two-leaved gates; and the gates shall
   not be shut;

   1. Sic dicit Iehova Meschiae suo Cyro, eujus apprehendi dexteram ad
   subigendas coram eo gentes; itaque lumbos regum dissolvam, ad aperienda
   coram eo ostia; ideo portae non claudentur.

   2. I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will
   break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron:

   2. Ego to praecedam, et tortuosa dirigam, ostia aenea confringam, et
   vectes ferreos comminuam.

   3. And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of
   secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the LORD, which call thee
   by thy name, am the God of Israel.

   3. Et dabo tibi thesauros tenebrarum, et arcana latebrarum; ut scias
   quod ego sire Iehova, vocans to nomine tuo, nempe, Deus Israel.

   4. For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even
   called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not
   known me.

   4. Propter servum meum Iacob, et Israel electum meum, vocabo, inquam,
   to nomine tuo; cognominabo to, quamvis non noveris me.

   5. I am the LORD, and there is none else; there is no God beside me: I
   girded thee, though thou hast not known me:

   5. Ego Iehova, et nullus praeter me; non est praeter me Deus; accinxi
   to, utcunque non noveris me.

   6. That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west,
   that there is none besides me. I am the LORD, and there is none else.

   6. Propterea scient ab ortu solis, et ab occasu, quod non sit printer
   me. Ego Iehova, et nemo praeter me.

   7. I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create
   evil: I the LORD do all these things.

   7. Formans lucem, et creans tenebras, faciens pacem, et creans malum;
   Ego Iehova faciens omnia haec.

   8. Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down
   righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation,
   and let righteousness spring up together; I the LORD have created it.

   8. Rorate coeli superne; et nubes stillent justitiam; aperiatur terra;
   et proveniant salus et justitia; proferat eas simul; Ego Iehova creavi
   eum.

   9. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive
   with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that
   fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands?

   9. Hei litiganti cum fictore suo! Testa ad testas terrae. An dicet
   lutum fictori suo, Cur fecisti me? et operi tuo Non sunt manus.

   10. Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to
   the woman, What hast thou brought forth?

   10. Hei qui dicit patti, Cur genuisti? et mulieri, Cur parturis?

   11. Thus saith the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me
   of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my
   hands command ye me.

   11. Sic dicit Iehova, Sanctus Israel, et fictor ejus; de futuris
   interrogate me; super filiis meis, et super opere manuum mearum
   praecipite mihi.

   12. I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands,
   have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded.

   12. Ego feci terram, et hominem super eam creavi; ego cujus manus
   extenderunt coelos, et toti militiae eorum praecepi.

   13. I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his
   ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for
   price nor reward, saith the LORD of hosts.

   13. Ego exeitavi ilium in justitia, et omnes vias ejus dirigam. Ipse
   extruet urbem meam, et captivitatem meam dimittet, non pretio nec
   munere, dicit Iehova exercituum.

   14. Thus saith the LORD, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of
   Ethiopia, and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto
   thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains
   they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall
   make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there
   is none else; there is no God.

   14. Sic dicit Iehova, Labor Aegypti, merces AEthiopiae, et proceri
   Sabaei ad to transibunt, et tui erunt; ibunt post to, in compedibus
   transibunt, et adorabunt, (atque) to obsecrabunt. Utique (vel, tantum)
   in to est Deus, et nullus ultra prater Deum.

   15. Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the
   Saviour.

   15. Vere tu Deus abscondens to, Deus Israel servator.

   16. They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall
   go to confusion together that are makers of idols.

   16. Pudore afficientur, atque etiam erubescent omnes ipsi; simul cum
   pudore abibunt omnes fabricatores sculptilium.

   17. But Israel shall be saved in the LORD with an everlasting
   salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.

   17. Israel servatus est in Iehova salute aeterna; non afficiemini
   pudore, neque erubescetis usque in secula.

   18. For thus saith the LORD that created the heavens; God himself that
   formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not
   in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the LORD, and there is none
   else.

   18. Quia sic dicit Iehova creans coelos, ipse Deus fictor terrae, qui
   fecit eam, paravit earn; non inanem creavit, ad inhabitandum formavit
   earn; ego Iehova, et nullus praeter me.

   19. I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said
   not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the LORD speak
   righteousness, I declare things that are right.

   19. Non in abscondito loquutus sum, in loco terrae tenebrarum; non
   frustra dixi semini Iacob, Quaerite me; ego Iehova loquens justitiam,
   annuncians recta.

   20. Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are
   escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of
   their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.

   20. Congregamini, venite, accedite simul, abjecti (vel, remoti)
   Gentium. Nihil intelligunt qui efferunt lignum sculptilis sui, et orant
   Deum qui non servat.

   21. Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together:
   who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that
   time? have not I the LORD? and there is no God else beside me; a just
   God, and a Saviour; there is none beside me.

   21. Annunciate, et adducite, etiam consultent simul. Quis audire fecit
   hoc ab initio, et jam olim nunciavit? Annon ego Iehova? et non est
   ultra Deus praeter me, Deus justus, et servator, non est praeter me.

   22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am
   God, and there is none else.

   22. Respicite ad me, et salvi critis, omnes fines terrae; quia ego
   Deus, et non est amplius.

   23. I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
   righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow,
   every tongue shall swear.

   23. Per me juravi; egressum est ex ore meo in justitia verbum, quod non
   revertetur, quod mihi flectetur omne genu, jurabit omnis lingua.

   24. Surely, shall one say, In the LORD have I righteousness and
   strength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed against
   him shall be ashamed.

   24. Utique in Iehova milli, dicet, justitiae et robur; ad eum usque
   veniet; pudefient autem omnes qui provocant eum.

   25. In the LORD shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall
   glory.

   25. In Iehova justificabuntur, et gloriabuntur, totum semen Israel.


   1. Thus saith Jehovah. He pursues the subject which he had begun to
   handle. He shews that not in vain did he promise deliverance to his
   people, since the manner of it was altogether decreed and appointed by
   him; [191] for when the question relates to our salvation, we always
   inquire into the way and manner. Although God frequently chooses to
   hold us in suspense, and thus conceals from us the method which he has
   ready at hand, yet, in this instance he indulges the weakness of his
   people, and explains the method in which he will deliver them.

   To Cyrus his anointed. He names the person by whose hand he will bring
   them back; for, since their faith would be sharply tried by other
   temptations, he wished in this respect to provide against doubt, that
   the difficulty of the event might not shake them. And in order to
   impart greater efficacy to this discourse, he turns to Cyrus himself:
   "I have chosen thee to be a king to me; I will take hold of thy hand,
   and will subject the nations to thy authority, so that they shall open
   up a passage for thee, and voluntarily surrender." These words have
   greater effect than if the Lord spoke to his people.

   Yet it might be thought strange that he calls Cyrus his Anointed; for
   this is the designation which was given to the kings of Israel and
   Judah, because they represented the person of Christ, who alone,
   strictly speaking, is "the Lord's Anointed." "The Lord went forth with
   his Anointed," says Habakkuk, "for the salvation of his people."
   (Habakkuk 3:13.) In the person of David a kingdom had been set up,
   which professed to be an image and figure of Christ; and hence also the
   prophets in many passages call him "David," and "the Son of David."
   (Ezekiel 37:24, 25.) It was indeed a special anointing, intended to
   distinguish that priestly kingdom from all heathen kingdoms. Since
   therefore this title belonged to none but the kings of Judea, it might
   be thought strange that it is here bestowed on a heathen king and a
   worshipper of idols; for although he was instructed by Daniel, yet we
   do not read that he changed his religion. True, he regarded with
   reverence the God of Israel, and considered him to be the Highest; but
   he was not prompted by a sincere affection of the heart to worship him,
   and did not advance so far as to forsake superstitions and idolatries.

   Thus God deigns to call him his "Anointed," not by a perpetual title,
   but because he discharged for a time the office of Redeemer; for he
   both avenged the Church of God and delivered it from the Assyrians, who
   were its enemies. This office belongs peculiarly to Christ; and this
   ordinary appellation of kings ought to be limited to this circumstance,
   that he restored the people of God to the enjoyment of liberty. This
   should lead us to observe how highly God values the salvation of the
   Church, because, for the sake of this single benefit, Cyrus, a heathen
   man, is called "the Messiah," [192] or "the Anointed.

   Whose right hand I have taken hold of. By this mode of expression, he
   means that Cyrus shall prosper in all his undertakings, for he shall
   carry on war under God's direction; and therefore Isaiah declares that,
   for the sake of the Church, in order that he may deliver her, God will
   grant to him prosperity in all things; while he again commends the
   providence of God, that the Jews may fully believe, amidst changes and
   troubles, that God on high governs all things in such a manner as to
   promote the benefit of his elect. Now, since it was not easy for Cyrus
   to penetrate as far as Babylon, because the whole of Asia had leagued
   together in order to frustrate his designs, the Prophet testifies that
   God will dissolve all the strength which men can bring against him.

   I will loose the loins of kings. Because the whole strength lies in the
   reins, the Hebrew writers use the phrase "opening," or "loosing the
   loins," to denote "being deprived of strength." We might also view it
   somewhat differently, that is, that the Lord will "make bare," or
   "loose their loins," according to the customary manner of Scripture, by
   which kings are said to be ungirded of the belt, namely, of the badge
   of royalty, when they are deprived of authority. Job (Job 12:18)
   employs this mode of expression, and Isaiah will afterwards employ it:
   [193] "I will gird thee." (Ver. 5.) On this account I more readily
   adopt this sense, that the force of the contrast may be more evident.
   This shews clearly that kings have just as much strength and power as
   the Lord bestows on them for the preservation of each nation; for when
   he determines to convey their authority to others, they cannot defend
   their condition by any weapons or swords.

   To open the gates before him. By this expression he means that no
   fortresses can resist God, which indeed is acknowledged by all, but yet
   they do not cease to place foolish confidences in bulwarks and
   fortresses; for, where cities are well surrounded by walls, and the
   gates are shut, men think that there they are safe. On the other hand
   the Prophet shews that all defences are useless, and that it serves no
   purpose to block up every entrance, when the Lord wishes to open up a
   way for the enemies. Although it is certain that the gates were shut
   and securely barred, yet, because Cyrus pushed his way as swiftly as if
   all the cities had been thrown open, the Prophet justly affirms that
   nothing shall be closed against him.

   2. and 3. I will go before thee. These two verses contain nothing new;
   but, in general, he shews that Cyrus will gain an easy and rapid
   victory, because he will have the Lord for the leader of his
   expedition. Accordingly he promises that all crooked paths shall be
   made straight, because God will remove every obstruction. Now, since
   money is the sinews of war, and Cyrus came from the scorched and poor
   mountains of Persia, Jehovah says that treasures which were formerly
   hidden and concealed shall come into the hands of Cyrus, so that, laden
   with rich booty, he shall have enough for defraying any expenditure;
   for by the treasures of darkness he means those which lay concealed,
   and as it were buried in safe and deep places of defense. It is
   abundantly clear from history, that all these things happened; for by
   taking Croesus, king of Lydia, who was at that time the richest of all
   men, he obtained large sums of money. Nor would any one have expected
   that he would gain victories so easily; and the reason of so great
   success is now added, because the Lord called and directed him, that he
   might give in him an illustrious demonstration of his power; for he
   adds --

   That thou mayest know that I am Jehovah. True, Cyrus, as we formerly
   said, though he acknowledged that the God of Israel is the true God,
   and was filled with admiration, yet was not converted to him, and never
   embraced his pure worship according to the standard of the Law. This
   was therefore special knowledge, that is, so far as he assisted the
   Church, for whose deliverance he was appointed; and therefore it was
   necessary that he should be under the influence of this knowledge, in
   order that he might execute this work of God. Thus he does not speak of
   that knowledge by which we are enlightened, or about the Spirit of
   regeneration, but about special knowledge, such as men destitute of
   religion [194] may possess.

   Calling thee by thy name. From some commentators this mode of
   expression has received a trivial interpretation, that "before Cyrus
   was born, God called and described him by his name." But we have seen
   in a former passage, (Isaiah 43:1,) that the Prophet, while he used the
   same form of expression, meant something different; for God is said to
   "call by name" those whom he has chosen, and whom he appoints to
   perform some particular work, that they may be separated from the
   multitude. This word denotes closer and more familiar intercourse. Thus
   a shepherd is said to "call his sheep by name," (John 10:3,) because he
   knows them individually. This applies indeed, in the highest degree, to
   believers, whom God reckons as belonging to his flock, and to the
   number of the citizens of his Church. God did not bestow this favor on
   Cyrus; but because, by appointing him to be the leader of so excellent
   a deliverance, he engraved on him distinguished marks of his power;
   with good reason is the commendation of an excellent calling applied to
   him.

   The God of Israel. This ought to be carefully observed; for
   superstitious men ascribe to their idols the victories which they have
   obtained, and, as Habakkuk (Habakkuk 1:16) says, "They sacrifice every
   one to his god;" and therefore they wander in their thoughts, and
   conceive in their hearts any deity that they fancy, while they ought to
   acknowledge that Jehovah is the only and true God. What is said of
   Cyrus ought to be much more applied to us, that we may not fashion any
   knowledge of God according to our fancy, but may distinguish him from
   idols, so as to embrace him alone, and to know him in Christ alone,
   apart from whom nothing but an idol, or even a devil can be worshipped.
   In that; respect, therefore, let us surpass Cyrus, to whom the
   knowledge of God was revealed, so that we may lay aside superstitions
   and all false worship, and may thus adore him in a holy and upright
   manner.

   4. For the sake of my servant Jacob. He shews for what purpose he would
   grant such happy and illustrious success to this prince. It is, in
   order that he may preserve his people; as if the Lord had said, "Thou
   shalt indeed obtain a signal victory, bur I will have regard to my own
   people rather than to thee; for it is for their sake that I subject
   kings and nations to thy power." By these predictions, indeed, the Lord
   intended to encourage the hearts of believers, that they might not
   despair amidst those distresses; but undoubtedly he intended likewise
   to excite Cyrus to acknowledge that he owed to that nation all that he
   should accomplish, that he might he more disposed to treat them with
   all kindness.

   And Israel mine elect. In this second clause there is a repetition
   which serves still farther to explain that reason; and at the same time
   he shews on what ground he reckons the Israelites to be "his servants."
   It is because he condescended to choose them by free grace; for it is
   not in the power of men to make themselves "servants of God," or to
   obtain so great honor by their own exertions. This clause is therefore
   added, [195] as before, for the sake of explanation. But still it
   denotes also the end of election; for, since we are naturally the
   slaves of Satan, we are called in order that, being restored to
   liberty, we may serve God. Yet he shews that no man is worthy of that
   honor, as we have said, but he whom God hath chosen; for who will boast
   that he is worthy of so high an honor, or what can we render or offer
   to God? Thus "we are not sufficient of ourselves, but the Lord hath
   made us sufficient," as Paul says. (2 Corinthians 3:5.) The beginning
   of our salvation, therefore, is God's election by free grace; and the
   end of it is the obedience which we ought to render to him.

   But although this is limited to the history of Cyrus, still we may draw
   from it a general doctrine. When various changes happen in the world,
   God secures at the same time the salvation of his people, and in the
   midst of storms wonderfully preserves his Church. We are indeed blind
   and stupid as to the works of God, yet we ought firmly to believe that,
   even when everything appears to be driven about at random, and to be
   tossed up and down, God never forgets his Church, whose salvation, on
   the contrary, he promotes by hidden methods, so that it is at length
   seen that he is her guardian and defender.

   Josephus relates a memorable narrative about Alexander, who, while he
   was besieging Tyre, sent ambassadors to Jerusalem, to demand the
   tribute which the Jews were paying to Darius. Jaddus, the high-priest,
   who had sworn that he would pay that tribute, would not become subject
   to Alexander, and refused to pay him the tribute. Alexander was highly
   offended, and, swelling with pride and fierceness, determined to
   destroy Jerusalem, and, after having conquered Darius, marched to
   Jerusalem, for the purpose of consigning it to utter destruction.
   Jaddus went out to meet him, accompanied by other priests and Levites,
   wearing the priestly dress; and Alexander, as soon as he saw him, leapt
   from his horse, and threw himself down as a suppliant at his feet.
   Every person was astonished at a thing so strange and so inconsistent
   with his natural disposition, and thought that he had lost his senses.
   Parmenio, who alone of all who were present asked the reason, received
   a reply, that he did not adore this man, but God, whose servant he was;
   and that, before he left Dion, a city of Macedonia, a man of that
   appearance and dress, who appeared to have the form of God, presented
   himself to him in a dream, encouraged him to take Asia, and promised to
   be the leader of the army, so that he ought to entertain no doubt of
   victory, and therefore that he could not but be powerfully affected by
   seeing him. In this manner, therefore, was Jerusalem rescued from the
   jaws of that savage highwayman who aimed at nothing else than fire and
   bloodshed, and even obtained from him greater liberty than before, and
   likewise gifts and privileges. [196]

   I have quoted this example in order to shew that the Church of God is
   preserved in the midst of dangers by strange and unusual methods. Those
   were troublous times, and scarcely a corner of the earth was at rest;
   but above all other countries Judea might be said to be devoted to
   destruction. Yet behold the Church rescued in a wonderful and unusual
   manner, while other nations are destroyed, and nearly the whole world
   has changed its face!

   And yet thou hast not known me. These words are added for the purpose
   of giving greater force to the statement, not only that Cyrus may learn
   that this is not granted on account of any of his own merits, but that
   he may not despise the God of Israel, though he does not know him. The
   Lord frequently, indeed, reminds us on this subject, that he
   anticipates all the industry that exists in men, in order that he may
   beat down all the pride of the flesh. But there is another reason, as
   regards Cyrus; for if he had thought that the Lord granted those things
   for his own sake, he would have disregarded the Jews and treated them
   as despicable slaves. For this reason the Lord testifies that it does
   not happen on account of Cyrus's own merit, but only for the sake of
   the people, whom he determines to rescue out of the hands of enemies.
   Besides, nothing was more probable than that this man, in his
   blindness, would appropriate to his idols that which belonged to the
   true God; because, being entirely under the influence of wicked
   superstitions, he would not willingly have given place to a strange and
   unknown God, if he had not been instructed by this prediction.

   5. I am Jehovah. He confirms the preceding statement, and the
   repetition is not superfluous; for it was proper that it should be
   often repeated to Cyrus, that there is one God, by whose hands all
   rulers and nations are governed, that he might be drawn aside from all
   delusions and be converted to the God of Israel. Besides, it is clearly
   stated that we ought not to try to find divinity in any other; as if he
   had said, "Beware of ascribing this victory to idols, or forming any
   confused idea of a god such as men imagine; know that the God of Israel
   is the only author of this victory." Although Cyrus did not profit by
   this admonition to such an extent as to leave his idols and devote
   himself to the true God, yet it made so deep an impression on his heart
   that he acknowledged Jehovah to be God and to possess the highest
   authority. At the same time, it was proper that they who were members
   of the Church should embrace this doctrine, that they might boldly
   despise all pretended gods.

   I have girded thee. That girding corresponds to the nakedness which he
   formerly mentioned, (verse 1,) when he said that he "opened" or
   "ungirded the loins of kings;" for he is said to "gird" those whom he
   supplies with strength and courage and renders victorious. Hence it
   ought to be inferred, that men have no courage but when the Lord
   imparts to them his power and strength, that neither weapons nor any
   military force can do anything unless he assist, and, in a word, that
   he presides over all wars, and gives victory to whomsoever he pleases,
   that none may think that it happens by chance. He again repeats, Though
   thou hast not known me, in order to make it still more certain that
   these things are granted to Cyrus for the sake of the Church, in order
   that he may give evidence that he remembers it with gratitude, and may
   shew kindness to the people of God in return for such a distinguished
   favor.

   6. Therefore they shall know. He means that this favor shall be so
   remarkable as to be acknowledged and admired by all nations. This was
   not indeed immediately fulfilled; for, although the fame of that
   victory was spread far and wide, yet few understood that the God of
   Israel was the author of it; but it was immediately made known to the
   neighbors, and was communicated by one nation to another, till the
   report of it was spread throughout the whole world. He does not predict
   what shall happen immediately, but what shall happen afterwards, though
   these things were long concealed. God therefore did not permit the
   remembrance of this transaction to fade away, but determined that it
   should be handed down in permanent records, that it might be celebrated
   in all ages, and by the most distant nations, to the very end of the
   world. We must therefore remember what I formerly remarked, that the
   Prophet interweaves earlier and later events, because the return of the
   people was the prelude to a future redemption, and that he thus speaks
   of a perfect restoration of the Church. Besides, when it happens that
   the illustrious works of God are buried by the ingratitude and malice
   of men, still it does not cease to be true, that they shall be visible
   to the whole world; for they shine openly and brightly, though the
   blind do not see them.

   7. Forming light. As if he had said, that they who formerly were wont
   to ascribe everything either to fortune or to idols shall acknowledge
   the true God, so as to ascribe power and the government and glory of
   all things, to him alone. He does not speak of perfect knowledge,
   though this intelligence is requisite for the attainment of it. But
   since the Prophet says that it shall be manifest even to heathens, that
   everything is directed and governed by the will of God, they who bear
   the Christian name ought to be ashamed, when they strip him of his
   power, and bestow it on various governors, whom they have formed
   according to their fancy, as we see done in Popery; for God is not
   acknowledged when a bare and empty name is given to him, but when we
   ascribe to him full authority.

   Making peace, and creating evil. By the words "light" and "darkness" he
   describes metaphorically not only peace and war; but adverse and
   prosperous events of any kind; and he extends the word peace, according
   to the custom of Hebrew writers, to all success and prosperity. This is
   made abundantly clear by the contrast; for he contrasts "peace" not
   only with war, but with adverse events of every sort. Fanatics torture
   this word evil, as if God were the author of evil, that is, of sin; but
   it is very obvious how ridiculously they abuse this passage of the
   Prophet. This is sufficiently explained by the contrast, the parts of
   which must agree with each other; for he contrasts "peace" with "evil,"
   that is, with afflictions, wars, and other adverse occurrences. If he
   contrasted "righteousness" with "evil," there would be some
   plausibility in their reasonings, but this is a manifest contrast of
   things that are opposite to each other. Consequently, we ought not to
   reject the ordinary distinction, that God is the author of the "evil"
   of punishment, but not of the "evil" of guilt.

   But the Sophists are wrong in their exposition; for, while they
   acknowledge that famine, barrenness, war, pestilence, and other
   scourges, come from God, they deny that God is the author of
   calamities, when they befall us through the agency of men. This is
   false and altogether contrary to the present doctrine; for the Lord
   raises up wicked men to chastise us by their hand, as is evident from
   various passages of Scripture. (1 Kings 11:14, 23.) The Lord does not
   indeed inspire them with malice, but he uses it for the purpose of
   chastising us, and exercises the office of a judge, in the same manner
   as he made use of the malice of Pharaoh and others, in order to punish
   his people. (Exodus 1:11 and 2:23.) We ought therefore to hold this
   doctrine, that God alone is the author of all events; that is, that
   adverse and prosperous events are sent by him, even though he makes use
   of the agency of men, that none may attribute it to fortune, or to any
   other cause.

   8 Drop down dew from above. Some think that a form of prayer is here
   added, which it was the duty of believers to use while they were
   waiting for the redemption which is here described; and they connect
   this verse with the preceding in the following manner, "The Lord will
   not so speedily deliver you, but still it is your duty to be diligently
   employed in prayer." But I interpret it differently in this manner. The
   Prophet always speaks in the name of God, who, in the exercise of his
   authority, calls on heaven and earth to lend their services to the
   restoration of the Church.

   This verse is fitted very powerfully to confirm the godly in the hope
   of future redemption; for the people, wherever they looked, saw nothing
   but despair. If they tumed their eyes towards heaven, there they beheld
   the wrath of God; if towards the earth, there also were beheld
   afflictions and chastisements; and therefore nothing fitted to lead
   them to entertain favorable hope was visible. On this account the
   Prophet confirms them, and enjoins heaven and earth, which held out
   nothing but threatentings and terrors, to bring forth salvation and
   "righteousness." This is more emphatic than if he promised that it
   shall be, when all the elements, which are ready to yield obedience to
   God, receive orders as to what he wishes them to do. And thus the
   stream of the discourse will flow on continuously, which otherwise will
   be abruptly broken off, if we understand this passage to be a prayer.
   [197]

   And let the clouds drop righteousness. This form of expression is
   frequently employed in Scripture; such as,

   "And the mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the hills
   righteousness."
   (Psalm 72:3.)

   And again, "Piety and truth met together, righteousness and peace
   kissed each other; truth shall spring from the earth, and righteousness
   looked down from heaven;" where David describes the kingdom of Christ
   and its prosperity, and shews that in it "righteousness, peace, mercy,
   and truth, shall be joined together." (Psalm 85:10, 11.) This passage
   treats of the same subject. There is an allusion to the ordinary food
   of men, who subsist on bread and other productions of the soil; for
   their life needs such aids. Now, in order that the earth may bring
   forth fruits, it must obtain its vigor from heaven and draw water from
   the clouds, that it may be rendered fertile, and then bring forth herbs
   and fruits both for men and for animals.

   By the word righteousness he means nothing else than the fidelity with
   which the Lord defends and preserves his people. The Lord thus "drops
   down from heaven righteousness," that is, well established order, of
   which salvation is the fruit; for he speaks of the deliverance of the
   people from Babylon, in which the Lord shews that he will be their
   protector. Yet while we understand the natural meaning of the Prophet,
   we must come down to the kingdom of Christ, to which these words
   undoubtedly bear a spiritual import; for God does not limit these
   promises to a few years, but continues his favors down to the coming of
   Christ, in whom all these things were abundantly fulfilled. There can
   be no doubt, therefore, that he likewise celebrates that eternal
   righteousness and salvation which is brought to us by Christ; but we
   ought first to observe that simple interpretation about the return from
   the captivity in Babylon.

   9. and 10. Wo to him that striveth with his Maker! This passage is
   explained in various ways. Some think that it refers to King
   Belshazzar, who, as is evident from Daniel, haughtily defied God, when
   he profaned the vessels of the Temple. (Daniel 5:3.) But that is too
   forced an exposition. The second might appear to be more probable, that
   the Lord grants far more to his children than a man would grant to his
   sons, or an artisan to his work; for they suppose that a comparison of
   this kind is made. "If the son rise up against the father, and debate
   with him, he will not be listened to. The father will choose to retain
   his power, and deservedly will restrain his son; and in like manner, if
   the clay rise up against the workman. But the Lord permits questions to
   be put to him, and kindly offers to satisfy the people; nay, even bids
   them put questions to him." And thus they join together the 10th and
   11th verses, and think that God's forbearance is manifested by treating
   us with greater kindness, and condescending to greater familiarity,
   than men usually exhibit towards their sons.

   The latter exposition is indeed more plausible, but both are at
   variance with the Prophet's meaning; and therefore a more simple view
   appears to me to be, to understand that the Prophet restrains the
   complaints of men, who in adversity murmur and strive with God. This
   was a seasonable warning, that the Jews, by patiently and calmly
   bearing the cross, might receive the consolation which was offered to
   them; for whenever God holds us in suspense, the flesh prompts us to
   grumble, "Why does he not do more quickly what he intends to do? Of
   what benefit is it to him to torture us by his delay?" The Prophet,
   therefore, in order to chastise this insolence, says, "Does the
   potsherd dispute with the potter? Do sons debate with their fathers?
   Has not God a right to treat us as he thinks fit? What remains but that
   we shall bear patiently the punishments which he inflicts on us? We
   must therefore allow God to do what belongs to him, and must not take
   anything from his power and authority." I consider hvy, (hoi,) Wo! to
   be an interjection expressive of reproof and chastisement.

   Potsherd to potsherds. That is, as we say in common language, (Que
   chacun se prenne a son pareil,) "Let each quarrel with his like," "Let
   potsherds strive with potsherds of the earth." [198] When he sends men
   to those who are like themselves, he reproves their rashness and
   presumption, in not considering that it is impossible to maintain a
   dispute with God without leading to destruction; as if he had said,
   "With whom do they think that they have to deal? Let them know that
   they are not able to contend with God, [199] and that at length they
   must yield. And if, unmindful of their frailty, they attack heaven
   after the manner of the giants, they shall at length feel that they did
   wrong in warring [200] with their Maker, who can without any difficulty
   break in pieces, and even crush into powder, the vessels which he has
   made.

   Some interpret chsym (charasim) to mean "workmen" or "potters," and
   suppose the meaning to be, "Shall the potsherd rise up against the
   potter?" But those interpreters change the point and read s (schin)
   instead of s (sin). I acknowledge that such diversity and change may
   easily occur, but I prefer to follow the ordinary reading, and to adopt
   this simple meaning, "Shall the clay say to its maker? A potter is
   allowed to make any vessel of what form he pleases, a father is allowed
   to command his sons; will you not admit that God possesses a higher
   right?" Thus he reproves those who in adversity remonstrate with God,
   and cannot patiently endure afflictions.

   We ought therefore to listen to the warning given by Peter, when he
   bids us learn to submit to God, and to "humble ourselves under his
   mighty hand," (1 Peter 5:6,) so as to yield to his authority, and not
   to strive with him, if he sometimes tries us by various afflictions;
   because we ought to acknowledge his just right to govern us according
   to his pleasure. If we must come to debate, he will have such strong
   and decisive arguments as shall constrain us, being convicted, to be
   dumb. And when he restrains the insolence of men, it is not because he
   is destitute of argument, but because it is right and proper that we
   should yield and surrender ourselves to be wholly governed according to
   his pleasure; but at the same time he justly claims this right, that
   his own creatures should not call him to render an account. What can be
   more detestable than not to approve of his judgments, if they do not
   please men?

   Paul makes use of the same metaphor, but on a higher subject; for he
   argues about God's eternal predestination, and rebukes the foolish
   thoughts of men, who debate with God why he chooses some, and
   reprobates and condemns others. He shews that we ought, at least, to
   allow to God as much power as we allow to a potter or workman; and
   therefore he exclaims,

   "O man, who art thou, that repliest against God? Shall the clay say to
   the potter, Why hast thou made me thus?"
   (Romans 9:20.)

   "Who is so daring as to venture to oppose God, and to enter into debate
   with him?" Thus he perfectly agrees with the Prophet, though he makes
   use of this metaphor on a different and more intricate subject; for
   both affirm that God has full power over men, so as to permit
   themselves to be ruled and governed by him, and to endure patiently all
   adverse events. There is only this difference, that Isaiah reasons
   about the course of the present life, but Paul ascends to the heavenly
   and eternal life.

   His work hath no hands. The Prophet speaks in ordinary language, as we
   say that one "puts the last hand," when a thing is completed, and that
   "hands are wanting," when a work is disorderly, confused, or imperfect.
   Thus, whenever men murmur against God for not complying with their
   wishes, they accuse him either of slothfulness or of ignorance.

   11. Thus saith Jehovah. I have already said, that I do not agree with
   those who connect this verse with the preceding, as if God, abandoning
   his just right, gave permission to the Jews to put questions more than
   is allowed among men. There is another meaning not much different, that
   the Israelites are miserable, because they know not, and do not even
   wish to know the will of the Lord; that they do not seek and even do
   not accept of consolation; and, in short, that the deep sorrow with
   which they are oppressed arises from the fault of the people, that is,
   because they do not ask at the mouth of the Lord. If we adopt this
   exposition, we must arrive at the conclusion that this passage treats
   of a different kind of inquiry; for as it is unlawful to thrust
   ourselves into the secret decrees of God, so he graciously condescends
   to make known to his people, as far as is necessary, what he intends to
   do; and, when he opens his sacred mouth, he justly commands us to open
   our ears to him, and to hear attentively whatever he declares. Now, we
   also know by experience that which Isaiah brings as a reproach against
   the ancient people.

   But it is more reasonable to view this statement as depending on the
   preceding, so as to be an application of the metaphor in this sense: "A
   son will not be allowed to enter into a dispute with his father, and
   the clay will not be permitted to strive with its potter; how much more
   intolerable is this liberty which men take, when they prescribe to God
   in what manner he ought to treat his sons?" For otherwise this sentence
   would be broken and imperfect, but those two clauses agree beautifully
   with each other. "The potter will make clay of any shape according to
   his pleasure, the son of a mortal man will not venture to expostulate
   with his father; and will you refuse to me, who am the supreme Father
   and Maker of all things, to have equal power over my sons and my
   creatures?" If the former meaning be preferred, the Prophet reproaches
   men with their slothfulness, in not deigning to put questions to God,
   and to learn from his mouth those things which related to their
   consolation; for they might have learned from the prophecies that God
   took care of them, and might have known the conclusion of their
   distresses. And indeed there is no better remedy in adversity than to
   ask at the mouth of God, so as not to fix our eyes on the present
   condition of things, but to embrace with the heart that future
   salvation which the Lord promises.

   "The Lord is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tried beyond what
   we are able to bear; but with the temptation will also grant
   deliverance, and will increase his grace in us."
   (1 Corinthians 10:13.)

   Command ye me. This must not be understood as denoting authority; for
   it does not belong to us to "command" God, or to press upon him
   unseasonably; and it will not be possible for any person to profit by
   the word of God, who does not bring an humble heart. [201] But God
   presents himself to us, that we may ask from him what is of importance
   to us to know; as if he had said, "Order me; I am ready to reveal those
   things which are of the highest importance for you to know, that you
   may derive consolation from them." But as that would be an unnatural
   mode of expression, I consider that the complaint which I have stated
   is more simple, that God is robbed of a father's right, if he do not
   retain the absolute and uncontrolled government of his Church. Thus, in
   the clause, Ask me of things to come, the word ask is taken in a bad
   sense, when men, forgetting modesty, do not hesitate to summon God to
   their bar, and to demand a reason for anything that he has done. This
   is still more evident from the word command; as if he had said, "It
   will belong to you, forsooth, to prescribe what shape I ought to give
   to my work!"

   In a word, the Prophet's design is to exhort men to moderation and
   patience; for, as soon as they begin to dispute with him, they endeavor
   to drag him from his heavenly throne. Now, he does not address the Jews
   alone, for he needed to restrain the blasphemies which even at that
   time were current among infidels. It is as if God, wishing to maintain
   his right, thus refuted the slanders of the whole world: "How far shall
   your insolence carry its excesses, that you will not allow me to be
   master in my own workshop, or to govern my family as I think fit?"

   12. I made the earth. He appears merely to maintain the power of God,
   as be had formerly done; so that there is an indirect contrast between
   God and idols, which superstitious persons worship. Foolish men ask
   counsel of idols, as if the world were governed at their pleasure. On
   the contrary, God calls us back to himself, when he says that he

   "made the earth, and placed man upon it, and that his hands stretched
   out the heavens." (Genesis 1:1, 6,26.)

   But it will be more appropriate, in my opinion, to apply the whole of
   this discourse to the nature of the present subject. "Can anything be
   more foolish than that men shall uphold their own rank, and shall
   haughtily interrogate, and treat as a criminal, God, whose majesty is
   above the heavens?" Thus he indirectly censures the madness of men, who
   do not scruple to exalt themselves above the very heavens. Yet at the
   same time he reminds them that, if it must come to a strict
   examination, God will not want arguments to defend his cause; for, if
   he governs the whole world, he undoubtedly takes a peculiar care about
   his own people, and does not care for strangers, so as to allow the
   members of his family to be scattered and wander. Thus, then, I
   understand this verse. "Shall I, whose vast and inconceivable wisdom
   and power shine brightly in heaven and earth, not only be bound by
   human laws, but be degraded below the ordinary lot of men? And if there
   be any doubts of my justice, shall not I, who rule and govern all
   things by my hand, be careful of those whom I have adopted into my
   family? Shall I not watch over their salvation?"

   Thus it is an argument from the less to the greater, and this meaning
   is agreeable to Scripture. We know that we have been adopted by God, in
   such a manner that, having been received under his protection, we are
   guarded by his hand; and none can hurt us, but by his permission. If "a
   sparrow," as Christ tells us, "does not fall to the ground without his
   permission," (Matthew 10:29,) shall we whom he values more than the
   sparrows be exposed by him at hazard to the rage and cruelty of
   enemies? And, therefore, since God upholds all the creatures by his
   providence, he cannot disregard the Church, which he prefers to the
   whole world. We must, therefore, betake ourselves to this providence,
   even in the most desperate affairs, and must not give way to any
   temptations by which Satan attacks us in various ways.

   13. I have raised him up. He now continues the subject on which he had
   entered in the beginning of the chapter; for, having undertaken to
   soothe their affliction, which was exceedingly sharp and severe, Isaiah
   holds out the hope of deliverance, and stretches out his hand to them,
   that they may look for an absolutely certain redemption. Though you
   think that you are ruined, yet the Lord will protect you against
   destruction. Why the reproof which we have seen was intermingled with
   it, may be easily gathered from the event itself; for, if Isaiah had
   not abruptly made this digression, the Jews, in their vehement
   impatience, would have been hurried into despair.

   In righteousness. This means "justly and truly," and must be understood
   relatively; for it assigns the reason why God determined to raise up
   Cyrus, that is, because he is a faithful guardian of his Church, and
   does not disappoint his worshippers. Some explain it, "in justice,"
   that is, in order that he may punish the Babylonians; and others, "that
   he may reign justly;" but the Prophet meant nothing of this sort. But
   in the Scriptures, "righteousness" often signifies fidelity, (Psalm
   5:8; 22:31), because the Lord manifests his "righteousness" by
   fulfilling his promises and defending his servants. The "righteousness"
   of God shines brightly in giving a display of exalted and perfect
   rectitude by saving his people; for, although there is no work of God
   on which a mark of righteousness is not engraven, yet a much more clear
   and striking proof is seen in the salvation of the Church. The meaning
   therefore is, that he "raised up" Cyrus, in order to manifest his
   "righteousness" in him, whom he has appointed to lead and conduct in
   bringing back his people.

   He shall build my city. Jerusalem is meant, which he calls "his city,"
   because he wished that there the remembrance of his name should be
   preserved, and because he had consecrated it in a peculiar manner to
   himself. In like manner God himself had declared,

   "Wherever I shall cause my name to be recorded, I will come to thee,
   and will bless thee." (Exodus. 20:24.)

   Now, there was no other city which he had appointed for sacrifices and
   vows, and for calling on his name; and, therefore, also it is called
   (Psalm 46:4, 5) "The city of God, the holy tabernacle of the Most High,
   for God is in the midst of her;" and in another place it is said, "This
   is my rest for ever and ever." (Psalm 132:14.) Now, Cyrus did not build
   this city with his own hand, but by royal edicts forbade any one to
   hinder the rebuilding of it, and likewise supplied the people with
   provisions and money. (2 Chronicles 36:23; Ezra 1:2; 6:3.)

   And shall release my captivity, not for a price, that is, "for
   nothing." This was uncommon; for, if captives are released by a
   conqueror, either a price is demanded, or harsh conditions are imposed
   on them; but Cyrus did nothing of that kind. Hence it follows that this
   deliverance took place by the will of God, and not by the will of man.
   The word "captivity" is here used as a collective noun, denoting
   "captives."

   14. Thus saith Jehovah. He still speaks of the restoration which was
   afterwards effected under the conduct of Cyrus; but we must keep in
   remembrance what we formerly remarked, that those promises must be
   extended farther; for it includes the whole time which followed, down
   to the coming of Christ. Whoever shall duly consider and weigh this
   Prophet's ordinary style will find in his words nothing extravagant,
   and will not look upon his language as exaggerated.

   The labor of Egypt, the merchandise of Ethiopia. The Prophet alludes to
   the expenses which Cyrus contributed for building and adorning the
   temple. (Ezra 6:8) At that time was fulfilled what he says, that "the
   labor of Egypt" and "the merchandise of Ethiopia" came to the Jews; for
   "Egypt and Ethiopia" were tributaries and subjects of the king of
   Persia. From those tributes the temple of Jerusalem was rebuilt. But as
   that restoration was only the prelude to that which was accomplished by
   Christ, so likewise the homage which foreign nations rendered to the
   people of God was only the beginning of that homage which various
   nations rendered to the Church of God, after Christ had been revealed
   to the world.

   Now, under the name of "Egypt, Ethiopia, and the Sabeans," who
   flourished at that time, he includes also the rest of the nations. It
   is as if he had said, "You are now oppressed by the tyranny of foreign
   nations, but the time shall one day come when they shall be subject to
   you." This was not immediately fulfilled, but only at the time when
   Christ, by his coming, subdued their flinty and hitherto untameable
   hearts, so that they mildly submitted to the yoke that was laid upon
   them. But the Lord redeemed his people from Babylon, in order that he
   might preserve some Church till the coming of Christ, to whose
   authority all nations should be subject; and therefore we need not
   wonder, if the Prophet, when speaking of the return of the people,
   directs his discourse at the same time to God's end and design, and
   makes it to be one redemption.

   In chains they shall pass over. When he says that the Israelites shall
   be victorious over all the nations, this depends on the mutual relation
   between the Head and the members. Because the Only-begotten Son of God
   unites to himself those who believe in him, so that they are one with
   him, it frequently happens that what belongs to him is attributed to

   "the Church, which is his body and fullness."
   (Ephesians 1:23.)

   In this sense also government is ascribed to the Church, not so as to
   obscure by haughty rule the glory of her Head, or even to claim the
   authority which belongs to him, or, in a word, so as to have anything
   separate from her Head; but because the preaching of the gospel, which
   is committed to her, is the spiritual scepter of Christ, by which he
   displays his power. In this respect no man can bow down submissively
   before Christ, without also obeying the Church, so far as the obedience
   of faith is joined to the ministry of doctrine, yet so that Christ
   their Head alone reigns, and alone exercises his authority.

   Surely [202] God is in thee. He relates what will be said by those who
   shall make respectful entrearies to the Church. They will acknowledge
   that "God is in her." Some translate 'k (ach) only, which I do not
   object to, and even acknowledge to be well adapted to express the
   Prophet's meaning; yet it will not be inappropriate to explain it
   affirmatively, Surely God is in thee

   And there is none besides God. [203] He explains the manner in which
   foreign nations shall be subject to the Jews; that is, by acknowledging
   that there is no other God than He whom the Jews worshipped. If it be
   objected, that this has nothing to do with the Jews, who are now
   alienated from the Church, I reply, The gospel nevertheless proceeded
   from them, and was diffused throughout the whole world; and thus we
   acknowledge Jerusalem to be the fountain from which pure doctrine
   flowed. (Psalm 76:2; Luke 24:47.) In ancient times there undoubtedly
   were none but the Jews who understood who is God, and what is the
   proper manner of worshipping him; the rest were devoted to trifles and
   delusions, and worshipped their own inventions. Hence also Christ,
   addressing the Samaritan woman, says, "We know what we worship." (John
   4:22.) Justly, therefore, is it here said, "God is in thee," because
   other nations were ignorant of God. Yet as there is an implied
   contrast, I cheerfully admit the adverb only, so as to be a testimony
   of the repentance of the Gentiles, when they are satisfied with the one
   God and forsake their idols.

   The meaning may be thus summed up, "They who formerly were haughty, and
   with lofty brow despised the Church, shall submit to her, when it shall
   be known that she is the sanctuary of the true God," for, as we have
   said, when God extols his Church, he does not relinquish his own
   authority. And this is a Sign of true conversion, that we do not
   worship a God whom we have imagined, but him who is acknowledged in the
   Church. We ought also to observe this encomium pronounced on the
   Church, "God is in thee;" for, as we formerly quoted, "God is in the
   midst of her," because he hath chosen her to be his habitation. (Psalm
   46:5.) If we are the people of God, and are subject to his doctrine
   which bringeth salvation, it follows that he will assist, us; because
   he does not wish to forsake his people; for this promise is perpetual,
   and ought not to be viewed as referring solely to that time.

   15. Truly thou art a God that hidest thyself. Isaiah now exclaims, that
   there is need of long exercise of patience, that we may enjoy the
   promises of God; for the people might have been prompted to despair,
   when the wicked had everything to their wish, and when everything
   adverse befell themselves. I am aware that some expound it differently.
   The Jewish writers commonly interpret it to mean, that the Lord will
   hide himself from the Gentiles, but will reveal himself to his people.
   Christian interpreters bring forward a different sense, but too
   far-fetched. There is ingenuity, indeed, in what they say, that Christ
   is a hidden God, because his divinity lies concealed under the
   infirmity of the flesh. But it does not agree with the Prophet's
   meaning; for he calls himself "a hidden God," because he appears to
   withdraw, [204] and, in some measure, to conceal himself, when he
   permits his people to be afflicted and oppressed by various calamities;
   and, therefore, our hearts ought to be encouraged by hope. Now, as Paul
   says, (Romans 8:24,) "hope is not directed to those things which are
   seen;" and in this sense Isaiah calls him "a hidden God," because those
   things which he promised are not immediately visible to our eyes.

   Thus he intended that we should withdraw our minds from present
   objects, and raise them above the heavens, which we must do, [205] if
   we wish to receive and accept of his aid. There is "need of patience,"
   (Hebrews 10:36,) therefore, that we may continue to direct our desires
   towards him, when he delays the execution of his promises. He had said,
   a little before, that unbelievers, though at that time they were blind
   and stupid, would feel the presence of God; but, because the time of
   manifestation was not yet at hand, this exclamation is appropriately
   introduced, that God, before he displays his glory, conceals his power
   in order to try our faith.

   God the Savior of Israel. That the Prophet does not speak of the
   essence of God, but of his assistance, may be easily inferred from the
   epithet which is now added, when he calls God "the Savior." He explains
   that God "hides himself" in the method which he takes for saving his
   Church, because he conceals his hand for a time in such a manner as if
   he had intended totally to abandon them. He wishes that our salvation
   should remain, as it were, hidden in darkness, that, if we desire to
   enjoy it, we may know that we must go out of this world, [206] for it
   will not all at once present itself to us, or become visible to our
   eyes. We ought, therefore, to look for it with unshaken steadfastness;
   for it is highly advantageous that in this manner God should try and
   prove our faith, that, when we shall be oppressed by various
   afflictions on every hand, we may nevertheless rely on God and on his
   promises.

   16. and 17. They shall all be put to shame. Here the Prophet compares
   the Jews with the Gentiles, in order to meet a grievous and dangerous
   temptation, by which they might be assailed, when they saw the Gentiles
   enjoying prosperity; [207] for, amidst so great troubles, they might
   have suspected that God was favorable to the Gentiles, or that he had
   cast away the care of his people, or that everything was governed by
   the blind impulse of fortune. The Prophet, therefore, assures them
   that, although for a time the Gentiles flourish and appear to be
   exalted to heaven, [208] yet the result must be, that they shall perish
   and Israel shall be saved. In a word, he exhorts them not to judge of
   the power of God from the present condition of things, not to have
   their minds fixed on temporary happiness, but to raise them to eternal
   salvation, and, when struck by the hand of God, patiently to bear their
   condition, and, on the other hand, not to envy the prosperity of the
   wicked, which shall be followed by a moumful reverse, as it is
   excellently described by the Psalmist. (Psalm 37:1,2.)

   This statement is added to the preceding; for whoever shall know that
   God, when he is a "Savior," is "hidden," will not wonder that wicked
   men enjoy prosperity, and that good men are poor, and despised, and
   tried by various afflictions. Thus the Lord makes trial of our faith
   and patience, and yet no part of our eternal salvation is lost; but
   they who now appear to be a thousand times safe and happy shall at
   length perish, and all the wealth which they possess shall plunge them
   in deeper ruin; because they abuse God's benefits, and, like robbers,
   seize on what belongs to other men, even though they appear to possess
   all of them by a just title. Whenever, therefore, this thought arises
   in our minds, "Wicked men are at ease, and therefore God favors them,
   and the promises on which we rely are unworthy of credit;" let us
   betake ourselves to this declaration of the Prophet as the surest
   anchor, and let us fortify ourselves by it, "The Lord will not
   disappoint our expectation, but we shall at length be delivered, even
   though we be now exposed to the reproaches, slanders, mockings, and
   cruelty of the wicked."

   18. For thus saith Jehovah. This verse tends to confirm the preceding;
   for the Prophet means that the Jews are fully convinced that the Lord
   will at length deliver them, though they are oppressed by wretched
   bondage.

   God the maker of the earth. Some think that by "the earth" is here
   meant Judea, but I consider it to be an argument from the less to the
   greater, as we said formerly on the twelfth verse, that, since the
   providence of God extends universally to the creatures, much more does
   it relate to those whom he has adopted to be his sons; for of them he
   has a special care. In short, the Prophet's argument is this. "Since
   God created the earth, that men might have an abode and habitation in
   it, much more did he create it, that there might be a residence for his
   Church; for he takes a deeper concern about his Church than about all
   the rest." If, therefore, he founded the earth, if he gave to it a
   shape and a fixed use, that men might be nourished by the fruits which
   it should produce, he has undoubtedly assigned to his children the
   first place and the highest rank of honor. This is not always visible
   to our eyes, and therefore our hearts ought to be encouraged and upheld
   by hope, that we may stand unmoved against all temptations.

   In a word, as long as the earth shall endure, so long shall the Church
   of God exist; so long as the sun and moon shall last, it shall not
   fail. Afterwards the Prophet will use a still stronger argument. "If
   the covenant which God made with Noah, as to the settled order of this
   world, is stable, much more the covenant which he hath made concerning
   the Church must be stable. (Isaiah 54:9; Genesis 9:9.) The world is
   fading and corruptible; but the Church, that is, the kingdom of Christ,
   shall be eternal; and therefore it is reasonable to believe that the
   promises which relate to the Church shall undoubtedly be more stable
   and permanent than all the rest.

   He did not create it empty. As it is the principal ornament of the
   earth that it is the abode of inhabitants, he adds, that it was not
   created in order that, by being empty, it might be waste and desolate.
   If it be objected, on the other hand, that the earth was "empty and
   void" when it was created, as appears from that passage in which Moses
   employs the same word that is here used by the Prophet, thv, (tohu,)
   which means "shapeless and empty," the answer is easy. The Prophet does
   not speak of the commencement of the creation, but of God's purpose by
   which the earth was set apart for the use and habitation of men; and
   therefore, there is nothing here that is contrary to what is said by
   Moses, for Isaiah contemplates the end and use.

   He formed it to be inhabited. This statement indeed extends to all
   mankind, because the earth was appointed to all, that they might dwell
   in it; for how comes it that God nourishes us and supplies us with
   everything that is necessary, and even supports wicked men, but because
   he intended that his decree should stand, by which he gave the earth to
   be inhabited by men? In any other point of view, it is strange that he
   bears with so many sins and crimes, and does not entirely destroy
   mankind; but he has regard to his own purpose, and not to our merit.
   Hence kingdoms and commonwealths are sustained, and hence ranks of
   society and forms of government are preserved even amidst barbarians
   and infidels; for, although God often reduces some countries to
   desolation on account of the sins of men, and sprinkles them, as it
   were, with "saltness," (Psalm 107:34, [209] ) that they may become
   barren, and may never again be able to support their inhabitants, yet
   he always adds this alleviation, "that the earth may be inhabited;" for
   this is his inviolable decree. Yet we must bear in remembrance what I
   have already said, that, so long as the earth shall be inhabited, it is
   impossible that God shall not support his worshippers who call upon
   him. Besides, from this passage all good men ought to derive the
   highest consolation, that, although they are despised by the world and
   are few and feeble, and although, on the other hand, wicked men surpass
   them in numbers, and power, and influence, while they are despised so
   as to be reckoned of less value than "the offscourings of the world,"
   (1 Corinthians 4:13,) yet they are precious in the sight of God,
   because he reckons them in the number of his children, and will never
   suffer them to perish.

   I am Jehovah. When he repeats that he is God, this is not intended
   merely to assert his essence, but to distinguish him from all idols,
   and to keep the Jews in the pure faith; for even superstitious men
   acknowledge that there is one God, but conceive of him according to
   their fancy; and therefore we must acknowledge God, who revealed
   himself to the fathers, and who spoke by Moses. Thus, he does not speak
   merely of God's eternal essence, as some think, but of all the offices
   which belong to him alone, that no part of them may be ascribed to
   creatures.

   19. Not in secret have I spoken. He now recalls the people to the
   doctrine of the Law, because God cannot be comprehended by human
   faculties; but as he is concealed from carnal reason, so he abundantly
   reveals himself, and affords the remedy, by his word, which supplies
   what was wanting, that we may not desire anything more. If this had not
   been granted, we should have had no hope, and should have lost all
   courage. Now, he solemnly declares that he does not invite us in vain,
   though he delay his assistance; for what he has promised is most
   certain, and, as he plainly shewed to whom we ought to betake
   ourselves, and on whom we ought to rely, so he will give practical
   demonstration that the hope of those who relied on his word was not
   vain, or without foundation.

   This enables us to see clearly how wicked are the speeches of those who
   say that no certainty can be obtained from the word, and who pretend
   that it is a nose of wax, in order to deter others from reading it; for
   thus do wicked men blaspheme, because the mere doctrine of the word
   exposes and refutes their errors. But we reply with David,

   "Thy word, O Lord, is a lamp to our feet, and a light to our paths."
   (Psalm 119:105.)

   We reply with Isaiah and the rest of the prophets, that the Lord has
   taught nothing that is obscure, or ambiguous, or false. We reply also
   with Peter, that

   "the prophetic word is more sure, and you do well if you take heed to
   it, as to a lamp buming in a dark place, till the day dawn, and the
   morning-star arise in our hearts." (2 Peter 1:19.)

   If these things were said concerning the Law and the prophets, what
   shall we say of the Gospel, by which the clearest light has been
   revealed to us? Shall we not say with Paul,

   "If the Gospel is dark, it is dark to those who are lost, whom Satan,
   the prince of this world, hath blinded?"
   (2 Corinthians 4:3,4.)

   Let blind and weak-sighted men therefore accuse themselves, when they
   cannot endure this brightness of the word; but, whatever may be the
   darkness by which they shall endeavor to clothe it, let us adhere
   firmly and steadfastly to this heavenly light.

   Besides, the Prophet appears to allude to the predictions which were
   uttered out of the groves and tripods of the idols. [210] They are
   uncertain and deceitful, but nothing of this kind can be found in God's
   answers; for he speaks openly, and utters nothing that is deceitful or
   ambiguous. But experience tells us that Scripture is somewhat dark and
   hard to be understood. This is indeed true, but ought to be ascribed to
   the dulness and slowness of our apprehension, and not to the Scripture;
   for blind or weak-sighted men have no right to accuse the sun, because
   they cannot look at him.

   I have not said in vain to the seed of Jacob, Seek me. This continues
   to be a fixed principle, that they who shew themselves to be submissive
   and obedient, do not spend their labor in vain; because God faithfully
   performs the office of a teacher towards poor and little ones. Now,
   though all do not rise in the highest degree, yet the labor of those
   who shall sincerely seek God will never be unprofitable. By this
   expression, Seek me, Isaiah points out the principal end and use of the
   Law, to invite men to God; and, indeed, their true happiness lies in
   being united to God, [211] and the sacred bond of union is faith and
   sincere piety.

   In this second clause he not only asserts that he has spoken clearly
   and without ambiguity, but declares the certainty and steadfastness of
   his word; as if he had said, that he does not promise largely with an
   intention to deceive, or amuse hungry men by words, but actually
   performs what he has promised. This demonstrates the ingratitude of
   those who, when they are called, do not answer; since God has no other
   design than to make us partakers of all blessings, of which we are
   otherwise empty and destitute.

   I Jehovah speaking righteousness. This is added for the sake of
   explanation; as if he had said that the word by which he draws his
   elect to himself, is not soiled by any stain of fraud, but contains the
   most perfect holiness. "The words of the Lord," as David says, "are
   clean, like silver purified in an earthen fumace, seven times refined."
   (Psalm 12:6.) Thus, in the word of God we have bright righteousness,
   which instantly shines into our hearts, when the darkness has been
   removed.

   20. Assemble yourselves, He challenges all superstitious persons, and,
   as it were, appoints a day that they may submit to a righteous
   judgment, as we have formerly seen in expounding other passages, in
   order to shew that they can plead nothing which shall not be speedily
   overtumed. Now, indeed, they delight in their superstitions; but all
   their smoke shall be dispelled, when they come to plead their cause,
   and without any difficulty they shall be convicted. Let them then
   "assemble" in crowds, let them conspire and make every effort by fraud,
   and threatenings, and terrors; the truth shall at length be victorious.
   This confirmation was highly necessary for the Jews, because in every
   nation and in every place they beheld the spread of wicked errors which
   buried the worship of the true God. We also ought to betake ourselves
   to this refuge, when we see how few and how feeble we are. The
   Mahometans possess a large portion of the world, the Papists, with
   elevated crest, triumph far and wide, while we are but a handful of
   people, [212] and are scarcely reckoned in the number of men. But truth
   shall at last prevail, and shall cast down all that loftiness which now
   dazzles the eyes of men.

   Ye rejected of the nations [213] phlyty (pelite) is translated by some
   "rejected," by others "exiles," or "those who have escaped;" and the
   address is supposed to be made to the Jews who had retumed from the
   captivity. But that is too forced a sense. The more generally received
   interpretation is, "Rejected of the nations," because phlt (palat)
   means "to reject." Not that he describes the meaner sort, or the refuse
   of men; but, on the contrary, he directs his discourse to those who
   were the highest in rank, and wealth, and power, and learning among the
   Gentiles. He calls them "rejected," because they are of no value in the
   sight of God, though they are highly esteemed by men; for

   "that which ranks high among men is detestable in the sight of God."
   (Luke 16:15.)

   Yet if it be thought preferable to translate it "distant," I have no
   objection; as if he had said, "Let them assemble from the farthest
   parts of the earth."

   That carry the wood of their graven image. He shews how great is the
   madness which seizes idolaters, who worship images, which they bear on
   their shoulders and carry round on waggons. Or we may take nsyym
   (nesum) as denoting "to place on a lofty and elevated spot," as it was
   a crafty device of Satan to erect statues on pillars and lofty places,
   in order to excite the admiration of men, and to lead men to pay honor
   and reverence by merely looking at them. But we may interpret it simply
   as denoting all worship that is rendered to images, so as to convict
   them of vanity and madness. Superstitious persons know that idols need
   the aid and assistance of men, instead of men needing the aid and
   assistance of idols, which cannot even be made to stand upright without
   the agency of men. [214] And this is the meaning of what next follows,
   to pray to a god that cannot save; for what can be more foolish than to
   address vows and prayers to wood and stone? and yet infidels run about
   to dead statues, for the purpose of seeking salvation from them.

   21. Tell ye. He again challenges all those who might have annoyed the
   Jews and shaken their faith by their taunts; for he always keeps this
   object in view, to fortify the faith of the people against all the
   assaults of the Gentiles. Amidst temptations so numerous and so severe,
   there was danger lest the Jews should sink under their terrible
   afflictions, if there had not been powerful arguments on the other side
   to induce them still to worship and trust the true God; and therefore
   he permits heathens to produce and bring forward everything that they
   can find in support of their cause.

   Let them also take counsel together. These words are added, in order to
   inspire greater confidence; for the Prophet means, as we have already
   said, that they will gain nothing, though they "take counsel" among
   themselves and enter into a conspiracy. Yet, perhaps, he intended also
   to make it evident that there is nothing but groundless pretense and
   falsehood in all that infidels contrive for excusing their errors.
   Whatever then may be the gaudy ostentation with which they plume
   themselves on their inventions, the Prophet shews that the word of God
   will be abundantly strong to support the faith of believers. He
   challenges them to a strict examination, in order to compare with the
   Law and the prophets all that infidels boast of as having been foretold
   by their idols. I cheerfully admit what is generally believed, that the
   Prophet speaks of the redemption of the people; but as the overthrow of
   the Babylonian monarchy was likewise connected with it, I think that it
   is also included.

   Who hath proclaimed this from the beginning? Because there is a
   repetition of the same statement, mqdm (mikkedem) and m'z (meaz) mean
   the same thing; as if he had said, "from the beginning," or, "from of
   old;" for this prophecy was published long before the event happened.
   Hence believers might with certainty conclude that God had spoken.

   And a savior. To foreknowledge he adds power, as in a former passage.
   Yet he likewise describes for what purposes he exerts his power, that
   is, for "saving" his people.

   22. Look unto me. Hitherto he addressed the Jews alone, as if to them
   alone salvation belonged, but now he extends his discourse farther. He
   invites the whole world to the hope of salvation, and at the same time
   brings a charge of ingratitude against all the nations, who, being
   devoted to their errors, purposely avoided, as it were, the light of
   life; for what could be more base than to reject deliberately their own
   salvation? He therefore commands all "to look to him," and to the
   precept adds a promise, which gives it greater weight, and confirms it
   more than if he had made use of a bare command.

   And ye shall be saved. Thus we have a striking proof of the calling of
   the Gentiles; because the Lord, after having broken down "the
   partition-wall" (Ephesians 2:14) which separated the Jews from the
   Gentiles, invites all without exception to come to him. Besides, we are
   here reminded also what is the true method of obtaining salvation; that
   is, when we "look to God," and tum to him with our whole heart. Now, we
   must "look to him" with the eye of faith, so as to embrace the
   salvation which is exhibited to all through Christ; for "God so loved
   the world that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
   in him may not perish." (John 3:16.)

   For I am God. When he exhorts all the ends of the earth, he at the same
   time shews that all men have hitherto wandered, and have not "looked
   to" the true God; for where infidelity exists, there cannot be a
   distinct looking towards God, so as to distinguish him from empty
   masks. In a word, he declares that the ruin of all has been occasioned
   by their being driven about by their wicked inventions, and thus
   revolting from the true God, from the knowledge of whom certain and
   eternal salvation flows. The Lord therefore stretches out his hand, in
   order to rescue all and point out the method of obtaining salvation.

   This makes it evident that it was not at random that the doctrine of
   the Gospel was preached to all nations, but by the decree of God, by
   whom it had been long ago ordained. Yet, as I remarked a little before,
   he accuses the Gentiles of stupidity, in allowing their senses to be
   tumed and whirled about in all directions, wherever their fancy led
   them. Though by nature they could not approach to God, and though they
   even sucked in with their milk the superstitions by which they were
   blinded, yet God might have justly reproached them with wicked contempt
   of his grace; for ignorance always implies hypocrisy, when men choose
   rather to be deceived by empty flatteries than to go straight to God.

   23. I have sworn by myself. He adds a clearer confirmation of the
   preceding statement; for, in consequence of this calling being unusual
   and marvellous, he adds an oath, as is usually done in what is new and
   hard to be believed. The Jews might have objected, that they alone were
   called by the name of the elect people; but, when he confirms it by an
   oath, this removes all debate. The Prophet still, indeed, aims at the
   same object, namely, that the glory of God shall be so visible in the
   restoration of the Church as to arouse the whole world to the
   admiration of it from the rising to the setting of the sun, or, to
   express it more briefly, that this demonstration of the power of God
   shall be so splendid and illustrious as to strike all nations with
   fear. Yet from these words we may justly infer what I have remarked,
   that the Gentiles shall be admitted to an equality with the Jews, so
   that God shall be the common Father of all, and shall be worshipped in
   every country.

   Now, God "swears by himself," because he cannot have another equally
   competent witness of the truth; for he alone is the truth. "Men," as
   the Apostle says, "swear by a greater than themselves; but God, because
   he had no greater, hath sworn by himself." (Hebrews 6:16.) We ought to
   observe the reason why he "swears." It is because he intended to aid
   the weakness of his people, that they might not be tossed about in
   uncertainty. This certainly is wonderful condescension, that, in order
   to remedy the fault of our distrust, he does not scruple to bring
   forward his own name as holding the place of a pledge; and the more
   base and disgraceful must be our unbelief, if even an oath does not
   satisfy us. Besides, since God claims for himself all confirmation of
   the truth, we ought to be exceedingly careful, when we appeal to him by
   an oath, not to mingle any other names either of saints or of any
   creature, but, by using his name with all becoming reverence, to
   preserve the honor due to him entire and unabated.

   The word hath gone out of my mouth in righteousness. He means that all
   that he has commanded to be published by his Prophet is firm and
   lasting, as if he had said that this commandment did not proceed "out
   of his mouth" rashly or unadvisedly. And in this sense the word
   righteousness is often used in Scripture, that is, for a word that is
   not deceitful, which shall clearly appear to be perfectly true; and
   thus he says that the decree cannot be revoked.

   And shall not return. This is another mode of expression conveying the
   same idea. It means that the word of God shall continue to make
   progress, till the actual result shall make manifest that it has
   proceeded from a just and true and almighty God. A person is said to
   return, when some obstacle hinders him from proceeding farther; but,
   because nothing can prevent God from executing what he has decreed, the
   Prophet justly infers that nothing can interrupt or retard the course
   of this word. The particle ky, (ki,) that, must be viewed as
   introducing an explanatory clause; as much as to say, "This is the
   word,"

   That to me every knee shall bow. By this mode of expression he means
   that all the Gentiles shall be suppliants to God, because the
   astonishing deliverance of the Church shall strike terror upon all. Yet
   hence also it follows, that his worship shall be spread among all
   nations; for we cannot truly "bend the knee" before God till he hath
   been made known to us. To an unknown God, indeed, men may render some
   kind of worship; but it is false and unprofitable. But here he speaks
   of a true profession, which proceeds from a knowledge of God deeply
   seated in our hearts; for, where there is no faith, there can be no
   worship of God, and faith is not directed to a thing unknown or
   uncertain. Accordingly, he has made use of the sign to express the
   thing itself, as is frequently done.

   Hence it ought to be observed, that God demands also external worship;
   for the Prophet does not separate an external profession of religion
   from the inward feelings of the heart. In vain, therefore, do fanatics
   boast that in some manner they worship God and do homage to him, while
   they bow down before idols. In vain, I say, do they pretend that their
   heart is upright towards God; for the worship of the heart cannot be
   separated from an external profession. In like manner the soul cannot
   be dedicated and consecrated to God, while the body is consecrated to
   the devil; for both ought to be consecrated to God, and thus the
   worship of the heart ought also to be accompanied by an external
   profession.

   "With the heart we believe to righteousness, and with the mouth
   confession is made to salvation." (Romans 10:10)

   Hence also the Lord, approving of the piety and uprightness of his
   people, says, "that they have not bowed a knee before Baal." (1 Kings
   19:18; Romans 11:4.)

   Paul applies this passage of Isaiah to the last judgment, when he says
   (Romans 14:10, 11) that "we must all stand before the judgment-seat of
   Christ;" although the subject here treated of is, the redemption of the
   people, the publication of the gospel, and the establishment of the
   kingdom of Christ. But he takes for granted (what all ought to know)
   that those statements which relate to the kingdom of Christ must not be
   limited to any part of it, but extend to the whole of its course, till
   it arrive at full perfection. The knee is bent to Christ, when his
   doctrine is obeyed, and when the preaching of the gospel is accepted.
   But many still oppose and boldly despise him; Satan contrives many
   schemes and incessantly carries on war with him; and therefore we are
   at a great distance from the full accomplishment of this prophecy. Then
   shall every knee be truly bent to Christ, when he shall triumph over
   vanquished and utterly ruined adversaries, and shall render visible to
   all men his majesty, which Satan and wicked men now oppose. Thus Paul
   teaches that, when Christ shall ascend his judgment-seat to judge the
   world, then shall be fully accomplished that which began to be done at
   the commencement of the gospel, and which we still see done from day to
   day.

   Every tongue shall swear. By a figure of speech in which a part is
   taken for the whole, the word swear is put for worship, reverence, or
   subjection. "Swearing" is one department of the honor which is due to
   God; for by it we confess and acknowledge that he is the Author and
   Father and lawful defender of the truth, and that "all things are naked
   and open to him." (Hebrews 4:13.) Whenever therefore this honor is
   bestowed on idols, the majesty of God is dishonored by abominable
   sacrilege; and consequently they who worship him purely swear
   exclusively by his name. But on this subject we have spoken [215] in
   the exposition of another passage. (Isaiah 19:18.)

   24. Surely in Jehovah. He shews what is the nature of true faith and of
   the true worship of God; that is, when we not only acknowledge, or
   perceive by the understanding, that there is a God, but likewise feel
   what he wishes to be towards us. Whoever shall be satisfied with a bare
   knowledge departs very widely from faith, which must invite us to God
   in such a manner that we shall feel him to be in us. In like manner
   Paul wishes that

   "Christ should dwell in the hearts of believers through faith."
   (Ephesians 3:17.)

   He who imagines that God sits unemployed in heaven either will not
   humble himself sincerely before him, or will not make an open and
   sincere profession.

   Righteousness and strength. As these are the two principal parts of our
   salvation, when believers acknowledge that they receive both of them
   from God, they ascribe to him the undivided praise of a happy life, and
   testify that by nature they do not possess that which they acknowledge
   that they owe to his grace. Thus they own that in themselves they have
   nothing either of "righteousness" or of "strength," but seek them in
   God alone, that he may not be defrauded of his right.

   To him shall he come. Here commentators differ; but, for my own part, I
   take a simple view of this passage as relating to believers who submit
   themselves to God, so as to enable us to perceive the nature of the
   contrast between them and rebels, who do not cease obstinately to
   resist God. I explain it thus: "They who shall confess that their
   righteousness is placed in God will approach to him." He means that we
   obtain access to God through faith, so that they who perceive that
   their righteousness is placed in him, feel that he is present; and
   indeed no man, if he be not reconciled to God, will ever approach to
   him willingly, but, on the contrary, all who dread his majesty will fly
   to the greatest possible distance from him. Thus the Prophet applauds
   the very delightful result of grace, because it will unite to God those
   men who were formerly driven away from him by their wickedness; and to
   this corresponds what is said by the Psalmist,

   "Thou art the God that heareth prayer; to thee shall all flesh come."
   (Psalm 65:2.)

   But all who defy him shall be ashamed. After having testified that God
   wishes to gather strangers from their dispersion, that he may bring
   them into a state of intimate friendship with himself, he threatens
   vengeance against despisers, who, being without God, and despising God,
   give the reins to their wicked passions, and wallow in the enjoyments
   of the world. As it is only by faith that we obey God, so it is by
   unbelief alone that Isaiah declares his anger to be provoked; while he
   distinguishes all unbelievers by this mark, that they are disobedient
   to God, and even challenge him to a contest. Although they now use the
   language of triumph, the Prophet declares that they shall be clothed
   with shame and disgrace.

   25. In Jehovah shall be justified. He now makes a brief reply to an
   objection which might be urged, that it appeared absurd to say, that
   the Lord called the Gentiles, who had always been alienated from him.
   "Is it in vain that the Lord hath chosen the seed of Abraham? Is his
   promise void, which he so frequently repeated?" (Genesis 15:5, and
   17:7.) In order to remove this doubt, he declares that the Lord will
   nevertheless stand by his promises; that, though he choose the
   Gentiles, yet the covenant which he made with the fathers shall not
   fall to the ground, because the elect people shall enjoy the privileges
   of their rank. Nor does he in this passage, as in many others, speak of
   the rejection of that nation; but the Prophet simply shews that the
   grace of God, which shall be diffused throughout the whole world, shall
   flow from that fountain.

   As to the greater number having been rejected by God, still this did
   not set aside God's covenant; because the remnant of adoption were
   always the true and lawful Israel; and although they were few in
   number, yet they were the first-born in the Church. Besides, all those
   among the Gentiles who had been ingrafted into that body began also, as
   we have formerly seen, to be accounted children of Abraham.

   "One shall say, I belong to Jacob; another shall subscribe with his
   band, I am a descendant of Israel." (Isaiah 44 5.)

   And on this ground we are now reckoned the genuine Israel of God,
   though we are not the descendants of Israel. The Prophet therefore
   added this, both that the Jews might not think that the Lord's covenant
   had failed, and that they might not boast of their birth and despise
   the Gentiles.

   All the seed of Israel. He extends this seed farther, that they may not
   suppose that it ought to be limited to the family of Abraham; for the
   Lord gathers his people without distinction from among Jews and
   Gentiles, and here he speaks universally of the whole human race.

   Shall be justified and shall glory. It ought to be observed that the
   Prophet says that we "are justified and glory in the Lord," for in none
   else ought we to seek "righteousness" or "glory." He has joined to it
   "glory," which depends on "righteousness," and is added to it. Hence
   also Paul says,

   "Where is thy glorying? It is excluded. By what law? Of works? No, but
   by the law of faith." (Romans 3:27.)

   And, again,

   "If Abraham was justified by works, he hath glory,
   but not before God." (Romans 4:2.)

   It follows, therefore, that they alone deservedly glory who seek their
   righteousness in God, and acknowledge that in themselves they have no
   ground for glorying.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [191] "Estoit decrete et ordonne desia en son conseil." "Was already
   decreed and appointed in his counsel."

   [192] For an explanation of the meaning and use of the term "Messiah,"
   see Harmony of the Evangelists, [21]vol. 1, p. 92, n. 2, and [22]p.
   142, n. 2. -- Ed.

   [193] Our author has already explained this allusion. See Commentary on
   Isaiah, [23]vol. 2, p. 135. -- Ed.

   [194] "Les profanes et incredules." "Heathens and infidels."

   [195] "Ce mot d' eleu est donc adjuste." "This word elect is thus
   added."

   [196] Joseph. Ant., Book 11, chap. 8.

   [197] "This is what is usually called a prophetic imperative,' which
   supplies the place of the future tense; for the prophets command those
   things to be done which they promise, and which they know will
   certainly happen. Thus Elisha said to Naaman, Wash thee seven times in
   Jordan, and be thou clean;' that is, And thou shalt be clean.' (2 Kings
   5:10.) See also Isaiah 23:1, and 26:19" -- Rosenmuller.

   [198] "It seems to be a just observation of Hitzig, that earth is not
   mentioned as the dwelling of the potsherd, but as its material, which
   is indeed the predominant usage of 'dmh, (adamah,) as distinguished
   from 'rts, (eretz.)" -- Alexander.

   [199] "Que Dieu sera plus fort qu' eux." "That God will be stronger
   than they."

   [200] "Qu' ils ont eu tort de guerroyer."

   [201] "Un esprit humble et modeste." "An humble and modest mind."

   [202] "Seulement." "Only."

   [203] "N'y en a point d'autre que Dieu." "There is no other than God."

   [204] By a reference to the human form anthropomorphos God is said, in
   the ordinary language of Scripture, to hide himself when he refuses
   assistance, does not answer prayers, and withdraws himself, that is,
   withdraws his power from the wishes of men. There is, as Hensler has
   justly observed, a beautiful contrast between msttr,(mistatter,)
   hiding, and mvsy, (moshiang,) saving." -- Doederlein.

   [205] "Ce qu' aussi nous devons faire."

   [206] "Hors de ce monde."

   [207] "En voyant les Gentils avoir toutes choses a souhait." "When they
   saw the Gentiles have everything to their wish."

   [208] "Et semblent estre elevees jusqu' au ciel."

   [209] It may be necessary to remind the reader, that, in the passage
   alluded to, the word commonly rendered "barrenness" literally means
   "saltness." On this point our author's [24]version and [25]commentary,
   and the editor's instructive [26]note, may be consulted with advantage.
   See Com. on the Psalms, vol. 4, p. 260. -- Ed.

   [210] "Vitringa, Lowth, Ewald, and Umbreit suppose an allusion to the
   mysterious and doubtful responses of the heathen oracles. The
   objections of Gesenius are of no more weight than in verses 1, 2, 3,
   the analogy of which places makes it not improbable that such an
   allusion to the oracles is couched under the general terms of the verse
   before us." -- Alexander.

   [211] "C'est leur vraye felicite d'estre conjoints a leur Sauveur." "It
   is their true happiness to be united to their Savior."

   [212] "Qui ne sommes qu'une poignee de gens."

   [213] "Ye (that are) escaped of the nations." -- Eng. Ver.
   This interpretation, though set aside by our author, is approved by
   able commentators. "Escaped of the nations has been variously explained
   to mean the Jews who had escaped from the oppression of the Gentiles,
   and the Gentiles who had escaped from the dominion of idolatry. But
   these last would scarcely have been summoned to a contest. On the
   whole, it seems most natural to understand the nations who survived the
   judgments sent by God upon them. The Hebrew phrase is in itself
   ambiguous, the noun added to phlyty (pelite) sometimes denoting the
   whole body, out of which a remnant has escaped, sometimes the power
   from which they are delivered. Compare Judges 12:4; Ezra 6:9; 7:16;
   Obadiah 11, with Jeremiah 44:28; Ezra 6:8. The predominant usage and
   the context here decide in favor of the first interpretation." --
   Alexander.

   [214] "Lesquelles ne pourroyent demeurer debout si les hommes n'y
   mettoyent la main." "Which could not stand upright, if men did not put
   their hand to them."

   [215] See Commentary on Isaiah, [27]vol. 2, p. 70.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 46
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 46:1-13

   1. Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth; their idols were upon the beasts,
   and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a
   burden to the weary beast.

   1. Incurvatus est (vel, prostratus est) Bel; depressus est Nebo.
   Simulachra eorum bestiae et jumento erunt, gestantia vos a vobis
   onerata, pondus ad lassitudinem.

   2. They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the
   burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.

   2. Incurvata sunt, depressa sunt pariter, (et) non potuerunt se
   subtrahere oneri; et anima eorum in captivitatem abiit.

   3. Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house
   of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from
   the womb:

   3. Audite me, domus Iacob, omnes reliquiae domus Israel, qui gestamini
   ab utero, qui portamini a vulva.

   4. And even to your old age I am he; and even to hoar hairs will I
   carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will
   deliver you

   4. Et usque ad senium ego idem, et usque ad caniciem ego portabo. Ego
   feci, et ego feram, ego portabo et servabo.

   5. To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we
   may be like?

   5. Cui similem me facitis, et aequatis, et comparatis me, ut similis
   sim?

   6. They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance,
   and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they
   worship.

   6. Promentes aurum ex sacculis, argentum in statera ponderantes,
   conducent aurifabrum, ut ex eo faciant Deum, cui se incurvent, et quem
   adorent.

   7. They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his
   place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea, one
   shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his
   trouble.

   7. Portabunt super humerum, deferent, ponent in loco suo; illic stabit,
   loco suo non movebitur. Adhaec, si quis clamet ad eum, non respondebit,
   neque ex tribulatione ejus liberabit eum.

   8. Remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring it again to mind, O ye
   transgressors.

   8. Recordamini hoc, et erubescite (vel, roboramini;) redite,
   praevaricatores ad cor.

   9. Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none
   else; I am God, and there is none like me;

   9. Recordamini priora a seculo; quia ego Deus, et nullus praeterea
   Deus, et nihil mihi simile.

   10. Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the
   things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I
   will do all my pleasure:

   10. Nuntians ab initio novissimum, et a vetustate quae nondum facta
   erant; dicens, Consilium meum stabit, et quicquid voluero faciam.

   11. Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my
   counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it
   to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.

   11. Vocans ab Oriente avem (vel, cogitationem,) e terra longinqua virum
   consilii mei. Loquutus sum, ideo adducam hoc; cogitavi, idem faciam.

   12. Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from righteousness:

   12. Audite me praefracti corde, qui procul estis a justitia.

   13. I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be far off, and my
   salvation shall not tarry: and I will place salvation in Zion for
   Israel my glory.

   13. Appropinquare faciam justitiam meam, nec elongabitur, et salus mea
   non morabitur. Et ponam in Sion salutem, et in Ierusalem gloriam meam.


   1. Bel hath bowed down. Isaiah continues the same subject; for we need
   not trouble ourselves about the division of chapters, which have not
   always been accurately divided; but we ought to examine the statements
   themselves, which agree with each other in the manner which I have
   pointed out. Yet if any prefer to view this as the commencement of a
   new discourse, because immediately afterwards he prophesies concerning
   the destruction of Babylon, I shall not greatly quarrel with him.

   Nebo is cast down. "Bel" and "Nebo" were idols which were worshipped by
   the Babylonians, and probably were their chief patrons; as idolaters
   always have some particular gods, under whose protection, above all
   others, they consider themselves to be placed. It may be conjectured
   that this "Nebo" was a sort of inferior god that was added to the chief
   god "Bel," as Mercury was to Jupiter. Under their names he includes
   also the rest of the idols, and declares that all the superstitions and
   false worship of the Gentiles shall be overthrown, when God shall lay
   low and triumph over their worshippers; because it shall then be
   manifest that he is the righteous avenger of his Church.

   Their idols shall be on the beasts. The Babylonians having haughtily
   boasted of the protection of false gods, the Prophet rebukes that vain
   confidence, because the God of Israel will not only bring utter ruin on
   that wicked nation, but also will cast down and treat disdainfully
   their gods. The reason why he says that they shall be burdens of
   "beasts" is, that they shall be laid on waggons and removed from one
   place to another, and shall even be huddled together without any
   respect, as the waggoners think proper. This is what is meant by "being
   cast down," for the robbers shall collect into a large heap those gods
   which formerly occupied an elevated station.

   There can be no doubt, indeed, that this was fulfilled when the
   Persians and Medes took Babylon by storm; for when the monarchy was
   removed, these idols were taken away as a part of the booty. But
   Isaiah, though he predicted this, looked farther, that is, to the
   coming of Christ, who was to overtum and destroy all false worship;
   for, when his kingdom has been established, all idols immediately fall
   to the ground, and it is impossible that false religion and
   superstition can exist along with the knowledge of him. By his
   brightness he dispels all darkness, so as to leave no room for false
   gods or superstitions; for, as Paul says,

   "What hath Christ to do with Belial? What hath light to do with
   darkness?"
   (2 Corinthians 6:14,15.)

   At the same time it ought to be observed, that the Prophet had his eye
   on the time when the Jews were held in captivity; for they saw the
   Babylonians offer incense to idols, and ascribe to them supreme power,
   as if the government of affairs depended on them; while the God of the
   Jews was treated with scorn, as if he could not defend his people, or
   as if he cared nothing about them. For this reason he shews that there
   will be so great a revolution, that the gods of the Babylonians, which
   were elevated so high, shall be laid low, and God, who appeared to he
   low, shall rise up and avenge his people.

   2. They could not withdraw themselves from the burden. He ridicules the
   vanity of such gods as these, which have neither strength nor motion,
   and cannot defend or support themselves, and, in a word, who need the
   aid of beasts of burden to carry them. There is, therefore, an implied
   contrast between idols and the true God, who has no need of anything
   whatever. I interpret these words as applied to beasts, but the Prophet
   heightens the disgrace by saying that they were a heavy burden to the
   beasts themselves which would willingly have cast them off, and
   consequently that the false gods, besides being of no use to their
   worshippers, also wearied out the beasts.

   And their soul hath gone into captivity. This is a Hebrew mode of
   expression, by which he ridicules those gods which have neither "soul"
   nor understanding. He speaks ironically, therefore, against useless and
   dumb idols, when he says that they shall be carried into captivity
   along with their soul. But we must see if these things cannot be
   retorted on the true God, whose ark, by which he gave testimony of his
   presence, was taken by the Philistines; for in this way it appeared as
   if the Lord were a captive. (1 Samuel 4:11.) This objection may be
   easily answered; for, although the Lord intended that the ark should be
   a testimony of his presence, yet he forbade the Jews to fix their whole
   and exclusive attention upon it, but commanded them to raise their eyes
   to heaven, and there to seek and adore God. He wished to be always
   worshipped in a spiritual manner, (John 4:24,) and the ark was not
   adored instead of God, but was a symbol, by which the people were led
   upwards, as by the hand, to God. The Gentiles, on the other hand, fixed
   their attention on their idols, and attributed to them divine power.

   It might even have been said that the Philistines were at length
   punished for their wickedness, and acknowledged that they had to deal
   with the true God. (1 Samuel 5:6.) But that would not have been a
   sufficient answer, because the Lord sometimes permitted his ark to be
   treated with derision, as is evident from other passages of the
   history. The true solution therefore is, that the Lord, though he holds
   intercourse with us by symbols and sacraments, yet wishes to be sought
   in heaven. To this must be added, that he had openly declared, by
   memorable predictions, that he was not dragged as a captive by
   conquerors, but that of his own accord he exposed his sanctuary to the
   sport of enemies, in order to punish the sins of his people. Nor could
   the Jews, when the Temple had been thrown down and bumt, and when the
   holy vessels were carried to Babylon, doubt that the same God whom they
   had worshipped was the author of this punishment, since he had so
   frequently threatened by his prophets what then happened.

   3. Hear me. Here the Prophet beautifully points out the vast difference
   between the true God and idols. Having formerly said that the
   Babylonian gods must be drawn on waggons and carts, because they
   consist of dead matter, he now ascribes a widely different office to
   the God of Israel, namely, that he "carries" his people, like a mother,
   who carries the child in her womb, and afterwards carries it in her
   bosom. He addresses the Jews, that they may return an answer from their
   experience; for this ought to have powerfully affected them, when they
   actually felt that he bore them and their burdens. He, therefore, makes
   use of a highly appropriate contrast, and concludes from the preceding
   statements: "Acknowledge that I am the true God, and that I differ
   widely from idols, which are useless and dead weights; for you have
   known and experienced my power by constant benefits, which I have not
   ceased to confer upon you from the womb." God is not only powerful in
   himself, but diffuses his power through all the creatures; so that we
   feel his strength and energy.

   Who are carried from the womb. This is a very expressive metaphor, by
   which God compares himself to a mother who carries a child in her womb.
   He speaks of the past time, when he began to give them testimonies of
   his grace. Yet the words might be taken as meaning simply that God
   kindly nourished that people, like an infant taken from its mother's
   womb, and carried it in his bosom, as the Psalmist says,

   "I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my mother's
   belly."
   (Psalm 22:10.)

   But as God did not only begin to act as the father and nurse of his
   people from the time when they were born, but also "begat them" (James
   1:18) spiritually, I do not object to extending the words so far as to
   mean, that they were brought, as it were, out of the bowels of God into
   a new life and the hope of an eternal inheritance.

   If it be objected, that God is everywhere called "a Father," (Jeremiah
   31:9; Malachi 1:6,) and that this title is more appropriate to him, I
   reply, that no figures of speech can describe God's extraordinary
   affection towards us; for it is infinite and various; so that, if all
   that can be said or imagined about love were brought together into one,
   yet it would be surpassed by the greatness of the love of God. By no
   metaphor, therefore, can his incomparable goodness be described. If you
   understand it, simply to mean that God, from the time that he begat
   them, gently carried and nourished them in his bosom, this will agree
   admirably with what we find in the Song of Moses,

   "He bore them, and carried them, as an eagle carrieth her young on her
   wings." (Deuteronomy 32:11.)

   In a word, the intention of the Prophet is to shew, that the Jews, if
   they do not choose to forget their descent, cannot arrive at any other
   conclusion than that they were not begotten in vain, and that God, who
   has manifested himself to be both their Father and their Mother, will
   always assist them; and likewise, that they have known his power by
   uninterrupted experience, so that they ought not to pay homage to
   idols.

   All the remnant of the house of Israel. By calling them a "remnant" he
   means, as we formerly remarked, that the greater part had been
   alienated from the Church by their revolt, so that the hope of
   deliverance belonged only to a very small number. On this account he
   demands from them a hearing; for unbelievers, not less than heathen
   nations, were utterly deaf to his voice. Now, although the people were
   so far from being in their unbroken strength, that the dispersion of
   them had left but a small number behind, yet God bids them consider how
   wonderfully they have been hitherto preserved, that they may not doubt
   that he will henceforth act towards them, as he has hitherto acted, the
   part of both father and mother. And when he demands that they shall
   listen to him, he shews that the true and indeed the only remedy for
   our distresses and calamities is, to hang on his mouth, and to be
   attentive to the promises of grace; for then shall we have sufficient
   courage to bear every affliction; but if not, the way is opened for
   despair, and we ought not to expect anything else than destruction.

   4 And even to old age. Here I explain the copulative v (vau) to mean
   therefore; and the reasoning ought to be carefully observed, for he
   argues thus, "I have begotten and brought you forth;" and again, "Even
   when you were little children, I carried you in my arms, and therefore
   I will be the guardian of your life till the end." Thus also David
   reasons,

   "Thou art he who brought me out of the womb; I trusted in thee while I
   hung on my mother's breasts; I was cast upon thee from my birth; thou
   art my God from my mother's womb."
   (Psalm 22:10.)

   He therefore promises that he will always be a Father to the Jews; and
   hence we see that we ought to cherish assured confidence of salvation
   from the time that the Lord hath once begun it in us, for he wishes to
   continue his work till the end. "The Lord," says David, "will complete
   what he hath begun;" and again,

   "O Lord, thy loving-kindness is eternal, and thou wilt not forsake the
   works of thy hands." (Psalm 138:8.)

   I am the same. The Hebrew word hv' (hu) is, in my opinion, very
   emphatic, though some interpreters render it simply by the
   demonstrative pronoun He; [216] but it means that God is always "the
   same" and like himself, not only in his essence, but with respect to
   us, so that we ourselves shall feel that he is the same. When he says,
   "Even to old age," [217] it might be thought absurd; for we ought to
   become full-grown men after having been carried by God from infancy.
   But if any one shall examine it properly, it will be found that we
   never make so great progress as not to need to be upheld by the
   strength of God, for otherwise the most perfect man would stumble every
   moment; as David also testifies,

   "Forsake me not in the time of old age, withdraw not from me when my
   strength faileth." (Psalm 71:9.)

   I have made and will carry. He again argues in the same manner. God
   does not regard what we deserve, but continues his grace toward us; and
   therefore we ought to draw confidence from it, "Thou didst create us,
   not only that we might be human beings, but that we might be thy
   children; and therefore thou wilt continue till the end to exercise
   continually toward us the care of a father and of a mother."

   5. To whom will ye liken and compare me? Here the Prophet introduces
   the Lord as remonstrating with the Jews, because they distrusted and
   doubted his power, and, in a word, because they put him on a level with
   idols, and even placed idols above him. When they saw the Babylonians
   enjoy prosperity, they thought that their hope was gone, and that the
   remembrance of the covenant had faded away, and hardly believed that
   God was in heaven or took any concern about them. On this account the
   Lord complains that they ascribe some power to idols, and that thus
   they east his power into the shade. This subject was formerly discussed
   under the forty-second, forty-third, and following chapters; and
   therefore it is unnecessary to repeat observations in each word.

   In order that they may not estimate the power of God by the present
   condition of things, he bids them raise their minds higher. In like
   manner, when we see the Papists enjoy prosperity, if we should
   entertain doubts whether or not they possessed the true religion, we
   would need to be dissuaded by the same exhortation; for this would be
   to compare God with idols. And we ought carefully to observe this
   circumstance, the forgetfulness or disregard of which has led many
   commentators absurdly to weaken this statement, by supposing that the
   Prophet merely attacks superstitious persons who ascribe some divine
   power to wood or stone, because this degrades the glory of God by
   comparing him to dead things. But I have no doubt that he reproves that
   sinful and wicked conclusion by which the people, when they were
   weighed down by adversity, imagined that God was favorable to the
   Babylonians; for, if he had been favorable to them, it would follow
   that he approves of idolatry, and thus his honor would have been
   conveyed to dumb creatures. We may likewise draw from it a general
   doctrine that God is robbed of his glory, when he is compared to dumb
   and senseless things, as Paul also applies the passage appropriately.
   (Acts 17:29.)

   6. Lavishing gold out of bags. The Prophet had formerly said this, and
   he now repeats it, in order to fix this doctrine more and more deeply
   on the hearts of men; for superstition has struck its roots so deeply
   in their hearts, that it cannot be torn out, unless the Lord entirely
   change our nature. Whatever we have heard about this madness quickly
   passes out of our minds; for we always carry about some seed of
   superstition, and there is nothing to which we are more prone than to
   fall into it. He says, therefore, that one person supplies the
   materials for manufacturing idols, and another gives them a shape; and
   that in this way it may be said that there are two fathers of such
   gods, that is, the rich man who lavishes out the gold or silver, and
   the workman who adds the shape and makes the idol. Thus he makes an
   open exposure of the madness of these who seek a deity in their purses
   and in the hand of their workmen; for what means so sudden a change,
   that they bow down before the metal, as soon as it has assumed a
   different shape, and a shape, too, which has been regulated by their
   own will or caprice? for it is exactly such a god as they have been
   pleased to manufacture at their own expense.

   They even adore. The particle 'ph, (aph,) even, heightens the
   description of this madness; for there might perhaps be some room for
   repentance, if one who had been overtaken by a sudden mistake adored
   some false god; but these men obstinately persevere in their error.
   This word therefore draws attention more strongly to that obstinacy,
   and shews that they are altogether blinded. Excessively foolish, as I
   have said, is this stupidity, when men adore a god which they have made
   with their own hands.

   7. They shall carry them on the shoulder. The picture is still more
   heightened by the description contained in this verse; for, since the
   idols have no feeling of any kind, they who fly to them to ask
   assistance must be not only very stupid but very obstinate.

   8. Remember this. This verse may be explained in two ways, either that
   the Lord addresses the Jews, or that he addresses the Gentiles. Men who
   otherwise are not well instructed in the Law are led into mistakes,
   because they extinguish that knowledge which God kindles in their
   hearts; for there is no person who has not some seed of religion
   implanted in him by nature, but men choke it by their unbelief, or
   corrupt and debase it by their inventions. On this account we might
   extend it to the whole human race. But I am more disposed to adopt a
   different opinion, which is also demanded by the context; for the
   Prophet will soon afterwards add what does not apply to any but the
   Jews, whom he calls transgressors, because, having been vanquished by a
   slight temptation, they revolted from the true God, as if captivity
   ought to have obliterated from their hearts all the benefits which he
   had bestowed on them. Since, therefore, they had shaken off the true
   religion, he sharply rebukes their ingratitude in having been so easily
   led away to sinful inventions.

   Return to the heart. [218] By giving them this injunction he means that
   they are not of sound understanding. Others render it, "Recall." This
   is feeble and inappropriate, and, a little before, he had bid them
   remember, and will immediately repeat the same thing. Now, therefore,
   he rather bids them "return to the heart," because forgetfulness of
   God's benefits was a sort of madness.

   Blush. Others render it, "Act a manly part," and derive the word from
   'ys, (ish.) Others derive it from 'sys, (ashish,) which means "a
   foundation;" as if he had said, "Take courage, do not despair of my
   assistance." But I rather agree with Jerome, who derives it from 's,
   (esh;) for it is more appropriate, when their disgrace has been
   exposed, to "be ashamed" than to assume manly courage; though I leave
   it to every person to form his own judgment. He therefore means that
   they blush for their madness, ingratitude, and wickedness, so as to
   return to God. [219]

   9. Remember the former things. This is an explanation of the preceding
   statement; for he expresses more fully what he formerly meant, that is,
   that God hath testified of himself by sufficiently numerous proofs, and
   hath shewed what is his nature and greatness; and that not merely for
   two or three days, or for a few years, but at all times; for he had
   continued his benefits, and had incessantly bestowed his grace upon
   them. Hence he infers that the manifestations of his divinity, being so
   clear, ought to prevent them from giving their hearts to another.

   That I am God. In this passage the particle ky (ki) does not signify
   for, but that, and introduces a clause which explains what goes before.
   Besides, as we have formerly explained, God wishes not only that he may
   be acknowledged, but that he alone may be acknowledged; and therefore
   he wishes to be separated from all the gods which men have made for
   themselves, that we may fix our whole attention on him; because, if he
   admitted any companion, his throne would fall or shake; for either
   there is one God or there is none at all.

   10. Declaring from the beginning. He now explains more fully in what
   manner he wishes the Jews to remember the past time, namely, that they
   were taught by constant predictions, as far as was necessary for their
   advantage. But from this preface he immediately makes a transition to
   the hope of deliverance.

   My counsel shall stand. We ought not to wonder that he repeats this so
   frequently, because it is very hard to persuade men of the truth of it.
   The people were not only slow to believe, but even obstinate; and
   therefore he reminds them that they had learned long ago, and not on
   one occasion only, how safe it is to place their confidence in God. Nor
   is it only his foreknowledge that is here extolled by him, but he says
   that he has testified by his prophets what he had decreed. Even the
   prophecies would have no certainty or solidity, if the same God who
   declares that this or that thing shall happen had not the events
   themselves in his power. At the same time, he states that he speaks
   according to truth and brings forward his decrees in all the
   prophecies, that the Jews may not hesitate to place a firm reliance, as
   soon as the prophets have spoken. But as I have already explained these
   subjects more largely, I now give nothing more than a brief view of
   them.

   11. Calling a bird or a thought from the east. After having spoken of
   God's foreknowledge and power, the Prophet applies to his own purpose
   the general statement which he had made. He intended to comfort the
   Jews, and to shew that they were not led into captivity in such a
   manner as to leave no hope of deliverance; and therefore he adds a
   specific instance, and promises that Cyrus shall come, though it
   appeared to be incredible.

   The word yt (ait,) which I have translated thought, is translated by
   the greater part of interpreters a bird; and this is the true
   signification of the word. But as we may learn from Daniel 2:14, that
   it sometimes denotes counsel, (for the insertion of a letter in the
   noun yt is customary among the Chaldee writers,) I choose rather to
   follow this interpretation, which is approved by some Hebrew writers.
   Yet it is possible that he alludes to a bird, [220] as if he had said
   that his purpose would be sudden; and I do not deny that he alludes to
   the swiftness of the approach of Cyrus.

   The man of my counsel. When he again calls Cyrus "the man of his
   counsel," this is a repetition very frequent among Hebrew writers; and
   hence also it is evident that, in the former clause, the noun yt (ait)
   is put for "thought" or "decree." Now, he calls him "the man of
   counsel," because he executes the Lord's decree.

   Yet if it be thought preferable to translate it bird, I do not debate
   about it. The metaphor is beautiful; for the approach of Cyrus was so
   sudden and unexpected, that he seemed to fly like "a bird." He suddenly
   invaded Babylon and took it by storm, even when the Babylonians
   imagined that every entrance was closed against him. It may also be
   said, if this interpretation of the word be approved, that Isaiah
   alludes to auguries, to which the Babylonians were greatly addicted.
   Accustomed to practice judicial astrology, they observed the flight and
   chattering of birds, and looked upon this as a certain knowledge of
   future events; but the Lord threatens that he will send "a bird" which
   they had not foreseen. But I prefer the former exposition, namely, that
   he alludes to the swiftness of Cyrus, and declares that no roads shall
   be shut against him, and that no fortresses shall hinder him from
   entering immediately into Babylon.

   When he says from the east, this not only relates to the certainty of
   the promise, but is intended to inform us that no distance or length of
   time can retard the work of God; and accordingly, in the second clause,
   it is added by way of explanation, from a distant country Let us learn
   from this what is the purpose to which we ought to apply all that we
   read in Scripture concerning the foreknowledge and power of God; for
   those statements are not made in order to keep us in suspense, but that
   we may apply them to our own use. Now, he makes an implied contrast
   between the counsel of God and our thoughts; for he delivers his people
   in such a manner that the reason of the deliverance cannot be
   comprehended by men. Thus, although that which God promises appears to
   be incredible, yet he says that he will easily open up a way, that we
   may not measure by our capacity his unsearchable counsels.

   I have thought. Others render it I have formed; but in this passage it
   appears to be more appropriate to view ytsr (yatzar) as signifying "to
   think." He confirms what he formerly said, that this hath been
   determined by him, and therefore shall be steadfast and unalterable.

   I have spoken, and will accomplish. These words mean, that he has
   predicted nothing in vain, and that this prediction, which he has
   commanded to be published, ought to be regarded as fulfilled. To
   establish our faith in himself was the object of the one clause, and in
   the other he connects his thoughts with the preached word. This ought
   to be carefully observed; for we are distracted by a variety of
   thoughts, and we doubt if God has spoken sincerely, and suspect that he
   is like us, that is, that he is a hypocrite or dissembler. But he
   declares that nothing proceeds from him but what he formerly determined
   in his counsel. [221] so that the preaching of the word is nothing else
   than a sure testimony of his hidden counsel, which he commands to be
   revealed to us. As soon therefore as the Lord hath spoken any word, we
   ought; to be certain of its accomplishment.

   12. Hear me. He again rebukes the Israelites, because they could not
   place confidence in God, or receive any consolation in adversity. That
   rebuke is indeed sharp and severe, but was well deserved by those whose
   hearts were not soothed by any promise, or by any invitation, however
   gracious, which God addressed to them.

   We ought to observe the two epithets which he employs here, Hardened in
   heart and Far from righteousness By these expressions he means that
   poor distressed persons shut the door against God's assistance on
   account of their obstinacy; because by murmuring or fretting they shake
   off the fear of God, and thus throw themselves into despair, so that
   they openly rage against God. He addresses the Jews, who, though they
   were almost overwhelmed, yet were swelled with pride and insolence,
   and, having thrown off the fear of God, rose to more and more
   outrageous madness; as frequently happens to many persons in the
   present day, whom distresses and afflictions render more rebellious.
   Accordingly, they refused to receive any medicine, any remedy for their
   distresses. If any one prefer to consider the word righteousness to be
   put for "the assistance of God," as in the following verse, let him
   enjoy his opinion, which indeed is not inappropriate; because obstinate
   men, who refuse to believe the promises of God, drive God away from
   them, and reject his grace; for they do not suffer God to confer
   benefits upon them, though he offered to them his assistance.

   13. I will bring near my righteousness. If that interpretation which I
   mentioned a little before be preferred, that those persons are called
   "far from righteousness" who are incapable of receiving the grace of
   God, the meaning will remain unaltered; but if we hold that the Jews
   were "far from righteousness," because, like desperate men, they were
   wholly abandoned to crimes, there will be a beautiful contrast between
   the righteousness of men and the righteousness of God. Although
   therefore the Jews revolted and were estranged from all practice of
   godliness, yet God assures them that "his righteousness is near;" as if
   he had said that unbelief is indeed a very great obstacle, but yet that
   it is such an obstacle as cannot hinder God from at length manifesting
   the power of his truth. "For the unbelief of men," as Paul says,
   "cannot make void the truth of God; and, though men are liars, God will
   always be true." (Romans 3:3, 4.) And indeed, if he did not exceed the
   malice of men by his goodness, we should all perish without exception,
   for who is there that receives God, and makes use of his grace as he
   ought?

   Accordingly, the only reason why he does not continue to bestow
   benefits upon us is, that we are estranged from "his righteousness;"
   and yet, though we are reluctant and make resistance, he approaches to
   us in order to display "his righteousness," though we do not deserve
   it. Now, he does this in such a manner that unbelievers obtain no
   advantage at all from it; for the Prophet did not include wicked
   apostates, as if they should be partakers of the salvation which he
   promises, but he only says that God has at hand a method by which "his
   righteousness" shall be made manifest. But here we must consider what
   was the condition of the people to whom those things were spoken; for
   everything had been corrupted by unbelief, and there were very few who
   relied on the promises of God; and they who belonged to the number of
   the elect sometimes shewed that they were obstinate, so that they
   appeared to be infected by the same plague of impiety as the others. He
   therefore rebukes the whole nation, both to convict the reprobate and,
   at the same time, to chastise the elect and bring them back into the
   right path; but especially, as I have said, he attacks unbelievers, who
   professedly, as it were, rejected all hope of grace.

   And my salvation shall not tarry. This makes still more plain what he
   meant by the word "righteousness," that is, the assistance which the
   Lord promised to his people. Consequently, he means the same thing by
   the word "salvation" and the word "righteousness;" for the most
   remarkable instance of the "righteousness" of God is, when he
   preserves, guards, and delivers his people. It is not superfluous to
   say that it is not "retarded" or "delayed;" for he describes the
   greatness of his mercy by saying, that the Lord opens up a course for
   his justice, notwithstanding the reluctance and opposition of the
   people.

   And I will place. The copulative v (vau) is here used in order to
   express the cause, "For I will place." This is an additional
   confirmation of the preceding statement, that, since the Lord has once
   determined to save Jerusalem, she cannot be deprived of that benefit.

   And my glory in Jerusalem. He connects his "glory" with the "salvation"
   of believers, as Paul also uses the word "glory" to denote "mercy."
   (Ephesians 1:6, and 3:16.) The glory of God is most illustriously
   displayed, when he rescues his people from destruction and restores
   them to liberty; for he wished that an indissoluble bond should connect
   the salvation of the Church with his righteousness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [216] "I (am) he." (Eng. Ver.) This is the literal rendering. -- Ed.

   [217] "When thou shalt be old, and thy strength shall fail, (for thou
   hast no merits or works of righteousness,) I am the same as to my mercy
   and kindness, to keep, and carry, and bear, and deliver;' for the
   Prophet had said of the idol that it is carried about, and cannot rid
   itself of its own burden, and therefore God says here, I am He who
   carry others and bear my own burden.'" -- Jarchi.

   [218] "Bring (it) again to mind." -- Eng. Ver.

   [219] "The verb ht'ssv (hithshteshu) is a hapax legomenon, and admits
   of several different explanations. Joseph Kimchi derived it from 's
   (esh,) fire, and explained it to mean, Be inflamed or reddened,' that
   is, blush.' So the Vulgate, confundamini (be confounded.) The Targum
   and Jarchi understand it to mean, Fortify or strengthen yourselves,'
   and connect it with 'ssym, (ashishim,) foundations. (Isaiah 16:7.)
   Bochart derives it from 'ys, (ish,) a man, and identifies it with the
   andrizesthe, of 1 Corinthians 16:13." -- Alexander.

   [220] "By a bird of prey is here meant the Eagle; for the Greek word
   aetos is derived from yt (ait.) There can be no doubt that he means
   Cyrus, who, in a former passage, (Isaiah 41:25,) is said to have been
   called by Jehovah from the East,' that is, from Persia, which lay to
   the east of Judea. In other passages also, (as in Jeremiah 49:22;
   Ezekiel 17:3,) kings and princes are compared to eagles, because, in
   the opinion of the ancients, the eagle is the king of birds. Thus also
   Cyrus is represented under the image of a bird of prey,' chiefly on
   account of the astonishing swiftness with which he rode in his
   expeditions from Persia into very distant countries, and on account of
   the violence with which he flew upon his enemies and seized them as his
   prey. There may also be an allusion to the circumstance, that Cyrus
   ordered a golden eagle, with outstretched wings, laid on a long spear,
   to be carried before him as his military standard; for so Xenophon
   describes it. En de auto semeion aetos chrusous epi doratos makrou
   anatetamenos, kai nun de touto epi semeion to Person basilei diamenei
   And his standard was a golden eagle stretched on a long spear, and even
   now this continues to be the standard of the king of Persia.' (Xen.
   Cyrop. 7.)" -- Rosenmuller.

   [221] "En son conseil."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 47.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 47:1-15

   1. Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on
   the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou
   shalt no more be called tender and delicate.

   1. Descende, et sede in pulvere, virgo filia Babel. Sede super terram;
   non est solium filiae Chaldae-orum; quoniam non fiet amplius ut to
   vocent teneram et delicatam.

   2. Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare
   the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.

   2. Tolle molas, et mole farinam, dissolve cincinnos tuos, denuda pedes,
   discooperi crura, ut transeas flumina.

   3. Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I
   will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.

   3. Retegetur turpitudo tua, et videbitur probrum tuum; ultionem sumam,
   et non occurram homini (vel, homo.)

   4. As for our redeemer, the LORD of hosts is his name, the Holy One of
   Israel.

   4. Redemptor noster, Iehova exercituum nomen ejus, sanctus Israelis.

   5. Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the
   Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms.

   5. Sede quieta, ingredere in tenebras, filia Chaldmorum; quoniam non
   fiet amplius ut to vocent dominam regnorum.

   6. I was wroth with my people; I have polluted mine inheritance, and
   given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the
   ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.

   6. Iratus fui in populum meum, profanavi haerditatem meam, et tradidi
   cos in manum tuam; non praestitisti Illis misericordias; super senem
   aggravasti jugum tuum valde.

   7. And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not
   lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of
   it.

   7. Et dixisti, Ero in aeternum domina. Hactenus non applicuisti huc
   animum, neque recordata es finis ejus.

   8. Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that
   dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else
   beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of
   children:

   8. Nunc vero audi hoc, delicata, sedens confidenter, quae dicit in
   corde suo, Ego sum, et nihil amplius; non sedebo vidua, nec sciam
   orbitatem.

   9. But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the
   loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their
   perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great
   abundance of thine enchantments.

   9. Atqui venient tibi ista duo repente, die uno, orbitas et viduitas;
   ad perfectionem suam venient super to, ob multitudinem (vel ia
   multitudine) divinationum tuarum, et copiam augurum tuorum.

   10. For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth
   me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast
   said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me.

   10. Nam confisa fuisti in malitia tua; dixisti, Nemo me videt.
   Sapientia tua et scientia tua ipsa seduxit re. Et dixisti in corde tuo,
   Ego, et non amplius.

   11. Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from
   whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be
   able to put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which
   thou shalt not know.

   11. Itaque venient super to malum, cujus diluculum ignoras; cadet super
   to contritio, quam non poteris avertere. Veniet repentevastatio super
   to, quam nescis.

   12. Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
   sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou
   shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.

   12. Sta nunc inter divinationes tuas, et in multitudine augurum tuorum,
   in quibus fatigasti to a pueritia tua; si forte possis proficere, si
   forte robores to.

   13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the
   astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and
   save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.

   13. Fatigata es in multitudine conciliorum tuorum, stent nunc et
   servent colligatores coelorum, speculatores astrorum, qui lunationes
   docent, ab ils qum ventura sunt super to.

   14. Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall bum them; they
   shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall
   not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.

   14. Ecce erant quasi stipula; ignis comburet cos; non liberabunt animam
   suam e manu flammae; non pruna ad calefaciendum, lumen ad quod
   sedeatur.

   15. Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even thy
   merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter;
   none shall save thee.

   15. Sic tibi erunt cum quibus to fatigasti; negotiatores tui a pueritia
   tua. Quisque in plagam suam errabit; nemo erit qui to servet.


   1. Come down, and sit in the dust. Isaiah now explains more fully what
   he had briefly noticed concerning the counsel of God, and the execution
   of it. He openly describes the destruction of Babylon; because no hope
   whatever of the return of the people could be entertained, so long as
   the Babylonian monarchy flourished. Accordingly, he has connected these
   two things, namely, the overthrow of that monarchy, and the deliverance
   of the people which followed it; for the elevated rank of that city was
   like a deep grave in which the Jews were buried, and, when it had been
   opened, the Lord brought back his people to their former life.

   The use of the imperative mood, "Come down," is more forcible than if
   he had expressed the same thing in plain words and simple narrative;
   for he addresses her authoritatively, and as if he were speaking from
   the judgment-seat; because he proclaims the commands of God, and
   therefore, with the boldness which his authority entitles him to use,
   he publishes what shall happen, as we know that God granted this
   authority to the prophets. "Behold, I have this day set thee over
   nations and kingdoms, to root out and pull down, to destroy and
   overthrow, to build and to plant." (Jeremiah 1:10.) There is no power
   that is not added to the authority of the word. In a word, he intended
   to place the event immediately before the eye of the Jews; for that
   change could scarcely be imagined, if God did not thunder from heaven.

   Virgin daughter of Babylon. It was a figure of speech frequently
   employed by Hebrew writers, to call any nation by the title of
   "Daughter." He calls her "Virgin," not because she was modest or
   chaste, but because she had been brought up softly and delicately like
   "virgins," and had never been forced by enemies, as we formerly said
   when speaking of Sidon. [222] And at the present day the same thing
   might be said of Venice and some other towns, which have a great
   abundance of wealth and luxuries, and, in the estimation of men, are
   accounted very happy; for they have as good reason as the Babylonians
   had to dread such a revolution of affairs, even when they appear to be
   far removed from danger.

   For it shall no longer be. That is, "Thou shalt no longer be caressed
   by men who thought that thou wast happy."

   2. Take millstones. The whole of this description tends to shew that
   there shall be a great change among the Babylonians, so that this city,
   which was formerly held in the highest honor, shall be sunk in the
   lowest disgrace, and subjected to outrages of every kind, and thus
   shall exhibit a striking display of the wrath of God. These are marks
   of the most degrading slavery, as the meanest slaves were formerly shut
   up in a mill. The condition of the captives who were reduced to it must
   therefore have been very miserable; for, in other cases, captives
   sometimes received from their conquerors mild and gentle treatment. But
   here he describes a very wretched condition, that believers may not
   doubt that they shall be permitted freely to depart, when the
   Babylonians, who had held them prisoners, shall themselves be
   imprisoned. Now, though we do not read that the nobles of the kingdom
   were subjected to such contemptuous treatment, it was enough for the
   fulfillment of this prophecy, that Cyrus, by assigning to them the
   operations of slaves, degraded them, and compelled them to abstain from
   honorable employments.

   Unbind thy curled locks. On account of their excessive indulgence in
   magnificence of dress, he again alludes to the attire of young women,
   by mentioning "curled locks." We know that girls are more eager than
   they ought to be about cuffing their hair, and other parts of dress.
   Here, on the contrary, the Prophet describes a totally different
   condition and attire; that is, that ignominy, and blackness, and filth
   shall cover from head to foot those who formerly dazzled all eyes by
   gaudy finery.

   Uncover the limbs. "Virgins" hardly ever are accustomed to walk in
   public, and, at least, seldom travel on the public roads; but the
   Prophet says that the Babylonian virgins will be laid under the
   necessity of crossing the rivers, and with their limbs uncovered.

   3. Thy baseness shall be discovered. This is the conclusion of the
   former statement. So long as Babylon was in a flourishing condition,
   she preserved her reputation, and was highly honored; for wealth and
   power, like veils, often conceal a great number of sores, which, when
   the veils have been removed, become visible, and are beheld with the
   greatest disgrace. And, as Demosthenes says, when, speaking of Philip's
   condition, -- hosper gar tois somasin hemon heos men an erromenos e tis
   ouden epaisthanetai ton kath hekasta sathron ep' an de arrostema sumbho
   panta kineitai kan rhegma kan stremma kan allo ti ton huparchonton
   sathron e houto kai ton poleon kai ton turannon. "For as, in our
   bodies, so long as any person is in full vigor, no malady is perceived
   in any of the members, but if he fall into debility, produced either by
   a wound or by a strain, or by any other of the diseases to which the
   body is subject, the whole is affected; so is it with cities and
   governments." (Dem., Olynth. 2.) When commotions arise, and when their
   wealth and troops are taken from them, disgraceful transactions which
   lay concealed are exposed to view; for cruelty, and fraud, and
   extortions, and perjury, and unjust oppressions, and other crimes,
   which were honored during prosperity, being to fall into disgrace.

   I will take vengeance, and will not meet (thee) a man. Some think that
   k (caph) ought here to be supplied, "As a man;" as if he had said, "Do
   not think that ye have to deal with man, whose attack ye may be able to
   resist." And, indeed, in other passages, when he speaks of the hand of
   man, it denotes some abatement; but here he means that no remedy is
   left, because God will reduce them to nothing. Others translate it, "I
   will not meet a man;" that is, "I will not allow a man to meet me;
   whoever shall meet me, or intercede in their behalf, I will not spare
   them, or remit or abate their punishment." This meaning is highly
   appropriate, but the construction is somewhat forced; for 'phg
   (ephgang) must thus be understood to have a passive sense, which could
   scarcely be admitted. Besides, the Prophet does not absolutely say that
   no petition shall be presented to God, but that he cannot be appeased.
   The former exposition, therefore, flows more smoothly, so far as
   relates to the context; but let every one choose that which he prefers;
   for, whatever exposition you adopt, the words amount to this, "that the
   Lord will destroy the Babylonians, and that there will be no room for
   mercy." Only, I say, that I prefer the former, because it is more
   agreeable to the original text.

   4. Our Redeemer. The Prophet shews for what purpose the Lord will
   inflict punishment on the Babylonians; that is, for the salvation of
   his people, as he had formerly declared. (Isaiah 45:4.) But this
   statement is much more forcible, because he speaks in what may be
   called an abrupt manner, and like a person awakened out of sleep, when
   he sees Babylon ruined, which formerly was wont to subdue other nations
   and trample them under her feet; and he shews that this happens for no
   other reason than that the Lord shews himself to be the "Redeemer" and
   defender of his people.

   The Holy One of Israel. As if he had said, that not in vain hath he
   chosen this people, and separated it from other nations. In this
   transaction he intended to give a display of his power, and on that
   account added to the title descriptive of his power, Jehovah of Hosts,
   the designation "Holy."

   5. Sit silent. He continues the same subject, and shews that the end of
   the Babylonian monarchy is at hand. As this appeared to be incredible,
   he therefore repeats the same thing by a variety of expressions, and
   repeats what might have been said in a few words; and thus he brings
   forward those lively descriptions, in order to place the event, as it
   were, before their eyes. When he bids her "sit" and be "silent," it is
   an indication of shame or disgrace. Yet this silence may be contrasted
   with her former condition, while she reigned; for at that time not only
   did she speak loudly and authoritatively, but she cried with a loud
   voice, and by her commands terrified the whole of the East. But now, in
   consequence of the change of her condition, he bids her "sit silent;"
   because not only will she not venture to utter terrific words, but she
   will not even venture to make a gentle sound. [223] But, since he adds,
   enter into darkness, I willingly adopt the former view, that it denotes
   shame; for they whose condition has been changed for the worse shut
   their mouth through shame, and scarcely venture to whisper.

   For it shall no longer be. We know that the Babylonian monarchy was
   very widely extended, and exercised dominion over large and numerous
   countries; for it was the chief of many kingdoms. On this account the
   captive people needed to be fortified by these promises, and to be
   forewarned of her fall, that they might entertain assured hope of
   deliverance

   6. I was angry with my people. This is an anticipation, by which he
   forewarns the Jews, as he has often done formerly, that the distressing
   condition of captivity was a scourge which God had inflicted; because,
   if it had proceeded from any other, there was no remedy in the hand of
   God. In order, therefore, that they might be convinced that he who had
   struck them would heal their wounds, he bids them attribute it to their
   sins that they were so terribly oppressed. Yet he exhorts them to
   cherish favorable expectation, because God intends to set a limit to
   the chastisement; and he even mentions this as the reason why the
   Babylonians shall be destroyed, that God, who is the just avenger of
   savageness and cruelty, will much more avenge the injuries done to his
   people.

   Thou didst not shew compassion to them. In the former clause he calls
   the Jews to repentance, because by their own crimes they drew down upon
   themselves so many calamities. Next, he accuses the Babylonians of
   having seized this occasion for exercising cruelty, just as if one were
   to become the executioner of a child whom a father had put into his
   hands to be chastised. Hence it follows that the Babylonians have no
   right to be proud, as if by their own power they had subdued the Jews
   and carried them into captivity; but, on the contrary, because they
   have wickedly abused the victory and cruelly treated the captives, he
   will justly punish them.

   I profaned my heritage. When he says that he "was angry," and that this
   was the reason why he "profaned his heritage," let us not imagine that
   he had changed his purpose, and was offended so far as to cast away the
   care of his people and the remembrance of his covenant. This is evident
   both from the event itself and from his deigning still to call them
   "his people," though the greater part of them were estranged from him,
   and though he had the best reasons for "profaning" them. But he has
   respect to his covenant when he speaks in this manner; for he looks at
   their source and foundation, that they who were the descendants of
   Abraham may be accounted the people of God, though very few of them
   actually belonged to him, and almost all boasted of an empty title.

   Thus the word amger, in Scripture, must not be supposed to refer to any
   emotion in God, who desires the salvation of his people, but to
   ourselves, who provoke him by our transgressions; for he has just cause
   to be angry, though he does not cease to love us. Accordingly, while he
   "profanes" his Church, that is, abandons her, and gives her up as a
   prey to her enemies, still the elect do not perish, and his eternal
   covenant is not broken. And yet, in the midst of anger, the Lord
   remembers his mercy, and mitigates the strokes by which he punishes his
   people, and at length even inflicts punishment on those by whom his
   people have been cruelly treated. Consequently, if for a time the Lord
   "profanes" his Church, if she is cruelly oppressed by tyrants, let us
   not lose courage, but betake ourselves to this promise, "He who avenged
   this barbarous cruelty of the Babylonians will not less avenge the
   savageness of those tyrants."

   It ought also to be carefully observed that no one should abuse victory
   so as to be cruel to captives, which we know is often done; for men,
   when they see that they are stronger, lay aside all humanity, and are
   changed into wild beasts, and spare neither age nor sex, and altogether
   forget their condition. After having abused their power, they shall not
   at length pass unpunished; for

   "judgment without mercy shall be experienced by those who shewed no
   mercy."
   (James 2:13.)

   But it is asked, "How could the Babylonians go beyond the limit which
   God had assigned to them, as if their lawless passions were laid under
   no restraint?" And what will become of that promise,

   "Not a hair shall fall from your head without the appointment of your
   Father?"
   (Luke 21:18.)

   The answer is easy. Though it was not in their power actually to go
   beyond the limit, yet he looked at their cruelty, because they
   endearvored utterly to ruin unhappy persons who had surrendered at
   discretion. Thus Zechariah complains of the unbridled rage of the
   Gentiles, because, when "he was angry with his people for a little,"
   they rushed forward with violent fury to destroy them. (Zechariah
   1:15.)

   On the old man. He states an aggravation of their guilt, that they did
   not spare even "the old men," for whom age naturally procures
   reverence; and hence he draws an inference, how savage was their
   cruelty towards armed foes.

   7. And thou saidst, I shall for ever [224] be a mistress. Here he
   censures the haughtiness of the Babylonians, in promising to themselves
   perpetual dominion, and in thinking that they could not fall from their
   elevation through any adverse event. Thus the children of this world
   are intoxicated by prosperity, and despise all men as compared with
   themselves; but Isaiah mocks at this confidence, and shews that God
   regards it with the greatest abhorrence. To say, means here to conclude
   in one's own mind, as will be more clearly evident from what the
   Prophet says shortly afterwards; for proud men do not publicly speak in
   this manner, but entertain this conviction, though they pretend the
   contrary. It is intolerable madness when men, forgetting their frailty,
   look upon themselves as not sharing in the common lot; for in this way
   they forget that they are men. Believers, too, have their conviction of
   being safe, because, under the protecting hand of God, they are
   prepared boldly to encounter every danger. And yet they do not cease to
   consider that they are liable to many distresses, because nothing in
   this world is lasting. Irreligious men, therefore, mock God whenever,
   through a foolish imagination, they promise to themselves lasting peace
   amidst the constant changes of the world.

   Hitherto thou hast not applied thy mind to it. [225] For the purpose of
   heightening the description of their madness, he adds that even a long
   course of time did not render them more moderate. To become elated
   immediately after having obtained a victory, is not so wonderful; but
   to become more fierce from day to day, and to throw out taunts against
   their captives, was altogether savage and intolerable. This arose, as
   we have said, from pride; because they did not consider that a
   revolution of affairs would afterwards take place, or that a condition
   so magnificent could be changed. Consequently, this is the second
   reason why the Lord overtumed the monarchy of the Babylonians.

   And didst not remember her end. [226] Some think that there is a change
   of the person here, but I consider that to be too forced; and indeed I
   have no doubt that he speaks of the "end" of Jerusalem, which is the
   opinion most commonly received. The Lord often speaks of the Church, by
   way of eminence, kat' exochen without mentioning the name, as we do
   when our feelings are powerfully affected towards any person. Now,
   wicked men do not know the "end" of the Church, and the reason why the
   Lord chastises her. They mock at the calamities of good men, because
   they would wish them to be utterly destroyed and ruined, and do not
   consider that God takes care of them.

   If it be objected that the Babylonians could not know this, that is
   nothing to the purpose; for they could not be ignorant that he was the
   God whom the Israelites worshipped. Consequently, when they treated the
   Jews with haughtiness and cruelty, they insulted God himself, as if he
   and the covenant which he had made with his people had been
   intentionally trampled under their feet.

   8. And now hear this, thou delicate woman. The Prophet again threatens
   the destruction of Babylon, and employs appropriate words for
   strengthening the hearts of believers, that the prosperity of the
   Babylonians may not stupify and lead them to despondency; and yet he
   does not address Babylon in order to produce an impression upon her,
   but to comfort believers. He adds, that she was intoxicated with
   pleasures; for prosperity, being the gift of God, ought not in itself
   to be condemned, but it is well known how prone the children of the
   world are, to pass from luxury to insolence.

   Who saith in her heart. He now explains what is meant by the word to
   say, of which we spoke in the exposition of the preceding verse,
   namely, that one convinces himself and believes that it will be thus
   and thus, as proud and insolent men commonly do, although they often
   conceal it through pretended modesty, and do not wish it to be publicly
   known.

   I am, and there is none besides me. This arrogance, by which she
   prefers herself to the whole world, is intolerable. First, she thinks
   that she is; secondly, she imagines that the rest of the world does not
   deserve to be compared to her; thirdly, she promises to herself
   everlasting repose, for she says, I shall not sit as a widow. As to the
   first, there is none of whom it can be said with truth that he is, but
   God alone, who has a right to say, "I am what I am," (Exodus 3:14;) for
   by this mark he is distinguished from the creatures. Thus, he who
   thinks that he subsists by his own power robs God of the honor due to
   him, and so Babylon, by exalting herself, made war with God. Secondly,
   she treated the whole world with contempt, when she preferred herself
   to it. In this manner proud men begin with God, by representing him to
   be their enemy, and they end by making all men, without exception,
   their enemies, through their haughtiness. The third clause, which may
   be regarded as the copestone of her pride, is, that she considers her
   condition to be eternal, and does not take into account the liability
   of the affairs of men to undergo change; for the higher men have been
   exalted, they sometimes on that account sink the lower.

   9. But those two things shall suddenly come to thee. Because Babylon
   supposed that she was beyond the reach of all danger, the Prophet
   threatens against her very sore distress. When she said that she would
   neither be "a widow" nor "childless," he declares on the other hand,
   that both calamities shall come upon her, so that her miserable
   destitution shall expose her to the utmost contempt.

   In their perfection. That is, "completely," so that in all points,
   without any exception, she shall be childless. There is also an implied
   contrast between moderate punishment, some alleviation of which may be
   expected, and the dreadful vengeance of God, which has no other end
   than ruin; for, the greater the confidence with which wicked men are
   elated, the more severely are they punished.

   For the multitude of thy divinations. Some render this term diviners;
   but I think that it denotes the act or the vice rather than the
   persons. Some explain v (beth) to mean "on account of," and understand
   it to express a cause; and in this sense it frequently occurs in
   Scripture. Yet it might be suitably interpreted, that the Babylonians
   shall derive no aid or relief from the deceitful skill in divinations
   of which they boasted so much; and so it might be translated
   notwithstanding; [227] as if he had said, "The abundance of divinations
   or auguries shall not prevent these things from happening to Babylon."
   [228] He ridicules the confidence which they placed in their useless
   auguries, by which they thought that they foresaw future events; but,
   as we shall shortly afterwards dwell more largely on this point, I
   readily admit that it is here reckoned to be one of the causes of the
   vengeance inflicted on them, that, in consequence of trusting to such
   delusions, they dreaded nothing. [229]

   10. For thou trustedst. He explains what he said in the preceding
   verse, though it may be extended further, so as to be a censure of the
   fraud and oppression and violence and unjust practices by which the
   Babylonians raised themselves to so great power. Almost all large
   kingdoms are, what a distinguished robber pronounced them to be, great
   robberies; for there is no other way in which they enlarge their
   dominions than by extorting them from others by violence and
   oppression, and by driving out the lawful owners from their dwellings,
   that they alone may reign at large.

   In thy malice. He gives the name of "malice" to that which he will
   afterwards adorn with more plausible names, namely, wisdom and
   knowledge. In this manner do tyrants usually disguise their tricks,
   when they lay aside all regard to justice and equity, and cunningly
   deceive the people; but the Lord detests and exposes them; so that it
   becomes manifest that it served no purpose to cover their wickedness by
   useless veils. Thus Job, after having said that "wise men are taken in
   their own wisdom," explains this by calling it "craftiness." (Job
   5:13.)

   Thou saidst, No one seeth me. When he adds that Babylon thought that
   her iniquities were not seen, this refers to free indulgence in
   sinning; for while men are kept in the discharge of duty by fear or
   shame, he who neither dreads God as a witness, nor thinks that men will
   know what he does, breaks out into every kind of licentiousness. It is
   true, indeed, that even the worst of men are often tormented by the
   stings of conscience; but, by shutting their eyes, they plunge
   themselves in: stupidity as in a lurking-place, and, in short, harden
   all their senses. Above all, we see that they have the hardihood to
   mock God, as if by their craftiness they could dazzle his eyes; for
   whenever they wish to defraud simpletons, they think it enough that
   they are not detected, as if they could impose on God. But to no
   purpose do they flatter themselves in their cunning, for the Lord will
   speedily take off the mask from them. All men ought therefore to abhor
   this wisdom, by which men deceive themselves, and accomplish their own
   ruin.

   I, and there is none beside me. He again repeats those blasphemies,
   that all may plainly understand how greatly God abhors them, and how
   near to destruction are all who raise themselves higher than they
   ought.

   11. Therefore shall evil come upon thee. Continuing the subject which
   he had formerly introduced, he ridicules the foolish confidence of the
   Babylonians, who thought that by the position of the stars they foresaw
   all events. He therefore says that they shall soon be overtaken by that
   which Scripture threatens generally against all despisers of God, (1
   Thessalonians 5:3,) that, "when they shall say, Peace and safety,
   sudden destruction shall overwhelm them," and that at the dawning of
   the day they shall not know what shall be accomplished in the evening;
   and it is very clear from the book of Daniel that this happened.
   (Daniel 5:30.)

   12. Stand now amidst thy divinations. The Prophet speaks as we are
   accustomed to speak to desperate men, on whom no warnings produce any
   good effect; "Do as thou art wont to do; in the end thou shalt be
   instructed by the event; thou shalt know what good the augurs and
   soothsayers do thee." By the word "stand" he alludes to the custom of
   the augurs, who remain unmoved in one place till some sign is seen.
   [230] In like manner, the astrologers mark out their divisions in the
   heavens, even to the minutest points. If it shall be thought preferable
   to translate chvrym (chabarim) diviners instead of divinations, I shall
   not greatly object; for the meaning of the word is ambiguous.

   If perhaps thou shalt prevail. As if he had said, "Thou shalt not be
   able, by the aid of thy augurs, to mitigate the calamity which is about
   to overtake thee." He taunts their perverse confidence on this ground,
   that when they shall have made every attempt, no advantage will follow.

   13. Thou hast wearied thyself. He now declares still more plainly what
   he had formerly expressed in somewhat obscure language; that all the
   schemes which Babylon had previously adopted would lead to her ruin;
   for she nourished within herself a vain confidence arising from a
   belief of her power and wisdom, as if nothing could do her injury.

   In the multitude of thy counsels. He calls them not only "counsels,"
   but "a multitude of counsels," in order to declare that there is no
   good reason for being puffed up or exalting themselves, whatever may be
   the ingenuity or skill of their efforts to deceive; because their
   crafty counsels, the more numerous and the more plausible they are,
   will give them the greater annoyance. This is a general statement
   against those who, trusting to their own ability, contrive and form
   counsels of every sort, and, relying on their prudence, collect all the
   stratagems and annoyances that can be invented for oppressing others;
   for God scatters all their contrivances, and overtums their fraudulent
   designs, as he threatened that all unlawful means would be
   unsuccessful. "They dare," says he, "to take counsel, but not from me;
   they weave a web, but not from my Spirit." (Isaiah 30:1.)

   Thus do the consultations of many persons altogether fail of success,
   because they do not ask counsel of God, from whom (James 1:5) all
   wisdom should be sought; for, the more they toil, the greater annoyance
   do they suffer, and they can obtain no advantage. Well does David [231]
   say, (Psalm 127:2,) that "in vain do they toil who rise early in the
   morning, and go late to rest, and eat the bread of sorrow;" for he
   speaks of unbelievers, who do not cast their cares on the Lord, but,
   trusting to their industry, make many daring efforts. The Lord
   ridicules this confidence, and causes them to be at length
   disappointed, and to feel how worthless are all their wicked labors and
   efforts, and how in this way they are punished for their rashness;
   while at the same time "the beloved of God sleep pleasantly," as is
   said in that passage. Not that they are freed from all annoyances, but
   that they do not weary themselves with useless labor, and they commit
   to God the result of all their affairs.

   Let them stand now. Here we perceive what counsellors are chiefly meant
   by the Prophet, that is, those diviners who boasted to the people of
   the empty name of science; as if they understood, all future events by
   looking at the stars. But we have formerly spoken of that judicial
   astrology, and of its uselessness. If it be objected, that it was not
   in the power of those men to mitigate the dangers which were hanging
   over them, I reply, the Babylonians would have done it at their
   suggestion, if they had foreseen the calamity; and, since they did not
   foresee it, the conclusion is, that their art had no foundation
   whatever. It is idle to pretend, as some do, that the Prophet reproves
   unskilfulness in the art, and not the art itself; for he addresses the
   Babylonians, who were the authors of this science.

   The binders of the heavens. He says wittily that they "bind the
   heavens;" because they utter their decisions as boldly as if, by
   binding and tying the stars, they held mankind in chains. Yet, if any
   one choose to render the term "inchanters," the meaning will not be
   inapplicable, and both are denoted by the verb chvr (chabar). Although
   to observe the position of the stars is not in itself sinful, the
   Prophet says that it is carried farther than is proper by those who
   draw from it conclusions as to doubtful events, and appears indirectly
   to contrast those observers with the prophets, in order to make them
   more detested, because they extinguish all divine predictions; for,
   when men attach to the stars a fatal necessity, all the judgments of
   God must fall to the ground.

   14. Behold, they shall be as stubble. With still greater eagerness he
   attacks those astrologers who strengthened the pride of Babylon by
   their empty boasting; for impostors of this sort are wont to take away
   all fear of God out of the hearts of men, by ascribing everything to
   the stars, so that nothing is left to the providence of God. Hence
   arises contempt of God and of all his threatenings; for punishments are
   not ascribed to the judgment of God, but to some fate and relation of
   things which they foolishly imagine. For this reason he kindles into
   such indignation against the Babylonians, and says that they shall be
   buming "stubble," which is quickly consumed; for he does not compare
   them to wood, which is of some use for giving heat, but to "stubble,"
   in order to shew that nothing is so light or useless.

   15. So shal they be to thee. After having threatened destruction to
   those astronomers, he again retums to the Babylonians, and threatens
   that they must not look for assistance from that quarter from which
   they expected it, and that they ought not to rely on those vain
   counsels, with which they had long and eagerly vexed themselves in
   vain.

   He calls them dealers, or, as we commonly say, traffickers; a metaphor
   taken from merchants, who are skilled in innumerable arts of deceiving,
   and in impostures of every kind; for the princes do not consult in a
   manner suitable to their rank, but traffic in disgraceful transactions.
   [232] Though we may extend this to all the allies by whom the
   Babylonians were aided, yet the Prophet has his eye chiefly on the
   diviners. When he adds, from thy youth, he aggravates the guilt of
   Babylon, in having been infected with this foolish belief from an
   ancient date, and in having held this error as if it had been born with
   her.

   Every one to his own quarter. [233] It is supposed that the Prophet
   here speaks of the flight of the astrologers, that every one shall
   provide for his own safety; and I fully agree with this, but think
   that, there is also an allusion to the "quarters" of the heavens, which
   astrologers divide and measure, so as to deduce their prognostications
   from them. He therefore ridicules their vain boasting. "They shall
   withdraw into their quarters, but they shall go astray, and there shall
   be no means of protection. If any one choose to apply it to the revolt
   of those whose assistance Babylon thought that at any time she could
   easily obtain, I have no objection.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [222] Commentary on Isaiah, [28]vol. 2, p. 155.

   [223] "Tant s'en faut qu'elle ose tonner si haut que de coustume, que
   mesmes elle n'osera desserrer les dents." "So far as she is from
   venturing to sound as loudly as she was wont to do, that she will not
   even venture to open her teeth."

   [224] "He chastises the pride and exeessive confidence of Babylon, by
   which she promised to herself an eternal reign. Thus Rome is ealled
   eternal in the constitutions of the emperors, and in inscriptions and
   coins, and also The mistress of the whole world, the queen and mistress
   of the world.'" -- Rosenmuller.

   [225] "It will not be inelegant to view d (gnad) as meaning until, or
   so that; and it is so rendered by Jarchi, who explains this verse thus,
   -- "Thou thoughtest with thyself that thou wouldest perpetually be
   mistress, and that punishment would not be inflicted on thee; and this
   thought led thee astray until thou didst not recall to mind those
   afflictions which shall befall thee.'" -- Rosenmuller.

   [226] "The apparent solecism of remembering the future may be solved by
   observing that the thing forgotten was the knowledge of the future once
   possessed, just as in common parlance we use the word hope in reference
   to the past, because we hope to find it so, or hope that something now
   questionable will prove hereafter to be thus and thus." -- Alexander.

   [227] "Ewald agrees with the English Version and the Vulgate in
   explaining it to mean propter, on account of,' and supposing it to be a
   new specific charge against the Babylonians, by assigning a new cause
   for their destruction, namely, their cultivation of the occult arts.
   Gesenius and the other recent writers follow Calvin and Vitringa in
   making it mean notwithstanding, as in Isaiah 5:25, and Numbers 14:11.
   There is then no new charge or reason assigned, but a simple
   declaration of the insufficiency of superstitious arts to save them.
   But a better course than either is to give the particle in its proper
   sense of in or in the, midst of, which suggests both the other ideas,
   but expresses more, namely, that they should perish in the very act of
   using these unlawful and unprofitable means of preservation." --
   Alexander.

   [228] "Nonobstant la multitude des derins et augures." "Notwithstanding
   the multitude of divinations and auguries."

   [229] "Ils ont defie tous dangers." "They defied all dangers."

   [230] "Jusqu' a ce que quelque oiseau soit apparu." "Till some bird is
   seen."

   [231] In the Latin original the word is "Solomon," and not "David;" but
   this oversight has been corrected in the French Version. -- Ed.

   [232] "It becomes a question whether these are called traders in the
   literal and ordinary sense, or at least in that of national allies and
   negotiators; or whether the epithet is given in contempt to the
   astrologers and wise men of the foregoing context, as trafficking or
   dealing in imposture. J. D. Michaelis supposes them to be described as
   travelling dealers, that is, pedlars and hawkers, who removed from
   place to place, lest their frauds should be discovered. He even
   compares them with the gipsy fortune-tellers of our own day, but admits
   that the astrologers of Babylonia held a very different position in
   society." -- Alexander.

   [233] "That is, wherever each person can depart, they disperse and
   wander, so that every person pursues his own road, for rescuing himself
   from danger, by fleeing to the farthest boundaries of the kingdom of
   Babylon. -- Rosenmuller.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 48
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 48:1-22

   1. Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of
   Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by
   the name of the LORD, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in
   truth, nor in righteousness.

   1. Audite hoc, domus Iacob, qui vocamini nomine Israelis, qui de aquis
   Iuda exierunt, qui jurant in nomine Iehovae, et Dei Israel recordantur,
   non in veritate, neque injustitia.

   2. For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon
   the God of Israel; The LORD of hosts is his name.

   2. Quoniam ab urbe sancta denominantur, et innituntur Deo Israel, eujus
   nomen Iehova exercituum.

   3. I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went
   forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did them suddenly, and they
   came to pass.

   3. Priora jam olim annuntiavi, ex ore meo egressa sunt; publicavi ea,
   repente feci, et venerunt.

   4. Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron
   sinew, and thy brow brass;

   4. Quia cognovi qubd durus sis, et nervus ferreus cervix tua, et frons
   tuae aenea.

   5. I have even from the beginning declared it to thee; before it came
   to pass I shewed it thee: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done
   them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath commanded them.

   5. Annuntiavi tibi jam olim; antequam venirent indicavi tibi, ne forte
   diceres, Idolum meum fecit haec, sculptile meum et conflatile meum
   praecepit ea.

   6. Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare it? I have
   shewed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou
   didst not know them.

   6. Audisti, vide omnia; et vos nonne annuntiabitis? Feci to jam nunc
   audire nova et abscondita, quae nesciebas.

   7. They are created now, and not from the beginning; even before the
   day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I
   knew them.

   7. Nunc primum creata sunt, non jam olim, neque successu temporis; non
   audieras ea; ne dicas, Ecce noveram.

   8. Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time
   that thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal very
   treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.

   8. Certe non audieras; cert, non noveras; certe non fuit pridem aperta
   auris tun; quia sciebam quod transgrediendo transgressurus esses. Ideo
   rebellem ab utero vocavi to.

   9. For my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I
   refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.

   9. Propter nomen meum differam furorera meum, et in laudera meam
   moderabor mihi erga to, ut to non succidam.

   10. Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen
   thee in the furnace of affliction.

   10. Ecce examinavi to, et non instar argenti; elegi to in fornace
   afflictionis.

   11. For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how
   should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another.

   11. Propter me, propter me faciam; nam quomodo profanabitur nomen meum?
   Et gloriam meam alteri non dabo.

   12. Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he: I am the
   first, I also am the last.

   12. Audi me, Iacob, et Israel, vocate mi. Ego ipse, ego primus; adhuc
   ego novissimis.

   13. Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right
   hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up
   together.

   13. Utique manus mea fundavit terram, et dextera mea palmo mensa est
   (vel, sustinuit) coelos. Vocate me eos, adstant (vel, adstabunt)
   pariter.

   14. All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath
   declared these things? The LORD hath loved him: he will do his pleasure
   on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.

   14. Congregamini vos omnes, et audite. Quis in eis annuntians ista?
   Iehova dilexit eum, et voluntatem ejus exequetur in Babylone, et
   brachium (vel, opus) ejus in Chaldaeis.

   15. I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought him,
   and he shall make his way prosperous.

   15. Ego, ego locutus sum, utique vocavi eum, adduxi eum; ideo prospere
   habebit in via sua.

   16. Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret
   from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the
   Lord GOD, and his Spirit, hath sent me.

   16. Accedite ad me, audite hoc. Non ab initio in abscondito locutus
   sum. Ex quo res facta est, ibi fui. Et nunc Dominus Iehova misit me, et
   Spiritus ejus.

   17. Thus saith the LORD, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the
   LORD thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the
   way that thou shouldest go.

   17. Sic dixit Iehova redemptor tuus, Sanctus Israelis. Ego Iehova Deus
   tuus, docens to utiliter; dirigens to per viam qua incedis.

   18. O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace
   been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:

   18. O si attendisses ad mandata mea! Tunc fuisset uti fluvius pax tua,
   et justitia tua ut fluctus maris.

   19. Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels
   like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor
   destroyed from before me.

   19. Fuisset ut arena semen tuum, et filii uteri ut lapilli ejus. Non
   succideretur, neque aboleretur nomen ejus a conspectu meo.

   20. Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of
   singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth;
   say ye, The LORD hath redeemed his servant Jacob.

   20. Exite e Babel, fugite a Chaldaeis. Voce exultationis annuntiate
   hoc, divulgate, efferte usque ad extremum terrae. Dicite, Redemit
   Iehova servum suum Iacob.

   21. And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he
   caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock
   also, and the waters gushed out.

   21. Itaque non sitierunt eum per solitudines duxit eos; aquam fecit
   illis fluere e petra, scidit petram, et fluxerunt aquae.

   22. There is no peace, saith the LORD, unto the wicked.

   22. Non est pax, dixit Iehova impiis.


   1. Hear this, O house of Jacob. He now addresses his discourse to the
   Jews; whom also he had chiefly in his eye, in the whole of the
   preceding chapter; for he was not sent to the Babylonians, but
   addresses them in such a manner as to wish that the Jews, to whom he
   had been especially appointed, should hear him. Accordingly, he
   foretold the destruction of the Babylonians, that the Jews might calmly
   wait for deliverance, and at the same time might not be terrified by
   the greatness and power of their enemies, [234] and that, relying on
   these promises, they might stand unmoved against all temptations. But
   because the Jews were obstinate, and did not believe those promises,
   and because Isaiah foresaw how great would be their hard-heartedness
   and obstinacy during their captivity, for that reason he reproves them
   with greater severity. Ezekiel shews still more clearly how inveterate
   was their unbelief, when they murmured against God, and cast away all
   confidence, and cared no more about the promises of God than about
   empty fables. It was not without reason, therefore, that Isaiah made
   use of such vehement language, in order to shew that they offered the
   highest insult to God by refusing to rely on his grace.

   Who are called by the name of Israel. He addresses "Israel," but that
   which was actually spurious, and which at that time had nothing more
   than the name of "Israel;" for he does not employ this honorable name
   for the sake of mentioning them in a respectful manner, but rather in
   order to put to shame their false boasting, because they had no riglit
   to glory in this empty title, from the truth of which they were widely
   estranged. Why did God honor Jacob with this name, but because he
   proved himself to be courageous and invincible in adversity? This
   appeared from that wrestling in which he contended with God; for when
   the Lord tries by various afflictions, he enters, as it were, into
   debate with us. (Genesis 32:25.) How, then, did this name apply to his
   posterity, if they were cast down and threw away all hope in adversity?

   Who have come out from the.waters of Judah. He next reproaches them
   with being descended from the holy fathers, and yet being utterly
   unlike them. By "the waters of Judah," he means metaphorically the
   source and fountain from which the Jews proceeded; for I do not approve
   of the childish attempt of the Jewish writers to explain the metaphor,
   which is borrowed in a highly natural manner from waters which flow
   from a distant place.

   Who swear by the name of Jehovah. Having censured them for being the
   degenerate and wicked children of holy fathers, he adds that they
   falsely pretend to the worship of God, and to a semblance of piety from
   which they are widely distant. Now, as "swearing" is a kind of worship
   of God, he here puts one department for the whole class, by a figure of
   speech, in which a part is taken for the whole. As idolaters offer an
   insult to God, when they swear by their idols, in like manner do the
   sincere worshippers of God render honor to God, by employing his name
   in oaths; for they acknowledge that they have one God, in whose name
   they glory. But here he attacks hypocrites who, with open mouth, loudly
   boasted of the name of God, and frequently mentioned his name, and yet
   in their hearts were greatly opposed to him. On this account he says,
   not in truth nor in righteousness, he employs the word "righteousness,"
   to denote integrity and sincerity of heart, without which nothing can
   be acceptable to God; or rather "righteousness" and "truth" are
   synonymous terms; as if he had said, that it was mere pretense and
   hypocrisy to profess that they were the people of the true God, because
   their treachery openly proclaimed their falsehood.

   2. For from the holy city they are called. He continues the same
   subject, and by different words exposes their false boasting; for they
   falsely boasted that they were the citizens of "the holy city," which
   they defiled by their vices and crimes. Jerusalem ought to have been
   "holy," for God had consecrated her to himself; but she had prostrated
   herself to iniquities, so great and so numerous, that she scarcely
   retained any holiness. We see in Psalm 15:2, and 24:4, what the true
   citizens of Jerusalem ought to be; but because the Jews were not
   ashamed of mocking God, they reckoned it enough to be protected by the
   shadow of the Temple.

   And rely on the God of Israel. When he says that they "rely on
   Jehovah," he does not speak of sincere belief, but of empty confidence;
   for, as good men rely on God, and trust him with their whole heart, so
   hypocrites falsely make pretensions to his name, and are intoxicated by
   unfounded belief, and fearlessly despise everything, and even boast
   confidently of these words, "God will assist us, he will not cast off
   his people;" as if God wished to encourage their wickedness. In a word,
   by trampling him under their feet, they loudly declare that they rely
   on themselves for safety; but, lest they should think that they will
   not be punished for this mockery, the Prophet assures them that God
   loses nothing of his authority, when he is thus misrepresented by
   hypocrites; for, when he calls him Jehovah of hosts, he adds this by
   way of threatening, that they might know that God, under whose name
   they falsely sheltered themselves, was strong enough to punish them,
   and at length would not permit them to make him the subject of mockery.

   3. Long ago have I declared the former things. He accuses the Jews of
   ingratitude, because they distrust God, who has given every possible
   proof of his goodness, in order to establish them in sincere
   confidence; and therefore he takes away from them every excuse, by
   saying, that "he declared the former things." He appears to speak not
   of their deliverance from Babylon, but of other benefits which the Lord
   had bestowed on that nation; as if he had said that God began, long
   before this, to foretell to his people what would happen, and never
   promised anything which he did not perform, and yet that his people,
   after having received so many proofs, did not place confidence in his
   certain and infallible truth.

   It may also be said, that the Prophet did not merely address those who
   lived at that time, but those who should afterwards live during the
   captivity, in order that, when this certainty arrived, they might
   consider that it had been already foretold. God intended that this
   prediction should be widely known, in order that, during their
   captivity, they might know that these things did not happen by chance,
   and that they might obtain some consolation. Isaiah therefore rebukes
   them, because, after having learned the truth of this matter from the
   event itself, still they cannot acknowledge the work of God, or place
   confidence in him.

   And justly does he severely reprove and accuse them of obstinacy; for
   they resisted God, who stretched out his hand to them, and rejected his
   grace; they did not believe that they would have liberty to return to
   Judea, and, when the way was opened up, there were very few who had
   courage to return. Some thought that it would be better to remain in
   Babylon than to undergo the annoyances and dangers of the joumey.
   Others suspected that Cyrus had made a crafty proclamation of liberty
   to return, in order that, having ascertained their dispositions, he
   might oppress them or treat them with severity; and they did not take
   into account that God had foretold these things, and that they must
   unavoidably happen, and that no power of men could prevent them.
   Accordingly, I understand those predictions of which the Prophet speaks
   so as to include, indeed, the ancient prophecies by which God foretold
   to Abraham (Genesis 15:13) that his seed would be held captive, and
   would afterwards be restored to their former freedom, but that
   afterwards, in their due order, other predictions are added, which also
   followed at different times; for this also was frequently fulfilled,
   partly at one time, and partly at another. He shews, therefore, that
   the Lord predicted nothing which was not justified by the event.

   4. For I knew that thou art obstinate. Literally it is, "On account of
   my knowing," or, "From nay knowing." Here the Lord solemnly declares by
   the Prophet, that it was on account of the hard-heartedness of the
   people that he spake of future events; as if he had said that he acted
   more liberally towards them than he ought to have done. Not that this
   was the only end which he aimed at; for we know that the chief use of
   doctrine belongs to believers, who gently submit themselves and
   cheerfully obey; but Isaiah, who had to deal with obstinate men, justly
   says that, if their depravity had not been incurable, God made use of
   an excellent remedy, by uttering many successive predictions for the
   purpose of ratifying his Law. Thus as he had foretold future events to
   the fathers, so he shews that he follows the same course, in order to
   conquer or soften the obstinacy and hard-heartedness of the people.

   And thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy forehead is of brass. He calls
   their neck "an iron sinew," because it cannot be bent. "Sinews" are
   indeed hard, but still they are capable of being bent; here, he says,
   there is no bending, because they are untameable. He next mentions "a
   brazen forehead," to denote their impudence. There are two ways by
   which we may be kept in the path of duty; first, if we are submissive
   and obey good instructions or holy commandments; and secondly, if,
   after having fallen into any sin, we are moved by sincere shame to
   repent of what we have done. When these are wanting, it is a sign of
   desperate wickedness. These are two proofs, therefore, which he has
   brought forward to shew that the nation was abandoned to everything
   that was sinful; they were refractory, and they were impudent. And yet,
   when the Lord cannot cure us in any other way, he treats even our
   perversity with such forbearance, that he is pleased to give us warning
   of future events. Thus he assumes, as it were, every possible shape, in
   order to recall us to himself, and bring us back into the right path.

   5. I foretold to thee long ago. He again repeats the same statement,
   that the people, when they had been delivered from Babylon, might
   acknowledge the kindness of God, and might not ascribe this deliverance
   to idols or to fortune. If it be asked "Why does the Prophet mention
   idols, seeing that the Jews professed the worship of one God?" I reply,
   They had been corrupted by associating with the Gentiles, and had
   degenerated into superstitions, to such an extent, that they had
   entirely forgotten God. Ezekiel complains of this, that, in the vision
   in which he appeared to be carried to Jerusalem, he beheld the
   sanctuary of God polluted by various idols. (Ezekiel 8:3.) Not without
   reason, therefore, does he recall them to God as the only author of
   these events, that they may acknowledge that he has redeemed them.

   Lest, perhaps, thou shouldest say. He means that the Jews will be
   inexcusable, if they do not acknowledge the kindness of God, when they
   shall have been emancipated from slavery; for what had been long ago
   foretold would not have happened by chance. God's foreknowledge is
   therefore connected by the Prophet with his power; and he declares that
   he not only foresaw, but likewise accomplished these events. Here then,
   as in a mirror, we behold the wicked exercise of our understanding,
   which always contrives in what way it shall rob God of the praise which
   is due to him. Whenever he either assists us, or in any way is kind to
   us, he may be said to stretch out his hand and invite us to himself.

   Yet the world, as if it purposely designed to make resistance, ascribes
   to others what has proceeded from God; as we see that in Popery all
   God's benefits are attributed to dead saints, in such a manner as if
   God were sleeping a deep sleep. It is therefore necessary that the lamp
   of doctrine should shine, in order to regulate our judgment; for, in
   considering the works of God, we shall always go astray, if he do not
   go before and enlighten us by his word. But even now we find in many
   persons what Isaiah deplores in his nation, that, even after having
   been warned, they do not cease to make idols for themselves, which they
   clothe with the spoils taken from God. Peter and John loudly declared
   (Acts 3:12) that it was not by their own merits or excellence that they
   performed their miracles; but we see how the Papists load them with
   miracles against their will, and in spiteof their resistance. Although
   God does not now foretell the events which shall happen, yet the
   doctrine of the Law and of the Gospel will tend as powerfully to
   condemn our ingratitude as if the prophecies had attested those works
   of which God there declares himself to be the author.

   6. Thou hast heard. This makes it still more clear that the Prophet
   speaks of a future captivity, and of the redemption by which it should
   be followed; thus intending to make provision for the advantage both of
   the men of his own time and of posterity, that, if they who then lived
   received no benefit, at least posterity might take warning and repent.
   It frequentlyhappens, that the doctrine of the prophets produces little
   effect on those who see and hear, and sometimes is even treated by them
   with contempt, while posterity receive it with better dispositions.

   See all. When he bids them see, some think that the Prophet exhibits
   the event in such a manner as if he had said, that God had spoken
   nothing which had not been made evident to be true. But I give a
   different interpretation of this word chzh, (chazeh,) see, in this
   manner: "Seeing that the Lord hath spoken, it is thy duty to examine
   the words, and to give attention." Hence we ought to observe, that it
   is owing to our sluggishness or indolence that we immediately lose
   those things which proceed from the mouth of God, and that in vain do
   many persons hold out the pretext of ignorance; because the Lord
   reveals clearly enough all that is necessary to be known, if they who
   hear would examine it carefully, and with due attention.

   And will ye not declare it? The Lord next demands something more from
   his people than to understand and consider his word; that is, that they
   may be a herald and witness of the miracles which they have known by
   experience. And, indeed, he instructs his people on this condition,
   that they shall afterwards lead others to the same confession of faith.
   Even now have I made thee to hear As if he had said, "Observe this day,
   on which the Lord foretells to thee, by my mouth, those things which
   thou didst not know; for these things cannot be perceived or foreseen
   by human conjecture."

   7. Now for the first time have they been created. The Prophet shews
   that he is not reasoning about things that are known, or that have been
   learned by actual experience; and his object is, not merely to correct
   that haughtiness which is natural to all men, (for they claim for
   themselves what belongeth to God alone,) but likewise that no part of
   this event may be ascribed to fortune or to any other cause. In various
   ways do men rob God of the glory that is due to him, and direct all
   their faculties towards distributing among the creatures that which
   belongs to Him alone, so as to leave Him nothing but a bare and empty
   name. That the people might not think that they had been vanquished by
   the power of the Babylonians, or that it was by human strength or by
   chance that they were afterwards restored to liberty, on this account
   he so frequently repeats and reiterates, that this is the work of God.

   Thou hadst not heard those things. When he affirms that "they had not
   heard them," some explain this to mean that the people rejected God's
   warnings, and did not listen to good counsels. But I think that the
   Prophet's meaning was different, namely, that what could not be known
   by human sagacity, and what had been unknown to the Jews, has been
   revealed in such a manner that they cannot defraud the Holy Spirit of
   the praise which is due to him; and this is very evident from the
   context.

   8. I knew that by transgressing thou wouldest transgress. By these
   words the Lord means that it is not without good reason that he so
   earnestly persuades and entreats the people to acknowledge that it was
   by him that they were chastised and afterwards delivered from so great
   distresses. The rebelliousness of that people might have prompted them
   to complain that it was useless to repeat this so often, and to press
   it on their attention. The Prophet replies, that men need not wonder at
   it, because he has to deal with obstinate men; and thus he confirms by
   different words what he said a little before about "the iron sinew of
   their neck." (Ver. 4.) The meaning amounts to this, that the
   forwardness of that nation was well known to God, and that consequently
   he left nothing undone which was fitted to retain those who were
   attached to his service; and that, having received abundant evidence
   from undoubted proofs, they were so much the more inexcusable.

   Therefore have I called thee a rebel from the womb. After having torn
   off the mask from this nation, which, as we formerly saw, falsely
   boasted of the name of Israel, he gives them a new name, and calls them
   "rebels." By the "womb" I understand to be meant, not their first
   origin when they began to be reckoned a nation, but the time when they
   were delivered from the bondage of Egypt; for that deliverance might be
   regarded as a sort of nativity of the Church. (Exodus 12:51.) But the
   people, though they had experienced the infinite goodness of God, did
   not cease to act treacherously towards him, and transgressed more and
   more, so that he justly calls them "rebels and transgressors."

   9. For my name's sake. After having reproached the people with that
   malice which was natural to their fathers from the beginning, and which
   had passed down to children and grandchildren, he now reminds them that
   it is owing to his mercy that they survive, but that otherwise they
   would have deserved a thousand times to perish. This warning served two
   purposes; first, believers needed to be supported, that during their
   captivity they might not lose courage; and secondly, when they had
   received permission to return, it was not of less importance that they
   should be humbled, that they might acknowledge that they were indebted
   for their deliverance to nothing else than God's undeserved goodness.

   So as not to cut thee off. Hence we see that the object of the
   preceding remonstrance was, that the people might know that it is not
   owing to their merit that the Lord stretches out his hand to bring them
   out of the grave of Babylon; for they deserved to be utterly ruined.
   Consequently, that the Lord now spares us also, that he mitigates or
   remits punishment, and, in a word, that he pays any attention to us,
   all this is entirely the result of his grace; so that we ought not to
   ascribe it to any merits or satisfactions of men. And thus, as we have
   formerly explained at other passages, the distinction made by the
   Sophists falls to the ground, as to the remission of punishment which
   they refuse to admit to be undeserved, because satisfaction is made to
   the justice of God. But here Isaiah declares that remission is made by
   free grace "for God's name's sake;" for he speaks of punishment which
   he might justly have inflicted on the Jews. He had the justest cause
   for destroying this nation, if he had not determined to defend his
   glory

   10. Lo, I have tried thee. The Lord shews that he exercises such
   moderation in chastising his people, that he makes provision for their
   salvation. Formerly he had said that he had spared or would spare them,
   because he had regard to his glory. He now declares that he does indeed
   lay stripes upon them, but of such a nature as to be serviceable to
   them; for it is for the purpose of "proving and trying" that he
   chastises them, and we "prove" that which we do not wish to be lost.
   Since therefore he has this end in view, it follows that he makes
   provision for our salvation. Besides, it is by way of anticipation that
   he mentions the "trial," lest any one should object that God's
   forbearance did not, at all appear amidst such severe afflictions. The
   Prophet therefore comes forward early to meet this objection, and
   points out that, although God does not permit his people altogether to
   go free, yet he deals gently with them.

   And not like silver. He adds that he does not "try us like silver,"
   because we should be altogether consumed; for "silver" contains
   something that is pure, but in us nothing will be found but chaff; and
   even if God did not make us "silver," we should be reduced, like chaff
   or stubble, to ashes and to nothing. Chastisement itself would
   undoubtedly bring out nothing that is pure. Accordingly, in the very
   "trial" the Lord considers what we can endure, so as not to proceed
   beyond measure; and, at the same time, by the secret influence of his
   Spirit, he makes those punishments to be profitable to us which would
   otherwise have been destruction.

   I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction. To "choose" means here
   to "distinguish." We "choose" that which we desire to preserve and
   defend, as he formerly said in the same sense,

   "to choose the good and refuse the bad." (Isaiah 7:15.)

   By this word, therefore, he shews how wide is the difference between
   the punishment which is inflicted on good men and that which wicked men
   endure, and which ends in their destruction. We, on the other hand,
   though the Lord bums and pierces us, are accepted by him; and he
   retains his kindness toward us in the midst of afflictions, and even
   causes us to come out of them more fully tried, and to be to him a
   sacrifice of good savor. In a word, he means that God, even when he
   appears to abandon his people to destruction, is still gracious to
   them.

   11. For my own sake. He repeats the same statement which he had
   formerly made, but adds a question, such as Hebrew writers are wont to
   employ, when they speak of what is absurd, "Is it possible that my name
   should be profaned?"

   And I will not give my glory to another. This second clause is added
   for the purpose of exposition; and therefore Isaiah, by multiplying the
   forms of expression, now adorns that which he had formerly expressed in
   a few words, and elevates his style. Nor is it a mere explanation of
   the former statement, but rather an adornment in order to confirm it
   the more. By these words he means that men do all that lies in their
   power to "profane the name of God," and to convey "his glory to
   another," but that the Lord, by his wonderful providence, meets this
   evil, and causes his glory to remain unabated. Although, therefore, by
   our fault we abandon the glory of God, yet he will preserve it, while
   he shall be our protector. Hence we derive wonderful consolation, that
   God connects our salvation with his own glory, as we have already
   pointed out on other passages.

   I will not give. That is, "I will not suffer my glory to be taken from
   me." This would have happened, if the God of Israel had been mocked on
   account of the ruin and destruction of the people; as wicked men, when
   the people of God were oppressed, were wont to taunt them with
   blasphemies of this sort, "Where is their God?" (Psalm 79:10.) Moses
   also assigned a familar reason why the Lord was unwilling to destroy
   the whole nation. "Lest perhaps," says he, "their enemies should claim
   it for themselves, and say, It is our lofty hand, and not the Lord,
   that hath done all this." (Deuteronomy 32:27.) And indeed, when the
   Lord, by exhibiting tokens of his anger, strikes terror into believers,
   there remains no refuge but this, that he will remember his adoption,
   so as not to expose his sacred name to the curses of wicked men. Nor
   did the Prophet, by these words, merely exhort his people to gratitude,
   that they might acknowledge that it was exclusively through the grace
   of God that they were preserved; but he held out to believers a ground
   of supplication, and a shield by which they might resist despair. [235]

   12. Hearken to me, O Jacob. We have formerly explained the reason why
   the Lord declares his eternity. It is, that we may know that he is
   always like himself, and that we may not measure him by our capacity.
   He bids us "hearken to him;" because we are led into errors and are
   carried away by false opinions, in consequence of refusing to lend our
   ears to him.

   And Israel, my called. When he says that "Israel has been called by
   him," he indirectly contrasts this statement with the reprobation
   mentioned by him at the beginning of the chapter; for he shewed that
   the Jews falsely assumed this name, and idly gloried in it, inasmuch as
   they did not prove themselves to be true Israelites. Here, on the
   contrary, he affirms that "Israel is his called." Just as if a father,
   in rebuking his son, should call him a bastard, and yet should
   afterwards acknowledge him to be his son, so the Lord shews that the
   Jews are so greatly degenerated that he might justly reject them, but
   that, although they do not deserve so high an honor as to belong to his
   family, still he pays regard to his calling, which no ingratitude or
   wickedness of men can set aside.

   I, even I. In this passage the particle 'ph (aph,) even, denotes
   continuance; for he lays down nothing else than that God is always like
   himself, and does not, like men, undergo change or alter his counsel.
   (Romans 3:3, 4; 11:29.) On this account he says that he is the first
   and the last. [236] But here it ought also to be observed, that Isaiah
   does not speak of God's eternal essence, but applies this doctrine to
   our use, that we may know that he will be to us the same that he has
   always been, and next, that we may remember to distinguish him from
   idols, lest our understandings, led away by extravagant inventions,
   should fall off from the fear of him.

   13. Surely my hand hath founded the earth. Here the Prophet explains
   more clearly what he meant in the preceding verse. After having spoken
   of God's constant and unvarying will toward us, he likewise praises
   God's power as manifested by the works which we daily behold. In these
   works the Lord may be said to present himself to our view; and, coming
   forth from his sanctuary, he approaches to us by means of them.

   And my right hand hath measured, or, hath upheld the heavens. Whether
   we translate tphchh (tippechah,) "Hath measured," or, "Hath upheld,"
   the meaning will be the same; and we need not give ourselves much
   trouble about the interpretation of the word. By the word "measure" is
   denoted God's amazing wisdom in having adjusted on all sides, with such
   exact proportion, the vast extent of the heavens, so that it is neither
   nearer to the earth nor farther from it than is advantageous for
   preserving order, and that in this prodigious expanse there is nothing
   jarring or unseemly. If we prefer the word "uphold," this also is an
   extraordinary commendation of the wisdom and power of God, in
   "upholding" the huge mass of the heavens in continual motion, so that
   it neither totters nor leans more to one side than to another.

   When I call them, they stand up, or, shall stand up together. This
   latter clause, in which he says that all things are ready at, his
   command, is attended by some greater difficulty; for it may refer
   either to the first creation or to the continual government of the
   world. If we refer it to the first creation, the future ymdv
   (yagnamdu,) they shall stand, will be put for a preterite. "As soon as
   the Lord commanded them to appear, they instantly obeyed;" as the
   Psalmist says, "He spake, and they were done." (Psalm 33:9.) But if we
   adopt this meaning, the word equally, which he adds, may appear not to
   agree well with the history of the creation as related by Moses; for
   heaven and earth were not created and beautified at one moment, but at
   first everything was shapeless and confused, and afterwards the Lord
   reduced them to order. (Genesis 1:2-6.) The answer is easy; for the
   Prophet means nothing more than that the Lord, by the mere expression
   of his will, created all things, and gave to heaven and earth their
   form, so that they immediately obeyed his command.

   Yet I willingly extend it to the continual government of the world; as
   if he had said, "Heaven and earth yield to the authority of the Lord
   and obey his voice, and those bodies which are at the greatest distance
   from each other move of their own accord with astonishing harmony, as
   if they were carried about by the same motion of a wheel. Though heaven
   is separated from the earth by a wide space, yet the voice of the Lord
   is everywhere heard, he needs no messengers to convey his will, but by
   the slightest expression he executes everything at the very moment." Is
   there any prince who has his servants everywhere rendering to him
   instant obedience? Certainly not. Thus, the power of God is infinite,
   is diffused far and wide, and extends to every part of the world, as
   Scripture declares, (Psalm 47:2,) and as we learn by the instructions
   of faith.

   14. Assemble, all of you, and hear. There can be no doubt that the
   Prophet addresses the Jews, though here he utters nothing that ought
   not to be acknowledged by all. But because unbelieving and irreligious
   men have no ears, on this account he does not invite them to "hear." We
   know that the Jews enjoyed this privilege above other nations, that God
   revealed himself to them. (Psalm 147:19, 20; Romans 3:2.) "God is known
   in Judea," says the Psalmist,: his name is great in Israel." (Psalm
   126:1.) So much the less excusable was either their slothfulness or
   their obstinacy, in paying scarcely any regard to their own prosperity.
   Whence arose their great levity or proneness to revolt, but from their
   undervaluing or despising the inestimable treasure of heavenly
   doctrine? They therefore deserved to be sharply and severely rebuked by
   the Prophet, who now exclaims against them, indirectly remarking that
   they wickedly and perversely agree among themselves to cast into the
   shade the grace of God.

   Who among them foretelleth those things? Here God appears to permit the
   Jews to bring forward publicly any objection which they can make, as
   those who trust to the goodness of their cause venture to taunt their
   adversaries: "Produce thy arguments; if thou possessest any acuteness,
   shew it." Of his own accord, therefore, he makes an attack upon them,
   and gives them permission to shew, if they can find any argument to
   that effect, that such things were foretold by the gods of the
   Gentiles. We may also extend it to the diviners and augurs, who claimed
   for themselves the knowledge of future events, and who could not at all
   foresee such things. With the same view he will repeat what follows in
   the next verse, "It is I, it is I who have spoken." The object of the
   whole is to shew that the Jews waver, and even fall away, in
   consequence of not estimating sufficiently how extraordinary a blessing
   it is to learn from the sacred mouth of God all that is necessary for
   their salvation.

   Jehovah hath loved him, and he shall execute his pleasure on Babylon.
   He points out a single instance, that God had now deigned to foretell
   to them the end of their captivity in Babylon. Cyrus is not named by
   him as the dispenser of this favor, but, as if he were speaking of a
   man who was known and ascertained, he says, without mentioning the
   name, that God has chosen him to take Babylon by force. The word loved
   is not employed in an absolute sense, but pros ti; with reference to a
   particular object; and therefore it is limited to the successful result
   of the expedition. In like manner Saul, with reference to a particular
   object, was dear to God, so that he reigned for a time, and was even
   endued with the gift of prophecy. (1 Samuel 10:10.) The case is
   different with believers, whom God has embraced with an unchangeable
   love, and whom he never permits to fall away from him. He intimates
   that Cyrus will take Babylon by force, in consequence of having
   undertaken this work by God's appointment and direction, not indeed
   intentionally on his part, but in such a manner as God makes even the
   ignorant and blind to go where he pleases, or compels them against
   their will to yield obedience; for the Prophet does not applaud Cyrus
   for voluntary obedience, but rather magnifies the providence of God, by
   which he leads all men to execute his counsel.

   And his arm. [237] Some read the word "arm" in the nominative, and
   others in the accusative case; but it makes little difference as to the
   meaning. Arm may here be taken for "work," and in a metaphorical sense;
   and thus the passage will read more smoothly. "He will execute his
   counsel on Babylon, his work on the Babylonians;" for we know that it
   is a distinguishing peculiarity in the style of the prophets to join
   together "the work of the Lord" and his "counsel." Indirectly he
   reproaches the Jews with their ingratitude in refusing to believe the
   promises of God, though he points out the event, as it were, with the
   finger, and speaks in a very different manner from that in which either
   diviners or false gods are accustomed to speak. In a word, he wishes to
   convince the Jews that, the taking of Babylon by storm shall be "the
   work of the Lord," under whose direction Cyrus shall execute it, in
   order that the Church may at length be delivered.

   15. Therefore he shall prosper in his way. He again reminds the Jews of
   the predictions, and claims for God this honor, that, by foretelling
   the event in due time, he has removed all doubt; and next he adds, that
   all that had been foretold shall be accomplished. Accordingly, in the
   repetition of the pronoun, It is I, it is I who have spoken, there is a
   double emphasis; first, tlmt none but the God of Israel hath spoken
   about future and hidden events, and secondly, that, because he is
   faithful and never deceives, all the events which he has foretold shall
   undoubtedly take place. Accordingly, in the last clause of the verse I
   consider the copulative v (vau) to mean therefore. Here Isaiah has two
   objects in view; first, that the captive Jews may expect deliverance,
   and secondly, that, after having been delivered, they may acknowledge
   God to be the author of so valuable a blessing, and may not imagine
   that it took place either by the assistance of men or by chance.

   Surely I have called him, I have conducted him. He declares that
   everything shall go prosperously with Cyrus, because Jehovah "hath
   called him;" not that he deserved so high a favor, or obtained it by
   his own industry or power, but because the Lord was pleased to employ
   the agency of Cyrus in delivering his people. As to his calling him
   beloved in the preceding verse, and now saying that he has been "called
   and conducted," I explained a little before that this cannot refer to
   the love of God, by which he adopts us to be his children and calls us
   to himself; for in this sense Cyrus was not "beloved" or "called."
   Though he was endowed with great virtues, yet he was stained by very
   great vices, ambition and the lust of power, avarice, cruelty, and
   other vices; and his lamentable end shewed what kind of person he was.
   The Prophet therefore means that God was favorable to Cyrus, so as to
   bestow upon him an external blessing, but not so as to adopt him, and
   to impart to him that grace which he bestows on the elect. We must
   consider the reason why he calls him by these names. It is because he
   makes use of the agency of Cyrus for delivering the Church, as we have
   already explained.

   16. Draw near to me, hear this. He again addresses the Jews, and, by
   bidding them draw near, goes out, as it were, to meet them, and to
   receive them kindly. Yet at the same time he indirectly glances at
   their revolt, shewing that they would not be capable of receiving sound
   doctrine, if they did not withdraw from error. It was no small crime
   that they were so far removed from God, to whom they ought to have been
   united in a friendly manner. They were at a great distance from him,
   not as to space, but as to the agreement of the heart. The "drawing
   near," therefore, means that we should lay aside our natural
   dispositions and be ready to hear him. And this must proceed from his
   grace; for we can never be prepared to do this, if he do not lead us to
   himself.

   Not from the beginning have I spoken in secret. Commentators explain
   this passage in various ways. Many apply it to Christ, though the
   Prophet meant no such thing; but we ought to guard against violent and
   forced interpretations. Others explain it as relating to the Prophet
   himself, but that is not more suitable; for this discourse would not be
   applicable to a man. I think, therefore, that Isaiah introduces God as
   speaking, in order to reproach the people with ingratitude, because
   "from the beginning," that is, from the time that he began to reveal
   himself to their fathers, he did not speak obscurely or secretly. Hence
   it follows, that all the ignorance that was in them ought to be
   ascribed to their depravity, because of their own accord they forsook
   the light.

   From the time that it was done, I was there. When he says that he was
   present at the time that the event occurred, the meaning is, that what
   he had uttered with his mouth was carried into execution by his
   strength and by his power. Justly, therefore, does he affirm that he
   gave tokens of his presence, when, by accomplishing all things, he not
   only proved the truth of the predictions by the event itself, but
   shewed that those things which are supposed to be accidental are
   governed by his authority. In a word, he mentions the ancient promises
   of God and the fulfillment of them, in order to shew that God will
   always be like himself. Those who say that Isaiah will be present in
   spirit, when the Lord shall bring back his people, torture the
   Prophet's words, and produce nothing that agrees with his meaning.

   And now Jehovah hath sent me. Isaiah now begins to speak of himself,
   and applies this statement to the preceding doctrine, and testifies
   that that God, who hath spoken from the beginning, now speaketh by him,
   and consequently that we ought to believe those things which God now
   speaketh by him, in the same manner as if he were visibly present.
   Hence we ought to draw a useful doctrine, namely, that all the miracles
   which the Lord has performed ought to be brought to our remembrance,
   that we may confirm his truth in our hearts. It is no slight argument,
   that the Lord had from the beginning a distinct people, whom he taught,
   to whom he made sure promises, and to whom he performed those promises,
   and whom he never deceived, even in the smallest matter; for all things
   were performed and fulfilled in due time. Whenever, therefore, any
   doubt arises, we ought to betake ourselves to these examples, "God hath
   always assisted his people; not now, for the first time, hath he spoken
   to them, and he did not deceive his people by words which were dark or
   ambiguous, but spoke plainly and clearly." Thus the Prophet declares
   that he brings forward nothing of his own, but that he was sent by God,
   who has proved himself to be faithful.

   And his Spirit. He mentions "the Spirit," not as if he meant something
   different from God, because he is of the same essence with him; for in
   one essence of God we acknowledge Three Persons; but he names "The
   Spirit," because He is the only teacher and director of all the
   prophets. Paul says, that "no man can say that Jesus is Christ, but by
   the Spirit," and a little after he says that "the gifts of God are
   various, but that it is one and the same Spirit who worketh all things
   in all." (1 Corinthians 12:3, 6.) This passage is also a clear proof of
   the divinity of the Spirit, since the prophets are sent by him; for it
   belongs to God alone to send them, as it is by the authority of the
   prince alone that ambassadors are sent; and since the Spirit does this,
   -- since he directs them, and gives to them power and efficacy,
   unquestionably he is God.

   From this passage we learn also, that they who have not this direction
   of the Spirit, though they boast of having been sent by God, ought to
   be rejected; such as those Popish bands of wolves which glory in the
   name of pastors and teachers, and impudently boast of their mission,
   though they are altogether opposed to the Spirit of God, and to his
   doctrine. In vain do they boast of having been sent or authorized by
   God, when they are not adorned with the gifts of the Spirit, which are
   necessary for the execution of such an office. To pretend to having the
   inspiration of the Spirit, while they are entirely destitute of faith,
   and have not even the slightest spark of doctrine, is excessively
   disgusting. Let us suppose an assembly of mitred bishops, the greater
   part of whom are known to be ignorant, and among three hundred of whom
   there shall scarcely be found ten who have a moderate share of the
   rudiments of piety; what could be more foolish than for such an
   assembly to boast of being governed by "the Spirit?"

   17. Thus saith Jehovah. I connect this verse with the four following
   verses, because they relate to the same subject, and because in them
   the Lord promises deliverance to his people, but in such a manner as
   first to shew that it was through their own fault that they were
   reduced to slavery; that is, that the people might not murmur and
   object that it would have been better to be kept in their native
   country, if the Lord wished to assist them, than to be carried away and
   brought back; for physicians who cure a disease which they might have
   prevented, are held to be less entitled to thanks. The Prophet
   therefore meets this, and says that this befell the people through
   their own fault, and that they might have escaped this destruction, if
   they had attended to the commandments of the Lord. He shews, therefore,
   that this was a just reward of the wickedness of the people; for it was
   not the Lord who had formerly prevented the people from enjoying
   prosperity, but they had rejected his grace. And yet he declares that
   the Lord will go beyond this wickedness by his goodness, because he
   will not suffer his people to perish, though he afflict them for a
   time.

   Teaching thee profitably. He means that God's "teaching" is such that
   it might keep the people safe and sound, if they would only rest upon
   it. Now, the Lord "teaches," not for his own sake, but in order to
   promote our salvation; for what profit could we yield to him? It is
   therefore by "teaching" that he makes provision for the advantage of
   each of us, that, having been instructed by it, we may enjoy
   prosperity. But since, through our ingratitude, we reject the benefit
   that is freely offered to us, what remains but that we shall miserably
   perish? Justly, therefore, does Isaiah reproach the Jews that, if they
   had not defrauded themselves of the benefit of teaching, nothing that
   was profitable for their salvation would have been hidden from them.
   And if these things were said of the Law, that the Lord, by means of
   it, "taught his people profitably," what shall we say of the Gospel, in
   which everything that is profitable for us is very fully explained?
   [238]

   Hence, also, it is manifest, how shocking is the blasphemy of the
   Papists who say that the reading of the Holy Scripture is dangerous and
   hurtful, in order to terrify unlearned persons [239] from reading it.
   Shall they then accuse God of falsehood, who declares, by the mouth of
   the Prophet, that it is "profitable?" Do they wish us to believe them
   rather than God? Though they impudently vomit out their blasphemies, we
   certainly ought not to be dissuaded from the study of it; for we shall
   learn by actual experience with what truthfulness Isaiah spoke, if we
   treat the Holy Scriptures with piety and reverence.

   Leading thee. These words shew more clearly the profitableness which
   was mentioned a little before. He means that the way of salvation is
   pointed out to us, if we hearken to God when he speaks; for he is ready
   to become our guide during the whole course of our life, if we will
   only obey him. In this manner Moses testifies that he "set before the
   people life and death." (Deuteronomy 30:19.) Again, it is said, (Isaiah
   30:21,) "This is the way, walk ye in it;" for the rule of a holy life
   is contained in the Law, which cannot deceive. "I command thee," says
   Moses, "that thou love the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways, and keep
   his commandments and statutes and judgments, that thou mayest live and
   be multiplied, and that the Lord may bless thee in the land which thou
   goest to possess." (Deuteronomy 30:16.) In a word, they who
   submissively yield obedience are not destitute either of counsel or of
   the light of understanding.

   18. O if thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! As the people might
   complain of being carried into captivity, the Prophet, intending to
   meet those murmurs, points out the cause, which was, that they did not
   submit to the doctrine of salvation, and did not allow themselves to
   derive any advantage from it. He undoubtedly alludes to the song of
   Moses, in which very nearly the same form of expression occurs, "O that
   they were wise, and that they understood!" (Deuteronomy 32:29.) lv'
   (lu) denotes a wish, O if! or, Would that!

   Not only does the Lord expostulate with the Jews for having disregarded
   the advantage, or "profitableness," (verse 17,) which was offered to
   them, but like a father, he deplores the wretchedness of his children;
   for he takes no pleasure in our distresses, and is not severe, unless
   when we constrain him by our wickedness. This is therefore a figurative
   appropriation of human affections, by which God compassionates the ruin
   of those who chose rather to perish of their own accord than to be
   saved; for he was ready to bestow blessings of every kind, if we did
   not drive him away by our obstinacy. Yet it would be foolish to attempt
   to penetrate into his secret counsel, and to inquire why he did not add
   the efficacy of the Spirit to the external word; for nothing is said
   here about his power, but there is only a reproof of the
   hard-heartedness of men, that they may be rendered inexcusable.
   Certainly, whenever God invites us to himself, there is clearly laid
   before us, in his word, complete happiness, which we wickedly reject.

   Then would thy peace have been as a river. The word peace, as we have
   formerly explained, [240] denotes all prosperous events. It is as if he
   had said, "The richest plenty of spiritual blessings would have flowed
   to thee abundantly, and thou wouldst have had no occasion to dread any
   change; because the blessing of God upon believers is never dried up.

   And thy righteousness as the waves of the sea. We might explain
   righteousness, which he connects with peace, to mean what is expressed
   by the familiar phrase (ton bon droict) "thy right." But I choose
   rather to understand by the word "Righteousness" a well regulated
   commonwealth, in which everything is administered in a regular and
   orderly manner; as if he had said, "Thou wouldest have had everything
   well conducted at home, and wouldest have had plenty and abundance of
   all things." And properly does he connect this condition with "peace;"
   for when government is overtumed, everything goes wrong and is out of
   order, and it is utterly impossible that we shall enjoy "peace," if
   there be not "righteousness," that is, a just and equitable
   administration of affairs. If, therefore, we are desirous of "peace,"
   let us likewise wish to have that blessed condition on which the Lord
   bestows his blessing. Here some commentators speculate about spiritual
   "righteousness," and the forgiveness of sins; but they wander far from
   the Prophet's meaning, which is plain and obvious.

   19. Thy seed would have been as the sand. This also relates to a happy
   life, when progeny is multiplied, by whose aid the labors of the old
   are alleviated, and which "resists the adversaries in the gate." The
   Psalmist compares such children to "arrows shot by a strong hand," and
   pronounces him to be "blessed who hath his quiver full of them;" that
   is, who has a large number of such children. (Psalm 127:4, 5.)

   When he mentions sand, he appears to allude to the promise which was
   made to Abraham,

   "I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which
   is on the sea-shore." (Genesis 22:17.)

   And he repeats the same sentiment in various words; according to the
   usage of the Hebrew writings, substituting children for "seed," and
   small stones for "sand." In a word, he shews that the people prevented
   God from causing them to enjoy the fruit of that promise.

   His name would not have been cut off. Coming down to the interruption
   of this favor, he next reproaches them in more direct terms with having
   sought for dispersion, after having been miraculously collected by the
   hand of God; for by the word name he means the lawful condition of the
   people, which would always have flourished, if the blessing had not
   been tumed aside front its course. What he says about the people having
   been "cut off," must be understood to refer to the land of Canaan, from
   which the people of God had been cast out, and thus appeared to have
   been thrust out of their Father's house; for the Temple, of which they
   were deprived, was a symbol of God's presence, and the land itself was
   a pledge or earnest of a blessed inheritance. Being driven into
   captivity, therefore, the people appeared to have been cut off and
   banished from the presence of God, and had no token of the divine
   assistance, if the Lord had not soothed their affliction by those
   promises. Now, we ought carefully to observe this distress, that, when
   they had been banished into a distant country, they had no temple, or
   sacrifices, or religious assemblies; for they who in the present day
   have no form of a Church, [241] no use of sacraments, and no
   administration of the word, ought to look upon themselves as being in
   some measure cast out from the presence of God, and should learn to
   desire, and continually to ask by earnest prayer, the restoration of
   the Church.

   20. Go out of Babylon. This is the second clause of this remonstrance,
   in which the Lord solemnly declares that he will be the Redeemer of his
   people, though they have been unworthy and ungrateful. After having
   declared that he performed the office of a good teacher, but that the
   people refused to hearken to him, so that by their own fault they drew
   down on themselves the punishment of captivity, he now declares his
   unwearied forbearance, by adding that he will still assist them, in
   order to bring them out of slavery. He therefore commands them to go
   out of the land of Babylon, in which they were captives. Hence we see
   that God, in his unspeakable goodness, though he has just cause to
   remonstrate with us, yet relieves our afflictions, and assists those
   who had been unworthy, and even who had insolently rejected his grace.

   With the voice ofrejoicing. This relates to the confirmation of the
   deliverance, for he intended to give assurance to a promise which was
   altogether incredible. In order, therefore, to remove all doubt, he
   employed lofty language in extolling this blessing.

   Tell it. He describes the strength of that confidence by which he
   wished to encourage the Jews; for we are wont to utter loudly and
   boldly those things of which we are certain, and, if we have any doubt,
   we scarcely venture to speak, and are dumb. Isaiah speaks of a future
   event as if it had actually arrived, that the people might cherish in
   their hearts greater and stronger confidence He makes use of the
   imperative mood, which is much more forcible, and produces a more
   powerful impression on our minds, than if he had expressed his meaning
   in plain terms.

   21. Therefore they thirsted not. Because the Jews did not see the way
   opened up for their return, and because great and dangerous
   wildernesses intervened, the Prophet asserts the power of God, and
   brings forward examples of it, that they may not be terrified by any
   difficulty. He therefore bids them consider whether or not God had
   sufficient power to rescue their fathers from the slavery of Egypt, and
   to lead them through desolate wildernesses, in which he supplied them
   with food and water and everything that was necessary for them. (Exodus
   16 and 17; Numbers 20.) Here the Jews, according to their custom,
   contrive absurd fables, and invent miracles which were never performed;
   and they do this, not through ignorance, but through presumption, by
   which anything that is plausible, though there be no ground whatever
   for it, easily gains their support.

   The design of the Prophet was to recall to their remembrance the former
   departure from Egypt, and the miracles which the Lord performed at that
   time, which we have already remarked to be customary with the Prophets,
   when they wish to extol in lofty terms the works of God. Thus David,
   when he was celebrating the victories which he had obtained, says that

   "the mountains trembled and flowed down, that the air was cleft
   asunder, and that the Lord was seen from heaven,"
   (Psalm 18:7,)

   though nothing of this kind ever happened to him; but he imitates the
   description of the deliverance from Egypt, in order to shew that God,
   who was the author of it, had also been his supporter and leader in
   conquering his enemies, and that the power of God ought not to be less
   acknowledged in his victory than in those signs and wonders.

   In like manner the Prophet wishes that the people should now
   contemplate those miracles, in order to correct their unbelief, and
   that they may not be tempted by any distrust. The holy servants of God
   were always accustomed to cast their eyes on that deliverance, in order
   that, by the remembrance of so great a benefit, they might strengthen
   the hearts of all in hope and confidence; as we have formerly said that
   it was the duty of believers in every age to expect the fruit of this
   redemption, that the Lord, by uninterrupted progress, might be the
   guardian of a redeemed people. Thus Isaiah means that the Lord will
   easily surmount every obstacle, will open up a way which is shut, and
   will supply them abundantly with water, so that they shall not die of
   thirst, in the same manner as he formerly brought water out of rock by
   an extraordinary miracle, when the people thought that their condition
   was hopeless; and consequently, that there is no reason why they should
   despair of their return, if they wish to contemplate, and cordially to
   believe, that power of God which they have already experienced.

   22. There is no peace, saith Jehovah to the wicked. These words, "saith
   the Lord," are included by some commentators in a parenthesis; but we
   view them as having this connection with what goes before, that the
   Lord denies to wicked men that "peace" of which they are unworthy.
   [242] And this is expressly added, that hypocrites might not, according
   to their custom, cherish false confidence in these promises; for he
   declares that the promises do not belong to them, in order to shut them
   out altogether from the hope of salvation. But Isaiah appears also to
   have had his eye on something else; for, since the greater part of the
   people, under the influence of impiety, rejected this blessing, many
   weak and feeble persons might hesitate and might be terrified by the
   opinion of the multitude; [243] as in our own day we see feeble
   consciences disturbed, when they see the greater part of men despise
   the doctrine of salvation. Beholding many persons placed in danger, he
   tums away their minds from such a temptation, that they may not be
   troubled by the multitude of wicked and unbelieving men, who reject the
   grace of God and this prosperous condition, but that, without paying
   any regard to those men, they may embrace and enjoy this benefit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [234] "De leurs ennemis."

   [235] "Mais pareillement a mis une priere en la bouche, et un bouclier
   au bras des fideles pour resister a la tentation." "But at the same
   time put a prayer into the mouth, and a shield on the arms, of
   believers, for resisting temptation."

   [236] That is, his nature is eternal, he depends on none, he is the
   beginning and end of all things, as in Isaiah 41 4; 44:6." --
   Rosenmuller.

   [237] "And his arm shall be seen (or shall be visible) in the land of
   the Babylonians.' Here he speaks of Cyrus." -- Jarchi.
   "Others, without supplying v, (beth,) suppose that this phrase contains
   an aposiopesis, and read the words thus: And his arm the Babylonians,'
   that is, And his arm (shall strike or shall make war upon) the
   Babylonians.' Koeher, thinking that in the words vzrvv ksdym (uzerogno
   kassedim) there is no ellipsis, explains them to mean, And the
   Babylonians his arm,' that is, they shall be his supporters. For,' adds
   he, their aid was of no small consequence, if what Xenophon (Cyroped.
   4:24; 5:11) has recorded about Gobryas and Gadates, who were
   Babylonians, be true. Thus, allies, friends, and any one that assists
   another, are accounted to be his arm.'" -- Rosenmuller.

   [238] "When God the Redeemer says here that he teacheth his people,
   lhvyl (lehognil) to profit,' and that he provides for their true
   interests, there can be no doubt that he makes this declaration
   concerning himself, kat' antithesin by way of contrast with Idols,
   false gods, the worship of which not only did no good, but even did
   harm, and brought great hurt and damage to their worshippers. (Compare
   Isaiah 44:10, and 45:19.) Hence also God says by, Jeremiah 2:11, Is
   there any nation that changeth its gods, though they are not gods? But
   my people have changed their glory vl' yvyl (belo yognil) for that from
   which they derive no advantage;' or rather, from which they suffer the
   greatest loss and damage." -- Vitringa.

   [239] "Afin de destourner les idiots (qu'ils appellent) de lira
   dedans." "In order to dissuade idiots (as they call them) from reading
   it."

   [240] See Commentary on Isaiah, [29]vol. 1, p 312; [30]vol. 2, pp. 214,
   [31]227.

   [241] "Nulle forme d'Eglise."

   [242] Our author means that, instead of reading the words thus, "There
   is no peace to the wicked, saith Jehovah," he prefers to read them,
   "Jehovah saith to the wicked, There is no peace." -- Ed.

   [243] "These words relate to those Jews who, being obstinately devoted
   to idolatry, and having settled down in Babylon, chose to remain there
   rather than to return to their native country and the religious worship
   of Jehovah. He declares, therefore, that such persons shall not have
   the happiness that is promised to those who shall return to their
   native habitations." -- Rosenmuller.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   A TRANSLATION OF

   CALVIN'S VERSION OF

   THE PROPHECIES OF ISAIAH.

   CHAPTERS 33--48
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 33

   1 Wo to thee that spoilest, And was not spoiled; Who dealest wickedly,
   And they dealt not wickedly with thee! When thou shalt have ceased to
   spoil, Thou shalt be spoiled; When thou shalt have ceased to deal
   wickedly, They shall deal wickedly with thee.

   2 O Jehovah, have pity upon us; We have hoped in thee; Be thou, who
   hast been their arm in the morning, Our salvation also in the time of
   trouble.

   3 At the voice of the tumult the people fled; At thy exaltation the
   nations were dispersed.

   4 And your prey shall be gathered by your gathering of cater-pillars,
   Advancing thither, according to the running of locusts.

   5 Jehovah is exalted, who dwelleth on high; He hath filled Zion with
   judgment And righteousness.

   6 And the stability of thy times shall be Strength, salvation, wisdom,
   And knowledge; The fear of Jehovah is his treasure.

   7 Behold, their messengers shall cry without; The ambassadors of peace
   shall weep bitterly.

   8 The roads are deserted, The traveler hath ceased; He hath violated
   the treaty, He hath despised the cities, He hath paid no regard to any
   man.

   9 The earth hath mourned And languished; Lebanon is ashamed And hewn
   down; Sharon hath been made like a wilderness; Bashan And Carmel have
   been shaken.

   10 Now will I arise, saith Jehovah; Now will I be exalted; Now will I
   lift up myself.

   11 Ye shall conceive chaff; Ye shall bring forth stubble; The fire of
   your breath shall devour you.

   12 And the peoples shall be the burnings of lime; [244] As thorns cut
   up shall they be burnt in the fire.

   13 Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; Ye that are near,
   acknowledge my power.

   14 The sinners in Zion are afraid; Terror hath seized the hypocrites.
   [245] Which of us [246] shall dwell with devouring fire? Which of us
   shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

   15 He who walketh in righteousnesses And speaketh what is right; Who
   despiseth the gain from violence And calumny; Who shaketh his hands
   from accepting a bribe; Who stoppeth his ear, that he may not hear
   blood; Who shutteth his eyes, that he may not see evil.

   16 He shall dwell in high places; Fortifications of rocks shall be his
   refuge; Bread shall be given to him, And his waters (shall be) sure.

   17 Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty; They shall behold the
   land (that is) very far off.

   18 Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is the
   weigher? Where is he who singleth out the principal houses?

   19 The fierce people thou shalt not see, The people of a confused lip,
   so that thou canst not understand; Of a stammering tongue, so that thou
   canst not comprehend.

   20 Look at Zion, the city of our solemnities; [247] Thine eyes shall
   see Jerusalem a peaceful habitation, A tent which shall not be carried
   away, The stakes of which shall never be removed, And of which none of
   the ropes shall be broken:

   21 Thus, [248] shall the mighty Jehovah there be to us, A place of
   streams, of broad rivers, Through which there shall not pass a ship
   with oars, And through which a splendid ship shall not pass.

   22 For Jehovah is our Judge; Jehovah is our Lawgiver; Jehovah is our
   King; He himself will save us.

   23 Thy cords were loosed, So that they did not fasten their mast, Nor
   spread the sail; Then was the prey of much spoil divided; The lame also
   seized the prey.

   24 And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; The people that dwell
   in it have been freed from iniquity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [244] Or, Burnt lime.

   [245] Or, The wicked.

   [246] Or, Who instead of us?

   [247] Or, Of our assemblies.

   [248] Or, For if.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 34

   1 Draw near, ye nations, to hear; And ye peoples, hearken. Let the
   earth hear, And its fullness; The world, And all its productions.

   2 For the indignation of Jehovah is on all nations, And his fury on all
   their army; He hath destroyed them; He hath delivered them to
   slaughter.

   3 Their slain shall be east out; And from their carcasses shall come up
   their stench; And the mountains shall melt on account of their blood.

   4 And all the armies of heaven shall fade away, And shall be rolled up
   as a scroll. The heavens And all their armies shall fall down, As a
   leaf falleth down from a vine, And as it falleth from the fig-tree.

   5 For my sword is made drunken in the heavens. Behold, it shall come
   down on Edom, Even on the people of my curse to judgment.

   6 The sword of Jehovah hath been filled with blood; It hath been made
   fat with fatness; Even with the blood of lambs And of goats, With the
   fat of the kidneys of rams; For the sacrifice of Jehovah is on Bozrah,
   And a great slaughter in the land of Edom.

   7 And the unicorns shall come down with them, And the bullocks with the
   bulls; And their land shall be made drunken with blood, And their dust
   shall be made fat with fatness.

   8 For (it is) the day of vengeance of Jehovah, The year of recompenses
   for the cause of Zion.

   9 And her streams shall be turned into pitch, And her dust into
   brimstone; And her land shall become burning pitch.

   10 By night And by day it shall not be quenched; Its smoke shall
   continually go up; From generation to generation it shall lie waste;
   Tone shall pass through it for ever And ever.

   11 Therefore shall the pelican And the owl take possession of it; The
   great owl And the raven shall dwell in it; And he shall stretch over it
   the cord of emptiness, And the plummets of vanity.

   12 They shall call her nobles without a kingdom, And all her princes
   shall be nothing.

   13 In her palaces she shall bring forth thorns, And nettles And
   thistles in her fortresses; And she shall be a habitation for dragons,
   And an abode for the young ones of the ostrich.

   14 And the wild beasts shall meet with the satyrs; And the screech-owl
   shall cry to his companion; There also shall the fairy dwell, And shall
   find for herself a peaceful abode.

   15 There shall the owl make her nest, And lay, And hatch And gather her
   young under her shadow; Yea, there shall the vultures be gathered
   together, Every one with her mate.

   16 Inquire at the book of Jehovah, And read. Not one of those shall
   fail; Tot one shall want her mate; For his mouth hath commanded, And
   his Spirit hath gathered them.

   17 And he hath cast the lot for them; And his hand hath divided it to
   them for ever, as by a cord. Therefore they shall inhabit it; From
   generation to generation they shall dwell in it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 35

   1 The wilderness And the desert shall be glad; The loathsome place
   shall rejoice, And shall flourish like the lily.

   2 Flourishing it shall flourish, And shall even rejoice with rejoicing,
   And shall sing; The glory of Lebanon shall be given to it, The beauty
   of Carmel And Sharon; They shall see the glory of Jehovah, The majesty
   of our God.

   3 Strengthen ye the weak hands, Confirm the tottering knees.

   4 Say to them that are trembling in heart, Be strong, fear not. Behold,
   your God will come with vengeance; God himself will come with a
   recompense, [249] And will save you.

   5 Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, And the ears of the deaf
   shall be opened.

   6 Then shall the lame man leap like a stag, The tongue of the dumb mall
   shall sound loudly; For waters shall be digged in the desert, And
   rivers in the wilderness.

   7 The dry place shall be changed into a pool, And the parched country
   into fountains of waters; And in the habitation of dragons, And in its
   lair, Shall be a place for the reed And the rush.

   8 And a path shall be there, And a way, And it shall be called, The
   holy way. An unclean person shall not pass through it; And he shall be
   to them one that walketh in the way, That fools may not go astray.

   9 There shall not be there a lion; Nor shall a wild beast go up by it;
   Neither shall it be found there; That the redeemed may walk.

   10 Therefore shall the redeemed of Jehovah return, And shall come to
   Zion with rejoicing; And everlasting joy shall be on their head; And
   they shall obtain joy And gladness; And sorrow And sighing shall flee
   away.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [249] Or, He will come with the recompense of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 36

   1 It came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that
   Sennacherib, king of Assyria, came up against all the defended cities
   of Judah, And took them.

   2 Then the king of Assyria sent Rabshakch from Lachish, with a powerful
   army, to Jerusalem, to king Hezekiah, who stood at the conduit of the
   upper pool in the way of the fullers field.

   3 And there came out to him Eliakim, son of Hilkiah, who was over the
   house, And Shebna the chancellor, And Joab, the son of Asaph, the
   secretary.

   4 And Rabshakeh said to them: Say now to Hezekiah? Thus saith the great
   king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this in which thou
   trustest? I have said, (only a word of the lips.)

   5 Counsel And strength for war. Now in whom hast thou trusted, that
   thou hast rebelled against me?

   6 Behold, thou hast rusted in that broken staff of reed, on Egypt, on
   which if one lean, it will go into his hand And pierce it. Such is
   Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to all who have confidence in him.

   7 And if thou shalt say to me, We trust in Jehovah our God; is it not,
   he whose high places And altars Hezekiah hath taken away, And hath said
   to Judah And Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?

   8 Now, come, give a hostage to my master, the king of Assyria. I will
   give thee two thousand horses; wilt thou have horsemen to set upon
   them?

   9 And how dost thou despise the face of one captain of the least of my
   masters servants, And place thy confidence in Egypt for chariots And
   horsemen?

   10 And have I now come up without Jehovah to this land, to destroy it?
   Jehovah said to me: Go up against this land, to destroy it.

   11 Then said Eliakim, And Shebna, And Joah, to Rabshakeh: Speak, I
   pray, to thy servants, in the Syrian language, (for we understand it,)
   And speak not to us in the Jewish language, in the hearing of the
   people who are on the wall.

   12 And Rabshakeh said: Hath my master sent me to thy master And to thee
   to speak those words? Is it not to the men who sit on the wall, that
   they may eat their own dung, And drink their own urine with you?

   13 Therefore Rabshakeh stood, And cried with a loud voice in the Jewish
   language, And said: Hear the words of the great king, the king of
   Assyria.

   14 Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah impose upon you, for he will
   not be able to deliver you.

   15 And let not Hezekiah make you trust in Jehovah, saying, By
   delivering will Jehovah deliver us; this city shall not be given up
   into the hand of the king of Assyria.

   16 Listen not to Hezekiah; for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make
   with me a blessing, And come out; And let every one eat of his own
   vine, And let every one eat of his own fig-tree, And let every one
   drink the waters of his own well.

   17 Till I come And take you into a land like your own land, a land of
   corn And wine, a land of bread And vineyards.

   18 Lest perhaps Hezekiah deceive you, saying, Jehovah will deliver us.
   Have any of the gods of the nations delivered their land out of the
   hand of the king of Assyria?

   19 Where is the god of Hamath And Arpad? Where is the god of
   Sepharvaim? Have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?

   20 Who is there among all the gods of those lands that hath delivered
   his land out of my hand; that Jehovah should rescue Jerusalem out of my
   hand?

   21 They were silent, And did not answer him a word; for this was the
   commandment of the king, Do not answer him.

   22 Then came Eliakim, who was over the house And Shebna the chancellor,
   And Joab, the son of Asaph, the secretary, to Hezekiah, with rent
   garments, And told him the words of Rabshakeh.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 37

   1 Now, it came to pass, that Hezekiah, when he heard this rent his
   clothes, And covered himself with sackcloth, And went into the house of
   Jehovah.

   2 At the same time he sent Eliakim, who was over the palace, And Shebna
   the chancellor, and the eldest of the priests, covered with sackcloth,
   to Isaiah the son of Amoz, the prophet.

   3 Who said to him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This is a day of trouble, and
   of rebuke, And of blasphemy; for the children have come to the birth,
   and there is not strength to bring forth.

   4 If, perhaps, Jehovah thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom
   his master, the king of Assyria, hath sent to curse the living God, And
   to rebuke with words which Jehovah thy God hath heard. Thou shalt
   therefore lift up a prayer for the remnant that is still left.

   5 The servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

   6 And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye say to your master: Thus saith
   Jehovah, Fear not the words which thou hast heard, with which the
   servants of the king of Assyria have reproached me.

   7 Behold, I will bring a wind upon him; for he shall hear a report, And
   shall return to his own land; And I will cause him to fall by the sword
   in his own land.

   8 And Rabshakeh, having returned, found the king of Assyria besieging
   Libnah; for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

   9 And hearing concerning Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia, He hath gone out
   to fight against thee; after having heard it, he sent messengers to
   Hezekiah, saying:

   10 Thus shall ye say to Hezekiah king of Judah: Let not thy God, in
   whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given
   up into the hand of the king of Assyria.

   11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to at
   hands, how they have destroyed them; And shalt thou be delivered?

   12 Have the gods of the nations delivered those whom my fathers
   destroyed, Gozan, And Itaran, And Rezeph, And the children of Edom, who
   were in Telassar?

   13 Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arphad, the king of the
   city of Sepharvaim, of Hena And Iva?

   14 Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, And
   read it, And went up to the house of Jehovah, and spread it before
   Jehovah.

   15 Then Hezekiah prayed to God, saying:

   16 O Jehovah of hosts, God of Israel, who dwellest between the
   cherubim, thou alone art God over all the kingdoms of the earth; thou
   hast made heaven And earth.

   17 Incline thine ear, O Jehovah, And hear; open thine eyes, O Jehovah,
   And see; And hear all the words of Sennacherib, who hath sent to
   reproach the living God.

   18 Truly, O Jehovah, the kings of Assyria have destroyed all the
   nations, And their land,

   19 And have cast their gods into the fire; for they were not gods, but
   the work of men's hands, wood, And stone; therefore they have destroyed
   them.

   20 And now, O Jehovah our God, save us from his hand; that all the
   kingdoms of the earth may know that thou alone art Jehovah.

   21 Then Isaiah, the son of Amoz, sent to Hezekiah, saying: Thus saith
   Jehovah, the God of Israel, Since thou hast prayed to me concerning
   Sennacherib, king of Assyria;

   22 This is the word which Jehovah hath spoken concerning him: The
   virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee, hath laughed at thee; The
   daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee. Whom hast thou
   reproached?

   23 And whom hast thou blasphemed? Against whom hast thou exalted thy
   Voice, And lifted up thy hands on high? Even against the Holy One of
   Israel.

   24 By the hand of thy servants thou hast reproached the Lord, And hast
   said, By the multitude of my chariots I will go up, To the heights of
   the mountains, To the sides of Lebanon; I will cut down the tallest of
   her cedars, Her choice firs; Then will I come to the height of his
   border, And even to his level forest. [250]

   25 I will dig, And will drink waters; With the sole of my feet I will
   dry up all the lakes of the siege.

   26 Hast thou not heard that I made it long ago, That I formed it from
   ancient days? And should I now bring it to be a desolation, To be heaps
   of ruins, like fortified cities?

   27 For their inhabitants were maimed, Were terrified And confounded;
   They were made like the grass of the field And the green herb, Like the
   grass of the house-tops, which withereth before it is ripe.

   28 I know thy sitting down, And thy going out, And thy entrance, And
   thy indignation against me.

   29 Because thou wast angry against me, Thy tumult hath come up into my
   ears. Therefore will I put my hook [251] in thy nostril, And my bridle
   ill thy lips, And will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

   30 And this shall be a sign to thee; Thou shalt eat this year that
   which groweth of itself, And in the second year that which springeth up
   of itself; And in the third year ye shall sow And reap, And shall plant
   vineyards, And eat the fruit of them.

   31 And that which shall be preserved of the house of Judah, And that
   which shall be left, Shall vet strike root downward, And shall bear
   fruit upward.

   32 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, And that which shall
   be preserved of Mount Zion. The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will do this.

   33 Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning the king of Assyria, He
   shall not enter into this city, Nor throw an arrow into it; And he who
   is defended by a shield shall not seize it, Nor cast a balister against
   it.

   34 By the way that he came shall he return, And shall not enter into
   this city, saith Jehovah.

   35 And I will be a protector to this city, To save it, for my own sake,
   And for the sake of my servant David.

   36 And the angel of Jehovah went forth, And smote in the camp of the
   Assyrians a hundred And eighty-five thousand; And when the people arose
   early in the morning, behold, they were all corpses of dead men.

   37 Then Sennacherib, king of Assyria, departed, And went, And returned,
   And dwelt in Nineveh.

   38 And it came to pass, while he was worshipping his god in the temple
   of Nisroch, [252] that his sons, Adrammeleeh And Sharezar, smote him
   with the sword, And fled into the land of Armenia; And Esarhaddon his
   son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [250] Or, To the forest of his plain.

   [251] Or, My ring.

   [252] Or, While he was worshipping in the temple of Nisroch, his god.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 38

   1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet,
   the son of Amoz, came to him, And said to him: Thus saith Jehovah, Give
   charge concerning thy house; [253] for thou shalt die, And shalt not
   live.

   2 Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, And prayed to Jehovah.

   3 And he said, I beseech thee, O Jehovah, remember now that I have
   walked before thee in truth, And with a perfect heart, And have done
   what was right in thine eyes. And Hezekiah wept with sore weeping.
   [254]

   4 Then was communicated the word of Jehovah to Isaiah, saying,

   5 Go, And say to Hezekiah: Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Jacob thy
   father: I have heard thy prayer, And have seen thy tears: Behold, I add
   to thy days fifteen years.

   6 And I will deliver thee And this city out of the hand of the king of
   Assyria; And I will be a protector to this city.

   7 And this shall be a sign to thee from Jehovah, that Jehovah will do
   this thing, of which he hath spoken:

   8 Behold, I bring back the shadow of degrees, by which it hath gone
   down on the sun-dial of Ahaz, ten degrees. And he sun went back on the
   sundial ten degrees, by which it had already gone down.

   9 The writing of Hezekiah, king of Judah, when he had been sick, And
   had recovered from his sickness.

   10 I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the
   grave; I am deprived of the residue of my years.

   11 I said, I shall not see God, God in the land of the living; I shall
   no longer behold man with the inhabitants of the world.

   12 Sly habitation is departed, And is removed from me as a shepherds
   tent; I have cut off; as a weaver, my life: From lifting up [255] he
   will cut me off; From day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

   13 I reckoned [256] till the dawn; As a lion, so he hath broken my
   bones; From the dawn till night thou wilt make an end of me.

   14 As a crane or a swallow, I chattered; I mourned as a dove. My eyes
   were lifted up on high, O Lord, it hath oppressed me; comfort me.

   15 What shall I say? He who hath spoken to me hath done it. I shall be
   moved [257] all the days of my life In the bitterness of my soul.

   16 O Lord, by all who shall live beyond those (years) Shall the life of
   my spirit (be known;) And that thou didst cause me to sleep, And didst
   make me alive.

   17 Behold, in peace my bitterness was bitter; And thou hast been
   pleased (to rescue) my soul from the pit; [258] For thou hast east
   behind thy back all my sins.

   18 For hell shall not confess thee; Death shall not praise thee; They
   that go down into the pit shall not wait for thy truth.

   19 The living, the living, he shall confess to thee, As I (do) this
   day; The father to the sons shall make known thy truth.

   20 Jehovah to save me; And we will sing our songs All the days of our
   life in the house of Jehovah.

   21 Now, Isaiah had said, They shall take a mass of figs, and apply it
   to the boil, And they shall live.

   22 For [259] Hezekiah had said, What is the sign that I shall go up
   into the house of the Lord?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [253] Or, Give charge to thy house.

   [254] "Et Ezechias pleura amerement." "And Hezekiah wept bitterly."

   [255] Or, Through leanness; or, Through sickness; or, By taking away.

   [256] Or, I determined; or, I laid down.

   [257] Or, I shall walk trembling.

   [258] Or, Thou hast loved my soul from the pit of destruction.

   [259] Or, Now.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 39

   1 At that time Merodach-Baladan, son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent
   letters And a present to Hezekiah, after having heard that he had been
   sick, And was recovered.

   2 And Hezekiah was glad on account of them, And showed to them the
   house of his treasure, silver, And gold, And spices, precious ointment,
   And all his armory, And all that was contained in his treasures; there
   was not anything in his house, And in all his kingdom, which Hezekiah
   did not show.

   3 Then came Isaiah the prophet to king Pezekiah, And said to him, What
   did those men say. And whence came they to thee. Hezekiah answered,
   They came to me from a distant country, from Babylon.

   4 Then he said, What have they seen in thy house? And Hezekiah said,
   They have seen all that is in my house; And there is nothing in my
   treasures which I have not showed to them.

   5 Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear the word of Jehovah of hosts:

   6 Behold, the days come, that all that is in thy house, And all that
   thy fathers have treasured up till this day, shall be carried to
   Babylon; And nothing shall be left, saith Jehovah.

   7 Of thy sons which shall issue from thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall
   they take; And they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of
   Babylon.

   8 Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is the word of Jehovah which thou hast
   spoken. And he said, At least there shall be peace And permanency in my
   days.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 40

   1 Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, Saith your God.

   2 Speak ye according to the heart of Jerusalem; And cry to her, That
   her warfare is accomplished; That her iniquity [260] is pardoned; For
   she hath received at the hand of Jehovah Double for all her sins.

   3 A voice crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of Jehovah; Make
   straight in the desert a path for our God.

   4 Every valley shall be exalted, And every mountain And hill shall be
   laid low; And the crooked shall be made straight, And the rough places
   shall become a plain.

   5 And the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed, And all flesh shall see
   it together; That the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it.

   6 The voice said, [261] Cry; And I said, What shall I cry? All flesh is
   grass, And all the goodliness of it as the flower of the field.

   7 The grass is withered; The flower is faded; Because the breath of
   Jehovah hath blown upon it. Surely, the people is grass.

   8 The grass withereth; The flower fadeth; But the word of our God shall
   stand for ever.

   9 Go up into the high mountain, O Zion, that bringest tidings; Lift up
   thy voice aloud, O Jerusalem, that bringest tidings; Lift it up, be not
   afraid; Say to the cities of Judah, Behold your God!

   10 Behold, the Lord Jehovah shall come with strength; And his arm shall
   be powerful. Behold, his reward is with him, And his work is before his
   face.

   11 He shall feed his flock like a shepherd; He shall gather the lambs
   in his arm, And shall early them in his bosom, And shall gently lead
   those that are with young.

   12 Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, And measured
   the heavens with his palm, And held with three fingers the dust of the
   earth, And weighed the mountains in scales, And the heavens in a
   balance?

   13 Who hath instructed the spirit of Jehovah, Or hath guided him by
   counsel, And hath taught him?

   14 From whom sought he counsel, that he might advise him? And who
   taught him the path of judgment, And instructed him in knowledge, And
   showed to him the way of wisdom?

   15 Lo, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, And are reckoned as the
   small dust of the balance; Lo, he taketh up the islands as a very
   little thing.

   16 And Lebanon would not be sufficient to make a fire, Nor its beasts
   for a burnt-offering.

   17 All nations are as nothing before him, And in comparison of him are
   reckoned less than nothing, And what hath no existence.

   18 To whom then have ye likened God? Or what resemblance will ye
   appoint to him?

   19 The workman prepareth a graven image, The goldsmith overlayeth it
   with gold, And (casteth) golden chains.

   20 The poor man chooseth for his offering wood that will not rot; He
   procureth a skilful workman. To prepare a graven image that shall not
   be moved.

   21 Do ye not know? Have ye not heard? Hath it not been told you from
   the beginning? Have ye not been instructed from the foundations of the
   earth?

   22 It is he that sitteth on the circle of the earth, The inhabitants of
   which are as locusts; He stretcheth out heaven as a curtain, And
   spreadeth it out as a tent to be inhabited.

   23 He bringeth the mighty to nothing, The rulers of the earth as if
   they were not.

   24 It is as if they had not been planted; It is as if they had not been
   sown; It is as if their stock had no root in the earth. Even while he
   bloweth on them, they wither, And the whirlwind carrieth them away as
   stubble.

   25 And to whom will ye liken me, That I may be like? saith the Holy
   One.

   26 Lift up your eyes on high, And see who hath created those things,
   Bringing out their army by number; He will call to all of them by name;
   By the greatness of his strength, And by the might of his power, None
   shall fail. [262]

   27 Why wilt thou say, [263] O Jacob? And why wilt thou speak, O Israel?
   My way is hidden from Jehovah, And my judgment passeth away from my
   God.

   28 Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard That Jehovah is the God of
   eternity, Who hath created the ends of the earth? He fainteth not, And
   is not worn out by fatigue; And there is no searching of his
   understanding.

   29 He giveth power to the faint, And to him who hath no might he
   imparteth strength.

   30 The youths are wearied, And they faint; And the young men by falling
   full.

   31 But they who wait upon Jehovah shall gather new strength; They shall
   raise their wings as eagles; They shall run, And shall not be wearied;
   They shall walk, And shall not faint.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [260] Or, Her misery is ended.

   [261] Or, Was saying.

   [262] Or, None shall be wanting.

   [263] Or, Why wouldst thou say?
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 41

   1 Be silent to me, O islands; And let the peoples collect their
   strength; Let them draw near; then let them speak; Let us come near
   together to judgment.

   2 Who raised up righteousness from the east, Called him to his foot,
   Gave nations before him, And subdued kings; Gave them as dust to his
   sword, And as driven stubble to his bow?

   3 He pursued them; he departed in peace, By the way that his foot had
   not gone.

   4 Who hath appointed And done it. He who calleth the nations from the
   beginning. I Jehovah am the first, And with the last I am the same.

   5 The islands saw, And were afraid; The farthest boundaries of the
   earth trembled; They drew near And came.

   6 Every one brought assistance to his neighbor, And said to his
   neighbor, Be courageous.

   7 The carver encouraged the founder, And he that beateth with the
   hammer him that striketh by turns; And he said, It is good for
   soldering; And he fastened it with nails, that it might not be moved.

   8 But thou, O Israel, (art) my servant, O Jacob, whom I have chosen,
   Thou seed of Abraham my friend.

   9 For I have taken thee from the ends of the earth; From its eminences
   have I called thee; And I have said to thee, Thou art my servant; I
   have chosen thee, And have not cast thee off;

   10 Fear not, for I am with thee; Be not terrified, for I am thy God;
   For I strengthen thee; yea, [264] I will help thee; Yea, I will uphold
   thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

   11 Behold, they who provoke thee, Shall be ashamed And shall blush;
   They who contend with thee, Shall become as nothing, And shall perish.

   12 Thou shalt seek them, And shalt not find them; They who contend with
   thee shall be as nothing, And they who fight with thee shall be as
   consumption.

   13 For I (am) Jehovah thy God, Taking hold of thy right hand, And
   saying to thee, Fear not, I will help thee.

   14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, Ye dead men of Israel. I will help thee,
   saith Jehovah, And thy Redeemer, [265] the Holy One of Israel.

   15 Behold, I have made thee a cart, Like a sharp thrashing instrument
   having teeth; Thou shalt thrash the mountains, And beat them small; And
   thou shalt reduce the hills to dust.

   16 Thou shalt winnow them; And the wind shall carry them away, And the
   whirlwind shall scatter them. But thou shalt rejoice in Jehovah; Thou
   shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

   17 The needy And poor shall seek waters, Which are nowhere to be seen;
   Their tongue shall be parched with thirst. I Jehovah will listen to
   them; I the God of Israel will not forsake them.

   18 I will open rivers on lofty mountain-tops, And fountains in the
   midst of a plain; I will make the wilderness pools of waters, And the
   dry land fountains of waters.

   19 In the wilderness I will give the cedar, The sloe, the myrtle, And
   the pine; I will set in the desert the fir-tree, The elm And poplar
   together.

   20 Therefore let them see And know; Let them likewise think And
   understand; That the hand of Jehovah hath done this, And that the Holy
   One of Israel hath created it.

   21 Plead your cause, saith Jehovah; Produce your strong reasons, saith
   the king of Jacob.

   22 Let them bring them forth, And let them tell us what is to come; Let
   them declare the former things which were, And we will lay our heart to
   them; And we shall know the latest of those things; And declare ye to
   us what is to come.

   23 Tell what shall be hereafter, That we may know that ye are gods;
   Yea, do good, or do evil, That we may relate And likewise may see [266]
   it.

   24 Behold, you are of nothing, And your work is of nothing; (The man)
   hath chosen abomination in you.

   25 I have raised him from the north, And he hath come; From the rising
   of the sun shall he call on my name; And he shall come to princes, as
   to clay; And he shall tread the clay like a potter.

   26 Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? Beforehand,
   And we will say, (He is) righteous. Surely, there is none that
   declareth; Surely, there is none that causeth (us) to hear; Surely,
   there is none that heareth your words.

   27 The first to Zion; Behold, behold them; And I will give a messenger
   to Jerusalem.

   28 I looked, And there was none; I inquired at them, And there was no
   counselor; I asked them, And they answered not a word.

   29 Behold, all are vanity; And their works are a failure; Their images
   are wind And confusion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [264] Or, Surely.

   [265] Or, Thy Protector.

   [266] Or, May be astonished.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 42

   1 Behold, my servant; I will lean upon him; [267] Mine sleet, in whom
   my soul is well pleased. I have put my Spirit upon him; He shall
   exhibit judgment to the nations.

   2 He shall not cry aloud; He shall not lift up, Nor cause his voice to
   be heard in the streets.

   3 A bruised reed he shall not break, And the smoking flax he shall not
   quench; He shall bring forth judgment in truth.

   4 He shall not thine, nor be discouraged, Till he set judgment in the
   earth; And the islands shall wait for his law.

   5 Thus saith God [268] Jehovah, The Creator of the heavens, And who
   stretcheth them out; Who spreadeth out the earth, And its productions;
   Giving breath to the people who dwell in it, And spirit to them who
   walk on it.

   6 I Jehovah have called thee in righteousness, And will hold thee by
   thy hand; And will keep thee, And will place thee for a covenant of the
   people, For a light of the nations;

   7 That thou mayest open the eyes of the blind; That thou mayest bring
   out the prisoners from the prison, And from the house of the prison
   those who sit in darkness.

   8 I am Jehovah, that is my name; And my glory will I not give to
   another, Nor my praise to graven images.

   9 Behold, the former things have come; And new things do I declare;
   Before they spring up, I will make them known to you.

   10 Sing to Jehovah a new song, His praise from the end of the earth; Ye
   who go down to the sea, And its fullness; Ye islands, And their
   inhabitants.

   11 Let the desert And its cities cry aloud, The villages where Kedar
   dwelleth; Let the inhabitants of the rock sing; And let them shout from
   the top of the mountains.

   12 Let them give glory to Jehovah, And let them declare his praise in
   the islands.

   13 Jehovah shall go forth as a giant; And as a warrior shall he rouse
   his zeal; He shall cry aloud; he shall shout; He shall strengthen
   himself against his adversaries.

   14 I have kept silence for a long time; I have been silent, And have
   refrained myself; I will cry like a woman in travail; I will destroy
   And swallow at once.

   15 I will reduce mountains And hills to a wilderness; I will dry up all
   their herbage; I will make the rivers islands; And I will dry up the
   pools.

   16 And I will lead the blind by a way which they knew not; I will cause
   them to walk in paths which they had not known; And I will turn
   darkness before them into light, And crooked ways into a plain. These
   things [269] will I do to them, And I will not forsake them.

   17 They shall be turned back, With shame shall they be ashamed, Who
   trust in a graven image; And who say to a molten image; Ye are our
   gods.

   18 O ye deaf, hear; And ye blind, be attentive to see.

   19 Who is blind but my servant? Who is deaf but my messenger whom I
   send? Who is blind as he that is perfect, And blind as the servant of
   Jehovah?

   20 By seeing many things which thou observest not; By opening the ears,
   so that he may not hear.

   21 Jehovah is well-pleased on account of his righteousness, That he may
   honor And magnify his law.

   22 But this people hath been robbed And trodden down; They shall all be
   snared in prisons, And they shall be hidden in caves; They shall be
   made a spoil, And there shall be none to deliver; A prey, And none
   shall say, Restore.

   23 Who among you will hear this? Who will hearken? Who will attend for
   the time to come?

   24 Who gave Jacob to be a prey, And gave up Israel to the robbers? Was
   it not Jehovah? Because we have sinned against him, And they would not
   walk in his ways, And did not hearken to his law.

   25 Therefore he hath poured upon him The fury of his anger, And the
   strength of battle. It set him on fire on every side, And he gave no
   heed to it; It burned him, But he laid it not to heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [267] Or, I will uphold him.

   [268] Or, The mighty.

   [269] Or, These words.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 43

   1 And now thus saith Jehovah, Thy Creator, O Jacob, And thy Former, O
   Israel; Fear not, for I have redeemed (thee); I have called thee by thy
   name; thou art mine.

   2 When thou shalt pass through the waters, I will be with thee; Through
   rivers, they shall not overflow thee; When thou shalt pass through the
   fire itself, thou shalt not be scorched; And the flame shall not kindle
   on thee.

   3 For I am Jehovah thy God; The Holy One of Israel, thy Savior; I have
   given Egypt as the price of thy redemption, Ethiopia And Sheba in thy
   room.

   4 Because thou hast been precious in my eyes, Thou hast been honorable,
   And I have loved thee. I will give a man in thy stead, And peoples
   instead of thy soul.

   5 Fear not, for I am with thee; I will bring thy seed from the East,
   And I will gather thee from the West.

   6 I will say to the North, Give; And to the South, Hinder not; Bring my
   sons from a distance, And my daughters from the end of the earth.

   7 All are called by my name, And I have created them for my glory; I
   have formed them; yea, I have made them.

   8 That I may bring forth the blind people, who have eyes; And the deaf,
   who have ears.

   9 Let all the nations be assembled together, And let the peoples be
   gathered. Who is there among them to declare this, And to cause us to
   hear the former things? Let them produce their witnesses, they shall be
   declared righteous; But let them hear, And they shall says, It is
   truth.

   10 Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, And my servant, whom I have
   chosen. Therefore ye shall know And believe me; And ye shall understand
   that I am He; Before me there was no god formed; Nor shall there be
   after me.

   11 I, I [270] am Jehovah; And there is no Savior besides me.

   12 I have declared, And have saved, And have made you to heat; And
   there is no strange (god) among you. Ye are my witnesses, saith
   Jehovah, That I am God.

   13 Even before the day was, I was; And there is none to deliver out of
   my hand. I will do; And who shall disannul it?

   14 Thus saith Jehovah, your Redeemer, The Holy One of Israel; For your
   sake have I sent to Babylon, And have made them come down. They are all
   fugitives; And the cry of the Babylonians is in the ships.

   15 I am Jehovah, your Holy One; The Creator of Israel, your King.

   16 Thus saith Jehovah, Who maketh a way in the sea, And a path in the
   stormy waters.

   17 When he bringeth (them) out, The chariot And the horse, The army And
   the power, Lie down together, so that they do not rise. They are
   quenched; they are quenched like flax.

   18 Remember not the former things, And mention not the things that are
   ancient.

   19 Behold, I do a new thing; Now it shall arise; Shall ye not know it?
   This time [271] I will make a way ill the wilderness, Rivers in the
   desert.

   20 The beast of the field shall honor me; The dragons, And the young of
   the ostrich; Because I will give waters in the wilderness, Rivers in
   the desert, To give drink to my people, my chosen.

   21 This people have I created for myself; They shall declare my praise.

   22 And thou hast not called on me, O Jacob; But thou hast been wearied
   of me, O Israel.

   23 Thou hast not brought to me the cattle of thy burnt-offerings; And
   thou hast not honored me with thy sacrifices; I have not made thee to
   serve with offering, Nor to be wearied with incense.

   24 Thou hast not bought cane for me with money, And hast not made me
   drunk with the fat of thy sacrifices; But thou hast made me to serve
   with thy sills; And thou hast made me to weary with thine iniquities.

   25 I, I [272] am He, Who blot out thine iniquities for my own sake;
   Therefore I will not remember thy sins.

   26 Bring to my remembrance; Let us plead together; declare thou, that
   thou mayest be justified.

   27 Thy first father hath sinned, And thy teachers have transgressed
   against me.

   28 Therefore I will pollute the princes of the sanctuary; And I will
   make Jacob a curse, And Israel a reproach.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [270] "Ce suis-je, ce suis-je." "It is I, it is I."

   [271] Or, Surely.

   [272] "Ce suis-je, ce suis-je." "It is I, it is I."
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 44

   1 Yet now hear, O Jacob, my servant, And Israel whom I have chosen.

   2 Thus saith Jehovah, thy Maker, And thy Former from the womb; He will
   help thee. Fear not, O Jacob, my servant, O beloved, whom I have
   chosen.

   3 For I will pour waters on that which is thirsty, And floods on the
   dry ground; I will pour my Spirit on thy seed, And my blessing on thy
   productions.

   4 And they shall spring up as among the grass, As willows near the
   streams of waters.

   5 One shall say, I belong to Jehovah; And another shall be called by
   the name of Jacob; Another shall write with his hand, (I belong) to
   Jehovah, And shall be surnamed by the name of Israel.

   6 Thus saith Jehovah, the King of Israel, And his Redeemer, Jehovah of
   hosts; I am the first, And I am also the last; And besides me there is
   no God.

   7 And who as I shall call, Shall declare this, And set it in order
   before me, Since I appointed the people of the age? And let them tell
   them the things that are coming, And the things that shall come.

   8 Fear ye not, And be not terrified. Have I not since then made thee to
   hear? And have I not declared it? Therefore ye are my witnesses, That
   there is no God besides me, And there is no strong God whom I know not.

   9 The formers of a graven image are all vanity; And their desirable
   things do no; profit; And they are their own witnesses That they do not
   see, nor know; And therefore they shall be confounded.

   10 Who is the maker of God? And who is it that hath molten a graven
   image, Which is profitable for nothing?

   11 Behold, all his companions shall be ashamed; And the workmen
   themselves are of men; Though they all assemble, And stand up, They
   shall tremble, And be ashamed together.

   12 The worker in iron shall take the file; [273] He shall work in the
   coals; He shall form it with hammers; He shall work in it with the arm
   of his strength; He shall even be hungry, so that his strength shall
   fail; He shall not drink water, so that he shall faint.

   13 The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; He marketh it with a dyed
   thread; He adjusteth it with planes; He shapeth it with a compass; He
   maketh it according to the shape of a man, According to the image of a
   man, That it may remain in the house.

   14 He shall cut down for himself cedars; He shall take the pine And the
   oak; He shall supply himself with trees of the forest; He shall plant a
   pine which the rain shall nourish.

   15 Then shall a man have them for burning; For he shall take of them,
   And shall warm himself; Yea, he shall heat an oven, And shall bake
   bread; He shall also make a god, And worship it; He shall make an idol,
   And shall bow down before it.

   16 Part of it he shall burn in the fire; Of a part he shall make ready
   flesh, And shall cat it; He shall roast roast. And shall be satisfied.
   Next, he shall warm himself, And shall say, Ah! I am warmed, And have
   seen the fire.

   17 The remainder of it he turneth into a god, Into his graven image; He
   boweth down before it; He worshippeth And prayeth to it, Saying,
   Deliver me; for thou art my God.

   18 They have not known, nor understood; For he hath smeared their eyes,
   that they may not see, And their heart, that they may not understand.

   19 It cloth not return into their heart; They have not knowledge, nor
   understanding, to say, Part of it I have burned in the fire; Yea, on
   the coals of it have I baked bread; I have roasted flesh, And have
   eaten it; Shall I turn the remainder of it into an abomination? Shall I
   bow down before the stock of a tree?

   20 He feedeth on ashes: A deceived heart turneth him aside, So that he
   cannot deliver his soul, nor sly, Is there not a lie in my right hand?

   21 Remember these things, O Jacob; And Israel, for thou art my servant;
   I have formed thee; thou art my servant; O Israel, do not thou forget
   me.

   22 I have blotted out, as a cloud, thy iniquities; As a vapor, thy
   sins. Return thou to me; For I have redeemed thee.

   23 Praise, O ye heavens; For Jehovah hath done it; Shout, ye lower
   parts of the earth; Burst forth into praise, ye mountains; O forest.
   And every tree that is in it; For Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob, And will
   be glorified ill Israel.

   24 Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, And thy Maker from the womb: I am
   Jehovah, who maketh all things, Who stretcheth out the heavens above,
   Who spreadeth out the earth by my power; [274]

   25 Who frustrateth the tokens of the diviners; Who maketh the
   soothsayers mad; Who turneth wise men backward; And who maketh their
   knowledge foolishness;

   26 Who upholdeth the word of his servant, And performeth the counsel of
   his messengers; Saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; And to
   the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built; And I will raise up her ruins.

   27 Who saith to the deep, Be thou dried up; And I will make dry thy
   rivers;

   28 Who saith to Cyrus, Thou art my shepherd; And he shall fulfil all my
   will; Even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; And to the Temple,
   Thou shalt be founded.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [273] Or, The tongs.

   [274] Or, By myself.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 45

   1 Thus saith Jehovah to his anointed, To Cyrus, whose right hand I have
   taken hold of, To subdue nations before him; Therefore will I loose
   [275] the loins of kings; To open the doors before him; Therefore the
   gates shall not be shut.

   2 I will go before thee; And will make straight the crooked ways; I
   will break asunder the brazen doors; And I will hew down the iron bars.

   3 And I will give thee treasures of darkness, And things hidden in
   secret places; That thou mayest know that I am Jehovah, Who call thee
   by thy name; Even the God of Israel.

   4 For the sake of my servant Jacob, And for the sake of Israel, mine
   elect; I will call thee by thy name; I will surname thee, though thou
   hast not known me.

   5 I am Jehovah, And there is none besides me; There is no god besides
   me; I have girded thee, though thou hast not known me.

   6 Therefore shall they know, From the rising of the sun, And from the
   west, That there is none besides me. I am Jehovah; And there is none
   besides me.

   7 Forming light, And creating darkness; Making peace, And creating
   evil; I Jehovah do all these things.

   8 Drop down, ye heavens, from above; And let the clouds pour down
   righteousness; Let the earth be opened; And let salvation And
   righteousness come forth; Let her bring them forth together: I Jehovah
   have created it.

   9 Wo to him that striveth with his Maker! A potsherd to the potsherds
   of the earth. Shall the clay say to his maker, Why hast thou made? And,
   Thy work hath no hands?

   10 Wo to him that saith to his father, Why hast thou begotten And to
   the woman, Why dost thou bring forth?

   11 Thus saith Jehovah, The Holy One of Israel, And his Maker; Ask me of
   things to come; Concerning my sons command ye me, And concerning the
   work of my hands.

   12 I have made the earth, And have created man upon it; It is I, whose
   hands have stretched out the heavens; And all their army have I
   commanded.

   13 I have raised him up in righteousness, And will make straight all
   his ways. He shall build my city, And shall release my captivity; Not
   for price nor for reward, Saith Jehovah of hosts.

   14 Thus saith Jehovah; The labor of Egypt, the merchandise of Ethiopia,
   And the Sabeans of great stature, Shall pass over to thee, And shall be
   thine; They shall walk behind thee; In chains shall they pass over, And
   shall reverence And beseech thee. Surely [276] God is in thee; And
   there is no other besides God.

   15 Truly thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the
   Savior!

   16 All of them shall be covered with shame, And shall even blush: With
   shame shall go away together All the makers of graven images.

   17 Israel hath been saved in Jehovah with eternal salvation; Ye shall
   not be covered with shame; Neither shall ye blush even for ever.

   18 For thus saith Jehovah, who createth the heavens; God himself, the
   Maker of the earth; Who made it, And furnished it; He created it not
   empty; He formed it to be inhabited; I am Jehovah, And there is none
   besides me.

   19 Not in secret have I spoken, In a place of the darkness of the
   earth; Not in vain have I said to the seed of Jacob, Seek me; I Jehovah
   speak righteousness; I declare what is right.

   20 Assemble yourselves, And come; Draw near together, ye rejected [277]
   of the nations. They know nothing, who carry about the wood of a graven
   image, And who pray to a god who cannot save.

   21 Publish ye, And bring forward; Yea, let them consult together. Who
   hath caused this to be heard from the beginning? And who hath declared
   it from ancient times? Is it not I Jehovah? And there is no other god
   besides me; A just God, And a Savior; There is none besides me.

   22 Look to me, And ye shall be saved, All the ends of the earth; For I
   am God, And there is none else.

   23 By myself have I sworn; In righteousness hath the word gone out of
   my mouth, Which shall not return; That to me every knee shall bend;
   Every tongue shall swear.

   24 Surely in Jehovah, will he say, Have I righteousness And strength;
   To him shall he come; And all who provoke him shall be ashamed.

   25 In Jehovah all the seed of Israel Shall be justified, And shall
   glory.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [275] Or, I will ungird.

   [276] Or, Only.

   [277] Or, Ye distant.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 46

   1 Bel hath bowed down; Nebo is fallen; Their images shall be on the
   beasts And the cattle; They who carry you are burdened by you; A
   wearisome burden.

   2 They bowed down; they stooped together; And they could not withdraw
   themselves from the binden; And their soul hath gone away into
   captivity.

   3 Hear me, O house of Jacob; All ye the remnant of the house of Israel;
   Who are borne from the womb; Who are carried from the breast.

   4 And even to old age I am the same; And even to gray hairs I will
   carry. I have made, And I will bear; I will carry, And will save.

   5 To whom will ye liken, And make me equal, And compare me, that I may
   be like?

   6 Lavishing gold out of bags; Weighing silver in a balance; They shall
   hire a goldsmith, to make of it a god; To bow down before it, And to
   worship it.

   7 They shall carry him on the shoulder; They shall lead him about; They
   shall put him in his place; There shall he stand; From his place shall
   he not remove; Moreover, if any one cry to him, he will not answer, Nor
   deliver him from his trouble.

   8 Remember ye this, And blush; [278] Return to your heart, ye
   transgressors.

   9 Remember the former things of old; For I am God, And there is none
   besides, And there is none like me.

   10 Declaring the latest event from the beginning, And from antiquity
   those things which had not yet been done; Saying, My counsel shall
   stand, And I will do whatever I wish.

   11 Calling a bird [279] from the east, From a distant country the man
   of my counsel; I have spoken, And accordingly I will accomplish it; I
   have thought, And I will do it.

   12 Hear me, ye that are stubborn in heart, Who are far from
   righteousness.

   13 I will cause my righteousness to come near, And it shall not be
   delayed; And my salvation shall not tarry; And I will place salvation
   in Zion, And my glory in Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [278] Or, Take courage.

   [279] Or, a thought.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 47

   1 Come down, And sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon; Sit on
   the ground; There is no throne for the daughter of the Babylonians; For
   they shall no more call thee tender And delicate.

   2 Take millstones, And grind meal; Unbind thy curled locks, make bare
   the feet; Uncover the limbs, that thou mayest cross the rivers.

   3 Thy baseness shall be exposed, And thy shame shall be seen; I will
   take vengeance, And will not meet a man. [280]

   4 Our Redeemer, his name is Jehovah of hosts, The Holy One of Israel.

   5 Sit thou silent, enter into darkness, O daughter of the Babylonians;
   For they shall no longer call thee the mistress of kingdoms.

   6 I was angry with my people; I profaned my inheritance; And I gave
   them up into thy hand; Thou didst not show compassion to them; On the
   old man didst thou heavily lay thy yoke.

   7 And thou saidst, I shall for ever be a mistress. Hitherto thou hast
   not applied thy mind to it, And hast not remembered her end.

   8 But now hear this, thou delicate woman, That sitteth confidently; Who
   saith in her heart, I am, And there is none besides me; I shall not sit
   as a widow, And I shall not know bereavement.

   9 But those two things shall suddenly come to thee, Bereavement And
   widowhood; In their perfection shall they come upon thee, For the
   multitude [281] of thy divinations, And for the abundance of thy
   auguries.

   10 For thou trustedst in thy malice; Thou saidst, No one seeth me. Thy
   wisdom And thy knowledge have led thee astray; And thou saidst in thy
   heart, It is I, And there is none besides me.

   11 Therefore shall evil come upon thee, the dawn of which thou knowest
   not crushing shall fall upon thee, which thou shalt not be able to
   avert; Destruction shall suddenly come upon thee, which thou knowest
   not; [282]

   12 Stand now amidst thy divinations, And amidst the multitude of thy
   auguries, In which thou hast wearied thyself from thy youth: If perhaps
   thou mayest be profited, If perhaps thou mayest prevail.

   13 Thou hast wearied thyself with the multitude of thy counsels; Let
   the binders of the heavens, The watchers of the stars, who predict by
   the moon, Stand now And deliver thee, From those things which shall
   come upon thee.

   14 Behold, they shall he as stubble; The fire shall burn them; They
   shall not deliver their soul from the strength of the flame; There
   shall not be a coal to warm, Nor a light at which they may sit.

   15 So shall they be to thee with whom thou weariedst thyself, Thy
   traders from thy youth. Every one shall wander into his own quarter;
   There shall be no one to save thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [280] Or, As a man.

   [281] Or, In the multitude.

   [282] "Et tu ne sqauras d'ou il viendra." "And thou shalt not know
   whence it shall come."
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 48

   1 Hear this, O house of Jacob, Ye who are called by the name of Israel,
   Who have come forth from the waters of Judah, Who swear by the name of
   Jehovah, And remember the God of Israel, Not in truth, nor in
   righteousness.

   2 For from the holy city they are called, And they rely on the God of
   Israel, Whose name is Jehovah of hosts.

   3 Long ago did I declare the former things; They went out of my mouth;
   I published them; I did them suddenly, And they came.

   4 For I knew that thou art obstinate; And thy neck is all iron sinew;
   And thy forehead is of brass.

   5 Long ago did I declare them to thee; Before they came, I showed to
   thee; Lest perhaps thou shouldst say, My idol hath done these things;
   My graven image And my molten image hath commanded them.

   6 Thou hast heard; see all things; And will ye not declare them? Even
   now have I made thee to hear new things, And hidden things, which thou
   didst not know.

   7 Now for the first time have they been created, And not long ago, nor
   by a succession of time; Thou hadst not heard them; Lest thou shouldst
   say, Behold, I knew.

   8 Surely thou hadst not heard; Surely thou hadst not known; Surely it
   is not long since thine ear was opened; For I knew that by
   transgressing thou didst transgress; Therefore have I called thee a
   rebel from the womb.

   9 For my names sake I will delay my fury; And for my praise I will
   restrain myself toward thee, So as not to cut thee off.

   10 Behold, I have tried thee, And not like silver; I have chosen thee
   in the furnace of affliction.

   11 For mine own sake, for mine own sake, will I do it; For how shall my
   name be profaned? And I will not give my glory to another.

   12 Hear me, O Jacob, And O Israel, my called; I, even I, am the first;
   Also I am the last.

   13 Surely my hand hath founded the earth; And my right hand hath
   measured [283] the heavens with the palm; When I call them they stand
   up [284] together.

   14 Assemble yourselves, all of you, And hear. Who among them declareth
   those things? Jehovah hath loved him, And will execute his pleasure
   against Babylon, And his arm [285] against the Babylonians.

   15 I, I [286] have spoken; Surely I have called him, I have led him;
   Therefore he shall prosper in his way.

   16 Draw near to me, hear this. I have not spoken in secret from the
   beginning; Since the thing was done, there was I; And now the Lord
   Jehovah, And his Spirit, hath sent me.

   17 Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer, The Holy One of Israel. I am
   Jehovah thy God, Who teacheth thee profitably, Who directeth thee in
   the way which thou goest.

   18 O if thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! Then should thy peace
   have been as a river, And thy righteousness as the waves of the sea.

   19 Thy seed should have been as the sand, And the children of thy womb
   as the small stones of it; Her name would not be cut off, And would not
   be destroyed before my face.

   20 Come forth from Babylon; Flee from the Babylonians. With the voice
   of rejoicing tell this; Publish, And carry it even to the end of the
   earth. Say ye, Jehovah hath redeemed his servant Jacob.

   21 Therefore they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts; He
   made water to flow to them from the rock; He clave the rock, And the
   waters flowed out.

   22 There is no peace, saith Jehovah to the wicked.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [283] Or, Hath upheld.

   [284] Or, They shall stand up.

   [285] Or, It is work.

   [286] "Ce suis-je, ce suis-je." "It is I, it is I"
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE SUN-DIAL OF AHAZ.

   This is believed to be the earliest account of a Sun-Dial that is
   anywhere to be found in history, and, on that account, has arrested the
   attention of scholars little addicted to the study of the Holy
   Scriptures. The form of it, which can now be nothing else than a matter
   of ingenious conjecture, has been investigated with uncommon industry,
   and illustrated with great profusion of learning. Little aid can be
   obtained from the incidental notice of the sacred historian, which our
   author has expounded with more than his usual conciseness.

   A preliminary question relates to the Hebrew word mlvt, (magnaloth,)
   which, like the Latin word gradus, literally means steps, but might
   naturally enough mean degrees. It has been contended that bathmous the
   term used by Josephus, is liable to a similar ambiguity, and may have
   been used by him in its literal signification. Michaelis differed so
   widely from this view, that he considered, mlh (magnalah) to signify a
   degree, in the sense used by modern mathematicians, who divide a circle
   into 360 degrees, so that 10 degrees (10) would denote the ninth part
   of a right angle; and he supports his opinion by shewing that this use
   of the word degree did not take its rise among European philosophers,
   but traveled from the East, and, like our ordinary numerals, had an
   Arabic origin.

   Assuming that the word denotes steps, there is still abundant room for
   diversity of interpretation. Some have thought that there was a flight
   of steps leading to the royal palace of Ahaz, on the top of which was
   placed a gnomon, (or obelisk,) and that the steps served to measure the
   shadow of the sun which was thrown upon them. Others refer it to an
   earlier period, when the sun-dial consisted of a massive structure,
   towering into the sky like other monuments of Oriental architecture,
   and built with scientific precision, but unfitted by its cumbrous form
   to vie with the accuracy and elegance of lighter instruments which
   belong to a more advanced age of science The type of such buildings is
   naturally sought, not in Judea, where such studies were never
   cultivated, but among the Egyptians, and especially among the
   Babylonians, to whom the Greeks and other nations were indebted for
   their knowledge of astronomy. Polon men gar gnomona kai ta duodeka
   merea tos hemeres, para Babulonion emathon hoi Ellenes "For the Greeks
   learned from the Babylonians the dial, and the gnomon, and the division
   of the day into twelve (parts) hours." (Herodotus Eut., 109.) Nothing
   is more natural than to suppose that Ahaz directed some architect to
   copy a celebrated building in Babylon, the general form of which may be
   gathered from the description given by Bishop Stock,^* whose version of
   the passage, and note, accompanied by a drawing, we shall lay before
   our readers: --

   Behold, I turn the shadow of the degrees,
   By which the sun is gone down on the dial of Ahaz,^**
   Backward ten degrees.
   So the sun turned back ten degrees,
   On the dial, by which it had gone down.

   In what manner the shadow was made to go backward ten degrees is a
   question totally distinct from the form of the dial. That it was
   effected by a motion of the sun itself, or by a change of the relative
   position of the earth to that luminary, though this has been boldly
   stated and argued, is a notion too extravagant to need refutation.
   There is plausibility in the view suggested by Doederlein, that "the
   change of the shadow depended entirely on a cloud, which intercepted,
   and in a manner altogether extraordinary refracted, the rays of the
   sun, and thus made the shadow or the light to go back ten degrees."
   Rosenmuller relates, on the authority of another commentator, an
   alteration of the shadow of a sun-dial, to the extent of an hour and
   half, which was effected by the shadow of a cloud at Metz, in the
   beginning of the eighteenth century. Without inquiring into the
   historical evidence of such an occurrence, or entering into long and
   intricate reasonings on the principles of optics, which would be
   unsuitable to this place, we shall only remark, that the transaction
   was undoubtedly miraculous; for it is declared to have been "a sign
   from Jehovah." In this respect, it is but one of innumerable miracles
   which were performed by an Almighty hand in the sight of the Jewish
   people, and which have been recorded in order to strengthen the faith,
   and aid the devotion, of the worshippers of God in all ages, who
   delight to "praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
   works to the children of men." -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [32]1:1   [33]1:1   [34]1:2   [35]1:2-6   [36]1:6   [37]1:14
   [38]1:26   [39]2:5   [40]2:9   [41]2:19   [42]3:6   [43]4:26
   [44]7:11   [45]7:15   [46]9:9   [47]9:12   [48]9:13   [49]11:31
   [50]11:31   [51]11:31   [52]12:1   [53]12:1   [54]12:3   [55]12:7
   [56]12:17   [57]12:17   [58]12:17   [59]14:14-15   [60]14:14-15
   [61]14:16   [62]14:17   [63]15:1   [64]15:5   [65]15:8   [66]15:13
   [67]17:7   [68]17:7   [69]17:7   [70]17:7   [71]19:24   [72]19:28
   [73]20:3   [74]20:3   [75]20:3   [76]20:18   [77]22:17   [78]22:18
   [79]23:6   [80]25:26   [81]32:25   [82]36:8   [83]48:16

   Exodus

   [84]1:11   [85]2:23   [86]3:6   [87]3:12   [88]3:14   [89]3:18
   [90]4:22   [91]7:20   [92]10:5   [93]10:15   [94]10:22   [95]11:4
   [96]12:8   [97]12:29   [98]12:29   [99]12:51   [100]12:51   [101]13:9
   [102]13:16   [103]13:21   [104]13:21   [105]14:4   [106]14:17
   [107]14:18   [108]14:21   [109]14:28   [110]14:29   [111]16:1-17:15
   [112]19:6   [113]19:6   [114]19:6   [115]20:2   [116]20:4   [117]20:5
   [118]20:24   [119]20:24   [120]23:22   [121]25:18   [122]28:11
   [123]30:23   [124]34:6

   Leviticus

   [125]26:19   [126]26:36

   Numbers

   [127]4:23   [128]14:11   [129]20   [130]20:12   [131]21:8   [132]23:10

   Deuteronomy

   [133]4:7   [134]4:12   [135]4:15   [136]4:24   [137]4:24   [138]4:37
   [139]7:6-8   [140]7:7-8   [141]9:3   [142]9:3   [143]9:5   [144]12:13
   [145]18:10   [146]18:15   [147]18:15   [148]18:15   [149]28:10
   [150]28:23   [151]28:37   [152]28:48   [153]30:3-4   [154]30:16
   [155]30:19   [156]32:1   [157]32:11   [158]32:15   [159]32:27
   [160]32:29   [161]32:30   [162]32:39

   Joshua

   [163]3:16   [164]11:23   [165]24:2

   Judges

   [166]5:6   [167]6:17   [168]6:37   [169]6:39   [170]12:4

   1 Samuel

   [171]2:6   [172]3:18   [173]4:11   [174]5:6   [175]10:10   [176]15:22
   [177]26:2   [178]28:20

   2 Samuel

   [179]6:1   [180]7:12   [181]7:12   [182]12:12   [183]24:1

   1 Kings

   [184]2:10   [185]7:14   [186]8:27   [187]11:14   [188]11:23
   [189]19:18   [190]22:22

   2 Kings

   [191]5:10   [192]15:29   [193]17:6   [194]17:6   [195]18:2
   [196]18:4   [197]18:4   [198]18:4   [199]18:11   [200]18:13
   [201]18:14   [202]18:20   [203]19:20   [204]19:20   [205]19:28
   [206]19:31   [207]19:35   [208]20:6   [209]20:8   [210]20:8
   [211]21:1   [212]21:13

   2 Chronicles

   [213]32:31   [214]32:31   [215]36:14-17   [216]36:23

   Ezra

   [217]1:2   [218]1:2   [219]4   [220]6:3   [221]6:8   [222]6:8
   [223]6:9   [224]7:16

   Job

   [225]5:13   [226]7:4   [227]9:15   [228]12:18   [229]14:5
   [230]15:35   [231]33:23   [232]40:4

   Psalms

   [233]1:4   [234]2:7-8   [235]2:9   [236]5:8   [237]6:3-6   [238]6:5
   [239]7:8   [240]7:14   [241]7:15   [242]9:14   [243]12:2   [244]12:6
   [245]14:1   [246]14:7   [247]15:2   [248]17:2   [249]18:2   [250]18:7
   [251]22:9-10   [252]22:10   [253]22:10   [254]22:10   [255]22:17
   [256]22:24   [257]22:31   [258]24:4   [259]27:1   [260]30:6-7
   [261]30:9   [262]33:3   [263]33:9   [264]33:22   [265]34:10
   [266]36:7   [267]37:1-2   [268]37:3   [269]37:3   [270]37:15
   [271]38:6   [272]39:9   [273]39:9   [274]42:2   [275]44:22
   [276]46:4-5   [277]46:5   [278]46:5   [279]47:2   [280]48:8
   [281]50:13   [282]50:15   [283]50:15   [284]53:6   [285]55:22
   [286]57:6   [287]58:10   [288]59:10   [289]59:17   [290]62:9
   [291]63:2   [292]65:2   [293]66:12   [294]67:5   [295]71:6
   [296]71:9   [297]72:3   [298]73:3   [299]74:9   [300]74:9   [301]76:2
   [302]76:2   [303]78:69   [304]78:69   [305]79:10   [306]79:10
   [307]84:4   [308]84:10   [309]85:10-11   [310]87:4   [311]89:36-37
   [312]89:39   [313]91:11   [314]96:1   [315]96:4-6   [316]102:28
   [317]103:5   [318]103:12   [319]103:15   [320]103:16   [321]104:2
   [322]104:30   [323]104:30   [324]105:12   [325]105:14   [326]105:14
   [327]105:15   [328]105:15   [329]105:30   [330]107:34   [331]110:6-7
   [332]114:3-4   [333]114:7   [334]115:3   [335]115:8   [336]115:17
   [337]116:16   [338]119:24   [339]119:105   [340]119:122   [341]123:2
   [342]126:1   [343]127:2   [344]127:4-5   [345]129:6   [346]129:8
   [347]130:3   [348]131:5   [349]132:14   [350]132:14   [351]132:14
   [352]132:14   [353]137:3   [354]137:4   [355]138:8   [356]141:2
   [357]143:6   [358]145:18   [359]147:2   [360]147:4   [361]147:19-20

   Proverbs

   [362]1:7   [363]16:9   [364]25:1

   Isaiah

   [365]1:2   [366]1:8   [367]1:15   [368]1:29   [369]3:6-7   [370]4:1
   [371]4:1   [372]5:25   [373]6:9   [374]7:4   [375]7:14   [376]7:15
   [377]8:6   [378]9:7   [379]10:5   [380]10:21-22   [381]11:1
   [382]11:2   [383]14:32   [384]14:32   [385]16:7   [386]19:18
   [387]21:9   [388]22:9   [389]22:20   [390]23:1   [391]23:12
   [392]26:17   [393]26:19   [394]29:10   [395]30   [396]30:1
   [397]30:1   [398]30:15   [399]30:21   [400]31   [401]32:15
   [402]33:1   [403]33:1-24   [404]33:6   [405]33:6   [406]33:20
   [407]34:1-17   [408]34:2   [409]34:14   [410]34:16   [411]35:1-10
   [412]36:1-22   [413]36:2   [414]36:22   [415]37:1-38   [416]37:2-4
   [417]37:8   [418]37:14   [419]37:29   [420]37:30   [421]37:38
   [422]38:1-22   [423]38:20   [424]39:1-8   [425]40   [426]40:1-31
   [427]40:9   [428]40:18   [429]41:1-29   [430]41:4   [431]41:7
   [432]41:25   [433]41:25   [434]42:1-25   [435]43:1   [436]43:1-28
   [437]43:12   [438]44:1-28   [439]44:5   [440]44:6   [441]44:10
   [442]44:12   [443]44:13   [444]45:1   [445]45:1   [446]45:1-25
   [447]45:4   [448]45:19   [449]46:1-13   [450]46:6   [451]47:1-15
   [452]48:1-22   [453]53:2   [454]54:1   [455]54:1   [456]54:9
   [457]59:4   [458]60:1-2   [459]63:13

   Jeremiah

   [460]1:10   [461]2:10-13   [462]2:11   [463]10:8   [464]10:14
   [465]17:5   [466]17:5   [467]23:7-8   [468]29:14   [469]30:9
   [470]31:9   [471]44:28   [472]49:22   [473]51:17   [474]51:20

   Lamentations

   [475]1:20   [476]2:15   [477]3:38   [478]3:41

   Ezekiel

   [479]8:3   [480]17:3   [481]18:20   [482]36:22   [483]36:22
   [484]36:25   [485]37:24   [486]37:24-25

   Daniel

   [487]2:14   [488]5:3   [489]5:30   [490]9:2

   Hosea

   [491]2:18   [492]3:5   [493]12:1

   Amos

   [494]3:6   [495]3:7

   Obadiah

   [496]1:11

   Jonah

   [497]1:2   [498]1:2   [499]3:4

   Micah

   [500]7:19

   Nahum

   [501]3:15

   Habakkuk

   [502]1:16   [503]1:16   [504]1:16   [505]2:11   [506]2:18   [507]3:9
   [508]3:13   [509]3:13

   Haggai

   [510]1:4   [511]2:6-9

   Zechariah

   [512]1:15   [513]12:10

   Malachi

   [514]1:4   [515]1:4-5   [516]1:6   [517]2:7   [518]2:7   [519]2:7
   [520]4:4

   Matthew

   [521]3:3   [522]3:16   [523]3:17   [524]4:16   [525]5:44   [526]5:44
   [527]6:8   [528]6:34   [529]7:2   [530]7:23   [531]8:4   [532]8:12
   [533]9:30   [534]10:6   [535]10:29   [536]11:19   [537]11:30
   [538]12:16   [539]12:17-21   [540]12:18   [541]12:39   [542]13:13
   [543]22:18   [544]23:13   [545]26:24

   Mark

   [546]1:3   [547]1:10   [548]5:43

   Luke

   [549]1:74-75   [550]3:4   [551]3:22   [552]6:25   [553]8:56
   [554]12:32   [555]13:27   [556]16:15   [557]21:18   [558]21:19
   [559]21:19   [560]21:28   [561]24:47

   John

   [562]1:21   [563]1:29   [564]1:32   [565]1:45   [566]2:22   [567]3:16
   [568]4:22   [569]4:24   [570]4:24   [571]8:36   [572]8:36   [573]8:36
   [574]8:44   [575]10:3   [576]10:3   [577]10:5   [578]10:16
   [579]10:29   [580]13:3   [581]15:15   [582]15:15   [583]17:3
   [584]17:10   [585]20:8   [586]20:23

   Acts

   [587]2:41   [588]3:12   [589]3:21   [590]3:24   [591]5:41   [592]7:2
   [593]7:3   [594]7:24   [595]7:51   [596]8:22   [597]13:46
   [598]14:17   [599]17:28   [600]17:29   [601]17:29

   Romans

   [602]1:2-3   [603]1:20   [604]1:20   [605]1:28   [606]1:28
   [607]1:28   [608]3:2   [609]3:3-4   [610]3:3-4   [611]3:23
   [612]3:27   [613]4:2   [614]4:18   [615]4:18   [616]4:18
   [617]4:20-21   [618]5:3   [619]5:3   [620]6:4   [621]8:23   [622]8:24
   [623]8:24   [624]8:25   [625]8:26   [626]8:26   [627]8:26   [628]8:38
   [629]9:4   [630]9:6-7   [631]9:11   [632]9:11   [633]9:20
   [634]10:10   [635]10:14   [636]11:4   [637]11:29   [638]11:29
   [639]11:34   [640]14:10-11   [641]14:17   [642]15:4   [643]15:8

   1 Corinthians

   [644]1:20   [645]4:13   [646]6:11   [647]8:4   [648]9:16   [649]10:13
   [650]11:30   [651]12:3   [652]12:3   [653]12:6   [654]16:13

   2 Corinthians

   [655]1:20   [656]1:20   [657]1:24   [658]3:5   [659]4:3-4
   [660]4:8-9   [661]6:14-15   [662]6:16   [663]9:7   [664]11:14
   [665]12:7   [666]12:9   [667]12:9

   Galatians

   [668]4:26   [669]5:22

   Ephesians

   [670]1:4   [671]1:4   [672]1:4-6   [673]1:6   [674]1:6   [675]1:21
   [676]1:22-23   [677]1:23   [678]2:10   [679]2:10   [680]2:12
   [681]2:12   [682]2:14   [683]2:14   [684]2:17   [685]3:16   [686]3:17
   [687]5:8   [688]5:8

   Philippians

   [689]1:6   [690]1:6   [691]2:6   [692]2:9   [693]2:15   [694]4:5-6
   [695]4:7

   Colossians

   [696]1:9   [697]1:15   [698]1:28   [699]2:3   [700]3:3

   1 Thessalonians

   [701]4:7   [702]4:13   [703]4:14   [704]5:3

   2 Thessalonians

   [705]2:11   [706]2:11

   1 Timothy

   [707]1:5   [708]3:15   [709]3:15   [710]6:15

   2 Timothy

   [711]1:12   [712]2:13   [713]2:13

   Hebrews

   [714]1:1   [715]4:13   [716]4:13   [717]4:13   [718]6:16   [719]10:36
   [720]11:3   [721]11:6   [722]11:6   [723]11:13   [724]12:3
   [725]12:12   [726]12:29

   James

   [727]1:2   [728]1:5   [729]1:17   [730]1:18   [731]1:18   [732]2:13
   [733]5:17-18   [734]5:20

   1 Peter

   [735]1:23   [736]1:25   [737]2:9   [738]2:9   [739]4:17   [740]5:6
   [741]5:6   [742]5:7   [743]5:7

   2 Peter

   [744]1:19   [745]1:20-21   [746]3:4

   Jude

   [747]1:7
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Isaiah

   [748]33   [749]33:1   [750]33:2   [751]33:3   [752]33:4   [753]33:5
   [754]33:6   [755]33:7   [756]33:8   [757]33:9   [758]33:10
   [759]33:11   [760]33:12   [761]33:13   [762]33:14   [763]33:15
   [764]33:16   [765]33:17   [766]33:18   [767]33:19   [768]33:20
   [769]33:21   [770]33:22   [771]33:23   [772]33:24   [773]34
   [774]34:1   [775]34:2   [776]34:3   [777]34:4   [778]34:5   [779]34:6
   [780]34:7   [781]34:8   [782]34:9   [783]34:10   [784]34:11
   [785]34:12   [786]34:13   [787]34:14   [788]34:16   [789]34:17
   [790]35   [791]35:1   [792]35:2   [793]35:3   [794]35:4   [795]35:5
   [796]35:6   [797]35:7   [798]35:8   [799]35:9   [800]35:10   [801]36
   [802]36:1   [803]36:2   [804]36:3   [805]36:4   [806]36:5   [807]36:6
   [808]36:7   [809]36:8   [810]36:9   [811]36:10   [812]36:11
   [813]36:12   [814]36:13   [815]36:14   [816]36:15   [817]36:16
   [818]36:17   [819]36:18   [820]36:19   [821]36:20   [822]36:21
   [823]36:22   [824]37   [825]37:1   [826]37:2   [827]37:4   [828]37:5
   [829]37:6   [830]37:7   [831]37:8   [832]37:9   [833]37:10
   [834]37:11   [835]37:12   [836]37:14   [837]37:15   [838]37:16
   [839]37:17   [840]37:18   [841]37:19   [842]37:20   [843]37:21
   [844]37:22   [845]37:23   [846]37:24   [847]37:25   [848]37:26
   [849]37:27   [850]37:28   [851]37:29   [852]37:30   [853]37:31
   [854]37:32   [855]37:33   [856]37:34   [857]37:35   [858]37:36
   [859]37:37   [860]37:38   [861]38   [862]38:1   [863]38:2   [864]38:3
   [865]38:4   [866]38:5   [867]38:6   [868]38:7   [869]38:8   [870]38:9
   [871]38:10   [872]38:11   [873]38:12   [874]38:13   [875]38:14
   [876]38:15   [877]38:16   [878]38:17   [879]38:18   [880]38:19
   [881]38:20   [882]38:21   [883]38:22   [884]39   [885]39:1
   [886]39:2   [887]39:3   [888]39:4   [889]39:5   [890]39:6   [891]39:7
   [892]39:8   [893]40   [894]40:1   [895]40:2   [896]40:3   [897]40:4
   [898]40:5   [899]40:6   [900]40:7   [901]40:8   [902]40:9
   [903]40:10   [904]40:11   [905]40:12   [906]40:13   [907]40:14
   [908]40:15   [909]40:16   [910]40:17   [911]40:18   [912]40:19
   [913]40:20   [914]40:21   [915]40:22   [916]40:23   [917]40:24
   [918]40:25   [919]40:26   [920]40:27   [921]40:28   [922]40:29
   [923]40:30   [924]40:31   [925]41   [926]41:1   [927]41:2   [928]41:3
   [929]41:4   [930]41:5   [931]41:6   [932]41:7   [933]41:8   [934]41:9
   [935]41:10   [936]41:11   [937]41:12   [938]41:13   [939]41:14
   [940]41:15   [941]41:16   [942]41:17   [943]41:18   [944]41:20
   [945]41:21   [946]41:22   [947]41:23   [948]41:24   [949]41:25
   [950]41:26   [951]41:27   [952]41:28   [953]41:29   [954]42
   [955]42:1   [956]42:2   [957]42:3   [958]42:4   [959]42:5   [960]42:6
   [961]42:7   [962]42:8   [963]42:9   [964]42:10   [965]42:11
   [966]42:12   [967]42:13   [968]42:14   [969]42:15   [970]42:16
   [971]42:17   [972]42:18   [973]42:19   [974]42:20   [975]42:21
   [976]42:22   [977]42:23   [978]42:24   [979]42:25   [980]43
   [981]43:1   [982]43:2   [983]43:3   [984]43:4   [985]43:5   [986]43:6
   [987]43:7   [988]43:8   [989]43:9   [990]43:10   [991]43:11
   [992]43:12   [993]43:13   [994]43:14   [995]43:15   [996]43:16
   [997]43:17   [998]43:18   [999]43:19   [1000]43:20   [1001]43:21
   [1002]43:22   [1003]43:23   [1004]43:24   [1005]43:25   [1006]43:26
   [1007]43:27   [1008]43:28   [1009]44   [1010]44:1   [1011]44:2
   [1012]44:3   [1013]44:4   [1014]44:5   [1015]44:6   [1016]44:7
   [1017]44:8   [1018]44:9   [1019]44:10   [1020]44:11   [1021]44:12
   [1022]44:13   [1023]44:14   [1024]44:15   [1025]44:18   [1026]44:19
   [1027]44:20   [1028]44:21   [1029]44:22   [1030]44:23   [1031]44:24
   [1032]44:25   [1033]44:26   [1034]44:27   [1035]44:28   [1036]45
   [1037]45:1   [1038]45:2   [1039]45:4   [1040]45:5   [1041]45:6
   [1042]45:7   [1043]45:8   [1044]45:9   [1045]45:11   [1046]45:12
   [1047]45:13   [1048]45:14   [1049]45:15   [1050]45:16   [1051]45:18
   [1052]45:19   [1053]45:20   [1054]45:21   [1055]45:22   [1056]45:23
   [1057]45:24   [1058]45:25   [1059]46   [1060]46:1   [1061]46:2
   [1062]46:3   [1063]46:4   [1064]46:5   [1065]46:6   [1066]46:7
   [1067]46:8   [1068]46:9   [1069]46:10   [1070]46:11   [1071]46:12
   [1072]46:13   [1073]47   [1074]47:1   [1075]47:2   [1076]47:3
   [1077]47:4   [1078]47:5   [1079]47:6   [1080]47:7   [1081]47:8
   [1082]47:9   [1083]47:10   [1084]47:11   [1085]47:12   [1086]47:13
   [1087]47:14   [1088]47:15   [1089]48   [1090]48:1   [1091]48:2
   [1092]48:3   [1093]48:4   [1094]48:5   [1095]48:6   [1096]48:7
   [1097]48:8   [1098]48:9   [1099]48:10   [1100]48:11   [1101]48:12
   [1102]48:13   [1103]48:14   [1104]48:15   [1105]48:16   [1106]48:17
   [1107]48:18   [1108]48:19   [1109]48:20   [1110]48:21   [1111]48:22
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * aetos: [1112]1
     * akousas angelian: [1113]1
     * amarturon: [1114]1
     * anakephalaiosis: [1115]1
     * andrizesthe: [1116]1
     * anthropomorphos : [1117]1
     * anudros: [1118]1
     * hapax legomenon: [1119]1
     * emou thanontos gaia michtheto puri: [1120]1
     * ephemeron: [1121]1
     * ophthesomai: [1122]1
     * horathesomai autois: [1123]1
     * hosper gar tois somasin hemon heos men an erromenos e tis ouden
       epaisthanetai ton kath hekasta sathron ep' an de arrostema sumbho
       panta kineitai kan rhegma kan stremma kan allo ti ton huparchonton
       sathron e houto kai ton poleon kai ton turannon.: [1124]1
     * En de auto semeion aetos chrusous epi doratos makrou anatetamenos,
       kai nun de touto epi semeion to Person basilei diamenei: [1125]1
     * ei adiketeon turannidos peri adiketeon: [1126]1
     * ei boulesthe sulogethonai: [1127]1
     * kat exochen: [1128]1
     * kat' antithesin: [1129]1
     * kat' exochen: [1130]1
     * mimetikos: [1131]1
     * nekroi: [1132]1
     * peri tautes palingenesias: [1133]1
     * pros auxesin: [1134]1
     * pros ti: [1135]1
     * skene: [1136]1
     * sumptomata: [1137]1
     * to poiema: [1138]1 [1139]2
     * tethneotes: [1140]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * mvsr: [1141]1
     * mzkyr: [1142]1
     * 'vrym: [1143]1
     * 'ddh: [1144]1 [1145]2
     * 'dmh: [1146]1
     * 'vly: [1147]1
     * 'ys: [1148]1 [1149]2 [1150]3 [1151]4 [1152]5 [1153]6
     * 'k: [1154]1
     * 'lhym: [1155]1 [1156]2
     * 'mvnt: [1157]1
     * 'mt: [1158]1
     * 'ph: [1159]1 [1160]2 [1161]3 [1162]4 [1163]5 [1164]6
     * 'ph zrtyk: [1165]1
     * 'phg: [1166]1
     * 'tsylym: [1167]1
     * 'r'h lm: [1168]1
     * 'r'lm: [1169]1
     * 'rts: [1170]1
     * 's: [1171]1 [1172]2
     * 'sh: [1173]1 [1174]2
     * 'sys: [1175]1
     * 'sr: [1176]1 [1177]2 [1178]3 [1179]4
     * 'ssym: [1180]1
     * 'tmk: [1181]1
     * v: [1182]1 [1183]2
     * vdym: [1184]1
     * vhvrym: [1185]1
     * vchrym: [1186]1
     * vl' yvyl: [1187]1
     * vrchym: [1188]1
     * vrkh: [1189]1
     * ddh: [1190]1
     * dvr: [1191]1
     * dlh: [1192]1 [1193]2
     * dll: [1194]1 [1195]2
     * h'l: [1196]1
     * hv': [1197]1 [1198]2 [1199]3 [1200]4 [1201]5
     * hvy: [1202]1
     * hvrh: [1203]1
     * hnphym: [1204]1
     * hphch: [1205]1
     * hrm: [1206]1
     * ht'ssv: [1207]1
     * v: [1208]1 [1209]2 [1210]3 [1211]4 [1212]5 [1213]6 [1214]7
     * vhyh: [1215]1
     * vzrvv ksdym: [1216]1
     * chvr: [1217]1
     * chvrym: [1218]1
     * chh: [1219]1
     * chzh: [1220]1
     * chch: [1221]1
     * chsd: [1222]1
     * chsdv: [1223]1
     * chrs: [1224]1 [1225]2
     * chsym: [1226]1
     * chsq: [1227]1
     * tphchh: [1228]1
     * yvv': [1229]1
     * yh yh: [1230]1
     * yhgh: [1231]1
     * yhvh: [1232]1
     * ykhh: [1233]1
     * ymdv: [1234]1
     * ytsr: [1235]1
     * yqr': [1236]1
     * yrdh: [1237]1
     * yrh: [1238]1
     * ysr: [1239]1 [1240]2
     * ysrvn: [1241]1
     * k: [1242]1
     * ky: [1243]1 [1244]2 [1245]3 [1246]4 [1247]5 [1248]6 [1249]7
     * ky ym: [1250]1
     * ksch: [1251]1
     * l' nvtsr: [1252]1
     * lhvyl: [1253]1
     * lhm: [1254]1
     * lv: [1255]1
     * lv': [1256]1
     * lm: [1257]1
     * m: [1258]1
     * m'z: [1259]1 [1260]2
     * mdlh: [1261]1
     * mhlyq: [1262]1
     * mvsy: [1263]1
     * msttr: [1264]1
     * mlh: [1265]1
     * mlvt: [1266]1
     * mqdm: [1267]1
     * mty: [1268]1 [1269]2
     * mty msphr: [1270]1
     * mtym: [1271]1 [1272]2
     * n': [1273]1
     * nvz: [1274]1
     * nrym: [1275]1
     * nrtsh: [1276]1
     * nsyym: [1277]1
     * sllh: [1278]1
     * sphr: [1279]1
     * vdv my slm': [1280]1
     * d: [1281]1
     * vnh: [1282]1
     * yt: [1283]1 [1284]2 [1285]3
     * yt: [1286]1
     * rv: [1287]1
     * svq: [1288]1
     * phlt: [1289]1
     * phlyth: [1290]1
     * phlyty: [1291]1 [1292]2
     * phm: [1293]1 [1294]2
     * tsv'h: [1295]1
     * tsdqv: [1296]1
     * tsrph: [1297]1 [1298]2 [1299]3
     * r'v vyyr'v: [1300]1
     * s: [1301]1 [1302]2
     * svr: [1303]1
     * skr: [1304]1
     * slm: [1305]1
     * sqr: [1306]1 [1307]2
     * srv: [1308]1
     * thv: [1309]1 [1310]2
     * tvrh: [1311]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Aio to : [1312]1
     * Astrologia: [1313]1
     * Croesus Halym penetrans magnam pervertet opum vim: [1314]1
     * Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum; Quum faber, incertus
       scamnum faceretne: [1315]1
     * Pronaque quum spectent animalia caetera terram, Os homini sublime
       dedit, coelumque videre Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere
       vultus: [1316]1
     * Quoad domum taam, vel, domui tuae: [1317]1
     * ad cor: [1318]1
     * confundamini: [1319]1
     * descenderat: [1320]1
     * propter: [1321]1
     * qui mortui estis in Israel: [1322]1
     * quoe erat arida: [1323]1
     * secundum cor: [1324]1
     * vanitas: [1325]1
     * videntes: [1326]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * A ceux qui la veulent contempler en foy: [1327]1
     * A l'idole corruptible: [1328]1
     * A la rigueur: [1329]1
     * A leur advis: [1330]1
     * A ne tenir conte des menaces d'iceluy: [1331]1
     * Afin de destourner les idiots (qu'ils appellent) de lira dedans:
       [1332]1
     * Afin de ne la point voir: [1333]1
     * Apres des erreurs et superstitions: [1334]1
     * Assavoir, sur belles paroles: [1335]1
     * Au chemin d'entre Iudee et Babylone: [1336]1
     * Au moins qu'il y ait paix: [1337]1
     * Au travers de la quelle ceste desconfiture passera sans espargner
       endroit quelconque: [1338]1
     * Aux causes secondes: [1339]1
     * Aux enfans de ce monde: [1340]1
     * C'est leur vraye felicite d'estre conjoints a leur Sauveur: [1341]1
     * Car il n' empoigne la verge soudainement: [1342]1
     * Car il y aura paix: [1343]1
     * Car tonte son etude est: [1344]1
     * Ce mot d' eleu : [1345]1
     * Ce peu qu'ils ont de conscience: [1346]1
     * Ce qu' aussi nous devons faire: [1347]1
     * Ce suis-je, ce suis-je: [1348]1 [1349]2 [1350]3 [1351]4 [1352]5
       [1353]6
     * Certainement nos enfans sont plus savans et religieux qu'eux:
       [1354]1
     * Comme celuy qui fut donne a Pyrrhus: [1355]1
     * Comme si Dieu n'en cust rien veu: [1356]1
     * Comme si toutes les autres villes n'estoyent rien derant Dieu au
       pris de cesteci: [1357]1
     * D'autant qu'ils estoyent de matire corruptible: [1358]1
     * D'escheles: [1359]1
     * D'un remords de mauvaise conscience: [1360]1
     * De ce beau theater du monde: [1361]1
     * De la droite fiance en luy: [1362]1
     * De leurs ennemis: [1363]1
     * Dechassant par la splendeur de sa vertu toutes tenebres
       d'ignorance: [1364]1
     * Des idolatres mesmes: [1365]1
     * Des poures pecheurs: [1366]1
     * Devant moy: [1367]1
     * Doit considerer et savoir que ce que fait ici Ezechias, luy est
       enjoint en cas semblable: [1368]1
     * En les punissant: [1369]1
     * En son conseil: [1370]1
     * En un seul homme: [1371]1
     * En voyant les Gentils avoir toutes choses a souhait: [1372]1
     * Encor qu'il y en air un: [1373]1
     * Encore qu'il leur air pardonne: [1374]1
     * Estoit decrete et ordonne desia en son conseil: [1375]1
     * Et: [1376]1
     * Et Ezechias pleura amerement: [1377]1
     * Et exauce les souspirs faits en foy: [1378]1
     * Et jetter au sein d'iceluy sa tristesse et soliciltude: [1379]1
     * Et n'ont que faire de luy: [1380]1
     * Et qu'il ne se soucie des choses de ce monde: [1381]1
     * Et semblent estre elevees jusqu' au ciel: [1382]1
     * Et tu ne sqauras d'ou il viendra: [1383]1
     * Evangile, c'est a dire Bonne nouvelle: [1384]1
     * Fortifler ceux qui sont prests a tomber: [1385]1
     * Hors de ce monde: [1386]1
     * Il a de belles paroles: [1387]1
     * Il devoit (ce semble) monstrer la vertu de bonne heure, et non pas
       declarer ce qu'il feroit apres le siege leve: [1388]1
     * Il ne fait pas grand bruit: [1389]1
     * Il s'esleve d'une saincte colere alencontre de la folie desesperee
       des hommes: [1390]1
     * Ils ont defie tous dangers: [1391]1
     * Ils seront sacrifiez par les mains d'aussi mecans qn'eux: [1392]1
     * Jusqu' a ce que quelque oiseau soit apparu: [1393]1
     * Jusqu' ace qu'il nons esleve en haut a soy: [1394]1
     * L' a-il pas appele pour venir apres soy: [1395]1
     * L'apparence d'un ver de terre: [1396]1
     * L'arc en la nuce: [1397]1
     * La reconciliation avec Dieu: [1398]1
     * Le Seigneur m'a delivre: [1399]1
     * Le mal m' oppresse: [1400]1
     * Lequel viendroit avec une merveilleuse vistesse: [1401]1
     * Les bestes sauvages (assavoir Ziim avec Iim,) s'y rencontreront:
       [1402]1
     * Les ennemis de l'Eglise: [1403]1
     * Les fideles: [1404]1
     * Les idols et l'idolatrie: [1405]1
     * Les maisons: [1406]1
     * Les profanes et incredules: [1407]1
     * Lesquelles ne pourroyent demeurer debout si les hommes n'y
       mettoyent la main: [1408]1
     * Mais c'estoit temps perdu: [1409]1
     * Mais celle ou il y aura des sergens de bande, capitaines, colonels
       et autres conducteurs: [1410]1
     * Mais pareillement a mis une priere en la bouche, et un bouclier au
       bras des fideles pour resister a la tentation: [1411]1
     * N'y en a point d'autre que Dieu: [1412]1
     * Non pas a ces sages mondains: [1413]1
     * Non pas que pour crainte d'estre mal voulu, il se descharge sur le
       Seigneur: [1414]1
     * Nonobstant la multitude des derins et augures: [1415]1
     * Nulle forme d'Eglise: [1416]1
     * Outre ces ans-ci: [1417]1
     * Par un poete profane: [1418]1
     * Paraventure, ou possible: [1419]1
     * Pour adoucir la tristesse des fideles de ces tempsla: [1420]1
     * Pour l'amour de mon sainct nom: [1421]1
     * Pour recognoistre Dieu, qui les chastioit si rudement: [1422]1
     * Pource que nous avons ose abolir les traditions et ceremonies qui
       estoyent en usage de long temps: [1423]1
     * Puis qu'il estoit ills et successeur de David: [1424]1
     * Puis que ton naturel est d'assister aux tiens, quand tout est
       reduit au desespoir: [1425]1
     * Puisque sa force n'estoit point diminuee, ni sa beneficence
       refroidie: [1426]1
     * Qu' ils ont eu tort de guerroyer: [1427]1
     * Qu'il faisoit son conte de mourir: [1428]1
     * Qu'ils seroyent constrains de signer leur condamnation: [1429]1
     * Quand leurs coeurs sont endureis: [1430]1
     * Quand on leur apportoit nouvelles de l' ennemi: [1431]1
     * Que Dieu sera plus fort qu' eux: [1432]1
     * Que l'homme est plus beste que los bestes mesmes: [1433]1
     * Que la guerre qu'il entreprendoit de faire auroit heureuse issue,
       et seroit benite du ciel: [1434]1
     * Que le vent d'adversite ne les puisse abattre: [1435]1
     * Que nons avons traduit Guerre, pour "le temps," comme s'il estoit
       dit Son temps est accompli: [1436]1
     * Que tous sont vanite: [1437]1
     * Quel orgueil estce donc que le premier qui voudra mettre la main a
       la besogne se face autant de dieux que bon luy semblera: [1438]1
     * Qui comprend en soy le regne de Christ jusqu' a la fin du monde:
       [1439]1
     * Qui ne sommes qu'une poignee de gens: [1440]1
     * Qui sont plus vaines que la vanite mesme: [1441]1
     * S'ils ont quelque loisir de reprendre haleine: [1442]1
     * Satisfaction ou recompenses: [1443]1
     * Selon le coeur: [1444]1
     * Seulement: [1445]1
     * Si nous ne daignons ouvrir la bouche pour prier: [1446]1
     * Son Eglise composee de toutes les nations de la terre: [1447]1
     * Tant s'en faut qu'elle ose tonner si haut que de coustume, que
       mesmes elle n'osera desserrer les dents: [1448]1
     * Tant sous le vieil que sous le nouveau testament: [1449]1
     * Tellement qu'ils ne marchent qu'en trainant les jambes ou a
       clochepied: [1450]1
     * Un esprit humble et modeste: [1451]1
     * Un renonvellement incroyable, ou seconde creation du monde: [1452]1
     * mirage: [1453]1
     * qu'il estoit monte: [1454]1
     * ton bon droict: [1455]1
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. http://www.ccel.org/
   2. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p374
   3. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p393
   4. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p429
   5. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p330
   6. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p420
   7. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p232
   8. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.chap36.vs7
   9. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.chap37.vs28
  10. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.chap38.vs8
  11. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.sundial
  12. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p246
  13. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p83
  14. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p264
  15. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p132
  16. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.preface.p26
  17. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.Isa15.vs5
  18. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p84
  19. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol09.htm|vol09.p19.note
  20. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol09.htm|vol09.p19
  21. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol31.htm|vol31.p92.note2
  22. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol31.htm|vol31.p142.note2
  23. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p135
  24. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol11.htm|vol11.p260
  25. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol11.htm|vol11.p261
  26. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol11.htm|vol11.p260.note
  27. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p70
  28. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p155
  29. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p312
  30. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p214
  31. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p227
  32. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xii.i-p126.1
  33. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xiv.i-p118.1
  34. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#x.i-p222.2
  35. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xvii.i-p99.3
  36. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xiv.i-p118.1
  37. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xiii.i-p181.1
  38. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#xiv.i-p118.1
  39. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xi.i-p113.2
  40. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.i-p90.3
  41. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.i-p101.2
  42. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#xii.i-p200.1
  43. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=26#xii.i-p178.1
  44. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=11#xi.i-p183.1
  45. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=15#iii.i-p101.1
  46. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=9#xiv.i-p155.2
  47. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=12#vii.i-p90.4
  48. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vii.i-p185.2
  49. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=31#vi.i-p135.3
  50. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=31#xiii.i-p92.1
  51. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=31#x.i-p72.2
  52. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#x.i-p72.2
  53. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#x.i-p75.3
  54. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vi.i-p182.2
  55. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=7#x.i-p75.2
  56. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=17#iii.i-p100.2
  57. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=17#x.i-p77.2
  58. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=17#x.i-p84.4
  59. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=14#x.i-p77.1
  60. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=14#x.i-p77.6
  61. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=16#x.i-p84.1
  62. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=17#x.i-p90.1
  63. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vi.i-p181.2
  64. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=5#xiv.i-p215.1
  65. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=8#xii.i-p202.1
  66. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=13#xvii.i-p59.1
  67. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#vi.i-p181.2
  68. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#ix.i-p78.1
  69. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#x.i-p106.1
  70. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#xiv.i-p215.1
  71. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=24#iii.i-p73.1
  72. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=28#iii.i-p53.2
  73. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=3#iii.i-p100.3
  74. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=3#vii.i-p72.1
  75. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=3#x.i-p77.3
  76. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=18#x.i-p84.3
  77. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=17#xvii.i-p133.1
  78. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#xi.i-p96.1
  79. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=23&scrV=6#x.i-p76.1
  80. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=26#xiii.i-p64.2
  81. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=25#xvii.i-p50.1
  82. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=36&scrV=8#iii.i-p55.4
  83. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=16#xii.i-p90.1
  84. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xiv.i-p87.2
  85. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=23#xiv.i-p87.3
  86. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii.i-p108.3
  87. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi.i-p236.2
  88. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xvi.i-p75.1
  89. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.i-p236.2
  90. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=22#xii.i-p78.1
  91. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=20#xii.i-p158.1
  92. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=10&scrV=5#xi.i-p113.3
  93. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=10&scrV=15#xii.i-p158.4
  94. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=10&scrV=22#xii.i-p158.2
  95. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=11&scrV=4#ix.i-p95.2
  96. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=8#vii.i-p90.7
  97. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vi.i-p265.4
  98. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=29#xii.i-p158.3
  99. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=51#xiii.i-p172.1
 100. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=51#xvii.i-p76.1
 101. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=9#xii.i-p144.1
 102. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=16#x.i-p89.1
 103. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=21#iv.i-p64.1
 104. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=21#vii.i-p90.5
 105. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=4#xii.i-p172.1
 106. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=17#xii.i-p172.1
 107. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=18#xii.i-p172.1
 108. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=21#xii.i-p145.1
 109. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=28#xii.i-p147.1
 110. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=29#xiii.i-p193.1
 111. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=1#xvii.i-p142.1
 112. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=6#x.i-p107.2
 113. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=6#xii.i-p131.1
 114. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=6#xii.i-p203.2
 115. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=2#xii.i-p151.1
 116. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=4#v.i-p91.2
 117. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#xi.i-p107.1
 118. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=24#vi.i-p201.1
 119. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=24#xiv.i-p125.1
 120. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=22#vi.i-p182.3
 121. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=18#vi.i-p149.1
 122. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=28&scrV=11#x.i-p97.4
 123. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=23#xii.i-p183.1
 124. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=6#vii.i-p126.1
 125. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=19#ii.i-p143.1
 126. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=36#iii.i-p50.1
 127. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=23#ix.i-p85.2
 128. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=11#xvi.i-p80.3
 129. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=0#xvii.i-p142.1
 130. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=12#xii.i-p203.1
 131. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=8#vii.i-p90.6
 132. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=10#vii.i-p108.2
 133. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=7#x.i-p63.2
 134. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=12#ix.i-p169.2
 135. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#ix.i-p169.2
 136. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=24#ii.i-p129.1
 137. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=24#ii.i-p132.1
 138. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=37#x.i-p109.2
 139. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=6#x.i-p109.2
 140. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=7#x.i-p115.1
 141. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=3#ii.i-p129.1
 142. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=3#ii.i-p132.1
 143. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=5#x.i-p117.1
 144. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=13#xii.i-p181.1
 145. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=10#xiii.i-p180.1
 146. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vi.i-p87.1
 147. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#x.i-p211.2
 148. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#x.i-p213.1
 149. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=10#xii.i-p90.2
 150. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=23#ii.i-p143.2
 151. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=37#xii.i-p212.1
 152. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=48#ii.i-p143.2
 153. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=3#xii.i-p84.1
 154. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=16#xvii.i-p123.3
 155. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=19#xvii.i-p123.1
 156. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=1#iii.i-p40.2
 157. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=11#xv.i-p46.1
 158. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=15#xiii.i-p67.7
 159. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=27#xvii.i-p89.2
 160. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=29#xvii.i-p125.1
 161. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=30#xi.i-p175.1
 162. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=39#vii.i-p73.1
 163. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xii.i-p145.2
 164. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=11&scrV=23#xii.i-p159.1
 165. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=2#xii.i-p202.2
 166. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=5&scrV=6#ii.i-p103.1
 167. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vii.i-p90.2
 168. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.i-p90.2
 169. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=39#vii.i-p90.2
 170. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=12&scrV=4#xiv.i-p179.3
 171. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.i-p73.2
 172. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=3&scrV=18#viii.i-p55.2
 173. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xv.i-p38.1
 174. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xv.i-p39.1
 175. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=10&scrV=10#xvii.i-p104.2
 176. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vii.i-p69.1
 177. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=26&scrV=2#xi.i-p63.1
 178. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=20#viii.i-p55.3
 179. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xi.i-p63.2
 180. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=12#vi.i-p259.1
 181. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=12#vii.i-p75.1
 182. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=12#viii.i-p55.1
 183. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=1#viii.i-p47.1
 184. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.i-p109.2
 185. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=7&scrV=14#x.i-p97.5
 186. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=27#ix.i-p185.1
 187. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=14#xiv.i-p87.1
 188. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=23#xiv.i-p87.1
 189. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=18#xiv.i-p202.1
 190. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=22#x.i-p181.3
 191. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xiv.i-p91.1
 192. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=15&scrV=29#vi.i-p243.1
 193. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=6#vi.i-p243.1
 194. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=6#vi.i-p135.1
 195. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=2#vii.i-p48.1
 196. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.i-p50.1
 197. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.i-p90.2
 198. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.i-p91.1
 199. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=11#vi.i-p135.1
 200. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vii.i-p48.2
 201. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=14#v.i-p55.1
 202. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=20#v.i-p63.1
 203. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=20#vi.i-p172.1
 204. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=20#vi.i-p174.1
 205. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=28#xii.i-p74.1
 206. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=31#v.i-p93.1
 207. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=35#ii.i-p77.1
 208. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=6#vii.i-p48.3
 209. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=8#vii.i-p90.1
 210. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=8#vii.i-p187.1
 211. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vii.i-p52.1
 212. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=13#iii.i-p81.3
 213. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=32&scrV=31#viii.i-p22.1
 214. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=32&scrV=31#xii.i-p205.1
 215. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=36&scrV=14#viii.i-p46.1
 216. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=36&scrV=23#xiv.i-p126.3
 217. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xii.i-p159.3
 218. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xiv.i-p126.4
 219. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xii.i-p160.1
 220. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xiv.i-p126.4
 221. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=6&scrV=8#xiv.i-p130.1
 222. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=6&scrV=8#xiv.i-p179.7
 223. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=6&scrV=9#xiv.i-p179.4
 224. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=7&scrV=16#xiv.i-p179.4
 225. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=13#xvi.i-p85.1
 226. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=4#vii.i-p137.1
 227. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=15#vii.i-p138.3
 228. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=12&scrV=18#xiv.i-p61.1
 229. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=5#vii.i-p85.1
 230. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=35#ii.i-p113.2
 231. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=33&scrV=23#xii.i-p205.2
 232. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=4#vii.i-p138.2
 233. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.i-p114.1
 234. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xi.i-p100.1
 235. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xi.i-p77.3
 236. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xiv.i-p123.2
 237. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vii.i-p126.2
 238. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.i-p168.1
 239. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=8#vii.i-p66.1
 240. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=14#ii.i-p113.2
 241. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=15#ii.i-p115.1
 242. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=14#vi.i-p178.1
 243. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vii.i-p67.2
 244. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=6#xiv.i-p174.1
 245. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#ix.i-p224.1
 246. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=7#vi.i-p242.2
 247. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=2#xvii.i-p54.1
 248. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=2#vii.i-p66.1
 249. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=2#vii.i-p100.1
 250. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=7#xvii.i-p144.2
 251. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=9#xiii.i-p174.1
 252. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=10#xiii.i-p61.1
 253. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=10#xv.i-p43.2
 254. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=10#xv.i-p51.2
 255. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=17#vii.i-p126.2
 256. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vi.i-p104.1
 257. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=31#xiv.i-p123.2
 258. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=4#xvii.i-p54.1
 259. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=1#vii.i-p100.1
 260. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=6#vii.i-p149.1
 261. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=9#vii.i-p109.1
 262. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=3#xi.i-p117.1
 263. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=9#xvii.i-p99.2
 264. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=22#ii.i-p62.2
 265. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=10#ii.i-p143.3
 266. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=7#vi.i-p187.1
 267. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=1#xiv.i-p150.2
 268. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=3#xiii.i-p147.2
 269. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=3#xiii.i-p148.1
 270. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=15#ii.i-p115.1
 271. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=6#vii.i-p126.2
 272. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=9#vii.i-p59.1
 273. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=9#vii.i-p138.1
 274. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=2#vii.i-p118.3
 275. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=22#xii.i-p75.1
 276. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=4#xiv.i-p126.1
 277. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=5#ii.i-p169.2
 278. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=5#xiv.i-p139.1
 279. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=47&scrV=2#xvii.i-p100.1
 280. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=8#vi.i-p198.1
 281. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=13#iii.i-p66.2
 282. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=15#vii.i-p71.2
 283. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=15#xii.i-p177.1
 284. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=53&scrV=6#vi.i-p242.2
 285. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=22#vi.i-p137.1
 286. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=6#ii.i-p115.1
 287. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=10#x.i-p143.2
 288. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=59&scrV=10#ix.i-p112.2
 289. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=59&scrV=17#ix.i-p112.2
 290. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=9#ix.i-p161.1
 291. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=2#vii.i-p118.3
 292. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=2#xiv.i-p212.1
 293. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=12#xii.i-p68.1
 294. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=67&scrV=5#vi.i-p198.1
 295. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=71&scrV=6#xiii.i-p61.1
 296. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=71&scrV=9#xv.i-p57.1
 297. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=3#xiv.i-p93.2
 298. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=3#vii.i-p110.1
 299. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=9#ix.i-p72.1
 300. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=9#ix.i-p103.2
 301. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#xi.i-p65.1
 302. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#xiv.i-p138.2
 303. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=69#vi.i-p198.1
 304. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=69#xiii.i-p93.1
 305. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=79&scrV=10#xiii.i-p90.1
 306. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=79&scrV=10#xvii.i-p89.1
 307. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=4#v.i-p122.1
 308. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=10#v.i-p122.1
 309. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=10#xiv.i-p94.1
 310. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=87&scrV=4#xiii.i-p79.1
 311. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=36#vii.i-p76.2
 312. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=39#xii.i-p210.1
 313. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#vi.i-p265.1
 314. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=1#xi.i-p117.2
 315. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=4#v.i-p133.2
 316. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=28#vi.i-p211.1
 317. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=5#ix.i-p246.2
 318. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=12#vii.i-p161.2
 319. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=15#ix.i-p111.1
 320. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=16#ix.i-p116.2
 321. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=2#ix.i-p186.1
 322. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=30#xiii.i-p76.1
 323. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=30#ix.i-p118.1
 324. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=12#x.i-p136.7
 325. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=14#x.i-p77.4
 326. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=14#x.i-p84.2
 327. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=15#x.i-p77.5
 328. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=15#xii.i-p210.2
 329. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=30#xiii.i-p73.2
 330. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=34#xiv.i-p157.1
 331. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=6#xi.i-p77.4
 332. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=114&scrV=3#xii.i-p166.1
 333. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=114&scrV=7#xii.i-p166.1
 334. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#ii.i-p82.1
 335. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=8#x.i-p219.1
 336. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=17#vii.i-p170.1
 337. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=16#xiii.i-p61.1
 338. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=24#viii.i-p33.2
 339. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=105#xiv.i-p163.2
 340. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=122#vii.i-p135.1
 341. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=123&scrV=2#vi.i-p81.2
 342. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=1#xvii.i-p102.3
 343. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=2#xvi.i-p98.1
 344. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=4#xvii.i-p131.1
 345. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=129&scrV=6#vi.i-p222.1
 346. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=129&scrV=8#vi.i-p218.1
 347. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=3#ii.i-p145.1
 348. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=5#ii.i-p159.2
 349. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#vi.i-p260.1
 350. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#vi.i-p200.1
 351. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#vi.i-p127.2
 352. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#xiv.i-p126.2
 353. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=3#ix.i-p165.1
 354. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=4#ii.i-p162.1
 355. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=8#xv.i-p53.1
 356. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=2#vi.i-p103.2
 357. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=6#xiii.i-p72.1
 358. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=18#vi.i-p96.1
 359. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=2#iii.i-p81.1
 360. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=4#ix.i-p215.1
 361. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=19#xvii.i-p102.1
 362. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=7#ii.i-p93.1
 363. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vi.i-p224.2
 364. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=1#vii.i-p102.1
 365. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.i-p40.1
 366. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.i-p178.2
 367. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xii.i-p181.2
 368. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=29#xiii.i-p104.1
 369. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.i-p83.1
 370. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xiii.i-p81.1
 371. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xii.i-p90.3
 372. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=25#xvi.i-p80.2
 373. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=9#xi.i-p149.1
 374. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=4#iv.i-p44.2
 375. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#xi.i-p55.2
 376. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=15#xvii.i-p84.1
 377. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=6#ii.i-p170.1
 378. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vi.i-p249.1
 379. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.i-p141.1
 380. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=21#xii.i-p88.2
 381. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=1#x.i-p167.1
 382. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#ii.i-p95.2
 383. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=32#iii.i-p81.2
 384. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=32#vi.i-p198.2
 385. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=16&scrV=7#xv.i-p72.6
 386. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=19&scrV=18#xiv.i-p205.2
 387. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=21&scrV=9#xiii.i-p187.1
 388. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=9#ii.i-p163.1
 389. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=20#v.i-p57.1
 390. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=23&scrV=1#xiv.i-p91.2
 391. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=23&scrV=12#vi.i-p178.2
 392. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=17#ii.i-p113.2
 393. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=19#xiv.i-p91.2
 394. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=10#iv.i-p49.1
 395. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=0#v.i-p79.2
 396. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=1#v.i-p69.1
 397. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=1#xvi.i-p96.1
 398. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=15#ix.i-p241.1
 399. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=21#xvii.i-p123.2
 400. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=31&scrV=0#v.i-p79.2
 401. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=15#ii.i-p52.1
 402. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=1#xii.i-p132.1
 403. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=1#ii.i-p1.1
 404. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=6#iii.i-p38.1
 405. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=6#viii.i-p28.1
 406. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=20#iii.i-p38.1
 407. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=1#iii.i-p1.1
 408. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=2#ix.i-p137.1
 409. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=14#iv.i-p68.1
 410. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=16#ix.i-p217.2
 411. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=1#iv.i-p1.1
 412. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=1#v.i-p1.1
 413. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=2#ii.i-p100.1
 414. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=22#ii.i-p100.1
 415. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=1#vi.i-p1.1
 416. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=2#viii.i-p31.1
 417. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=8#xii.i-p74.2
 418. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=14#vii.i-p61.1
 419. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=29#vi.i-p122.1
 420. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=30#vii.i-p88.2
 421. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=38#v.i-p145.1
 422. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=1#vii.i-p1.1
 423. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=20#viii.i-p28.2
 424. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=1#viii.i-p1.1
 425. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=0#xiii.i-p112.1
 426. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=1#ix.i-p1.1
 427. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=9#x.i-p211.3
 428. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=18#ix.i-p199.1
 429. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=1#x.i-p1.1
 430. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=4#xvii.i-p95.1
 431. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=7#x.i-p97.9
 432. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=25#xii.i-p91.1
 433. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=25#xv.i-p82.3
 434. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=1#xi.i-p1.1
 435. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=1#xiv.i-p68.1
 436. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=1#xii.i-p1.1
 437. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=12#xi.i-p113.1
 438. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=1#xiii.i-p1.1
 439. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=5#xiv.i-p217.1
 440. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#xvii.i-p95.1
 441. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=10#xvii.i-p120.3
 442. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=12#x.i-p97.2
 443. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=13#x.i-p97.3
 444. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=1#ix.i-p215.2
 445. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=1#xii.i-p88.3
 446. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=1#xiv.i-p1.1
 447. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=4#xvi.i-p47.1
 448. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=19#xvii.i-p120.4
 449. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=1#xv.i-p1.1
 450. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=6#x.i-p97.9
 451. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=1#xvi.i-p1.1
 452. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=1#xvii.i-p1.1
 453. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=2#ii.i-p150.1
 454. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#ix.i-p127.3
 455. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#x.i-p210.2
 456. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=9#xiv.i-p155.1
 457. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=4#ii.i-p113.2
 458. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=1#xi.i-p153.1
 459. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=13#ix.i-p95.3
 460. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xvi.i-p35.1
 461. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xiii.i-p128.2
 462. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xvii.i-p120.5
 463. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=8#ix.i-p170.1
 464. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=14#xiii.i-p152.2
 465. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=5#v.i-p70.1
 466. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=5#v.i-p86.2
 467. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=7#xii.i-p153.1
 468. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=14#vi.i-p242.3
 469. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=30&scrV=9#vi.i-p259.2
 470. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=9#xv.i-p45.1
 471. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=44&scrV=28#xiv.i-p179.6
 472. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=49&scrV=22#xv.i-p82.4
 473. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=17#xiii.i-p152.2
 474. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=20#xi.i-p185.1
 475. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=1&scrV=20#x.i-p210.1
 476. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=2&scrV=15#ix.i-p165.2
 477. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=38#x.i-p188.1
 478. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=41#vi.i-p102.1
 479. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=3#xvii.i-p64.1
 480. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=17&scrV=3#xv.i-p82.5
 481. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=20#xii.i-p206.1
 482. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=22#vi.i-p258.2
 483. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=22#xii.i-p192.1
 484. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=25#xiii.i-p73.1
 485. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=24#vi.i-p259.3
 486. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=24#xiv.i-p57.2
 487. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xv.i-p81.2
 488. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xiv.i-p97.1
 489. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=30#xvi.i-p89.2
 490. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=2#ix.i-p77.2
 491. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.i-p70.1
 492. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi.i-p259.4
 493. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xiii.i-p147.1
 494. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=3&scrV=6#x.i-p187.2
 495. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=3&scrV=7#x.i-p183.2
 496. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Obad&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xiv.i-p179.5
 497. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.i-p100.1
 498. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vii.i-p72.2
 499. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii.i-p72.2
 500. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=19#vii.i-p159.1
 501. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ii.i-p78.1
 502. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.i-p128.2
 503. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.i-p143.1
 504. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xiv.i-p69.1
 505. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.i-p93.1
 506. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=18#ix.i-p170.2
 507. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.i-p53.1
 508. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=13#ix.i-p95.1
 509. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=13#xiv.i-p57.1
 510. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xiii.i-p198.1
 511. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=6#xii.i-p162.1
 512. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=1&scrV=15#xvi.i-p62.1
 513. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#xii.i-p185.1
 514. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.i-p75.1
 515. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.i-p79.2
 516. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xv.i-p45.2
 517. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.i-p87.2
 518. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#ix.i-p127.1
 519. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#xi.i-p155.1
 520. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#ix.i-p77.3
 521. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=3#ix.i-p96.1
 522. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xi.i-p74.1
 523. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xi.i-p64.1
 524. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xi.i-p87.1
 525. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#x.i-p141.1
 526. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#x.i-p141.3
 527. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vi.i-p140.2
 528. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#viii.i-p65.1
 529. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=2#x.i-p141.2
 530. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=23#xii.i-p65.1
 531. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=4#xi.i-p70.2
 532. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=12#ii.i-p127.3
 533. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=30#xi.i-p70.2
 534. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=6#xi.i-p95.2
 535. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=29#xiv.i-p120.1
 536. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=19#x.i-p205.1
 537. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#xi.i-p77.2
 538. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=16#xi.i-p70.2
 539. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=17#xi.i-p56.1
 540. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=18#xi.i-p64.2
 541. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=39#xi.i-p77.1
 542. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=13#xi.i-p149.2
 543. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=18#xi.i-p77.1
 544. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=13#xi.i-p77.1
 545. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=24#vii.i-p154.1
 546. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ix.i-p96.2
 547. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=10#xi.i-p74.2
 548. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=43#xi.i-p70.3
 549. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=74#xii.i-p173.1
 550. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=4#ix.i-p96.3
 551. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#xi.i-p74.3
 552. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=25#ii.i-p127.2
 553. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=56#xi.i-p70.4
 554. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=32#xiii.i-p69.1
 555. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=27#xii.i-p65.2
 556. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=15#xiv.i-p180.1
 557. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=18#xvi.i-p61.2
 558. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=19#iii.i-p70.1
 559. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=19#x.i-p148.1
 560. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=28#vii.i-p107.3
 561. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#xiv.i-p138.3
 562. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=21#ix.i-p96.5
 563. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#ix.i-p96.4
 564. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=32#xi.i-p74.4
 565. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=45#xii.i-p105.1
 566. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=22#xii.i-p109.2
 567. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xiv.i-p191.2
 568. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=22#xiv.i-p138.4
 569. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vii.i-p67.1
 570. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#xv.i-p38.2
 571. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#iv.i-p73.2
 572. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#xi.i-p167.1
 573. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#xii.i-p96.2
 574. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#x.i-p181.2
 575. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=3#viii.i-p57.1
 576. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=3#xiv.i-p68.2
 577. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=5#viii.i-p57.1
 578. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#xi.i-p87.2
 579. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=29#ix.i-p144.2
 580. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=3#xi.i-p62.2
 581. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#x.i-p109.1
 582. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#xii.i-p78.2
 583. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#ii.i-p91.2
 584. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=10#xi.i-p62.2
 585. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=8#xii.i-p109.1
 586. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=23#xii.i-p195.1
 587. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#xii.i-p96.1
 588. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xvii.i-p66.1
 589. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.i-p26.1
 590. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=24#xii.i-p105.2
 591. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#iv.i-p77.1
 592. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=2#xiii.i-p92.2
 593. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=3#x.i-p75.4
 594. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vi.i-p135.2
 595. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#xii.i-p203.3
 596. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vi.i-p95.2
 597. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#xii.i-p99.1
 598. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=17#ix.i-p180.3
 599. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#ix.i-p160.1
 600. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=29#ix.i-p167.1
 601. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=29#xv.i-p61.1
 602. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xii.i-p105.3
 603. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.i-p118.1
 604. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#ix.i-p182.1
 605. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#xiii.i-p138.1
 606. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#xiii.i-p140.1
 607. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#xiii.i-p141.1
 608. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xvii.i-p102.2
 609. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xv.i-p93.1
 610. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=3#xvii.i-p94.2
 611. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#xi.i-p95.1
 612. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=27#xiv.i-p221.1
 613. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=2#xiv.i-p223.2
 614. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.i-p111.2
 615. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=18#ix.i-p146.1
 616. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=18#xii.i-p129.1
 617. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#ix.i-p141.1
 618. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.i-p75.1
 619. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iv.i-p76.1
 620. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xi.i-p66.1
 621. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.i-p107.1
 622. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iv.i-p58.1
 623. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#xiv.i-p142.4
 624. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=25#v.i-p111.1
 625. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vii.i-p63.1
 626. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vii.i-p71.1
 627. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vii.i-p130.2
 628. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=38#vi.i-p265.2
 629. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=4#x.i-p107.1
 630. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=6#xii.i-p88.1
 631. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=11#vii.i-p82.1
 632. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=11#xiii.i-p64.1
 633. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=20#xiv.i-p106.2
 634. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#xiv.i-p201.1
 635. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#ii.i-p63.1
 636. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=4#xiv.i-p202.2
 637. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=29#x.i-p120.1
 638. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=29#xvii.i-p94.2
 639. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=34#ix.i-p154.2
 640. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=10#xiv.i-p203.1
 641. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iv.i-p75.2
 642. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=4#vi.i-p89.1
 643. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=8#xi.i-p96.3
 644. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#ii.i-p155.1
 645. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xiv.i-p158.4
 646. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#x.i-p102.2
 647. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=4#x.i-p192.2
 648. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=16#ix.i-p110.2
 649. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#xiv.i-p112.2
 650. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=30#vii.i-p146.1
 651. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iv.i-p51.1
 652. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#xvii.i-p115.1
 653. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=6#xvii.i-p115.1
 654. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=13#xv.i-p72.9
 655. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#xi.i-p55.3
 656. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#xi.i-p96.2
 657. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.i-p36.1
 658. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#xiv.i-p73.2
 659. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#xiv.i-p167.2
 660. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=8#ix.i-p251.2
 661. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#xv.i-p34.2
 662. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xiii.i-p199.1
 663. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=7#xii.i-p179.2
 664. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.i-p86.1
 665. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#viii.i-p41.1
 666. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#ix.i-p231.1
 667. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#ix.i-p243.2
 668. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#ix.i-p127.4
 669. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iv.i-p75.3
 670. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.i-p203.2
 671. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#x.i-p104.1
 672. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xii.i-p172.2
 673. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xi.i-p64.3
 674. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xv.i-p97.1
 675. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi.i-p265.3
 676. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vi.i-p206.2
 677. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#xiv.i-p133.2
 678. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xii.i-p62.2
 679. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xii.i-p140.2
 680. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.i-p127.2
 681. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xi.i-p65.2
 682. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xi.i-p95.3
 683. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xiv.i-p191.1
 684. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xi.i-p96.4
 685. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xv.i-p97.1
 686. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xiv.i-p208.1
 687. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#x.i-p103.1
 688. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xiii.i-p156.2
 689. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.i-p69.1
 690. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=6#ix.i-p252.1
 691. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#xi.i-p59.1
 692. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xi.i-p60.1
 693. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=15#xiii.i-p156.3
 694. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.i-p41.1
 695. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=7#ii.i-p165.1
 696. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=9#ii.i-p91.1
 697. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vi.i-p206.1
 698. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=28#ii.i-p91.1
 699. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#ii.i-p90.1
 700. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii.i-p80.2
 701. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xiii.i-p156.1
 702. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vii.i-p107.2
 703. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii.i-p146.2
 704. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xvi.i-p89.1
 705. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xiii.i-p140.2
 706. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#x.i-p181.1
 707. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.i-p68.1
 708. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ix.i-p127.2
 709. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xii.i-p106.1
 710. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vi.i-p146.1
 711. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=12#ix.i-p142.2
 712. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#ii.i-p82.2
 713. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#x.i-p125.1
 714. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xii.i-p105.4
 715. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.i-p99.1
 716. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#x.i-p197.1
 717. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xiv.i-p204.1
 718. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xiv.i-p196.1
 719. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=36#xiv.i-p144.2
 720. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii.i-p118.2
 721. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#vi.i-p143.1
 722. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#ix.i-p135.1
 723. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=13#ix.i-p108.1
 724. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iv.i-p42.1
 725. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iv.i-p42.1
 726. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=29#ii.i-p129.2
 727. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=2#xii.i-p68.2
 728. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xvi.i-p97.1
 729. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#xiii.i-p141.2
 730. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.i-p205.1
 731. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#xv.i-p44.1
 732. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xvi.i-p59.2
 733. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.i-p93.1
 734. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=20#xiii.i-p150.1
 735. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=23#ix.i-p123.1
 736. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=25#ix.i-p123.1
 737. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#x.i-p108.2
 738. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xii.i-p172.3
 739. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.i-p25.1
 740. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#viii.i-p55.4
 741. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xiv.i-p104.1
 742. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#x.i-p209.1
 743. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xii.i-p76.1
 744. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#xiv.i-p165.1
 745. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#ix.i-p107.1
 746. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii.i-p146.3
 747. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.i-p73.2
 748. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=0#ii-p0.1
 749. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=1#ii.i-p51.1
 750. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=2#ii.i-p58.1
 751. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=3#ii.i-p71.1
 752. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=4#ii.i-p76.1
 753. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=5#ii.i-p80.1
 754. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=6#ii.i-p84.1
 755. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=7#ii.i-p96.1
 756. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=8#ii.i-p101.1
 757. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=9#ii.i-p105.1
 758. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=10#ii.i-p107.1
 759. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=11#ii.i-p111.1
 760. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=12#ii.i-p117.1
 761. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=13#ii.i-p122.1
 762. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=14#ii.i-p124.1
 763. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=15#ii.i-p131.1
 764. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=16#ii.i-p140.1
 765. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=17#ii.i-p147.1
 766. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=18#ii.i-p151.1
 767. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=19#ii.i-p157.1
 768. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=20#ii.i-p160.1
 769. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=21#ii.i-p168.1
 770. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=22#ii.i-p172.1
 771. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=23#ii.i-p175.1
 772. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=24#ii.i-p178.1
 773. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=0#iii-p0.1
 774. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=1#iii.i-p37.1
 775. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=2#iii.i-p41.1
 776. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=3#iii.i-p45.1
 777. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=4#iii.i-p48.1
 778. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=5#iii.i-p51.1
 779. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=6#iii.i-p57.1
 780. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=7#iii.i-p62.1
 781. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=8#iii.i-p67.1
 782. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=9#iii.i-p71.1
 783. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=10#iii.i-p74.1
 784. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=11#iii.i-p76.1
 785. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=12#iii.i-p82.1
 786. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=13#iii.i-p85.1
 787. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=14#iii.i-p87.1
 788. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=16#iii.i-p95.1
 789. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=17#iii.i-p102.1
 790. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=0#iv-p0.1
 791. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=1#iv.i-p23.1
 792. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=2#iv.i-p28.1
 793. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=3#iv.i-p33.1
 794. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=4#iv.i-p35.1
 795. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=5#iv.i-p47.1
 796. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=6#iv.i-p53.1
 797. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=7#iv.i-p55.1
 798. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=8#iv.i-p59.1
 799. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=9#iv.i-p67.1
 800. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=10#iv.i-p71.1
 801. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=0#v-p0.1
 802. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=1#v.i-p47.1
 803. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=2#v.i-p52.1
 804. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=3#v.i-p56.1
 805. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=4#v.i-p59.1
 806. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=5#v.i-p62.1
 807. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=6#v.i-p67.1
 808. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=7#v.i-p71.1
 809. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=8#v.i-p76.1
 810. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=9#v.i-p80.1
 811. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=10#v.i-p83.1
 812. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=11#v.i-p92.1
 813. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=12#v.i-p98.1
 814. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=13#v.i-p100.1
 815. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=14#v.i-p104.1
 816. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=15#v.i-p108.1
 817. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=16#v.i-p112.1
 818. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=17#v.i-p117.1
 819. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=18#v.i-p123.1
 820. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=19#v.i-p134.1
 821. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=20#v.i-p136.1
 822. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=21#v.i-p146.1
 823. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=22#v.i-p150.1
 824. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=0#vi-p0.1
 825. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=1#vi.i-p79.1
 826. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=2#vi.i-p85.1
 827. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=4#vi.i-p91.1
 828. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=5#vi.i-p105.1
 829. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=6#vi.i-p107.1
 830. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=7#vi.i-p113.1
 831. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=8#vi.i-p118.1
 832. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=9#vi.i-p120.1
 833. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=10#vi.i-p124.1
 834. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=11#vi.i-p131.1
 835. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=12#vi.i-p134.1
 836. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=14#vi.i-p136.1
 837. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=15#vi.i-p142.1
 838. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=16#vi.i-p144.1
 839. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=17#vi.i-p152.1
 840. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=18#vi.i-p157.1
 841. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=19#vi.i-p162.1
 842. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=20#vi.i-p168.1
 843. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=21#vi.i-p171.1
 844. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=22#vi.i-p177.1
 845. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=23#vi.i-p179.1
 846. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=24#vi.i-p188.1
 847. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=25#vi.i-p191.1
 848. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=26#vi.i-p194.1
 849. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=27#vi.i-p212.1
 850. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=28#vi.i-p223.1
 851. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=29#vi.i-p226.1
 852. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=30#vi.i-p231.1
 853. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=31#vi.i-p240.1
 854. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=32#vi.i-p247.1
 855. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=33#vi.i-p250.1
 856. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=34#vi.i-p253.1
 857. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=35#vi.i-p255.1
 858. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=36#vi.i-p261.1
 859. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=37#vi.i-p269.1
 860. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=38#vi.i-p272.1
 861. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=0#vii-p0.1
 862. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=1#vii.i-p47.1
 863. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=2#vii.i-p58.1
 864. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=3#vii.i-p64.1
 865. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=4#vii.i-p70.1
 866. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=5#vii.i-p74.1
 867. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=6#vii.i-p86.1
 868. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=7#vii.i-p89.1
 869. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=8#vii.i-p94.1
 870. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=9#vii.i-p99.1
 871. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=10#vii.i-p103.1
 872. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=11#vii.i-p113.1
 873. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=12#vii.i-p119.1
 874. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=13#vii.i-p124.1
 875. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=14#vii.i-p127.1
 876. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=15#vii.i-p136.1
 877. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=16#vii.i-p143.1
 878. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=17#vii.i-p147.1
 879. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=18#vii.i-p164.1
 880. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=19#vii.i-p173.1
 881. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=20#vii.i-p177.1
 882. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=21#vii.i-p183.1
 883. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=22#vii.i-p186.1
 884. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=0#viii-p0.1
 885. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=1#viii.i-p19.1
 886. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=2#viii.i-p25.1
 887. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=3#viii.i-p29.1
 888. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=4#viii.i-p37.1
 889. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=5#viii.i-p39.1
 890. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=6#viii.i-p44.1
 891. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=7#viii.i-p49.1
 892. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=39&scrV=8#viii.i-p51.1
 893. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=0#ix-p0.1
 894. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=1#ix.i-p65.1
 895. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=2#ix.i-p79.1
 896. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=3#ix.i-p89.1
 897. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=4#ix.i-p97.1
 898. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=5#ix.i-p101.1
 899. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=6#ix.i-p106.1
 900. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=7#ix.i-p115.1
 901. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=8#ix.i-p120.1
 902. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=9#ix.i-p124.1
 903. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=10#ix.i-p131.1
 904. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=11#ix.i-p136.1
 905. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=12#ix.i-p140.1
 906. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=13#ix.i-p149.1
 907. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=14#ix.i-p152.1
 908. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=15#ix.i-p155.1
 909. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=16#ix.i-p157.1
 910. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=17#ix.i-p159.1
 911. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=18#ix.i-p164.1
 912. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=19#ix.i-p171.1
 913. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=20#ix.i-p174.1
 914. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=21#ix.i-p176.1
 915. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=22#ix.i-p183.1
 916. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=23#ix.i-p189.1
 917. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=24#ix.i-p193.1
 918. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=25#ix.i-p198.1
 919. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=26#ix.i-p201.1
 920. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=27#ix.i-p220.1
 921. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=28#ix.i-p226.1
 922. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=29#ix.i-p230.1
 923. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=30#ix.i-p232.1
 924. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=31#ix.i-p238.1
 925. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=0#x-p0.1
 926. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=1#x.i-p61.1
 927. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=2#x.i-p70.1
 928. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=3#x.i-p79.1
 929. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=4#x.i-p81.1
 930. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=5#x.i-p86.1
 931. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=6#x.i-p91.1
 932. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=7#x.i-p95.1
 933. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=8#x.i-p100.1
 934. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=9#x.i-p110.1
 935. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=10#x.i-p121.1
 936. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=11#x.i-p126.1
 937. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=12#x.i-p128.1
 938. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=13#x.i-p130.1
 939. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=14#x.i-p133.1
 940. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=15#x.i-p139.1
 941. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=16#x.i-p146.1
 942. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=17#x.i-p151.1
 943. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=18#x.i-p156.1
 944. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=20#x.i-p161.1
 945. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=21#x.i-p164.1
 946. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=22#x.i-p169.1
 947. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=23#x.i-p185.1
 948. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=24#x.i-p189.1
 949. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=25#x.i-p194.1
 950. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=26#x.i-p203.1
 951. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=27#x.i-p207.1
 952. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=28#x.i-p215.1
 953. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=29#x.i-p217.1
 954. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=0#xi-p0.1
 955. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=1#xi.i-p53.1
 956. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=2#xi.i-p67.1
 957. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=3#xi.i-p71.1
 958. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=4#xi.i-p78.1
 959. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=5#xi.i-p88.1
 960. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=6#xi.i-p91.1
 961. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=7#xi.i-p98.1
 962. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#xi.i-p101.1
 963. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=9#xi.i-p108.1
 964. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=10#xi.i-p114.1
 965. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=11#xi.i-p119.1
 966. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=12#xi.i-p124.1
 967. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=13#xi.i-p126.1
 968. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=14#xi.i-p131.1
 969. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=15#xi.i-p137.1
 970. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=16#xi.i-p140.1
 971. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=17#xi.i-p145.1
 972. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=18#xi.i-p148.1
 973. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=19#xi.i-p150.1
 974. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=20#xi.i-p157.1
 975. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=21#xi.i-p159.1
 976. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=22#xi.i-p164.1
 977. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=23#xi.i-p168.1
 978. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=24#xi.i-p171.1
 979. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=25#xi.i-p181.1
 980. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=0#xii-p0.1
 981. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=1#xii.i-p59.1
 982. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=2#xii.i-p66.1
 983. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=3#xii.i-p70.1
 984. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=4#xii.i-p77.1
 985. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=5#xii.i-p80.1
 986. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=6#xii.i-p86.1
 987. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=7#xii.i-p89.1
 988. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=8#xii.i-p94.1
 989. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=9#xii.i-p97.1
 990. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=10#xii.i-p103.1
 991. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=11#xii.i-p116.1
 992. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=12#xii.i-p121.1
 993. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=13#xii.i-p125.1
 994. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=14#xii.i-p128.1
 995. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=15#xii.i-p138.1
 996. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=16#xii.i-p142.1
 997. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=17#xii.i-p146.1
 998. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=18#xii.i-p149.1
 999. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=19#xii.i-p155.1
1000. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=20#xii.i-p164.1
1001. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=21#xii.i-p169.1
1002. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=22#xii.i-p175.1
1003. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=23#xii.i-p180.1
1004. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=24#xii.i-p182.1
1005. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=25#xii.i-p186.1
1006. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=26#xii.i-p196.1
1007. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=27#xii.i-p199.1
1008. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=28#xii.i-p208.1
1009. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=0#xiii-p0.1
1010. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=1#xiii.i-p59.1
1011. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=2#xiii.i-p62.1
1012. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=3#xiii.i-p71.1
1013. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=4#xiii.i-p75.1
1014. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=5#xiii.i-p77.1
1015. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#xiii.i-p85.1
1016. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=7#xiii.i-p89.1
1017. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=8#xiii.i-p95.1
1018. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=9#xiii.i-p101.1
1019. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=10#xiii.i-p110.1
1020. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=11#xiii.i-p113.1
1021. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=12#xiii.i-p116.1
1022. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=13#xiii.i-p122.1
1023. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=14#xiii.i-p124.1
1024. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=15#xiii.i-p130.1
1025. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=18#xiii.i-p136.1
1026. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=19#xiii.i-p142.1
1027. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=20#xiii.i-p146.1
1028. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=21#xiii.i-p153.1
1029. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=22#xiii.i-p158.1
1030. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=23#xiii.i-p165.1
1031. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=24#xiii.i-p170.1
1032. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=25#xiii.i-p177.1
1033. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=26#xiii.i-p184.1
1034. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=27#xiii.i-p192.1
1035. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=28#xiii.i-p194.1
1036. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=0#xiv-p0.1
1037. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=1#xiv.i-p53.1
1038. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=2#xiv.i-p64.1
1039. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=4#xiv.i-p70.1
1040. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=5#xiv.i-p79.1
1041. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=6#xiv.i-p82.1
1042. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=7#xiv.i-p84.1
1043. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=8#xiv.i-p88.1
1044. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=9#xiv.i-p96.1
1045. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=11#xiv.i-p109.1
1046. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=12#xiv.i-p116.1
1047. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=13#xiv.i-p121.1
1048. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=14#xiv.i-p128.1
1049. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=15#xiv.i-p140.1
1050. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=16#xiv.i-p147.1
1051. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=18#xiv.i-p152.1
1052. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=19#xiv.i-p160.1
1053. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=20#xiv.i-p175.1
1054. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=21#xiv.i-p184.1
1055. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=22#xiv.i-p189.1
1056. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=23#xiv.i-p194.1
1057. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=24#xiv.i-p206.1
1058. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=25#xiv.i-p214.1
1059. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=0#xv-p0.1
1060. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=1#xv.i-p29.1
1061. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=2#xv.i-p36.1
1062. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=3#xv.i-p40.1
1063. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=4#xv.i-p49.1
1064. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=5#xv.i-p59.1
1065. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=6#xv.i-p62.1
1066. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=7#xv.i-p65.1
1067. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=8#xv.i-p67.1
1068. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=9#xv.i-p73.1
1069. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=10#xv.i-p76.1
1070. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=11#xv.i-p79.1
1071. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=12#xv.i-p89.1
1072. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=13#xv.i-p92.1
1073. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=0#xvi-p0.1
1074. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=1#xvi.i-p33.1
1075. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=2#xvi.i-p39.1
1076. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=3#xvi.i-p43.1
1077. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=4#xvi.i-p46.1
1078. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=5#xvi.i-p49.1
1079. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=6#xvi.i-p53.1
1080. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=7#xvi.i-p64.1
1081. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=8#xvi.i-p72.1
1082. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=9#xvi.i-p76.1
1083. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=10#xvi.i-p83.1
1084. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=11#xvi.i-p88.1
1085. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=12#xvi.i-p90.1
1086. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=13#xvi.i-p94.1
1087. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=14#xvi.i-p101.1
1088. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=15#xvi.i-p103.1
1089. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=0#xvii-p0.1
1090. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=1#xvii.i-p47.1
1091. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=2#xvii.i-p53.1
1092. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=3#xvii.i-p56.1
1093. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=4#xvii.i-p60.1
1094. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=5#xvii.i-p63.1
1095. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=6#xvii.i-p67.1
1096. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=7#xvii.i-p71.1
1097. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=8#xvii.i-p74.1
1098. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=9#xvii.i-p77.1
1099. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=10#xvii.i-p80.1
1100. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=11#xvii.i-p86.1
1101. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=12#xvii.i-p91.1
1102. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=13#xvii.i-p96.1
1103. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=14#xvii.i-p101.1
1104. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=15#xvii.i-p107.1
1105. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=16#xvii.i-p110.1
1106. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=17#xvii.i-p117.1
1107. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=18#xvii.i-p124.1
1108. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=19#xvii.i-p130.1
1109. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=20#xvii.i-p137.1
1110. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=21#xvii.i-p141.1
1111. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=22#xvii.i-p147.1
1112. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p82.1
1113. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p116.1
1114. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p180.2
1115. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p122.1
1116. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p72.8
1117. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p142.1
1118. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p57.2
1119. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p72.2
1120. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#viii.i-p63.1
1121. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p125.1
1122. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p98.4
1123. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p98.3
1124. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p44.1
1125. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p82.6
1126. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p130.1
1127. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p116.1
1128. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p57.1
1129. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p120.2
1130. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p70.1
1131. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p153.1
1132. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p136.3
1133. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p159.2
1134. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p73.1
1135. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p104.1
1136. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p123.1
1137. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p156.1
1138. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p198.4
1139. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p140.3
1140. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p136.2
1141. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p211.1
1142. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p58.2
1143. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iii.i-p66.1
1144. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p141.2
1145. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p142.1
1146. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p100.1
1147. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p92.1
1148. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iii.i-p98.1
1149. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p217.1
1150. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p217.3
1151. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p218.1
1152. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p71.1
1153. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p72.7
1154. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p136.2
1155. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p45.1
1156. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p46.1
1157. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p85.1
1158. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#viii.i-p62.1
1159. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p70.1
1160. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p194.1
1161. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p124.2
1162. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p93.1
1163. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p64.1
1164. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p94.1
1165. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p124.1
1166. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p45.2
1167. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p113.1
1168. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p98.2
1169. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p98.1
1170. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p100.2
1171. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p71.3
1172. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p72.3
1173. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iii.i-p98.2
1174. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p218.2
1175. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p71.2
1176. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p174.2
1177. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p145.2
1178. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p111.1
1179. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p67.5
1180. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p72.5
1181. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p62.1
1182. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p79.1
1183. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p106.2
1184. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p179.1
1185. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p166.3
1186. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p234.2
1187. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p120.6
1188. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p136.1
1189. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p116.2
1190. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p141.1
1191. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p83.1
1192. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p122.3
1193. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p132.2
1194. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p122.2
1195. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p132.1
1196. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p90.1
1197. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p63.1
1198. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p103.1
1199. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p104.1
1200. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p189.1
1201. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p54.1
1202. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p98.1
1203. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p84.3
1204. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p127.1
1205. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p166.2
1206. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p211.1
1207. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p72.1
1208. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p166.1
1209. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p60.1
1210. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p209.1
1211. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p60.1
1212. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p50.1
1213. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p96.1
1214. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p108.1
1215. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p99.1
1216. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p106.3
1217. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p100.1
1218. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p92.2
1219. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p229.1
1220. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p69.1
1221. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p228.1
1222. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p112.3
1223. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p112.1
1224. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p96.1
1225. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p97.1
1226. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p103.1
1227. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p151.1
1228. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p98.1
1229. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p46.2
1230. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p117.1
1231. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p152.1
1232. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p117.2
1233. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p79.1
1234. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p99.1
1235. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p86.1
1236. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p216.1
1237. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p96.3
1238. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p84.2
1239. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p67.3
1240. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p67.6
1241. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p67.2
1242. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p45.1
1243. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p138.1
1244. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p138.2
1245. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#viii.i-p59.1
1246. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p84.1
1247. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p179.1
1248. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p198.1
1249. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p75.1
1250. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p169.1
1251. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p120.1
1252. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p113.1
1253. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p120.1
1254. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p98.7
1255. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p134.1
1256. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p125.2
1257. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p98.6
1258. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p114.1
1259. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p97.1
1260. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p187.2
1261. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p122.1
1262. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p97.10
1263. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p142.3
1264. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p142.2
1265. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xix-p4.2
1266. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xix-p4.1
1267. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p187.1
1268. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p136.1
1269. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p136.5
1270. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p136.6
1271. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p135.1
1272. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p135.2
1273. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p60.1
1274. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p158.1
1275. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p234.1
1276. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p86.3
1277. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p182.1
1278. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p252.1
1279. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p58.1
1280. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p116.3
1281. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p68.1
1282. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p86.2
1283. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p81.1
1284. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p81.3
1285. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p82.2
1286. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p83.1
1287. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p135.3
1288. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p135.2
1289. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p179.9
1290. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p242.1
1291. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p179.2
1292. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p179.8
1293. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p97.11
1294. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p98.1
1295. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p84.2
1296. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p162.1
1297. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p97.6
1298. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p97.7
1299. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p97.8
1300. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p88.2
1301. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p103.2
1302. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p103.3
1303. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p67.4
1304. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p135.2
1305. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p67.3
1306. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p152.1
1307. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p152.3
1308. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p57.1
1309. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p221.1
1310. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p156.1
1311. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p84.1
1312. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p176.1
1313. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p182.1
1314. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p178.1
1315. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p134.1
1316. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p208.1
1317. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p56.1
1318. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p81.3
1319. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p72.4
1320. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p96.4
1321. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p80.1
1322. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p136.4
1323. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p57.3
1324. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p81.2
1325. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p163.1
1326. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p98.5
1327. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p130.1
1328. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p192.1
1329. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p162.1
1330. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p74.1
1331. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p233.1
1332. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p122.1
1333. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p88.1
1334. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p144.1
1335. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p66.1
1336. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p92.1
1337. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#viii.i-p60.1
1338. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iii.i-p61.1
1339. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p159.1
1340. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p236.1
1341. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p172.1
1342. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p178.1
1343. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#viii.i-p61.1
1344. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p120.1
1345. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p73.1
1346. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p107.1
1347. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p144.1
1348. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p118.1
1349. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p119.1
1350. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p188.1
1351. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xviii.xi-p14.1
1352. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xviii.xi-p30.1
1353. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xviii.xvi-p21.1
1354. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p65.1
1355. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p175.1
1356. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p70.1
1357. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p197.1
1358. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p164.1
1359. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p151.1
1360. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p146.1
1361. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p180.1
1362. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p93.1
1363. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p49.1
1364. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p160.1
1365. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p139.1
1366. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p160.1
1367. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p63.1
1368. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p101.1
1369. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p110.1
1370. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xv.i-p88.1
1371. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p165.1
1372. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p149.1
1373. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p159.1
1374. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p184.1
1375. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p55.1
1376. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p210.1
1377. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xviii.vi-p7.1
1378. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p130.1
1379. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p138.1
1380. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p127.1
1381. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p222.1
1382. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p150.1
1383. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xviii.xv-p16.1
1384. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p77.1
1385. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p38.1
1386. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p146.1
1387. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p65.1
1388. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p235.1
1389. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p70.1
1390. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p173.1
1391. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p82.1
1392. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iii.i-p65.1
1393. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p92.1
1394. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p69.1
1395. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p75.1
1396. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p203.1
1397. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p185.1
1398. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p82.1
1399. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p179.1
1400. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p134.1
1401. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p196.1
1402. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iii.i-p89.1
1403. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p220.1
1404. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p250.1
1405. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p90.1
1406. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p188.1
1407. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p67.1
1408. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p183.1
1409. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p97.1
1410. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p213.1
1411. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p90.1
1412. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p138.1
1413. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p144.1
1414. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#viii.i-p43.1
1415. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p81.1
1416. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p136.1
1417. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p145.1
1418. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p206.1
1419. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p97.1
1420. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p108.1
1421. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p258.1
1422. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xi.i-p187.1
1423. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#v.i-p75.1
1424. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p79.1
1425. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p69.1
1426. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#x.i-p72.1
1427. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p102.1
1428. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p111.1
1429. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xii.i-p102.1
1430. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ii.i-p126.1
1431. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p88.1
1432. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p101.1
1433. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p154.1
1434. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#viii.i-p23.1
1435. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p195.1
1436. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p85.1
1437. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p103.1
1438. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p166.1
1439. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p75.1
1440. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p177.1
1441. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p219.1
1442. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p51.1
1443. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p163.1
1444. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p81.1
1445. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p136.1
1446. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p83.1
1447. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiii.i-p169.1
1448. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvi.i-p51.1
1449. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p91.1
1450. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vi.i-p93.1
1451. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xiv.i-p114.1
1452. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#ix.i-p103.1
1453. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#iv.i-p57.5
1454. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#vii.i-p96.1
1455. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom15/cache/calcom15.html3#xvii.i-p129.1
