     __________________________________________________________________

         Title: Commentary on Daniel - Volume 1
    Creator(s): Calvin, John (1509-1564)
                (Alternative)
                (Translator)
        Rights: Public Domain
    LC Call no: BS491
   LC Subjects:

                The Bible

                Works about the Bible
     __________________________________________________________________

   COMMENTARIES

   ON THE

   BOOK OF THE PROPHET DANIEL


   BY JOHN CALVIN



   NOW FIRST TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL LATIN, AND COLLATED
   WITH THE FRENCH VERSION, WITH DISSERTATIONS, NEW
   TRANSLATION OF THE TEXT, AND COPIOUS INDICES,

   BY THOMAS MEYERS, M.A.

   VICAR OF SHERIFF-HUTTON, YORKSHIRE



   VOLUME FIRST



   CHRISTIAN CLASSICS ETHEREAL LIBRARY
   GRAND RAPIDS, MI

   [1]http://www.ccel.org
     __________________________________________________________________

   TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

   The Prophecies Of Daniel are among the most remarkable Predictions of
   The Elder Covenant. They are not confined within either a limited time
   or a contracted space. They relate to the destinies of mighty Empires,
   and stretch forward into eras still hidden in the bosom of the future.
   The period of their delivery was a remarkable one in the history of out
   race. The Assyrian hero had long ago swept away the Ten Tribes from
   the, land of their fathers, and he in his turn had bowed his head in
   death, leaving magnificent memorials of his greatness in colossal
   palaces and gigantic sculptures. The Son of the renowned Sardanapalus,
   the worshipper of Assarac and Beltis, had already inscribed his name
   and exploits on those swarthy obelisks and enormous bulls which have
   lately risen from the grave of centuries. The glory of Nineveah, passed
   away, to be restored again in these our days by the marvelous
   excavations at Koyunjik, Khorabad, and Nimroud. Another capital had
   arisen on the banks of the Euphrates, destined to surpass the ancient
   splendor of its ruined predecessor on the banks of the Tigris. The
   worshipper of the eagle-headed Nisroch -- a mighty leader of the
   Chaldean hordes -- had arisen, and gathering his armies from their
   mountain homes, had made the palaces and halls of Nineve a desert, had
   marched southwards against the reigning Pharaoh of Egypt -- had
   encountered him at Carchemish -- hurried on to The Holy City, and
   carried away with him to his favorite capital the rebellious people of
   the Lord. Among them was a captive of no ordinary note. He was at that
   time a child, yet he lived to see this descendant of the hardy Chasdim
   grow great in power and fame -- to hear the tale of the fall of Tyre,
   and "the daughter of the Zidonians," and of the triumph over Pharaoh
   Hophra, whom modern researches have discovered in the twenty-sixth
   dynasty of Egypt's kings. At length the haughty conqueror returns, and
   dreams mysteriously. This forgotten prisoner becomes the only
   interpreter of wondrous visions of Empires about to arise and spread
   over distant centuries. The dreamer is at length gathered to his
   fathers, yet the interpreter lives on through the reign of the
   grandson, and explains a mysterious writing on the palace wall, amidst
   revelry which ends in the city's overthrow. Cryus and his Persians,
   Darius and his Medes rise rapidly to power, and the Prophet rises with
   them -- till envy throws the aged Seer into a lion's den. But he
   perishes not till he has seen visions of the future history of mankind.
   The triumphs of Pitasia and Macedon are revealed -- the division of
   Alexander's Empire -- the wars of his successors -- the wide-spread
   dominion of Rome -- the overthrow of the Sacred Sanctuary by Titus --
   and The Coming Of Messiah to regenerate and to rule the world when the
   seventy weeks were accomplished.

   The Roll of the Book, containing all these surprising announcements,
   has naturally excited the attention of the Scholars and Divines of all
   ages. Among the voluminous Comments of the laborious Calvin, none will
   be received by the British public with more heartfelt interest than his
   Lectures upon Daniel. The various illustrations of Daniel and the
   Apocalypse with which the press has always teemed, display the hold
   which these Divine Oracles have taken of the public mind. Various
   theories of interpretation have been warmly and even bitterly
   discussed. The Praeterist, and the Futurist, the German Neologian, and
   the American Divine, have each written boldly and copiously; and the
   public of Christendom have read with avidity, because they have been
   taught that these predictions come home to our own times, and to our
   modern controversies. Abstruse arguments and historical discussions
   have been rendered popular, through the expectation of seeing either
   Pope or Turk, or, perhaps, the Saracen in The Willful King, and The
   Little Horn. If Napoleon the First, or Napoleon the Second, if an
   Emperor of Russia, or a Pharaoh of Egypt, can be discovered in the King
   of the South, pushing at the King of the North -- then the deep
   significance of the Prophecy to us is at once acknowledged, and the
   intensity of its brightness descends directly upon our own generation.
   If the "twelve hundred and ninety Days" of the twelfth Chapter be
   really years, then the blessing of waiting till "The Time of The End"
   seems to be upon us, since The French Revolution, and the waning of the
   Turkish sway, and the Conquests of Britain in the East, are then
   foretold in these "words" which have hitherto been "closed up and
   sealed."

   Whether any of these theories be true or false, they have exercised a
   mighty power over the imaginations of modern Writers on Prophecy, and
   have so attracted the minds of Theologians to the subject, as to give
   force to the inquiry, What was Calvin's view of these stirring scenes?
   Without anticipating his Comments, it may be replied, that he disposes
   of the important question in a few lines. "In numeris non sum
   Pythagoricus," is the expression of both his wisdom and his modesty. In
   attempting, however, a solution of these great problems in Prophecy,
   the opinions of The Reformers are most important, and among them all
   none stands higher as a deep and original thinker than the Author of
   these Explanatory Lectures. It is enough for this our Preface to
   remark, that the bare possibility of the contents of this Book corning
   home to the daily politics of Europe and the East, adds a charm and a
   zest to the following pages, which no infirmity in the Commentator can
   destroy.

   In these Introductory Remarks, we shall allude to the present state of
   opinion respecting the Genuineness and Authenticity of the Book itself,
   touching upon some of the conjectures advanced since Calvin's time to
   the present, and adverting to the skepticism of German Neology and the
   bold speculations of the amiable Arnold. In confutation of all Infidel
   Objections, we shall next give a general sketch of the History of
   Assyria and Babylon, as it has been lately disentombed by the labors of
   Mm. Botta and Layard, and rescued from the intricacies of the Cuneiform
   Inscriptions by Hincks and Rawlinson. By these means, the Nimrod
   Obelisk in the British Museum -- the palatial chambers of Khorsabad and
   Koyunjik -- the Winged Bull of Persepolis -- the statue of Cyrus,
   Moorghab -- and the magnificent sculpture of Darius at Behistun -- all
   become vocal proofs of the truthfulness of Daniel's predictions. A
   visit to the East India House in London will make us acquainted with
   the Standard Inscription of Nebuchadnezzar, containing a list of "all
   tire temples build by the king in the different towns and cities of
   Babylonia, naming the particular gods and goddesses to whom the shrines
   were dedicated: [1] a journey from Baghdad to the Bier's Nimrod, would
   shew us every ruin to be of the age of Nebuchadnezzar:" the testimony
   of experience is here decisive. "I have examined the bricks in situ,"
   says Major Rawlinson, "belonging, perhaps, to an hundreds of towns and
   cities within this area of about 100 miles in length, and thirty or
   forty in breadth, and I never found any other legend than that of
   Nebuchadnezzar, the son of Nabopalassar, king of Babylon." [2] These
   interesting researches into The Times Of Daniel will be followed by
   some criticism or The Book Of Daniel Here we might enlarge to an
   overwhelming extent, but we are necessarily compelled to confine our
   remarks to Calvin's method of interpreting these marvelous Prophecies.
   It will next be desirable to point out how succeeding Commentators have
   differed from our Reformer, while we must leave the reader to form his
   own opinion of his merits when he has compared his views with those of
   his successors. We shall present him, however, with sufficient data for
   making this comparison, and by references to some modern Writers of
   eminence; and by short epitomes of their leading arguments, we hope to
   render this edition of these celebrated Lectures as instructive and as
   interesting as the limit of our space will allow.

   AUTHENTICITY OF THE BOOK OF DANIEL

   The Third Century Of Christianity had scarcely commenced, when the
   Authenticity of this Book was fiercely assailed by the vigorous
   skepticism of Porphyry; and it would be totally unnecessary to allude
   to so distant an opponent, had not his arguments been reproduced by the
   later scholars of Germany, and adopted by one of our noble spirits,
   whom in many things we delight to honor. Although the Jews admitted
   this Book into their Haiographa, and our Lord referred to its contents
   when predicting Jerusalem's overthrow, yet these self-sufficient
   critics of our day have repeated the heathen objection which Jerome so
   elaborately refuted. If we inquire into the reason for the revival of
   such obsolete skepticism, we shall find it in the pride of that carnal
   mind which will not bow down submissively to the miraculous dealings of
   the Almighty. The Prophecies concerning the times of the Seleucidae and
   the Lagidae are found to be exceedingly precise and minute hence it is
   argued, "they are no prophecies at all -- they are History dressed in
   the garb of Prophecy, written by some pseudo-Daniel living during their
   supposed fulfillment." The Sacred words of Holy Writ become thus
   branded with imposture the testimony of the Jews and of our Lord to the
   integrity of the Sacred Canon is set aside, and the simple trust of the
   Christian Church both before and since the Reformation is asserted to
   be a baseless delusion. The judgment and labors of Sir Isaac Newton,
   the chronological acumen of Faber and Hales, are nothing but "the
   foolishness of the wise," because Bertholdt and Bleek, De Wett, and
   Kirmis, have repeated the cry "vaticinia post eventurn!" And why this
   eagerness to degrade this Book to a fabulous compilation of the
   Macabian times? Simply because its reception as the Word of God would
   overthrow the favorite theories of the Rationalists respecting The Old
   Testament. We cannot undertake to reply to such objections in detail;
   we can only furnish the reader with a few references to those Writers
   by whom they have been both propagated and refuted. We shall first
   indicate and label the poison. The proscenium of Rosemuller a furnishes
   us with a succinct abstract of the assertions of Eichhornas in his
   Einleit. in das A. T., [3] of Bertholt in his Histor. krit. Einleit,
   [4] of Bleek in his Theolog Zeitschr., [5] and of Grissinger in his
   Neue, ansicht der auffatze im Buche Daniel. [6] The antidote to these
   conjectures is contained in Havernick's article on Daniel, in Kitto's
   Cyclopmdia of Biblical Literature, and also in his valuable "New
   Critical Commentary on the Book of Daniel." [7]

   Professor Hengstenberg [8] of Berlin has ably refilled the Neologian
   objections of his predecessors the American reader will find the
   subject ably treated in the Biblical Repertory of Philadelphia; [9] and
   the English student may obtain an abstract of the points in dispute
   from the elaborate "Introduction" of Hartwell Horne. [10] The various
   theories of these Neologists imply that the Book was written during the
   Machabean period, by one or more authors who invented the earlier
   portions by mingling fable with history in inextricable confusion, and
   by throwing around the history of their own age the garb of prophetic
   romance! The reception of any such hypothesis would so completely
   nullify the whole of Calvin's Exposition, that we feel absolved from
   the necessity of entering into details. No disciple of this school will
   even condescend to peruse these Lectures. It is enough for us to know,
   that these unworthy successors of the early German Reformers have been
   met with ability and research by Luderwalk, Staudlin, Jahn, Lack, and
   Steudel. The unbelief of a Semler, and Michaelis, and a Corrodi, will
   seem to the follower of Calvin the offspring of an unsanctified reason
   which has never been trained in reverential homage to the inspired.
   Word. The keenness of this perverse criticism has attempted to explain
   away two important facts; first, that Ezekiel mentions Daniel as alive
   in his day, and as a model of piety and wisdom, (Ezekiel 14:20, and
   Ezekiel 28:3, [11] ) and secondly, that the Canon of the Hebrew
   Scriptures was finally closed before the times of the Maccabean
   warriors. Havernick also treats with the greatest erudition the
   linguistic character of the Book as a decisive proof of its
   authenticity. He reminds us that the Hebrew language had ceased to be
   spoken by the Jews long before the reigns of the Seleucid, that the
   Aramaean was then the vernacular tongue, and yet still there is a
   difference between the Aramaean of Daniel and the late Chaldee
   Paraphrases of the Old Testament. Oriental scholars have pronounced
   this testimony to be decisive. Interesting as his illustrations are,
   the numerous subjects which demand our immediate notice will only admit
   of our referring the reader to the Professor's "New Critical Commentary
   on the Book of Daniel." [12]

   Happily there exists a strong conservative protection against the
   injury arising from such speculations. They are perfectly harmless to
   us when locked up in the obscurity of a foreign language and of a
   forbidding theology. But it grieves the Christian mind to find a writer
   worthy of being classed among the boldest of Reformers giving the
   sanction of his authority to such baseless extravagances. There are
   many points of similarity between the characters of Arnold and Calvin.
   Both were remarkable for an unswerving constancy in upholding all they
   felt to be right, and in resisting all they knew to be wrong. Both were
   untiring in their industry, and marvelously successful in impressing
   the young with the stamp of their own mental rigor. Agreeing in their
   manful protest against the impostures of priestcraft, they differed
   widely respecting the Book of Daniel. Our modern interpreter, in a
   letter to a friend, [13] writes as follows concerning "the latter
   chapters of Daniel, which, if genuine, would be a clear exception to my
   canon of interpretation, as there can be no reasonable spiritual
   meaning made out of The Kings of the North and South. But I have long
   thought that the greater part of the Book of Daniel is most certainly
   very late work, of the time of the Maccabees; and the pretended
   Prophecy about the Kings of Grecia and Persia, and of the North and
   South, is mere history, like the poetical prophecies in Vigil and
   elsewhere. In fact, you can trace distinctly the date when it was
   written, because the events up to the date are given with historical
   minuteness, totally unlike the character of real prophecy, and beyond
   that date all is imaginary." It is not difficult to detect the leading
   fallacy of this passage in the phrase "my canon of interpretation."
   This original thinker, with a pertinacity equal to that of Calvin, had
   adopted his own method of explaining Prophecy, and determined at all
   hazards to uphold it. As the writings of this accomplished scholar have
   been very widely diffused, it will be useful to notice the arguments
   which he has employed. His "Sermons on Prophecy" contain the dangerous
   theory, which has been fully and satisfactorily answered by Blake in
   his chapter on "The Historical Reality of Prophecy." [14]

   Dr. Arnold's statements are as follow Sacred Prophecy is not an
   anticipation of History. For History deals with particular nation,
   times, places, and persons. But Prophecy cannot do thief, or it would
   alter the very conditions of humanity. It deals only with general
   principles, good and evil, truth and falsehood, God and his enemy. It
   is the voice of God announcing the issue of the great struggle between
   good and evil. Prophecy then, on this view, cannot be fulfilled
   literally in the persons and nations mentioned in its language, it can
   only be, fulfilled in the person of Christ. Thus, every part is said to
   have a double sense, "one Historical, comprehended by the Prophet and
   his own generation, in all its poetic features, but never fulfilled
   answerably to the magnificence of is language, because that was
   inspired by a higher object the other Spiritual, the proper form of
   which neither the Prophet nor his contemporaries knew, but fill-filled
   adequately in Christ, and his promises to his people as judgment on his
   enemies." "It is History which deals with the Twelve Tribes of Israel;
   but the Israel of Prophecy are God's Israel really and truly, who walk
   with him faithfully, and abide with him to the end." Twice the
   Prophecies have failed of their fulfillment, first in the circumcised
   and then in the baptized Church. "The Christian Israel does not answer
   more worthily to the expectations of Prophecy than Israel after the
   flesh. Again have the people whom he brought out of Egypt corrupted
   themselves" and hence Predictions relating to the happiness of the
   Church, both before and since the times of the Messiah, have signally
   and necessarily failed. We cannot undertake the refutation of this
   general theory, we must refer the reader to the satisfactory arguments
   of Birks. We can only quote his clear exposition of the manner in which
   the Visions of Daniel confute these crude speculations -- "Instead of a
   mere glimpse of the sure triumph of goodness at the last, we have most
   numerous details of the steps of Providence which lead to that blessed
   consummation. The seven years madness of Nebuchadnezzar, and his
   restoration to the throne; the fate of Belshazzar, and the conquests of
   the Medes and Persians; the rise of the Second Empire, the earlier
   dignity of the Medes, and the later pre-eminence of the Persians over
   them; the victories of Cyrus westsyard in Lydia, northward in Armenia,
   and southward in Babylon; the unrivaled greatness of his Empire, and
   the exactions on the subject provinces; the three successors of Cyrus,
   Cambyses, Smerdis, and Darius; the accession of Xerxes, and the vast
   armament he led against Greece, are all predicted within the time of
   the two earlier Empires. In the time of the Third Kingdom a fuller
   variety of details is given. The mighty exploits of Alexander, his
   total conquest of Persia, the rapidity of his course, his uncontrolled
   dominion, his sudden death in the height of his power, the fourfold
   division of his kingdom, and. the extinction of his posterity; the
   prosperous reign of the first Ptolemy, and of the great Seleucus, with
   the superior power of the latter before his death; the reign of
   Philadelphus, and the marriage of Berenice his daughter with Antiochus
   Theus; the murder of Antiochus and Berenice and their infant son by
   Laodice; the vengeance taken by Euergetes, brother of Bernice, on his
   accession to the throne; his conquest of Seleucia, the fortress of
   Syria, and the idol gods which he carried into Egypt; the earlier death
   of Callinicus; the preparations of his sons, Seleucus, Ceraunus, and
   Antiochus the Great, for war with Egypt, are all distinctly set before
   us. Then follows the history of Antiochus. His sole reign after his
   brother's death, his eastern conquests and recovery of Seleucia; the
   strength of the two rival armies and the Egyptian victory at Raphia;
   the pride of Ptolomy Philopater and his partial conquests, with the
   weakness of his profligate reign; the return of Antichous with added
   strength after an interval of years, and with the riches of the East;
   his victories in Judea and the capture of Sidon; the overthrow of the
   Egyptian forces at Panium, the honor shewn by Antiochus to the Temple,
   and his care for its completion and beauty; his treaty with Egypt, the
   marriage of his daughter Clopatra with Ptolemy Philometor, and
   defection from her father's cause; his invasion of the Isles of Greece;
   his rude repulse by the Roman Consul, and the reproach of tribute which
   came upon him through his defeat; his return to Antioch and speedy
   death, are all described in regular order. Then follow the reigns of
   Seleucus and Antiochus Ephphanes, given with an equal fitness of
   prophetic detail, and close the narrative of the Third Empire. Even in
   the time of the Fourth and last Kingdom, though more remote from the
   days of the Prophet, the events predicted are not few. We find there,
   distinctly revealed, the iron strength of the Romans, their gradual
   subjugation of other powers, their fierce and warlike nature, their
   cruel and devouring conquests, the stealthy policy of their empire, and
   its gradual advance in the direction of the East, southward and
   eastward towards the land of Israel, till it had cast down the noblest
   Kings, and firmly ingrafted its new dominion on the stock of the Greek
   Empire. We have next described its oppression of the Jews, the
   overthrow of their City and Sanctuary by Titus, the Abomination of
   Desolation in the Holy Place, and their arrogant pride in standing up
   against Messiah, the Prince of princes." [15]

   If the latter portion of these predictions were really written
   previously to the, events, they must be inspired; and if a writer of
   the Maccabaean period could thus accurately predict the Conquests of
   Rome in the East, the whole question is decided there is no reason
   whatever why the events of the Second and Third Empire should not have
   been foretold as clearly as those of the Fourth. Thus the very
   existence of the Book before the Jewish Canon was closed is fact which
   proves all that is required. These Visions then become "the voice of
   Him who sees the end from the beginning, and pronounces in his secret,
   council, even on the destiny of the falling sparrow. They are designed
   to stoop to the earthly estate of the Church, while they exalt her
   hopes to the glory that shall be revealed. They range through
   everlasting ages; but they let fall in passing a bright gleam of light
   that discovers to us the ass's colt, tied at the meeting of their ways,
   on which the Lord of glory was to ride into Jerusalem. Every step in
   the long vista of preparation lies before them, from the seven months
   reign of Smerdis and the marriage of Berenice with Antiochus, (Daniel
   11:2-6,) to the seven months burial of (corpses) in days to come in the
   land of Israel, and the marriage supper of the Lamb. They touch, as
   with an wand, the perplexed and tangled skein of human history, and it
   becomes a woof of curious and costly workmanship, that; bespeaks the
   skill of its Divine Artificer an outer hanging, embroidered by heavenly
   wisdom, for that glorious tabernacle in which the God of heaven will
   reveal himself for ever." [16]

   THE DIVINES OF GERMANY

   Throughout this Preface and the subsequent Dissertions the reader will
   find frequent reference to The Divines or Germany. Some of these have
   proposed explanations of our Prophet which appear to the English
   readers manifestly erroneous, that he may fancy we have spent too much
   space in confuting them. But he who would keep pace with the
   Theological Investigations of the day, may derive improvement from
   perusing the hypothesis of Bertholdt and De Wette, and rejoice that
   they have elieked the able replies of Havernick and Hengstenberg. In
   truth, the reader Of Daniel must put aside for a while the laudable
   prejudices which he has been taught to cherish from his earliest days,
   and descend into the arena where the contest is fiereest, -- whether
   our Prophet was contemporary with Nebuchadnezzar or Antiochus. To many
   the question itself is startling, and that we may be prepared to meet
   it, thoroughly furnished with available armory, let us glance over the
   wide field of Continental Rationalism as far as it concerns the
   Authenticity of Daniel.

   The system under review is a melancholy off-shoot from the teaching of
   Luther and his intrepid followers. They led men away from form, and
   ceremony, and imposture, to rely upon one Book as their Rule of Faith
   and Duty. They did more -- they sifted the chaff from the wheat, and by
   discarding the Apocrypha, placed before the eager attention of mankind
   the pure word of heaven. Luther and Calvin held very distinct ideas
   about Revelation and Justification, and enforced very boldly their
   views of the only Books which were written by the penmanship of the
   Almighty. Theirs was a work of purification and of reconstruction on
   the assertion of the existence of a Divine Revelation, of its being
   contained in the Old and New Testaments, and of these documents being
   the only Inspired Records of what we are to believe, and how we are to
   live. In process of time, each Boole became the subject of separate
   study -- its history, its criticism, and its preservation were
   respectively examined with intense eagerness -- and a vast amount of
   information was collected, which was totally unknown to the Early
   Reformers. It soon became apparent that the Reformed Churches were
   living under a totally different state of things from theft described
   in the Old Testament. The events, for instance, of this Book of Daniel
   all seemed so mingled and so intertwined; the ordinary occurrences of
   every-day life are so interlaced with marvelous dreams and visions, and
   the conduct and passions of monarchs seem so singularly controlled by
   an unseen Mind, that the question occurs, Is all this literally true?
   Did it all actually come to pass exactly as it is recorded? Or, Is it
   allegorical, or a historical romance, or only partially inspired by
   Jehovah, and tinged in its style and diction with the natural
   exaggeration of Oriental imaginary? Such inquiries shew us how the mind
   seeks to fathom the mysteries of what is offered to its veneration, and
   have led to the conclusion, that the Sacred Books of the Hebrews are
   not all pure revelation, but that they contain it amidst much
   extraneous matter. [17] The writers to whom we refer have ever since
   the sixteenth century been attempting to define how much of the Hebrew
   Scriptures is the pure and spiritual Revelation of the Divine Mind to
   us, and how much is the unavoidable impurity of the channel through
   which it has been conveyed. With the names of some later critics, the
   modern Theologian is familiar. Gesenius, Wegscheider, And Rohr, yet
   retain a powerful influence over the minds of later students, while
   Schultz at Breslau, Gieseler at Gottingen, Allmann at Heidelberg,
   Bretschneider at Gotha, De Wette -- lately deceased -- at Basle, hare
   at Jena, and Weiner at Leipsic, are writers who worship irreverently at
   the shrine of human reason, and either qualify or deny the Inspiration
   of Revelation.

   FALSE SYSTEMS OF SCRIPTURE EXPOSITION

   An important change was necessarily made on the minds of the successors
   of the Reformers, by the more general spread of Classical Literature,
   and a far better acquaintance with Hebrew philology. Here, we must
   allow, that some of the disciples of Luther and Calvin were better
   furnished for the work of Interpretation than their more
   Christian-minded masters. Ernesti, the learned philologer of Leipsic,
   in 1761 laid down "The Laws of a wise Interpretation," and has ever
   since been considered as the founder of a scholar like system of
   Scriptural Exposition. His principles are now universally admitted,
   viz., that we must make use of history and philology of the views of
   the period at which each Book was written, and of all those appliances
   which improved scholarship has provided in the case of the Classical
   Authors of Greece and Rome. Every attentive reader of German Theology
   must perceive, that too many of their celebrated Critics have rested in
   this outward appeal to mere reason and. research. Semler and Tittmann,
   Michaelis and Henke, have pursued this system of accommodation so far,
   that they have destroyed the very spirit and essence of a Divine
   Revelation. In the Prophets, and especially in Daniel, whom Semler
   includes among the doubtful Books, timre is a spiritual meaning only to
   be comprehended by the moral and religious faculties; and except this
   spirit be elicited, the merely outward form of prophetic dictation can
   effect no religious result. Let ROHR and Paulus sneer as they please,
   at the mysticism and pietism of the Evangelic Reformers, we must still
   contend, that without a spirituality similar to theirs, all comments
   are essentially lifeless and profitless to the soul of man. The may
   display erudition, but they will not aid the spirit which hungers and
   thirsts after righteousness on its way towards heaven.

   Every student who desires to become familiar with these discussions,
   may consult with advantage the Dissertations of Hengstenberg, who has
   written fully and ably on The Genuineness of our Prophet. He has
   sketched, historically, the attacks which have been made, and has
   answered every possible objection. The impurity of the Hebrew, the
   words supposed to be Greek, the silence of Siraeh, the disrespect shewn
   by the Jews, and the position in the Canon of Scripture, are all ably
   discussed. The miracles have been called "profuse in number and aimless
   in purpose;" historical errors have been asserted, and statements
   called contradictory, or suspicious, or improbable; many ideas and
   usages have been said to belong to later times. These and similar
   arguments are used to shew the Book to be the production of the times
   of Antiochus Ephphanes, but they have been fully treated by this
   orthodox Professor at Berlin. He discusses most ably, and with the most
   laborious erudition, those marvelous Prophecies of this Sacred Book,
   which have necessarily provoked a host of assailants. He reminds us
   that in the earliest ages, Porphyry devoted his twelfth book to the
   assault upon this Prophet, and that we are indebted to Jerome for a
   knowledge of his objections as well as for their refutation. He
   asserted that the Book was composed during the reign of Antiochus
   Ephphanes in Greek, "and that Daniel did not so much predict future
   events as narrate past ones." [18] Though the imperial commands
   condemned his works to the flames, yet Eusebius of Caesarea, Methodius
   of Tyre, and Apollinaris of Laodicea, have ably refuted them. In later
   times, the first scholar-like attack upon the genuineness of various
   portions was made by J. D. Michaelis. Collins and Semler, Spinoza and
   Hobbes, had each condemned the Book after his own manner but it was
   left for Eichorn [19] to lead the host of those later theologians who
   have displayed their vanity and their skepticism, by the boastfulness
   of their learning and the emptiness of their conclusions. Hezel and
   Corrodi treat it as the work of an impostor; while Bertholdt,
   Griesinger, and Gesenius, have each their own theory concerning its
   authorship and contents. Other Critics have followed the footsteps of
   these into paths most dangerous and delusive.

   Having replied to the most subtle objections against the Genuineness of
   these Prophecies, Hengstenberg proceeds to uphold the direct arguments
   in its favor. He first discusses the testimony of the author himself,
   and then enters upon its reception into the Canon of the Sacred
   Writings. He comments at full length on the important passage in
   Josephus contra Apion. 1:8, and shews the groundlessness of every
   assertion which impugns its Canonical value. He next proves that the
   declaration of our Lord assumes the prophetical authority of the work,
   and traces its existence in pre-Maccabaean times. The alleged
   exhibition of these Writings to Alexander The Great and the exposition
   of their contents to the Grecian Conqueror of the East, form a singular
   episode in the midst of profound criticism. The incorrectness of the
   Alexandrine Version and its rejection by the Early Church, who
   substituted that of Theodotion for it, is turned into an argument
   against the Maccabaean origin of the original; for certainly, a
   composition of which the author and the translators were nearly
   contemporary, might be better translated, than one separated by an
   interval of many ages. Then the peculiar features and complexion of the
   original language point out the exact period to which the writing is to
   be assigned. The historical accuracy, the apparent discrepancies, and
   yet the real agreement with Profane Narratives, all strengthen the
   assertion, that the writer lived during the times of the Babylonian and
   Persian Monarchies. Another argument, as strong as any of the former,
   is deduced from the nature of the symbolism used throughout the Book.
   The reasonings of Hengstenberg have now received additional
   confirmation from the excavations of Layard. The prevalence of animal
   imagery, rudely grotesque and awkwardly gigantic, is characteristic of
   Chaldean times, and bespeaks an era previous to the Medo-Persian
   Sculptures at Persepolis. Summing up his reasonings, the Professor
   quotes the observation of Fenelon: "lisez Daniel, denoncant a Balthasar
   la vengeance de Dieu toute prete a fondre sur lui, et cherchez dans les
   plus sublimes originaux de l'antiquite quelque chose qu'on puisse
   comparer a ces endroits la!"

   ENGLISH PHILOSOPHICAL SCHOOL

   The speculations which we have hitherto discussed are not confined
   within the limits of unreadable German Neology they have been
   transfused into English Philosophy, and presented in a popular form to
   the readers of our current literature. In a learned and speculative
   Work, entitled "The Progress of the Intellect, as exemplified in the
   Religious Development of the Greeks and Hebrews," the writer [20] has
   adopted the untenable hypothesis of the German Neologists. In his
   second section of a chapter on the "Notion of a supernatural Messiah,"
   he writes as follows; "During the severe persecution under Antiochus
   Ephphanes, when the cause of Hebrew faith in its struggle with colossal
   heathenism seemed desperate, and when, notwithstanding some bright
   examples of heroism, the majority of the higher class was inclined to
   submit and to apostatize, an unknown writer adopted the ancient name of
   Daniel, in order to revive the almost extinct hopes of his countrymen,
   and to exemplify the proper bearing of a faithful Hebrew in the
   presence of a Gentile Tyrant. The object of pseudo-Daniel is to
   foreshow, under a form adapted to make the deepest impression on his
   countrymen, by a prophecy, half-allusive, half-apocalyptic, the
   approaching destruction of heathenism through the advent of Messiah.
   Immediately after the overthrow of the Four Beasts, emblematic of four
   successive heathen Empires, the last being the Macedonian with its
   offset, the Syrian; the kingdom would devolve to the Saints of the Most
   High,' that is, to the Messianic Establishment of Jewish expectation,
   presided over by a being appearing in the clouds, and distinguished,
   like the angels, by his human form from the uncouth symbols of the
   Gentile Monarchies." [21] He treats "Messiah" as a "title which
   hitherto confined to human anointed authorities, such as kings,
   priests, or prophets, became henceforth, specifically appropriated to
   the ideal personage who was to be the Hope, the Expectation, and the
   Salvation of Israel." He discusses the Seventy Weeks as the fiction of
   the imaginary Daniel, and terms the accompanying predictions
   "adventurous," and as turning out "as fallacious as all that had
   preceded them." His fourth section on Daniel's Messiah is, if possible,
   more wildly conjectural than the two preceding ones. Daniel's idea,
   says he, of a supernatural leader called "Son of Man," became
   afterwards "a basis of mystical Christology." Those glowing passages of
   this Prophet, which fill the Christian mind with awe and delight, are
   to this theorist "the earthly or Messianic resurrection of pious
   Hebrews, which was all that was originally contemplated in the
   prediction." In thus attempting to overthrow the Inspired authority of
   Daniel, he mingles the Books of Esdras and the Jewish Targum, and is
   eager to catch at ally Jewish fiction as if it were true interpretation
   of ancient prophecy. He alludes to puerile Rabbinical fables as really
   explanatory of the Divine Records, and mingles Zoroaster and
   Maimonides, Gfrorer and Eisenmenger, as of equal value in determining
   abstruse points of sound criticism! The sections with which we are
   concerned evince the greatest research and the crudest opinions all
   hurried together without the slightest critical skill or philosophical
   sagacity. With materials gathered together in the richest abundance, he
   has presented us with results which are alike baseless, futile, and
   injurious. Tobit and Papias, the Book of Baruch and the Book of Enoch,
   are all treated as on a level with the writings of Moses or Tacitus,
   Justin Martyr or a German Mystic! The public, too, are in danger of
   being imposed on by a show of learning and by long Latinized words and
   phrases, which merely disguise, under classical forms, ideas with which
   the well-read Divine is already familiar; at the same time, they give
   such an air of scholarship to these speculations, that the unlearned
   may be readily deceived by their showy rationalism. The whole work
   utterly fails in its attempt to explain the rites and symbols of Jewish
   worship, and to give the slightest explanation of the "theories" and
   "philosophies" of the Old Testament. The tendency is to reduce it all
   to mysticism and symbolism, and to any other "theosophy" which leads
   the mind away from the Christian assurance of one God, one Faith, and
   one Spirit.

   THE RECENT EASTERN DISCOVERIES

   The strongest of all possible arguments against these fallacious
   theories has lately been derived from Eastern discovery. Fresh
   importation's of sculptured rock are daily arriving in Europe, from the
   sepulchers of those cities amidst which our Prophet dwelt. The more
   this new vein is worked, the richer it becomes. Are we to be told by
   Bleek that the writer of this Book transferred the events of which he
   was a spectator to the more ancient times of Assyria and Babylon? and
   that Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar were but fabulous characters, of
   which the original types were Antiochus and Alexander? [22] Are
   Eichhorn and Bertholdt to make Daniel another Homer, or Virgil, or
   AEschylus? Then let us appeal to the testimony of Mm. Botta and Layard
   let us visit the British museum, and under the guidance of Rawlinson
   and Hincks, let us peruse, in the arrow-headed characters, the history
   of the Monarchs of Assyria and Babylon, and observe how exactly those
   memorials of antiquity illustrate the Visions of our Prophet. The
   assistance which these excavations afford, for the elucidation of our
   subject, is too important to be passed over, and we must venture upon
   such arguments as may properly enter into a General Preface, while they
   vindicate the historical accuracy of the interpretation which Calvin
   has so elaborately set before us in the following Lectures.

   ANCIENT ASSYRIAN REMAINS

   The order of the Visions suggests the propriety of treating, first, The
   Ancient Assyrian Remains; then those of Babylon and Persepolis with
   such notices of the Egypt Of The Ptolemies as the connection of the
   history may require.

   The earliest memorials of Assyria have not been preserved in the
   records of literature, but by durable engravings on marble and granite.
   Within the last fifty years the Pyramids of Egypt have been compelled
   to open their lips of stone to speak for God's Word, and the Rosetta
   table suggested to Young and Champollion an alphabet by which they read
   on sarcophagus and entablature the history of the earliest dynasties of
   the Nile. What Lepsius and Bunsen have done for Thebes and Memphis,
   Dendera and Edfou, Layard and Rawlinson are now accomplishing for the
   long lost Nineveh, the majestic Babylon, and the elegant Persepolis. It
   has lately been revealed to astonished Europe, that a buried city lies,
   in all its pristine grandeur, beneath that huge mound which frowns over
   Mosul on the banks of the Tigris. Khorsabad and Koyunjik, Nimroud, and
   BEHISTUN, are now giving up their black obelisks, their colossal bulls,
   and their eagle-headed warriors, to become "signs and wonders" to our
   curious generation. In this general sketch we must avoid details,
   however interesting we can only allude to the first Assyrian monuments
   discovered by M. Botta, in 1843, [23] as containing a line of Cuneiform
   Inscriptions amid winged kings and their warlike chariots. They are
   deposited in the Louvre, and form the most ancient of its esteemed
   collections. The elegant volumes of Layard, and the more tangible proof
   of his untiring labors, now deposited in the British Museum, have
   thrown new light upon the prophetic portion of the Elder Covenant.
   Two-coned Conquerors, winged Chiefs, carrying either the gazelle or the
   goat, sacred trees, and their kneeling worshippers --

   The life-like statue and the breathing bust,
   The column rescued from defiling dust --

   enable us to guess at the exploits of a long line of kings before the
   age of Saul or Priam. The name of Sardanapalus is now rescued from
   traditional disgrace, and ennobled in the midst; of a hardy race of
   ancestors and successors. Our progress in interpreting these
   arrow-headed mysteries, enables us to assign the date 1267 B.C. for the
   founding of Nineveh as a settled point in Asiatic chronology. The
   earliest historical document in the world is that on the north-west
   palace of Nimroud built by Assar-Adan-Pal. He informs us of the
   existence, and celebrates the exploits of Temen-Bar the first, the
   founder of Haleh, at a time when the Hebrews were just entering the
   promised land, and the Argives were colonizing the virgin valleys of
   Hellas! The familiar names of Shalmaneser, Sennacherib, and Esarhaddon,
   are found incised upon the enduring masonry; and it is now possible to
   ascertain who founded the Mespila of Xenophon, who constructed the
   towers in the south-west palace of Nimroud and who stamped his annals
   on the clay cylinders in the British Museum. [24] The Nimroud obelisk
   becomes a precious relic, since it enables us to ascertain, for the
   first time, the events of those nine centuries, during which Nineveh
   existed from its rise to its overthrow. We are mainly concerned with
   the manner in which it confirms the truthfulness of the Prophets of the
   Hebrews, and with the unanswerable arguments which it supplies against
   the subtleties of German Neology. The credibility of one Prophet is
   intimately bound up with that of another. Whatever confirms either
   Isaiah or Ezekiel, throws its reflected light upon Daniel and Hosea.
   The god Nisroch, in whose temple Sennacherib was slain, (2 Kings 19:37,
   and Isaiah 37:38,) is, repeatedly mentioned on the obelisk as the chief
   deity of the Assyrians. The "Sargon king of Assyria" (Isaiah 20:1) is
   most probably the monarch who founded the city excavated by M. Botta;
   and the occurrence of the name "Yehuda," in the 33rd number of the
   British Museum series, leads Interpreters to consider the passage as
   alluding to the conquest of Samaria. The very paintings so graphically
   described by Ezekiel, (Ezekiel 23:14, 15,) have reappeared upon the
   walls of these palaces. They are, perhaps, the very identical objects
   which this Prophet beheld, for he dwelt at no great distance from them
   on the banks of the Khabur, and wrote the passage about thirteen years
   after the destruction of the Assyrian Empire. The prophecy bears the
   date B.C. 593, and "the latest Assyrian sculpture on the site of
   Nineveh must be as early as B.C. 634." [25] We would gladly linger over
   these proofs of the truthfulness of the ancient Prophets; but further
   details must be inserted in those Dissertations which accompany the
   text, and we close this rapid sketch of these Assyrian remains in the
   touching words of their enterprising Discoverer. "I used," says Mr.
   Layard, "to contemplate for hours these mysterious emblems, and to muse
   over their intent and history. What more noble forms could have ushered
   the people into the temple of their gods? What more sublime images
   could have been borrowed from nature, by men who sought, unaided by the
   light of Revealed Religion, to embody their conception of the wisdom,
   power, and ubiquity of a Supreme Being? They could find no better type
   of intellect and knowledge, than the head of a man; of strength, than
   rite body of the lion; of ubiquity, than the wings of the bird. The
   winged-human-headed lions were not idle creations;, the offspring of
   mere fancy; their meaning was written upon them. They had awed and
   instructed races which had flourished 3000 years ago. Through the
   portals which they guarded, kings, priests, and warriors had borne
   sacrifices to their altars, long before the wisdom of the East had
   penetrated to Greece, and had furnished its mythology with symbols long
   recognized by the Assyrian votaries. They may have been buried, and
   their existence may have been unknown, before the foundation of the
   Eternal City. For twenty-five centuries they had been hidden from the
   eye of man, and they now stood forth once more in their ancient
   majesty. But how changed was the scene around them! The luxury and
   civilization of a mighty nation had given place to the wretchedness and
   ignorance of a few half-barbarous tribes; the wealth of temples, and
   the riches of great cities had been succeeded by ruins and shapeless
   heaps of earth. Above the spacious hall in which they stood, the plough
   had passed and the corn now waved. Egypt had monuments no less ancient
   and no less wonderful, but they have stood forth for ages, to testify
   her early power and renown, while those before me had but now appeared
   to bear witness in the words of the Prophet, that once The Assyrian was
   a cedar in Lebanon, with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud of
   a high stature; and his top was among the thick boughs. His height was
   exalted above all the trees of the field, and his boughs were
   multiplied, and his branches became long, because of the multitude of
   the waters which he shot forth. All the fowls of heaven made nests in
   his boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts of the field
   bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all great nations;
   for now is Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness, and flocks
   lie down in the midst of her; all the beasts of the nations, both the
   cormorant and the bittern lodge in the upper lintels of it; their voice
   sings in the windows, and desolation is in the thresholds.'" [26]

   ANCIENT BABYLONIAN REMAINS

   As we travel onwards in time, and southward in place, our attention is
   attracted to those Babylonian antiquities which vindicate the
   correctness of the Comments of Calvin.

   After centuries of extensive empire, Nineveh yielded to a younger
   rival. The army of Sennacherib had been annihilated by the angel of the
   Lord; Esarhaddon, his son, had planted his heathen colonizes in the
   fertile plains of Samaria. Nebuchadonosor had won the battle of Rhagau;
   Phraortes had been slain, and his son, Cyaxares in alliance with
   Nabopalassar, had taken Nineveh, and destroyed for ever its place in
   the history of Asia. Palaces of black basalt, bas-reliefs, and
   hawk-headed heroes, covered with legends of unbounded triumphs, no
   longer rose at the bidding of the servants of Bar, and the worshippers
   of Assarac, Beltis, and Rimmon. No more

   Her obelisks of buried chrysolite

   proclaimed her far-famed majesty; for her new masters transferred the
   scat of their empire to the banks of the Euphrates. The renowned son of
   Nabopalassar now commences the era of Babylonian greatness. This
   enterprising chieftain is no creation of poetic fancy. Herodotus and
   Berosus have recorded his exploits, and we have now the testimony of
   recent discovery to confirm the assertions of Daniel, and to throw
   fresh light upon his narrative.

   "The earliest Babylonian record that we have," says Major Rawlinson,
   "is, I think, the inscription engraved on a triumphal tablet at Holwan,
   near the foot of Mount Zagros; it is chiefly religious, but it seems
   also to record the victories of a certain king named Temnin against the
   mountaineers. Unfortunately it is in a very mutilated state, and parts
   of it alone are legible. I discovered this tablet on the occasion of my
   last visit to Behistun, and with the help of a telescope, for there are
   no possible means of ascending the rock, succeeded in taking a copy of
   such portions of the writing as are legible. I am not able at present
   to attempt a classification of the kings of Babylon, such as they are
   known from the various relics that we possess of them nor, indeed, can
   I say with certainty, whether the kings recorded, with the exception of
   Nebuchadnezzar and his father, may be anterior or posterior to the era
   of Nabonassar. The Babylonians certainly borrowed their alphabet from
   the Assyrians, and it requires no great trouble or ingenuity at the
   present day to form a comparative table of the characters." [27] "I
   have examined," says this enterprising traveler, "hundreds of the Hymar
   bricks, (near Babylon,) and have found them always to bear the name of
   Nebuchadnezzar " Borsippa was a city in the neighborhood of Babylon,
   and there is monumental" evidence of its being the capital of Shinar,
   as early almost as the earliest Assyrian epoch." Temenbar, the Obelisk
   king, conquered it in the ninth year of his reign. the bricks upon the
   spot are exclusively stamped with the name of Nebuchadnezzar, being at
   this moment tangible proofs of the reality of the words "Is not this
   the great Babylon that I have built?" The rebuilding of the city, and
   the construction and dedication of the great temple is noticed "in the
   standard inscription of Nebuchadnezzar, of which the India house slab
   furnishes us with the best and most perfect copy " This valuable
   monument gives a detail of all the temples which he built throughout
   the various cities of his extensive provinces, it names the particular
   deities to whom the shrines were dedicated, and mentions other
   particulars, which our present ignorance of the language enables us.
   but partially to comprehend. The vast; mound of El Kasr contains the
   remains of a magnificent palace, supposed to be that of Nebuchadnezzar;
   but as these recent excavations are more to our present purpose, it is
   unnecessary to refer at length to this majestic ruin. [28]

   PERSIAN AND EGYPTIAN ANTIQUITIES

   Again, in commenting on the ninth chapter, Calvin has followed the
   usual method of interpreting it of Alexander and his successors he
   naturally assumes them to be real predictions, and believes them to
   have been accomplished according to the utterance of their Hebrew
   captive. And have we no traces of the foot-prints of Alexander now
   remaining to us? Not long ago, a traveler, amid the barren plains of
   Persia, lighted unexpectedly on a magnificent ruin -- alone, on a
   deserted plain -- its polished marbles, and its chiseled columns all
   strewed around in wild confusion. This Chehel-Minar, or hall of forty
   pillars, was built by the Genii, said the Arabs, amid the desert
   solitudes of Merdusht. The Genii builders have lately been stripped of
   their disguise of fable, and the long lost Persepolis, destroyed by the
   mad frolic of Alexander stands revealed to the world in the
   Takht-i-Jemshid. The grandeur of these pillared halls, these sculptured
   staircases, and fretwork fringes of horn-bearing lions, interests the
   reader of Daniel, through the inscriptions which they bear on their
   surface. The ingenuity of a Westergaard and a Lassen has been displayed
   in deciphering them, and has enabled us to discover the original
   architects. Cyrus and Cambyses, Darius Hystaspes and Xerxes, each
   erected his own portion. One portion can be assigned to the Achaenenian
   dynasty, and another to the monarchs of the Sassanian family. These
   inscriptions also point out where the rulers of Persia formed their
   sepulchral repose. The tomb of Cyrus at Moorghab, his statue discovered
   and described by Sir R. K. Porter, and "the thousand lines" on the
   sculptured rock of Behistun, [29] throw a clear and brilliant light on
   the statements of Daniel, as well as on the narrative of Herodotus.
   These passing allusions must suffice at present -- further discussions
   must be left for distinct dissertations -- while the ninth and tenth
   chapters of Vaux's Nineveh and Persepolis will supply additional
   information to all who are inclined to search for it. Enough is
   introduced, if the reader is impressed with the conviction that
   Daniel's Vision; and Calvin's Lectures are no vague or cunning
   delusions, no skillful travestying of history, under the garb of either
   intentional forgery or weak credulity.

   As Persepolis suggests the triumph of the He-goat, and the rising of
   the four horns towards the four winds of heaven, (Daniel 8:8,) so it
   leads us forwards towards the subsequent warfare between Asia and
   Egypt. The mighty king stood ups, and his kingdom was broken and the
   king of the south became strong and mighty, (Daniel 11:3, 4.) All index
   here points to the valley of the Nile, where there now exists a
   countless host of monuments, raised by the giants of the very earliest
   days of out race. On the day when Cambyses, flushed with victory,
   stabbed with his own hand the living Apis, and commanded the bones of
   the Pharaohs to be beaten with rods, he struck to the heart the genius
   of the Nile. At that moment, the quarries were teeming with busy
   sculptors, numerous as swarming bees -- massive monoliths were becoming
   Sphinxes and Memnons, while architrave's and propyla, worthy of the
   Temple of Karnak, were emerging from the living rock. They all retired
   to rest that evening, intending to renew their labor on the morrow, but
   can the morrow bursts the avenging Persian, and that long train of
   workers are still for ever. But their unfinished handicraft remains for
   the astonishment of our later centuries. A perfect statue only awaits
   one final blow to detach it from its parent rock -- there runs the
   track of the wheels which had come to transport it to either Edfou or
   Luxor; there may be seen the very marks of the tools which lay by its
   side all night, and were never used on the next fatal morning.

   Henceforth Egyptian art is transferred to the tombs and palaces of the
   kings of Persia. It is cheering to feel, that as our knowledge of the
   significance of these treasures advances, they confirm the assertions
   of Holy Writ. Among the mural sculptures at Karnak, one of the
   captives, with a Jewish physiognomy, bears the title which we can now
   read -- Youdah Malek, meaning a king of Judah. The Rosetta Stone in our
   National Museum, which is the basis of modern Egyptology was sculptured
   as late as B.C. 195 and contains decree of Ptolemy Ephphanes, to whom
   Daniel is supposed to refer. The primaeval antiquity of The Zodiac on
   the majestic portico Dendera, has now been disproved. "The Greek
   Inscription on the pronaos refers to Tiberius and Hadrian." The
   hieroglyphic legends on the oldest portion of its walls belong to the
   last Cleopatra while the Zodiac was constructed between A.D. 12 and
   132. While we willingly allow the connection between Assyria and Egypt
   as early as the thirteenth century before Christ, and admit the
   occurrence of its name on the Nimroud obelisk in the British Museum,
   [30] and on the sculptures of Behistun and Nakhshi-Rustam, [31] yet; we
   contend. against that assumption of a false antiquity, which is assumed
   for the purpose of throwing discredit upon die prophetic portions of
   our Sacred Oracles.

   What, then, is the result of our rapid sketch of these remains of the
   dynasties of former eras? A complete overthrow of the baseless
   fabrications of German Neology. Till the arrow-headed character was
   deciphered, the history of Nineveh was almost a bank to the world. As
   Assyria and Babylon now breathe and live in resuscitated glory, so all
   that Daniel wrote is confirmed and amplified by the marbles and tombs
   which have traveled to this Island of the West. Hence this Captive of
   Judah really lived while the Head of Gold was towering majestically
   upon the allegorical image. Neither poet nor impostor of the reign of
   Antiochus could have fancied or forged characters and events which
   accord so exactly with the excavations of a Layard, or the decipherings
   of a Rawlinson. Skeptical infidelity must now hide its head for ever,
   and speculations of the school of Arnold must shrink into their
   original insignificance.

   POSITIVE EVIDENCE

   The positive evidence of additional facts may also be adduced. This
   Book was translated by The Seventy many years before the death of
   Antiochus, and the translation was well known to Jerome, although it
   has not come down to our age. Bishop Chandler has pointed out fifteen
   places in which Jerome refers to it; [32] and Bishop Halifax has
   collected many conclusive arguments on these and kindred topics. [33]
   The words of Josephus are explicit enough as to the received opinion in
   his day, "you will find the Book of Daniel, in our Sacred Writings."
   [34] Maimonides, indeed, has attempted to detract from its high
   reputation, but has been sufficiently refuted by Abarbanel and the son
   of Jarchi. [35] The arrangement of the Jews, which places this Book
   among the Hagiography, and not among the Prophets, seems also to be
   intended to depreciate its Canonical value; but while the earlier
   Talmudists place it with the Psalms and the Proverbs, the later ones
   range it with Zechariah and Haggai. [36] When Aquila and Theodotion
   translated their Versions, he was admitted to the Prophetic rank and
   although we can -- not absolutely determine the point from the MS. of
   the Septuagint in the Chigian Library at Rome, yet the probability is
   highly in its favor. Origen places Daniel among the Prophets and before
   Ezekiel, following the example of Josephus in his first book against
   Apion.

   JEWISH TESTIMONIES -- SINAITIC INSCRIPTIONS

   Instead of following the beaten track of reference to Jewish Comments
   and Rabbinical Traditions, which Calvin always quoted and refitted, we
   shall here introduce a collateral branch of singular and valuable
   evidence. As the surface of the Theological world is much agitated by
   doubts of historic facts, originating alike with Rationalists and
   Romanists, it is desirable to fortify our evidence from existing
   inscriptions of correlative value with those of Nineveh. That far-famed
   seceder to Rome, Dr. Newman, speaks of some "Scripture Narratives which
   are quite as difficult to the reason as any miracles recorded in the
   History of the Saints;" and he then instances that "of the Israelites
   flight from Egypt, and entrance into the Promised Land." [37] Anxious
   as the votary of either Superstition or of Reason may be to suggest
   doubts as to the recorded facts, The Rocks Of Sinai are now vocal with
   the voices of the moving Tribes Valley after valley has been found in
   which these Sinaitic Inscriptions abound. "Their numbers may be
   computed by thousands, their extent by miles, and their positions above
   the valleys being as often measurable by fathoms as by feet." [38]
   These hitherto unreadable remnants of a former age have now been read,
   and they become fresh confirmations of the truthfulness of the Mosaic
   Narrative. It is enough for our present purpose to refer to the
   conclusive labors of the Rev. Charles Forster, who has compared the
   characters used with those of The Rosetta Stone, with the Arrow-headed
   Character, and with the Alphabets of Etruria, Palmyra, and Persepolis;
   and has been enabled to read what neither Beer could decipher nor
   Pococke explain. [39] By him they are shewn to record the bitterness of
   the Waters at Marah -- the Flight of Pharaoh on horseback -- the
   Miracle of the feathered fowls, the Murmuring at Meribah -- and the
   Uplifting of the hands of Moses at the battle of Rephidim. Thus the
   "Written Valley," and the "Written Mountain,"' have rendered their
   testimony in favor of Revelation. "No difficulties of situation, no
   ruggedness of material, no remoteness of locality, has been any
   security against the gravers of the one phalanx of mysterious scribes.
   The granite rocks of the almost inaccessible Mount Serbal, from its
   base to its summit, repeat the characters and inscriptions of the
   Sandstone's of the Mokateh." Countless multitudes are supposed to be
   yet undiscovered. And what people but the Israelites could have
   engraven them? Professor Beer allows them to be all of the same age --
   the soil affords no sustenance for hordes of men, and never did provide
   for the existence of a settled population. This wilderness may be
   periodically traveled through, but never has been permanently settled
   by mankind. The very execution of such works requires the use of
   ladders and platforms, ropes, baskets, and tools, and all the usual
   instruments of a long established population. But no people could have
   executed all this unproductive labor without a ready supply of water
   and food. If, then, a single generation carved and grayed these
   countless Inscriptions, how can we account for the fact, except by the
   Mosaic narrative? Whence came the bodily aliments, by which so many
   workmen were enabled to carry out their hazardous employments for so
   long and continuous a period? Grant that Israel coming out of Egypt
   performed them, and the difficulty is solved -- adopt; any other
   possibility, and the problem becomes perfectly insoluble! We forbear to
   enter further little this important discussion; it is enough to have
   awakened this train of thought, in accordance with our previous
   reasonings. [40]

   THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK OF DANIEL.

   The Contents of this Book admits of an easy and natural division. The
   first part has been called "The Historical," and the second "The
   Prophetical" portions. Each contains, six chapters, and the Comments on
   each, with the Editor's, Dissertations, will respectively occupy a
   Volume. The Historical Portion contains Predictions; but they were, not
   uttered by Daniel himself, and seem to spring naturally out of the
   events of the times. It is not without its difficulties. The learned
   have differed respecting the existence of a second Nebuchadnezzar, the
   person and character of Cyrus, and the reign of Darius the Mede.
   Strenuous efforts have been made to show that one Nebuchadnezzar
   plundered the Temple, and another was afflicted by madness that the
   Koresh of the last verse of the sixth chapter is not Cyrus The Great,
   but an obscure Satrap of an earlier age. A noble Duke, those scriptural
   researches confer higher honor on His name than the coronet he wears,
   has proposed an elaborate theory for the better explanation of" The
   Times of Daniel," [41] and the hypothesis has met with an equally
   learned reply by the author of "The Two later Visions of Daniel." [42]
   A detail of the arguments on both sides will be found in the
   Dissertation's previously referred to. The discrepancies between
   Herodotus and Xenophon, which Archbishop Secker tried in vain to
   reconcile, must be again discussed; the critical value of Ptolemy's
   Astronomical Canon ascertained, and many subordinate and collateral
   events examined. Calvin makes no pretensions to minute Historical
   Criticism- he adopts the received opinions of his day, and if he
   sometimes errs, he does so in ignorance of other sources of knowledge
   which have since been opened to the world. But his diligence and his
   judgment have preserved him from errors of ally ultimate importance;
   and it must be always remembered that the Antiquarian Researches of
   later times have thrown a flood of light upon these distant Eras.
   Baseless conjecture has, indeed, done much to pervert and mystify the
   plainest truths; but the materials themselves are of a most varied and
   intricate character; and the satisfactory adjustment of these
   historical difficulties requires the highest powers of discrimination,
   as well as the most comprehensive grasp of all the conflicting evidence
   by which a doubtful event is embarrassed.

   THE SEVENTY WEEKS.

   In attempting to appreciate Calvin's Comments on the Historical Portion
   of this Book, and of the celebrated period Of "The Seventy Weeks," it
   will be necessary to advert to some abstruse points of Chronology. We
   would willingly avoid any tedious discussion of dates and figures, but
   the interest of many important questions now frequently turns upon such
   arithmetical proofs. A strong assertion of the Chevalier Bunsen must
   justify us in the course which we are about to pursue. "All the
   results," says he, "of Jewish or Christian Research are; based upon the
   Writings of the Old Testament and their Interpretation, and upon the
   connection between the Chronological data they supply and divine
   Revelation. There are points, therefore, relative to which it is of
   vital importance, both to the sound thinker and the sound critic, to
   arrive at a clear understanding before embarking upon his inquiry...
   The question is, Whether the external History related in the Sacred
   Books be externally complete, and capable of chronological
   arrangement?" [43] The reply should be given "with a deep feeling of
   the respect due to the general chronological statements of Scripture,
   which have been considered during so many centuries as forming the
   groundwork of religious faith, and are even at the present moment
   intimately connected with the Christian Faith." Let but these
   principles of the learned Egyptologist guide us in our decisions, and
   we may hope for the blessing of Heaven in disentangling many of the
   Historical intricacies which will soon come under our notice.

   TIIE PRAETERIST, ANTI-PAPAL,
   AND FUTURIST VIEWS.

   In attempting to determine the intrinsic value of these Lectures, it
   becomes necessary to compare Calvin's Prophetic Interpretations with
   those of the Divines who preceded and have followed him. The scheme
   proposed for interpreting, these Visions may be classed generally under
   this threefold division, viz., the Praeterist, the Anti-Papal, and the
   Futurist Views. The first view is that usually adopted, with some
   slight modifications, by the Primitive Church and the Earlier
   Reformers. The second, sometimes called rite "Protestant" System,
   supposes the Papal power to be prominently foretold by both Daniel and
   Sir John; while the Third System defers the accomplishment of many of
   these Prophecies to times yet future. If these three Systems be borne
   distinctly in mind, it will become easy to understand how the most
   popular modern explanations differ for in those of the earlier period
   of the Reformation. The Primitive Church has, with few exceptions,
   agreed in considering The Head of Gold to mean, either the Babylonian
   Empire or the person of Nebuchadnezzar; the Silver denoting the
   Medo-Persian; the Brass the Greek; and the Iron the Roman; while the
   mixture of the Clay denotes the intermingling of Conquered Nations with
   the power of Heathen Rome. In interpreting the Four Beasts, the Lion
   denotes the Babylonian Empire; the Eagle Wings relate to
   Nebuchadnezzar's ambition; the Bear to the Medo-Persians; the Leopard
   to the Macedonians; and the Fourth Beast to the Romans. The Ten Horns
   were differently explained; some referring them to Ten individual
   Kings, and others to Ten Divisions, of the Empire; some supposing them
   to commence with the Roman sway in the East, others not till the Fourth
   or Fifth Centuries after Christ.

   Calvin differs slightly from the earlier, and most materially from the
   later Commentators. Supposing the Fourth Boast to typify the Roman
   Empire, "The Tell Kings," he says, "were not persons succeeding each
   other in dominion, but rather the complex Form of the Government
   instead of a unity under one head." The number "ten" is, he thinks,
   indefinite, for "many," and the Sway of a Senate instead of a Monarchy
   is the true, fulfillment of the Prophecy. The rise of one King and his
   oppressing three, refers to the two Caesars, Julius and Octavius, with
   Lepidus and Antony. How unconscious was Calvin that succeeding
   Protestant Writers would determine The "Little Horn" to be the Pope,
   and the Three Kings, the Exarchate of Ravenna, the Kingdom of Lombardy,
   and the State of Rome. Here the multitude of modern commentators differ
   most materially from the author of these Lectures. The "Time, Times,
   and Half a Time" of this chapter, Calvin refers to the persecution of
   the Christian Church under Nero, and similar tyrannical Emperors of
   Rome, and gives not the slightest countenance to any allusion in these
   words to a specified number of years. "Time and Times" are with him a
   long undefined period; and "Half a Time" is added in the spirit of the
   promise to shorten the time, for the Elects sake. Those modern Writers,
   who think the Year-Day theory essential to the full exposition of the
   Visions of Daniel, will be disappointed by the opinion of our Reformer.
   He takes no notice of either the 1260 years of the Papacy, or the 1290
   years for the reign of Antichrist. Again, there are Writers who deny
   the Fourth Beast to refer to Rome at all. Rosenmuller and Todd are
   instances; and each of these has his own way of interpreting the
   concluding portion of this chapter. The former asserts it to be
   fulfilled in the Greek Empire in Asia after Alexander's death, and the
   latter supposes it to be yet future. According to Dr. Todd and the
   Futurists, it has yet to be developed. Its fulfillment shall be the
   precursor of The Final Antichrist, whom the Lord shall destroy with the
   brightness of his Personal Advent. This Antichrist shall tyrannize in
   the world for the "Time, Times, and Half a Time," that is, for the
   definite space of three years and a half, till the Ancient of Days
   shall proclaim The Final Close Of The Gentile Dispensation.

   The three views, then, of the Interpretation of these Prophecies are
   thus clearly distinguished. The Praeterits, view treats them as
   fulfilled in past historical events, taking place under the several
   Empires of Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Heathen Rome. The modern
   Anti-Papal view treats "The Little Horn" as the Pope, and the drays as
   years; and this stretches the predictions over the Twelve Centuries of
   European struggle between the Ecclesiastical and the Civil Powers. The
   Futurist is dissatisfied with the Year-Day theory he cannot agree with
   the past fulfillment of these glowing images of future blessedness.
   Hence, instead of either Antiochus, Mahomet, Nero, or the Pope, he sees
   a future Antichrist in the Eleventh Horn of the seventh chapter, in The
   Little Horn of the eighth chapter, and ht The Willful King of the
   eleventh chapter. He rejects entirely the Year-Day explanation, and
   every assertion which is based upon it,; he takes the days literally as
   days, and supposes them yet unfulfilled. The "Toes" of the image, and
   the "Horns" of the beasts, are not to him Kingdoms or Successions of
   Rulers of any kind, but single individual persons. The phrase, The
   Pope, as equivalent to a "Horn," is to him a fallacy as it does not
   mean one person, like an Alexander or a Seleucus; or a single despotic
   Antichrist -- but a long succession of Rulers, one after another. [44]
   Faber, for example, interprets "the Scriptures of Truth," chapter 11,
   by extending it throughout all history, till the end of the Gentile
   Dispensation. Dr. Todd refers it solely to its close, and contends very
   strongly against the usual explanation of the Fourth verse. Elliott,
   again, (Horae Apoc., volume 3,) expounds this chapter to the 35th verse
   with great propriety and clearness, but passes at once from the
   Ptolemidae and Seleucidae to the Pope, as signified by "The Willful
   King." The Days then become Years, and. the various phases of the
   Papacy throughout many centuries are supposed to be predicted here, and
   fulfilled by the decrees of Justinian, persecutions of the Waldenses,
   French Revolutions, and catastrophes and convulsions yet to come. Our
   American brethren have adopted similar theories. Professor Bush in his
   "Hierophant," has inserted an able exposition of the "Little Horn," as
   unquestionably the Ecclesiastical Power of the "Papacy," [45] and
   introduced the Goths and Charlemagne as fulfilling their own portions
   of this interesting Vision. Professor Stuart, however, of Andover, and
   some of his followers, have returned to the simplicity of the Earlier
   Expositors. [46]

   CALVIN PROPHETIC SCHEME.

   Calvin, then, was, on the whole, a Praeterits. He saw hi the history of
   the world before the times of the Messiah the fulfillment of the
   Visions of this Book. They extended from Nebuchadnezzar to Nero. "The
   Saints of the Most High" were to him either the Hebrew or the Christian
   Church under heathen persecutors they had a glimpse indeed of the times
   of the Messiah, and expressed his views in general language; but he
   rejected the idea of any series of fulfillment's through a succession
   of either Popes or Sultans. He saw in these four-footed beings, neither
   Mahomet, nor Justinian, nor the Ottoman Empire, nor the Albigensian
   Martyrs. Heathen Rome, and its Senate, and its early Caesars, were to
   him what Papal Rome, and its Priesthood, and its Gregories, have been
   to later Expositors.

   Our Second Volume, which contains The Prophetical Portion of the Book,
   will be illustrated by many Dissertations, which will condense the
   sentiments of later Expositors. Ample scope will then be given to
   important details. Extracts will be made from the most approved
   Moderns, and copious references to the best sources of information. IT
   will be sufficient here to insert the reply of Professor Bush of New
   York to Professor Stuart of Andover, as illustrating the importance of
   the difference between those who adopt the Year-Day theory and those
   who do not "Denying in toto, as I do, and disproving, as I think I have
   done, the truth of your theory in regard to the literal import of Day,
   I can of course see no evidence, and therefore feel no interest in your
   reasonings respecting the events which you consider as the fulfillment
   of these splendid Visions. If a Day stands for a Year, and a Beast
   represents an Empire, then we are imperatively remanded to a far
   different order of occurrences in which to read the realization of the
   mystic scenery from that which you have indicated. As the Spirit of
   Prophecy has under his illimitable ken the most distant future as well
   as the nearest present, I know nothing, in reason or exegesis, that
   should prevent the affairs of the Christian economy being represented
   by Daniel as well as by John. As the Fourth Beast of Daniel lives and
   acts through the space of 1260 years, and as the Seven-headed and
   Ten-horned beast of John prevails through the same period, and puts
   forth substantially the same demonstrations, I am driven to the
   conclusion that they adumbrate precisely the same thing -- that they
   are merely different aspects of the same really -- and this, I have no
   question, is the Roman, Empire. This you deny; but I submit that the
   denial can be sustained only by shewing an adequate reason why the
   Spirit of God should be debarred from giving such extension to the
   Visions of the Old Testament Prophets. Until this demand is satisfied,
   no progress can be made towards convincing the general mind of
   Christendom of the soundness of your Expositions. The students of
   Revelation will still reiterate the query, Why the oracles of Daniel;
   should be so exclusively occupied with the historical fates of
   Antiochus Ephphanes? If I do not err in the auguries of the times, a
   struggle is yet to ensue on the prophetic field between two conflicting
   parties, on whose banners shall be respectively inscribed, Antiochus
   and Antichrist." [47]

   OECOLAMPADIUS, ZUINGLE, AND BULLINGER.

   This is precisely the point that these Lectures will assist in
   determining, and the following sketches of the opinions of the
   immediate predecessors and successors of our Reformer, will be useful
   hi guiding the judgment of the reader.

   One of the most learned of the Commentators among the Early Reformers
   was Oecolampadius, the well-known companion of Zuingle. Bullinger
   published his notes on the Prophets about fifty years before Beza
   edited Calvin's Lectures. His character for piety and profound
   erudition stood high among his contemporaries, and his elaborate
   expositions of the Prophets form a tangible proof of his industry,
   ingenuity, and Christian proficiency. Some account of the method in
   which he treats these interesting questions will here be appropriate.
   He divides the Book into the two natural divisions -- the Historical
   and the Prophetical. His remarks on the former portion contain nothing
   which demands our notice at present; but his second division contains
   some valuable comments. He takes the Four Beasts of chapter 7 for the
   Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman Empires, dwells on the
   cruelties of Sylla and Marius, Tiberius and Nero; and accuses Aben-Ezra
   and the Jews of denying this Fourth Beast to mean Heathen Rome, lest
   they should be compelled to embrace JESUS as their Messiah. He is not
   satisfied with Jerome's opinion, that the Ten Horns mean Ten Kings, who
   should divide among them the territories of the Roman power. He takes
   the numbers "ten" and "seven" for complete and perfect numbers, quoting
   from the parable, "The kingdom of heaven is like ten virgins." He
   quotes and approves of Hippolytus, who asserts "the Little Horn" to
   mean the Antichrist., to whom St. Paul alludes in the Second Ephstle to
   the Thessalonians. Apollinarius and other Ecclesiastical Writers judge
   rightly in adopting this interpretation, while Polychronius is deceived
   by Porphyay in referring it to Antiochus. But who is this Antichrist?
   Is he supposed to rule after the destruction of Heathen or of Papal
   Rome? Oecolampadius furnishes us with many opinions -- some supposing
   Mahomet, others Trajan, and others the Papal See. He quotes the
   corresponding passage in the Apocalypse, and implies that the
   successors of Mahomet and the occupiers of the Chair of St. Peter are
   equally intended. By thus introducing the modern history of Europe and
   of Asia, he leans rather to the second of those divisions into which
   Commentators on Daniel have been divided. On this testing question of
   "the Time, Times, and Half a Time" he assumes it to mean three years
   and a half, he has no limit of any extension of the time through 1260
   years; adding, "there is no reason why we should be religiously bound
   to that number, or follow puerile and uncertain triflings." He will not
   allow Antichrist to be only a single person, and thus throws an air of
   indefiniteness over the whole subject.

   Consistently with these principles, he interprets "The Willful King" of
   chapter 11 by both Mahomet and the Papacy; and explains how this
   twofold power should be destroyed in the Holy Land. The repetition in
   the numbers in chapter 12 is treated very concisely. Literal days are
   said to be intended, and the possibility of ascertaining certainty is
   doubted. "If any one has detected any certainty in these obscure dates,
   I do not envy him the exposition already offered satisfies me; for it
   is not in our power to know the precise divisions of the time
   (articulos temporum) " Throughout the whole Comment of Oecolampadius,
   there is a tone of pity, and a proficiency in correct interpretation
   which we seek for in vain in some disciples of the Early Reformers. He
   was evidently a spiritually-minded man, and was always preaching Christ
   in his Comments on the Old Testament. In this respect he equals, and if
   possible surpasses the more elaborate Calvin. The extreme spirituality
   of this eminent Reformer entitles him, in these days, to more notice
   than he receives. His constant effort's to honor Christ as his
   Redeemer, and the practical and persevering manner in which he preaches
   the gospel of his Redeemer, in his Old Testament Exposition, should
   render his writings familiar to every sincere and simple-minded
   Christian. And we are not surprised when we hear competent judges of
   the difference between Calvin and himself prefer the tone of his
   remarks to that of his more vigorous ally.

   GROTIUS

   The Commentary of Grotius is also worthy of comparison with that of
   Calvin. He is very precise and minute in shewing how the history of the
   East has borne out the truthfulness of the predictions; and is,
   perhaps, more accurate in details than his predecessor he differs,
   indeed, in a few points of importance, which will be separately
   noticed, but, on the whole, his remarks are correct and judicious. The
   Ten Kings of the seventh chapter (Daniel 7) he considers to be Syrian
   Monarchs, and enumerates them as Seleuci, Antioch, and Ptolemaei.
   Polanus and Junius, two Commentators who are constantly quoted by
   Poole, in his Synopsis, treat the passage in a similar way. The king to
   arise after them is still confined to the Jewish era, and "the Time,
   Times," etc., are supposed to be literally three years and a, half. The
   36th verse of chapter 11 (Daniel 11:36), Grotius interprets of
   Antiochus Ephphanes, and is supported by Junius, Polanus, Maldonatus,
   Willet, and Broughton. The "Days" of the twelfth chapter are taken
   literally by all the Commentators quoted by Poole from Calvin to Mede,
   and all sup -- pose the period intended to be during the reign of the
   successors of Alexander. Mede was the well-known reviver of the
   Year-Day theory. Before his time it was a vague assertion, he first
   gave it shape, and form, and plausible consistency, and since his day
   it has been adopted by many intelligent Critics, among whom are Sir
   Isaac Newton, Bishop Newton, Faber, Frere, Keith, And Birks.

   MALDONATUS.

   The Commentary of Maldonatus, the Jesuit, demands more extended notice,
   as he lived about the times of our author, and calls him Patriarcha
   Hereticorum, and looks upon the subject from exactly the opposite point
   of view. His exposition of Jeremiah, Baruch, Ezekiel, and Daniel, was
   published at Moguntiae, (Mentz,) 1611. In his procemium he sketches the
   life of Daniel, and defends his Book against Porphyry, the Manichaeans,
   and the Anabaptists. He quotes the mention made of Daniel by Ezekiel,
   and lays it down as a rule, that our ignorance of the author of a book
   does not impeach its Canonical Authority; and in the spirit of his
   Religious Society, lays special stress upon the judgment and decision
   of "the Church." He next argues in favor of the Apocryphal Books
   attributed to this Prophet, and then prefers the authority of his
   Church to the testimony of Jerome. He defends the canonicity of the
   stories of Susannah and the Idol Bel, and comments on them in two
   additional chapters, and places "The Song of the Three Children"
   between Daniel 3:23-24, translating from Theodotion's version. There is
   nothing worthy of special notice in his remarks on the first six
   chapters; but the next six treat of the reign's of Christ. and of
   Antichrist. In accordance with this view, he decides upon the Fourth
   Beast of tale seventh chapter as the Roman Empire, after rejecting the
   opinion of Aben-Ezra in favor of the Turks, and that of Porphyry, who
   thought it to be the successors of Alexander. Respecting the "Little
   Horn," his wrath is stirred up, for" the heretical Lutherans and
   Calvinists, and other monstrous sects," had dared to pronounce it to be
   the Roman Pontiff. "But this interpretation even their master, Calvin,
   has shewn to be absurd." [48] He combats the notion that by one term
   all the Roman Pontiffs are intended; and then triumphantly asks, Where
   are the "Three" whom this single one was to pluck up? He further
   inquires, Whether all were past in his own day, or all future? He
   determines that it is all yet to be fulfilled, and thus becomes an
   adherent to the cause of the Futurists. As neither the Ten Horns nor
   the Eleventh have yet come into existence, it is natural to conclude
   the Eleventh to be that Antichrist whom Jerome represents not as a
   Demon, but a man in whom "a whole Satan shall corporally dwell." He
   shall reign, he thinks, three years and a half -- a distinct and fixed
   period -- objecting to what he calls "figurt; Calvini," viz., that an
   uncertain period is intended by so clear an expression. The, various
   opinions of his predecessors on Daniel 11:36, move rather his derision
   than his wrath. Their notions about Constantine, and Mahomet, and the
   Roman Pontiffs, do not need his serious refutation. Almost all
   Catholics, he adds, both ancient and modern, refer it to the
   Antichrist. He also accuses the greater part of "the New Heretics" of
   stating the Michael of the 12th chapter to be, Messiah himself; and
   treats the "days" of the close of this chapter as partly fulfilled
   under the Jewish and partly under the Christian dispensations. His
   inconsistency in this interpretation is more apparent than in the
   preceding ones; while his work on the whole is worthy of perusal, as he
   quotes with judgment the opinions of learned Jews and of the earlier
   Commentators of the Christian Church.

   Within the first century after the Reformation, the views of Divines
   respecting these Prophecies were far more in accordance with the
   ancient Greek and Latin Fathers than those prevalent in the present
   day. The student who would know how Melancthon, Osiander, and Bullinger
   treated the subject in reply to Bellarmine, Fererius, and other Romish
   Divines, may profitably consult Willet's Hexapla in Danielem, published
   at Cambridge in 1610, and dedicated to King James I. The arguments of
   the ancients in reply to "wicked Porphirie" are collected and reviewed,
   the opinions of various Jewish writers are stated and confuted, and no
   valuable remark of any preceding Commentator is overlooked. For
   instance, the Fourth Beast of the seventh chapter is explained
   according to the Jews, as the Turkish, and to Jerome, of the Roman
   empire but he decides it to be the kingdom of Syria, under the sway of
   Seleucus and his posterity. The "Little Horne" is said to be Antiochus;
   and Calvin's view, connecting it with Augustus and the following
   Emperors, is thus treated -- "But though these things may, by way of
   analogy, be thus applied, yet, historically, as hath been shewed at
   large, this prophecy was fulfilled before the coming of the Messiah
   into the world." Bullinger refers it to. the Pope, and others to the
   Turks; and "These applications, by way of analogie, we mislike not."
   The "rimes" are supposed, by the majority of these writers quoted, to
   be single years, and the whole period three years and a half. His
   laborious industry respecting the "Seventy Weeks" is most instructive;
   and he deserves the greatest possible credit for the patience with
   which he has examined all authorities, and the acuteness with which he
   has discussed the most opposite opinions. He is careful in remarking
   the various readings of the text, and the different renderings of all
   preceding versions. The eleventh chapter he treats as all fulfilled in
   the history of Syria and Palestine before the birth of Christ. He
   discusses with much ability the question, whether Antichrist is a
   single person, or a succession of Rulers, as Caliphs or Popes, and
   presents us with the decisions of the leading Fathers, Romanists, and
   Reformers on the "notes and marks wherein Antiochus and Antichrist
   agree." All who would see Bellarmine fully confuted, and the enormities
   of this chapter brought home to the several occupants of the See of
   Rome, will peruse Willet with eagerness and profit. He will also find
   Calvin's Interpretations clearly stated and fairly compared with those
   of the most celebrated Reformers and their most acute antagonists. The
   days of the twelfth chapter are taken literally, and no hint is given
   of any elaborate theory of a dozen centuries, extending through the
   modern history of Europe. To all who love to trace the progress of
   opinion, respecting the intercourse between men and angels, "the
   Ancient of Daies," the Opening of the Books, Michael the Prince, and
   the application of these Prophecies to the Turks, the Papacy, and the
   times of a yet future Antichrist, will find hi the "Hexapla" a
   storehouse of valuable material, where he may exercise, with all
   freedom, the liberty of choice. It proposes and answers 593 questions,
   and discusses 134 controversies, the greater part of the latter
   division being directed against the doctrines aid practices of the
   Church of Rome.

   JOSEPH MEDE.

   A formidable opposition to the principles propounded in these Lectures
   is found in the writings of Joseph Mede. That learned and ingenious
   author is usually held as the ablest and earliest expositor of the
   Year-Day theory. It is neither necessary nor possible for us here
   either to confirm or confute all his hypotheses; we can only refer to
   his "Revelatio Antichrist, sive de Numeris Daniel's, 1290 1335."
   (Works, page 717.) The first part is occupied by refuting Broughton and
   Junius, who assert those mystic days to have been literally fulfilled
   during the Wars of Antiochus. The prediction, he thinks, fulfilled in
   the twelfth century of our era, when the persecutions of the Papal See,
   against the Heretics of those days, are said to verify the words of the
   Prophet. Dr. Todd has thought this treatise worthy of a detailed
   refutation, and to all who are interested in determining whether
   Antichrist is a Succession of Rulers or a single person, his learned
   remarks are worthy of attentive perusal. In pursuance of his own ideas
   respecting a personal future Antichrist, he is led to dispute the
   division of Alexander's empire into four parts, and to quote at full
   length various authorities, especially Venema, who endeavored to shew
   the number of divisions to be ten, and that the portion of chapter 8
   usually interpreted of the Roman was really fulfilled by the Grecian
   Empire in the East. [49]

   Calvin then, we find, agrees entirely with Venema, and by anticipation
   confutes the arguments of Dr. Todd. He thinks it surprising, that men
   versed in Scripture can thus substitute darkness for light. He is
   supported by Melancthon and Michaelis, Hengstenberg and Rosenmuller as
   well as by Theodoret and most of the Greek Expositors. He treats those
   more leniently who modestly and considerately suppose the times of
   Antiochus to be figurative of those of Antichrist. At this "figura
   Calvini" Maldonatus sneers; and yet if we determine that Calvin's
   solution is right, it is the very principle by which the perusal of
   Holy Scripture becomes profitable to us. "I desire," says he, "to treat
   the Sacred Oracles reverently; but I require something certain." "If
   any one wishes to adapt this passage to present use, he may refer it to
   Antichrist," on the principle, "that whatever happened to the Ancient
   Church, occurred for our instruction." Hence he, allows of a double
   sense, and raises a question which has been ably contended for and
   against by many subsequent Divines. It is too important to be passed
   over, and will demand our notice in our Second Volume.

   The followers of Mede have met with a formidable antagonist, and the
   adherents of Calvin a staunch supporter in the late Regius Professor of
   Hebrew in the University of Cambridge. Dr. Lee, in his pamphlet on the
   Visions of Daniel and St. John [50] has stated his reasons for adhering
   to the Older Interpreters, thus adopting the principle of the
   Praeterists, and entirely discarding the slightest reference to the
   Pope and the Papacy. His conclusions may be exhibited in a few words.
   Respecting Nebuchadnezzar's Image, "the feet must of necessity
   symbolize Heathen Rome in its last times." "Papal Rome cannot,
   therefore, possibly be any prolongation of Daniel's Fourth Empire."
   "These Kings," represented by the Toes, "may, therefore, be supposed in
   a mystical sense to be, as the digits ten, a round number, and
   signifying a whole series." [51] "The Little Horn" is said to be
   Heathen Rome -- its persecuting Emperors from Nero to Constantine
   fulfilling the Prophetic conditions. The phrase "a Time, Times, and a
   Half," is said to refer to the "latter half (mystically speaking) of
   the Seventieth Week of our Prophet." "Daniel's Week of seven days --
   equivalent here to Ezekiel's period of seven years -- is, we find,
   divided into two parts mystically considered halves, or of three days
   and a half." [52] [...] "That the Roman Power took away the Daily
   Sacrifice, arid cast down the place of its Sanctuary, it is impossible
   to doubt. Titus, during the reign of his father Vespasian desolated
   Jerusalem by destroying both the City and the Sanctuary." Thus in his
   general principles of Exposition, this celebrated Hebraist pronounces
   his verdict in favor of Calvin and his interpretation.

   No notice is taken in these Lectures of the Deutero-Canonical
   additions, to this Prophet. In the versions of the Septuagint, and that
   of Theodotion, there are some additions, to this Book which are not
   found in the Hebrew Canon. Jerome translated these from the version of
   Theodotion, and ably replies to the objection of Porphyry by denying
   the canonicity of the following treatises, viz., The Prayer of Azarias,
   the Song of The Three Children, the History of Susanna, and The Story
   of Bel and the Dragon. Eusebius also denies the identity between the
   Prophet and the Son of Abdias, the priest who ate of the table of the
   King of Babylon. De Wette, in his Lehrbuch, has discussed the,
   criticism of these treatises with great ability. As early as the second
   century, the Septuagint Version of Daniel was superseded by that of
   Theodotion; and the former was lost till it was discovered and
   published at Rome in 1772. The views of De Wette, and of" Alber Of
   Pesth, who contends. against Jahn for the historic truth of these
   variations," will be found in the Addenda to Daniel in Kitto's
   Cyclopaedia. The Commentators of the Romish Church feel bound in honor
   to defend these additional portions. Their best arguments will be found
   in a praiseworthy attempt of J. G. Kerkherdere Historian to his
   Catholic Majesty Charles III,. to explain some difficulties in this
   Prophet. [53] He considers, the number of Daniel's Treatises to be a
   dozen. He places the history of his own Youth first, that of Susanna
   second, the Story of Bel and the Dragon third, and Nebuchadnezzar's
   Dream fourth; and. then with great precision and clearness, enters upon
   those historical questions which need both acuteness and research in
   their treatment. [54] Bellarmine also dwells on the testimony of the
   Greek Fathers, but meets, with an able opponent in Willet, the
   laborious author of the Hexapla in Danielem. [55]

   It must not be forgotten that portions of this Book, like that of Ezra,
   are written in Chaldee. From the fourth verse of chapter 2 to the end
   of chapter 7., the language is Chaldee. Rosemuller assigns as a reason
   for this, the desire of the author to represent Nebuchadnezzar and the
   Magi as speaking in the language of their country. However valid this
   reason may be for the earlier chapters, it is not equally so for the
   sixth and seventh, since the Medes and Persians probably used the
   Persian tongue. Abarbenel, in the preface to his Commentaries, supposes
   that Chaldee was no longer in use after the taking of the city; and
   that Daniel, through ignorance of Persian, returned to the use of
   Hebrew. C.B. Michaelis, however, demurs to this, and suggests that the
   use of either tongue was arbitrary, just as modern scholars use either
   Latin or their own vernacular tongue according to their convenience and
   taste. The occurrence of this older form of the Aramaic idiom has been
   seized upon by the opponents of the, authenticity of this Book, while
   its use has been ably explained and vindicated by Hengstenberg. [56]

   THE RELIGIOUS, SOCIAL,
   AND POLITICAL VALUE OF CALVIN'S

   METHOD OF EXPOSITION.

   In concluding our Introductory Remarks it will be useful to offer a few
   suggestions on the Religious, Social, and Political value of Calvin's
   Method of Exposition throughout these Lectures. Such suggestions are
   the more appropriate in these days when views directly adverse to our
   Reformer's are extensively popular through the ingenious theories of
   Faber, Elliott, and Cumming. Those who have imbibed their views will
   pronounce these Volumes profitless and barren. "What can it benefit
   us," they will ask, "in the present day, to know how many Kings reigned
   from Cyrus to Xerxes; the changes in the Empire of Alexander; the
   troops which fought at Raphia; the marriage of Bernice, and the,
   results of the invasion of Greece by Antiochus,..." [57] "Why not
   suffer these antiquated facts of history to sleep quietly in the dust,
   and bend our strength to the controversies and practical movements of
   the present hour?" May we not reply, that he is best able to understand
   and unfold the religious phases of the age in which he lives, who is
   most familiar with the events and opinions of all preceding times. A
   man can permanently impress his own age with the precepts of spiritual
   wisdom, who knows nothing but what his own eyes have seen, and his own
   hands have handled. The ever varied messages of the Holy Spirit have
   always combined historical reality with the deepest spiritual
   significance. The details of Profane History and its comparison with
   the Sacred Text will never, by itself, enable us to reap the full
   harvest of solid improvement from the perusal of these Sacred Oracles.
   We must dive deeper than the surface. We must look at them in the light
   of one majestic and solemn truth. They are all "the foreseen counsels
   and works of the living God; the vast scheme of Providence which he has
   ordained for his own glory, and steps in the fulfillment of his
   everlasting counsel."

   We are fully aware, that many will pronounce these Volumes deficient in
   spiritual life, and in Protestant zeal. But the Christian who dares not
   dogmatize beyond the direct teachings of the Spirit of God, will apply
   them indirectly to the events of the present era, on the intelligible
   principles of Sacred Analogy. They thus become a portion of that Divine
   Lesson which fulfilled Prophecy is ever reading to the Church of God.
   They display His ceaseless dominion over the wills of Sovereigns and
   over the destinies of Nations. When abstract truths are felt to be
   powerless in breaking the spell of worldliness, and in piercing within
   the charmed circle of social strife and political party, these embodied
   proofs of an ever-watchful Deity may awe men into submission to his
   sovereign will. The hollow maxims of earthly policy will never be
   superseded till men reverence the God Of Daniel, and, like the heavenly
   Elders, cast all their crowns of intellect and renown before His
   throne. From the days of Nebuchadnezzar and of Cyrus, we see in every
   change the foot;-prints of a guiding Deity. "The reigns of Cambyses,
   Smerdis, and Darius; the armament of Xerxes, with its countless
   myriad's; the marches, and counter-marches, and conflicts, the subtle
   plots and shifting alliances of contending kings, long before they
   occurred, were noted down in the Scriptures of Truth -- the Secret
   Volume of the Divine counsels. All of them, before they rose into
   birth, were revealed by the Son of God to his holy Prophets; and they
   remain till the end of time an imperishable monument of His Providence
   and foreknowledge. All was foreseen by His wisdom and ordained by his
   Sovereign power. The passing generations of mankind, while they see,
   this blue arch of Providence above them, and around them, sure and
   steadfast, age after age, like Him who has ordained it, must feel a
   deep and quiet reverence take possession of their soul." The minuteness
   of detail in the visions concerning Alexander and Ptolemy Soter, and
   the repulse of Antiochus, convey the same instructive lesson. "Every
   royal marriage, like that of Berenice or Cleopatra, with all its secret
   issues of Peace or war, of discord or union; the levying of every army,
   the capture of every fortress, the length of every reign, the issue of
   every battle, the lies of deceitful ambition, the treachery of
   councilors, the complex web of policy, woven out of ten thousand human
   wiles, and each of them agahl the product of ten thousand various
   influences of good and evil, all are portrayed with unerring accuracy
   in the Scriptures of Truth.'" [...] "The pride of Antiochus the Great,
   his successful ambition and military triumphs, his schemes of politic
   affinity, nay, even his prudent regard for the house of God, cannot
   avert. the sentence written against him, for his fraud and violence in
   the Word of Truth. In the height of seeming power, his own reproach is
   turned against him, and he tumbles and falls, and is not found."

   If, then, we conclude with Calvin, that the persecution of the Little
   Horn and the idolatries of the Willful King are past, on what principle
   are we to derive instruction from their perusal? By the induction's of
   a Divine analogy, by the assertion that "all which has passed is in
   some sense typical of all that is to come." "The Saints of the Most
   High" are always the special objects of Jehovah's regard; they ever
   meet with an oppressor as fierce as Antiochus, and as hateful as "the
   Man of Sin;" but still, whatever their sufferings under a Guise or an
   Alva, they shall ultimately "take the Kingdom," and possess it for
   ever. Strongholds of Mahuzzim there always. will be, under either the
   successors of Medici or the descendants of Mahomet. The evidence of
   Gibbon, which has been used so freely by many modern theorists, is
   equally valuable on the hypothesis, that similar relations between the
   Church and the world occur over and over again in the course of
   successive ages. A parallel may often be drawn by an ingenious mind
   between the persecutions of Heathen and of Papal Rome, and the
   temptation is, always great to refer the fulfillment of Prophecy
   exclusively to that system of things with which we are immediately and
   personally concerned. Military ambition, subtle policy, the arts of
   Statesmen, the voice of excited multitudes, the passions of every hour,
   the delusions of every age -- all must pass in silent review Under the
   eye of heaven. They are repeated with every successive generation under
   an infinite variety of outward form, but with a perfect identity in
   spirit and in feeling. It may be safely asserted, that every social and
   political change from the times of Nebuchadnezzar to those of
   Constantine, have had their historic parallel from the days of
   Charlemagne to those of Napoleon. Hence, Predictions which originally
   related to the Empires of the East, may be naturally transferred to the
   transactions of Western Christendom. At the same time, there never may
   have been the slightest intention in the mind of the writer to apply
   them in this double sense. We cannot venture to discuss all the
   arguments either for or against the double sense of Prophecy. Calvin,
   at least, opposed it strongly, and whenever he swerved from the literal
   version, he substituted the principle of accommodation, according to
   the educated taste of an experienced Expounder of Holy Writ. It will,
   perhaps, be our truest wisdom to listen to the judicious advice of
   Bishop Horsley -- "Every single text of prophecy is to be considered as
   a portion of an entire system, and to be understood in that sense which
   may best connect it with the whole. The sense of Prophecy, in general,
   is to be sought in the events which have actually taken place [...] To
   qualify the Christian to make a judicious application of these rules,
   no skill is requisite in verbal criticism -- no proficiency in the
   subtleties of the logician's art -- no acquisition of recondite
   learning. That degree of understanding with which serious minds are
   ordinarily blessed -- those general views of the schemes of Providence,
   and that general acquaintance with the Prophetic language which no
   Christian can be wanting in these qualifications will enable the pious,
   though unlearned Christian, to succeed in the application of the
   Apostle's rules." (2 Peter 1:20, 21.) [58] While this sentiment is
   cheering to the humble minded believer, another principle laid down by
   the same author must never be omitted. The meaning of a prediction
   "never can be discovered without a general knowledge of the principal
   events to which k alludes." Let Calvin, then, be judged by this simple
   test -- and before we venture to condemn him, let us be equally
   patient, and equally careful to gather all the information within our
   reach.

   CONTEMPORARY EVENTS IN FRANCE.

   The period when our Reformer addressed these Lectures To All The Pious
   Worshippers Of God In France, is now worthy of our attention. Calvin
   writes from Geneva at the close of the month of August A.D. 1561,
   immediately preceding that Colloquy at Poissy to which reference was
   made in the preface to Ezekiel. [59] His Letter depicts so faithfully
   the state of persecution in which the Christians of France were placed,
   and compares it so efficiently with the condition of Daniel and the
   pious worshippers of God under Nebuchadnezzar, that the more we know of
   the times in which Calvin wrote, the more complete the parallel
   appears. An animated sketch of this eventful era has lately been
   published by the Queen's Professor of Modern History in the University
   of Cambridge; and as the views of the Editor accord with those of the
   Professor "On the Reformation and the Wars of Religion" in France, we
   shall abridge and condense his narrative, as the best suited to our
   purpose.

   THE GENERAL SYNOD
   OF PROTESTANTS AT PARIS.

   When Calvin addressed his followers in France, as desirous of the firm
   establishment of Christ's kingdom in the native land, he was at His
   College in Geneva; but his labors and his Writings were all-powerful in
   influence with the Reformed in France. Their numbers were large
   throughout the cities and villages of the Empire. Lefevre and Farel
   were as father and son in ceaseless efforts to make known to these
   Gentiles "the, unsearchable riches of Christ." Their evangelical
   preaching was signally blessed. Briconnet, the Bishop of Meaux, aided
   them in translating the Evangelists and in heralding the word of God,
   and so rapidly and widely had their gospel been received, that "a
   Heretic of Meaux" became the popular title for an opponent of the
   Papacy. Notwithstanding the hideous spectacle and the odious Massacre
   of the 29th of January 1535, when Francis I. celebrated the Fete of
   Paris by the Martyrdom of the Saints of God, the Reformers were so
   numerous throughout the realm, that a serious conflict was approaching
   between themselves and their foes. On the 25th of May 1559, a General
   Synod Of All Protestant Congregations was solemnly convened and held at
   Paris -- the ecclesiastical system of their Patriarch at Geneva was
   adopted, and his "Institution Chretienne" became the source and basis
   of their Confession of Faith. Paris was but the energizing center of an
   organized Church throughout the Sixteen Provinces of the Realm, while
   Synods, and Consistories, and Conferences formed a kind of Spiritual
   Republic, spreading like network over the land. But the hand and the
   eye of the Persecutor was upon them. Rome had its despotic tyrants both
   in Court and Camp. In the very midst of the Parliament at Paris, a
   confessor of the true fifth appeared -- but his courage was
   extinguished by his condemnation. Dubourg, a magistrate of eminent
   learning and illustrious family, in the presence of the King, in his
   place in Parliament, invoked a National Council for the Reform of
   Religion, and denounced the persecution of Heritics as a crime against
   Him whose holy name they were accustomed to adore with their dying
   breath. He expected His audacity by his death, and before the grave had
   been opened for him it had closed upon the Royal Tyrant, Henery II.,
   who bequeathed his crown to a second France in his sixteenth year. And
   who knows not the crafty, treacherous, and intriguing wickedness of the
   Queen-mother, Catherine or Medici? Who knows not the ambitious
   worldliness of the two sons of Claude or Lorraine -- Francis, the Duke
   of Guise -- the savage butcher of the Huguenots of Champagne, and
   Charles, the Cardinal Lorraine, the subtle agent of Rome's most hateful
   policy? These artful brothers worked their way to supreme influence in
   the national councils. Having married their niece, Mary Queen or Scots,
   to the youthful Sovereign, they employed their vast influence for the
   wholesale martyrdom of the defenseless flock of Christ. In every
   Parliament of the kingdom they established Chambers for trying and
   burning all persons charged with herisy, which obtained the unenviable
   notoriety of" chambres ardentes." "But deep," says the eloquent
   Lecturer, "called unto deep." The alarmed and exasperated Huguenots,
   confident in their strength and deriving courage from despair, rose in
   many parts of France to repel, or at least to punish their antagonists.
   In the midst of the anarchy of the times, a voice was raised in calm
   and earnest remonstrance, urging toleration and peace. In August 1560,
   the, renowned Chancellor L'hopital appeared before the King and an
   assembly of notables at Fontainebleau. He presents a Petition from the
   whole Reformed Church of the realm, and requests the royal permission
   for the free performance of public worship. "Your Petition," says the
   King, "is without a signature!" "True, sire," replies Coligny "but if
   you will allow us to meet for the purpose, I will obtain 50,000
   signatures in one day in Normandy alone!" His zeal might occasion a
   slight; exaggeration -- but the phrase presents us with data for
   conjecturing the number of "the pious" whom our Reformer addressed
   about a year afterwards. As soon as opportunity was given for listening
   to the glad tidings of salvation, large accessions were made to the
   hosts of the believers. Farel, though advanced in years, preached the
   truth to large and ethusiastic assemblages. In the neighborhood of
   Paris, the followers of Beza were numerous, and his admirers reckoned
   them at 40,000. L'hopital presented to the Queen-mother a list of 2150
   Ireformed Congregations, each under the ministry of a separate pastor,
   and he reckoned the number of the Huguenots as one-third of that of the
   Romanists!

   EDICT OF POISSY.

   At the very moment when Calvin was penning in his study the Letter
   which is prefixed to these Lectures Of Daniel, the Edict of July 1561
   was issued. It bears the impress of the restored influence of the House
   of Lorraine, which ever proved an implacable foe to the Gospel of
   Christ as preached by The Calvinists. That Edict forbid their public
   assemblies, and yet tolerated their private and social worship. It
   protected them from injury on account of their opinions, and provided
   for a National Council which should, if possible, settle differences
   which were in their nature irreconcilable. This important enactment was
   issued in the Assembly at Poissy, held a few weeks after the date of
   the Letter which follows this Preface, and which has been alluded to in
   the Preface to Ezekiel. Cams was absent, because the French Court
   refused to give those securities for his safety which the, Republic of
   Geneva required. But he was ably represented by Beza, and a dozen
   ministers, and twenty-two lay deputies of the Churches. The dramatic
   taste of the French mind was gratified by the scene, for the
   tournaments of belted knights had now given way to those of theological
   disputant,. In the Refectory of the great Convent the boy King was
   seated on a temporary throne. The members of his family, the officers
   and ladies of his Court, were stationed on one side, six Cardinals,
   with an array of mitred Bishops, were assembled on the other. The
   rustic garb of Beza and his associates, as they were introduced to
   their Sovereign by the Chancellor, contrasted strongly with the
   gorgeous apparel and the showy splendor of the Court and its
   attendants. The political Cardinal or Lorraine and the subtle General
   of the Jesuits, Iago Lasquez, conducted the dispute against Beza. The
   Doctors of the Sorbonne watched the sport with official keenness, while
   Catherine listened to the debate with secret contempt, having long ago
   determined to root out every Heretic as soon as she could throw the
   mantle of policy over her cruelty.

   PARALLEL BETWEEN THE PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE ANDTHE JEWS IN BABYLON.

   The matured Christian is now enabled to see at a glance, that such
   Conferences are, of necessity, worthless as to any progress of vital
   religion in the soul. The narrative, however, may enable the reader to
   enter a little into the state of the Christian, in France when Calvin's
   indicted his Prefatory Letter, and may justify the comparison which he
   makes between their lot, under the tyranny of such merciless rulers,
   and that of Daniel under the sway of the imperious Nebuchadnezzar, and
   at the tender mercy of his colleagues under Darius. The parallel is as
   complete as it could possibly be between the temporal position of the
   pious in France, and that of the devout Jews in Babylon -- and the
   graphic description of the Royal Professor of Modern History fully
   justifies the pastoral anxiety of the austere Theologian of Geneva.

   ARRANGEMENT OF THE PRESENT WORK.

   The Contents of these Volumes are as follow --

   The first Volume contains a translation of Calvin's elaborate Address
   to All the Faithful in France; and also of his Preface, to his
   Lectures. Their translation is continued to the end of the Sixth
   Chapter, which closes the Historical portion. of the Book.
   Dissertations explanatory of the subject-matter of the Commentary close
   the Volume, containing various historical, critical, and exegetical
   remarks, illustrating the Sacred Text as expounded by our Reformer. The
   chief of them are as follow, viz.

   CHAPTER 1 The Date of Jehoiakim's Reign.
   Nebuchadnezzar -- one King or two?
   His Ancestors and Successors
   The Chaldeans.
   The Three Children.
   Coresh -- was he Cyrus the Great?

   CHAPTER 2 The Dream.
   The Image.
   The Stone cut without hands.

   CHAPTER 3 The Statue at Dura.
   The Magistrates.
   The Musical Instruments.
   The Son of God

   CHAPTER 4 The Watcher.
   The Madness.
   The Edict of Praise.

   CHAPTER 5 Belshazzar and the feast.
   The Queen.
   The Handwriting.
   The Medes And Persians.
   Derius the Mede.
   The Capture of Babylon.

   CHAPTER 6 The Three Presidents.
   The King's Decease.
   The Prolongation of Daniel's Life.


   The Second Volume proceeds with the Translation of the remaining
   Chapters, which are the peculiarly Prophetic portion of the Book; and
   the interest which every sound Exposition of these Prophecies has
   always excited throughout the Theological world, will render the
   following Addenda acceptable to the reader.

   1. Dissertations Explanatory Of The Last Six Chapters Of Daniel, fully
   elucidating all important questions.

   2. A Connected Translation or Calvin's Version, illustrated by the
   peculiar words and phrases of his Commentary.

   3. Summary Of The Historical And Prophetic Portions Of The Book,
   according to Calvin's view of their contents.

   4. A Notice Of Some Ancient Codexes And Versions

   5. A List Of The Most Valuable Ancient And Modern British And Foreign
   Expositions Of Daniel, with concise Ephtomes of the contents of the
   most important.

   6. An Index Of The Scriptural Passages Quoted In The Lectures

   7. A copious Index Of The Chief Words And Subjects treated in these
   Volumes.

   Before concluding these Prefatory Observations, The Editor would
   briefly refer to the fundamental rules of The Calvin Translation
   Society, which very wisely exclude all expressions of private opinion.
   He hopes that no remarks in this Preface will be deemed inconsistent
   with so judicious a regulation. The clear illustration and the
   comprehensive defense of our Venerable Reformer seem to demand the
   candid statement of some views which are adverse to the popular
   current; but this necessity need not induce him to step beyond the
   limits of his province. It has been his desire conscientiously to
   vindicate his Author's Interpretations wherever he is able to do so,
   and as fearlessly to point out wherever Calvin is allowed to be in
   error; but in both cases, the Editor has scrupulously avoided taking
   any one-sided view of a great argument. He has attempted to exercise
   the utmost impartiality in quoting from a great variety of Standard
   Works which contain the most opposite conclusions; and yet, in
   accordance with the first principles of these Translations, he has at
   the same time carefully abstained from pressing any sentiments of his
   own on rite attention of the intelligent reader.

   T. M.
   Sheriff-Hutton Vicarag,
   May 1852.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Major (now Colonel) Rawlinson's Commentary on the Cuneiform
   Inscriptions of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 78.

   [2] P. 76, Ibid.

   [3] 1 Pt. 3. Section 615, 6-4th edit.

   [4] P. 1563, etc.

   [5] Pt. 3 p. 241, etc.

   [6] P. 12, etc.

   [7] Hamburg, 1838: an excellent treatise in German.

   [8] Die Authentie das Daniel etc. Berlin, 1831, 8vo

   [9] Volume 4, N.S., pp. 51, etc.

   [10] Volume 4, p. 205, etc. Edit. 8th.

   [11] Bleek, De Wette, and Kirms, suppose some more ancient Daniel to be
   intended. See Rosen. Proem, p. 6.

   [12] The title is Neue critische undersuchungen uber das Buch Daniel.
   Hamburg, 1838, pp. 104.

   [13] See the Life and Correspondence of the late Dr. Arnold of Rugby,
   volume 2, p. 191, edit. 2^nd. P. 195, edit. 5^th.

   [14] Chapter 20, (Daniel 20) of "The two later Visions of Daniel
   historically explained." The Editor strongly recommends all the works
   of Mr. Birks on prophecy; though he differs in opinion on some points
   of interest, he is deeply impressed by their solid learning and their
   chastened piety.

   [15] "The two later Visions of Daniel," p. 357.

   [16] Birks, p. 359.

   [17] See Tollner's Die heilige, Eingebund der heiligen, Schrift Linden,
   1771, quoted in Am. Saintes' Hist. Rat., 1849.

   [18] Jerome's Procemiunm in Dan., Op. tom. v. p. 267.

   [19] Einleitung in A. T.

   [20] By Robert William Mackay. 2 vols. 8vo. 1850.

   [21] Volume 2: Section 2, "Time of Messiah's coming," p. 307.

   [22] Rosemuiller Procem., p. 26.

   [23] See his letters to M. Mohl in the Journal Asiatique for 1843;
   April 5, June 2, October 31, and also March 22, 1844.

   [24] See Major Rawlinson's Commentary on the Cuneiform Inscriptions, p.
   57, and his references to the various plates of the British Museum
   series.

   [25] See Vaux's Ninevah and Persepolis, p. 263, edition. 2nd.

   [26] Vaux, p. 221.

   [27] Com. on Cuneif. Inscrip., p. 76.

   [28] See a description of the Kasr in Kitto's Bib. Cye., art. Babylon.

   [29] Major Rawlinson in Journ. Royal Geog. Sec., volume 9.

   [30] Kenrick's Ancient Egypt under the Pharaohs, volume 1, page 44.

   [31] Major Rawlinson's "Commentary," &e. p. 47.

   [32] Vindication of the Def., chapter 1: Section 3.

   [33] Warburtonian Lectures. Sermon II.

   [34] Antiq., Book 10, chapter 10:4.

   [35] Mor. Nevoch. p. 2, chapter 45.

   [36] See the Bava-bathra and the Megilla c. 2, Prideaux Connex., p. 1,
   65, Section 2. Kennicott's Dis. Gem, p. 14, and Disser. Prelim. to
   Wintle's Translation, p. 10 etc.

   [37] See his "Discources addressed to Mixed Congregations." Edit. 2d.

   [38] Forster's "One Primaeval Language," p. 33, where Lord Lindsay's
   letters are quoted.

   [39] Details are given at length in the interesting work quoted above.
   Professor Beer in his "Century of Sinaitic Inscriptions" utterly failed
   to unravel them. Leipsic, 1840

   [40] Before Professor Beer's attempt to explain them, Montfaucon had
   drawn the attention of the literary world to their value. See his Coll.
    Nov. Patr., t. 2: p. 206, where the narrative of Cosmas, the Indian
   traveler, is found in the original Greek.

   [41] The Duke of Manchester.

   [42] The Revelation T. R. Birks.

   [43] Bunsen's Egypt's Place in Universal History, volume 1.

   [44] A list of the chief "Futurist" writers and of their sentiments
   will be found in Birks' "First Elements of Sacred Prophecy," where the
   Year-Day theory is ably advocated, and much useful information
   condensed.

   [45] P. 109. New York, 1844.

   [46] Hints on the Interpretation of Prophecy, 1842; and Folsom's
   Daniel. Boston, 1842.

   [47] Hierophant, May 1843, New York.

   [48] Comment., p. 673, Daniel 7:8.

   [49] See Herm. Venem. Dis. ad Vat. Daniel Emblem., Dis. 5: Section
   3-12, pp. 347-364, 4to. Leovard, 1745, as quoted at length in Todd's
   Discourses on Antichrist, pp. 504-515.

   [50] Seeleys, London, 1851.

   [51] Ibid., p2

   [52] See Introductory.

   [53] See his "Prodromus Danielicus," Lovanii, 1711.

   [54] See the Appendix where the opinions of various writers are
   collected -- especially pp. 331-336.

   [55] See the Sixfold Commentary, Edit. 1610.

   [56] Atuthentic des Daniel, p. 310 -- on the other side, see
   Theologische Studien, 1830, et seq.; as quoted in Kitto's Biblic. Cyc.,
   Art. Chald. Lang.

   [57] Birks, ibid. chapter 21. Though the views of this writer,
   expressed from chapter 12 to 20 are diametrically opposed to those of
   Calvin, yet the remarks of chapter 21 are so excellent, that we shall
   avail ourselves of a few appropriate sentences.

   [58] See his four Sermons on this passage.

   [59] Calvin on Ezekiel, [2]vol. 1, p. 29.
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE PRINTER WISHES HEALTH FROM THE LORD

   TO THE PIOUS READER.

   Hail to thee, Christian Reader! -- I present to thee the Lectures of
   the most illustrious John Calvin, in which he has interpreted The
   Prophecies Of Daniel, with his usual diligence and clearness, and with
   that singular fidelity which shines throughout all his Expositions of
   Sacred Scripture. The manner in which they have been edited by those
   two brethren, John Budaeus and Charles Joinville, it would be
   superfluous to dwell upon, since that has been clearly made manifest in
   the way in which the Twelve Minor Prophets were brought out two years
   ago by John Crispin. For, in treating these Lectures, they have
   followed entirely the same course as they did in the former ones. Lest,
   perhaps, you should be surprised at the addition of the Hebrew context
   to the Latin version, I will explain the matter in a few words. Some
   studious and learned men very much wished to have the Hebrew text in
   the former Lectures which I mentioned, for the following reason
   chiefly, among others. It is exceedingly agreeable to Hebrew scholars
   to have that very fountain placed before their eyes from which this
   most faithful Interpreter drew the genuine sense of the Prophet. It is
   by no means unpleasing to those less skilled in the language, to see
   Daniel speaking not only in a foreign, but in his native tongue, and to
   understand how anything is originally expressed. Hence we have thought
   it right not to pass over the original words of the holy man. In
   addition to this, the same learned Interpreter, Calvin, is accustomed
   first to read each verse in Hebrew, and then to turn it into Latin. It
   was desirable to introduce this short preface, that you may understand
   his whole method of teaching. Besides, every one will judge better by
   his own perusal, what copious and abundant fruit all may derive from
   these Lectures. Farewell, and if you profit at all, ascribe the praise
   to God alone, who deserves it, and always pray much for Calvin, his
   most faithful servant. [60]

   Geneva, August 27th, 1561, A.D.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [60] This is the address of Bartholomew Vincent in his edition, A.D.
   1571, which has the Hebrew and Latin text printed together. It has been
   repeated in the edition at Geneva, 1591, with the omission of the
   clause "ante biennium Joanne Crispino;" since, like the former, it
   contains the Hebrew and Chaldee text opposite the Latin, with a running
   Hebrew title. In the collected edition of Calvin's works, Amsterdam,
   volume v., a Dedication to that Volume occurs, dated 10mo Cal. Aug.
   1568, which, although preceding Daniel, has no reference to his
   Prophecies, and is consequently omitted in this our work. It concerns
   the disputes of that period respecting the Lord's Supper, and certain
   heretical perversions of the truth then current. The Address of the
   Printer to the Reader prefixed to the same volume, refers to Jeremiah,
   Laminations, Twelve Miner Prophets, and Daniel generally; but; as it
   contains nothing suitable to our purpose, it is of course omitted.
     __________________________________________________________________

   DEDICATORY EPISTLE.

   JOHN CALVIN

   To ALL THE Pious WORSHIPPERS OF GOD WHO DESIRE THE KINGDOM OFCHRIST TO
   BE RIGHTLY
   CONSTITUTED IN FRANCE.

   HEALTH

   Although I have been absent these six-and-twenty years, with little
   regret, from that native land which I own in common with yourselves,
   and whose agreeable climate attracts many foreigners from the most
   distant quarters of the world; yet it would be in no degree pleasing or
   desirable to me to dwell in a region from which the Truth of God, pure
   Religion, and the doctrine of eternal salvation are banished, and the
   very kingdom of Christ laid prostrate! Hence, I have no desire to
   return to it; yet it would be neither in accordance with human nor
   Divine obligation to forget the people from which I am sprung, and to
   put away all regard for their welfare. I think I have given some strong
   proofs, how seriously and ardently I desire to benefit my
   fellow-countrymen, to whom perhaps my absence has been useful, in
   enabling them to reap the greater profit from my studies. And the
   contemplation of this advantage has not only deprived my banishment of
   its sting, but has rendered it even pleasant and joyful.

   Since, therefore, throughout the whole of this period I have publicly
   endeavored to benefit The Inhabitants OF France, and have never ceased
   privately to rouse the torpid, to stimulate the sluggish, to animate
   the trembling, and to encourage the doubtful and the wavering to
   perseverance, I must now strive to the utmost that my duty towards them
   may not fail at a period so urgent and so pressing. A most excellent
   opportunity has been providentially afforded to me; for in publishing
   the Lectures which contain my Interpretation Of The Prophecies Of
   Daniel, I have the very best occasion of showing you, beloved brethren,
   in this mirror, how God proves the faith of his people in these days by
   various trials; and how with wonderful wisdom he has taken care to
   strengthen their minds by ancient examples, that they should never be
   weakened by the concussion of the severest storms and tempests; or at
   least, if they should totter at all, that they should never finally
   fall away. For although the servants of God are required to run in a
   course impeded by many obstacles, yet whoever diligently reads this
   Book will find in it whatever is needed by a voluntary and active
   runner to guide him from the starting-post to the goal; while good and
   strenuous wrestlers will experimentally acknowledge that they have been
   sufficiently prepared for the contest.

   First of all, a very mournful and yet profitable history will be
   recorded for us, in the exile of Daniel and his companions while the
   kingdom and priesthood were still standing, as if God, through ignominy
   and shame, would devote the choicest flower of his elect people to
   extreme calamity. For what, at first sight, is more unbecoming, than
   that youths endued with almost angelic virtues should be the slaves and
   captives of a proud conqueror, when the most wicked and abandoned
   despisers of God remained at home hi perfect safety? Was this the
   reward of a pious and innocent life, that while the impious were
   sweetly flattering themselves through their escape from punishment, the
   saints should pay the penalty which they had deserved? Here, then, we
   observe, as in a living picture, that when God spares and even indulges
   the wicked for a time, he proves his servants like gold and silver; so
   that we ought not to consider it a grievance to be thrown into the
   furnace of trial, while profane men enjoy the calmness of repose.

   Secondly, we have here an example of most manly prudence and of
   singular consistency, united with a magnanimity truly heroic. When
   pious youths of a tender age are tempted by the enticements of a Court,
   they not only overcome the temptations presented to them by their
   temperance, but perceive themselves cunningly enticed to depart by
   degrees from the sincere worship of God; and then, when they have
   extricated themselves from the snares of the devil, they boldly and
   freely despise all poison-stained honor, at the imminent risk of
   instant death. A more cruel and formidable contest will follow when the
   companions of Daniel, as a memorable example, of incredible constancy,
   are never turned aside by atrocious threats to pollute themselves by
   adoring the Image, and are at length prepared to vindicate the pure
   worship of God, not only with their blood, but in defiance of a
   horrible torture set before their eyes. Thus the goodness of God shines
   forth at the close of this tragedy, and tends in no slight degree to
   arm us with invincible confidence.

   A similar contest and victory of Daniel himself will be added; when he
   preferred to be cast among savage lions, to desisting from the open
   profession of his faith three times a-day; lest by perfidious
   dissembling he should prostitute the Sacred Name of God to. the jests
   of the impious. Thus he was wonderfully drawn out of the pit which was
   all but his grave, and triumphed over Satan and his faction. Here
   philosophers do not come before us skillfully disputing about the
   virtues peacefully in the shade; but the indefatigable constancy of
   holy men in the pursuit of piety, invites us; with a loud voice to
   imitate them. Therefore, unless we are altogether untouchable, we ought
   to learn from these masters, if Satan lays the snares of flattery for
   us, to be prudent and cautious that we are not entangled in them; and
   if he attacks us violently, to oppose all his assaults by a fearless
   contempt of death and of all evils. Should any one object, that the
   examples of either kind of deliverance which we have mentioned are
   rare, I confess indeed that God does not always stretch forth his hand
   from heaven in the same way to preserve his people; but it ought to
   satisfy us that he has promised that he will be a faithful guardian of
   our life, as often as we are harassed by any trouble. We cannot be
   exposed to the power of the impious without his restraining their
   furious and turbulent plots against us, according to his pleasure. And
   we must not look at the results alone; but observe how courageously
   holy men devoted themselves to death for the vindication of God's
   glory; and although they were snatched away from it, yet their willing
   alacrity in offering themselves as victims is in no degree less
   deserving of praise.

   It is also worth while to consider how variously the Prophet was tossed
   about and agitated during the Seventy years which he spent in exile. No
   King treated him so humanely as Nebuchadnezzar, and yet he found him
   act like a wild beast. The cruelty of others was greater, until after
   the sudden death of Belshazzar and the taking of the City, he was
   delivered up to its new masters, The Medes and Persians. Their hostile
   irruption struck terror into the minds of all, and there is no doubt
   that the Prophet partook of the general feeling. Although he was kindly
   received by Darius, so that his slavery was rendered tolerable, yet the
   envy of the nobles and their tricked conspiracy against him subjected
   him to the greatest dangers. But he was more anxious for the common
   safety of the Church than for his own personal security. He evidently
   suffered the greatest grief, and was distracted with the utmost
   anxiety, when the position of affairs discovered no limit to so severe
   and miserable an oppression of the people. He acquiesced indeed, in the
   Prophecy of Jeremiah; still it was a proof of his incomparable
   forbearance that his hope, so long suspended, did not languish; nay,
   that when tossed hither and thither amidst tempestuous waves, it was
   not entirely drowned.

   I come now to the Prophecies themselves. The former part were uttered
   against the Babyloians; partly, because God wished to adorn his
   servants with sure testimonies, which might compel that most proud and
   victorious Nation to revere him; and partly, because His Name ought to
   be held in reverence with the profane. Thus he would exercise the
   prophetic gift among his own people more freely, through being endued
   with authority. After his name had become celebrated among The
   Chaldeans, God entrusted him with Prophecies of greater moment, which
   were peculiar to his elect people. Moreover, God so accommodated them
   to the use of his Ancient people, and they so soothed their sorrows by
   suitable remedies, and sustained their vacillating minds till The
   Advent Of Christ -- that they have no less value in our time; for
   whatever was predicted concerning the changing and vanishing splendor
   of these Monarchies, and the perpetual existence of Christ's Kingdom,
   is in these days no less useful to be known than formerly. For God
   shows how all earthy power which is not founded on Christ must fall;
   and he threatens speedy destruction to all Kingdoms which obscure
   Christ's glory by extending themselves too much. And those Kings whose
   sway is most extended shall feel by sorrowful experience how horrible a
   judgment will fall upon them, unless they willingly submit themselves
   to the sway of Christ! And what is less tolerable than to deprive Him
   of his right by whose protection their dignity remains safe? And we see
   how few of their number admit The Sons Of God; nay, how they turn
   every;stone and try every possible scheme to prevent his entrance into
   their territories! Many of their Councilors studiously use their utmost
   endeavors and influence to close every avenue against him. For while
   they put forward the name of Christianity, and boast themselves to be
   the best. defenders of the Catholic Faith, their frivolous vanity is
   easily refuted, if men hold the true and genuine definition of the
   Kingdom of Christ. For his throne or scepter is nothing else but the
   doctrine of the Gospel. Nor does his Majesty shine elsewhere, nor his
   Empire otherwise exist, than when all, from the highest to the lowest,
   hear His voice with the calm docility of sheep, and follow wherever he
   calls them. These Kings not only completely reject this doctrine, which
   contains the substance of True Religion, and the lawful Worship of God,
   in which the eternal salvation of men and their true happiness
   consists; but they drive it far away from them by threats and terrors,
   by the sword and flame, nor do they omit any violence in their efforts
   to exterminate it. How great, how prodigious this blindness, when they
   cannot bear that those whom the only-begotten Sort of God invites
   mercifully to himself should era.-brace him! But many in their own
   pride, forsooth, think themselves reduced. to the common level, if they
   lower their ensigns of royalty to the Supreme King others are unwilling
   to bridle their lusts, and since hypocrisy seizes on all their senses,
   they seek darkness, and dread to be dragged into light. No plague is
   worse than this fear, like Herod's as if tie who offers a celestial
   empire to the least and most despised of the people, would snatch away
   the kingdoms of the earth from its monarchs. In addition to this, when
   each regards the c, pinion of others, this mutual league retains them
   all bound in a distinctive bond under the yoke of impiety. For if they
   would seriously apply their minds to inquire what is true and right;
   nay, if they would only open their eyes, they could not fail to
   discover it.

   Since it has often been found, by experience, that when Christ goes
   forth with his Gospel serious commotion's arise, thus Kings have a
   plausible pretext for rejecting the heavenly doctrine by consulting for
   the public safety. I confess, indeed, that all change which occasions
   disturbance ought to be esteemed odious; but the injustice to God is
   great, unless this also is attributed to his power, that whatever
   tumults arise he allays them, and thus the kingdom of his Son is
   established! Although the heavens should mingle with the earth, the
   worship of God is so precious, that not even the least diminution of it
   can be compensated at any price. But those who pretend that the Gospel
   is the source of disturbances, accuse it falsely and unjustly. (Haggai
   2:7.) It is indeed true, that God thunders therein with the vehemence
   of His voice, which shakes heaven and earth; but while the Prophet
   gains attention to its preaching by this testimony, such concussion is
   to be wished for and expected. And, surely if God's glory did not shine
   forth his its own degree, until all flesh was humbled, it would be
   necessary that man's pride shone to be humbled by the bold and strong
   hand of God; since that pride raise, itself against him, and never
   yields of its own accord. But if the earth trembled at the promulgation
   of the Law, (Exodus 19:18,)it is not surprising that the force and
   efficacy of the Gospel should appear more resplendent. Wherefore, it
   becomes us to embrace that consoling doctrine which raises the dead
   from the grave, and opens heaven, and implants unaccustomed rigor in
   those whom the earth is unworthy to sustain, as if all the elements
   were subservient to our salvation.

   But, lo! storms and tempests now flow from another fountain! Because
   the Rulers and Governors of the world do not willingly submit to the
   yoke of Christ, now even the rude multitude reject what is salutary
   before they even taste it. Some delight themselves in filth, like pigs,
   and others excited by fury rejoice in slaughter. The devil instigates
   by especial fury those whom he has enslaved to himself to tumults of
   all sorts. Hence the clash of trumpets; hence conflicts and battles.
   Meanwhile, The Roman Protest -- a Heliogabalus -- with his red and
   sanguinary cohorts and horned beasts, [61] rages with a hasty rush
   against Christ and fetches from every side his allies from the filth of
   his foul Clergy, [62] all of whom sup the food on which they subsist
   from the same pot, though it be not equally dainty. Many hungry fellows
   also run up to offer their assistance. Most of the Judges are
   accustomed to gratify their appetites at these sumptuous banquets, and
   to fight for the kitchen and the kettle! and besides this, the haunts
   of the Monks, [63] and the dens of the Sorbonne, [64] send forth their
   gluttons who add fuel to the flame. I omit the clandestine arts and
   wicked conspiracies of which my best witnesses are these notorious
   enemies to piety! I mention no one by name, it is enough to point with
   the finger to those who are too well known to you. In this confused
   assault of wild beasts, it is not surprising if those who depend only
   on the complicated events of things hesitate through perplexity, while
   they unjustly and unfairly throw the blame of their distrust upon the
   Sacred Gospel of Christ. Let us suppose that all the infernal regions
   with their furies should offer us battle, will God sit at ease in
   heaven, and desert and betray his own cause? and when he has entered
   into the conflict, will either the crafty cunning, or the impetuous
   rush of men deprive Him of his victory?

   The Pope they say will draw with him a large faction -- it is the just
   reward of unbelief to tremble at the sound of a falling leaf!(Leviticus
   26:36.) Why, O ye counselors, have ye so little fore-sight? Christ will
   take care that no novelty shall disturb you. In a short time ye will
   feel how far more satisfactory it is to have God propitious, to despise
   terrors as of no moment, and to rest in His protection, than to harass
   Him by open warfare, through that of the wrath of the evil and the
   hypocritical. In truth, after all these discussions, the superstition
   which has hitherto reigned is with the defenders of the Pope, nothing
   else but well-placed evil, [65] and they think it cannot be removed,
   because the attempt would occasion irreparable damage. But those who
   regard the glory of God, and are endued with sincere piety, ought to
   have far higher objects in view, and so to submit themselves to the
   will of God as to approve of all the events of his providence. If he
   had not promised us anything, there might be just cause for fear and
   constant vacillation; but since he has so often declared, that his help
   shall never be wanting in upholding the kingdom of his Christ, the
   reliance on this promise is the one sole basis of right action.

   Hence it is your duty, dearest brethren, as far as lies in your power,
   and your calling demands it, to use your hearty endeavors, that true
   religion may recover its perfect state. It is not necessary for me to
   relate how strenuously I have hitherto endeavored to cut off all
   occasion for tumult; yea, I call you all with the angels to witness
   before the Supreme Judge of all men, that it is no fault of mine if the
   kingdom of Christ does not progress quietly without any injury. And I
   think it is owing to my carefulness that private persons have not
   transgressed beyond their bounds. Now, although God by his wonderful
   skill has carried forward the restoration of his Church further than I
   had dared to hope for, yet it is well to remember what Christ taught
   his disciples, namely, that they should possess their souls in
   patience. (Luke 21:19.)

   This is one object of the Vision which Daniel has explained. The Stone
   by which those kingdoms were destroyed, which had made war on God, was
   not formed by the hand of man and although it was rude and unpolished,
   yet it increased to a great mountain. I thought that ye required
   reminding of this, that ye may remain calm amidst the threatening
   thunders, while the empty clouds vanish away through being dispersed by
   heavenly agency. It does not escape me, while I pass by the numberless
   fires of thirty years, that ye have endured very great indignities
   during the last six months. How often in many places an irruption was
   made against you by a ferocious populace, and how often ye were
   attacked at one time by stones, and at another by swords! How your
   enemies plotted against you, and repressed your peaceful assemblies by
   sudden and unlocked for violence! How some were slain in their
   dwellings, and others by the wayside while the bodies of your dead were
   dragged about as a laughing-stock, your women ravished, and many of
   your party wounded, and even the pregnant female with her offspring
   pierced through, and their homes ransacked and made desolate. But,
   although more atrocious things should be yet at hand, that ye may be
   approved as Christ's disciples, and be wisely instructed in his school,
   you must use every effort, that no madness of the impious who act thus
   intemperately, should deprive you of that moderation by which alone
   they have thus far been conquered and broken down. And if the length of
   your affliction should cause you weariness, bear in mind that
   celebrated prophecy in which the Church's condition is depicted to the
   life. God therein shews his Prophet what contests and anxieties,
   troubles and difficulties, awaited the Jews from the close of their
   exile, and from their joyful return to their country until the advent
   of Christ.

   The similarity of the times adapts these predictions to ourselves, and
   fits them for our own use. Daniel congratulated the wretched Church
   which had so long been submerged in a deluge of evils, when he
   collected from the computation of the years, that the day of
   deliverance predicted by Jeremiah was at hand. (Jeremiah 25:12, and
   Jeremiah 29:10.) But he receives for an answer, that the lot of the
   people from the time of their permission to return would be more
   bitter, so that they would scarcely breathe again under a continual
   series of oppressive evils. With the bitterest grief, and with many
   sorrows, the people had dragged on in hope for seventy years, but now
   God increases the period sevenfold, and inwardly inflicts A deadly
   wound on their heart. He not only pronounces that the people, after
   their return home, should collect their strength and build their city
   and temple, and then suffer new anxieties, but he predicts fresh
   troubles amidst the very commencement of their joy, whilst they had
   scarcely tasted the sweetness of grace. Then with regard to the
   calamities which shortly followed, the multiform catalogue here
   presented affrights us even who have only heard of them: then how
   bitter and how distressing were they to that rude nation! To see the
   temple profaned by the audacity of a sacrilegious tyrant, its sacred
   rites shamefully mingled with foul pollution's, all the books of the
   law cast into the fire, and the whole of the ceremonies abolished, --
   how horrible the spectacle! Since all who professed to persist boldly
   and constantly in the worship of God were seized and subjected to the
   same burning, how could the tender and weak behold this without the
   greatest consternation! Yet this was the tyrant's plan, that the
   cruelty might excite the less earnest to deny their faith. Under the
   Maccabees, some relaxation seems to have taken place, but yet such as
   is soon deformed by the most cruel slaughters, and was never without
   its share of lamentation and woe. For since the enemy far excelled them
   in forces and in every equipment for war, nothing was left for those
   who had taken up arms for the defense of the Church but to hide
   themselves in the dens of wild beasts, or to wander through the woods
   in the greatest distress, and in utter destitution. Another source of
   temptation was added, since impious and abandoned men, in the boasting
   of a fallacious zeal as Daniel says, joined the party of Judas and his
   brethren, by which artifice of Satan infamy became attached to the band
   which Judas had collected, as if it had been a band of robbers. (Daniel
   11:34.)

   But nothing was a source of greater sorrow to the righteous, than to
   find the priests themselves betraying the temple and worship of God, by
   wicked compacts according to the prompting of their interested
   ambition. For not only was that sacred dignity both bought and sold,
   but it was purchased by mutual murders and parricides. Hence it
   happened, that men of all ranks grew more and more profane, and
   corruption's multiplied everywhere with impunity, although circumcision
   and the sacrifices still remained in use, so that the expectation of
   the kingdom of God, when Christ appeared, was a strange and unheard of
   marvel. Very few, indeed, are entitled to even this praise. If then, in
   that unworthy deformity of the Church, if in the midst of its many
   dispersions and its dreadful terrors, of the devastation of the lands,
   the destruction of the dwellings and the consequent dangers to life
   itself, this prophecy of Daniel sustained the spirit of the pious, when
   the religious ceremonies were involved in obscure shadows, and doctrine
   was almost extinct, when the priests were most degenerate, and all
   sacred ordinances abolished, -- how ashamed should we be of our
   cowardice, if the clearness of the Gospel, in which God shews to us his
   paternal face, does not raise us above all obstacles, and prop us up
   with unwearied constancy?

   There is no doubt that the servants of God accommodated to their own
   times the predictions of this Prophet concerning the exile at Babylon,
   and thus lightened the pressure of present calamities. Thus, also, we
   ought to have our eyes fixed on the miseries of the Fathers, that we
   may not object to be joined with the body of that Church to which it
   was said,

   "O, thou little flock, borne down by the tempest and deprived of
   comfort, behold, I take thee up." (Isaiah 54:11.)

   And, again, after she has complained that her back had been torn by the
   ungodly, like a field cut up by the course of the furrows, yet she
   boasts immediately afterwards, that their cords were cut away by a just
   God, so that they did not prevail against her. (Psalm 129:1-4.) The
   Prophet, then, not only animates us to hope and patience, by the
   example of those times, but adds an exhortation dictated by the Spirit,
   which extends to the whole reign or Christ, and is applicable to us.
   Wherefore it is no hardship to us to be comprehended in the number of
   those whom he announces shall be proved and purified by fire, since the
   inestimable happiness and glory which springs from this process more
   than compensates for all its crosses and distresses. And although these
   things are insipid to the majority, lest their sloth and stupidity
   should render us too sluggish, we should fix deeply in our hearts the
   denunciation of the Prophets, namely, that the ungodly will act
   impiously, since they understand nothing; while the sons of God will be
   endued with wisdom to hold on the course of their divine calling. It is
   worth while, then, to perceive the origin of that gross blindness which
   is commonly observed, so that the heavenly doctrine may make us wise.
   Hence, it too often happens that the multitude revile Christ and his
   Gospel; they indulge themselves without either care, or fear, or any
   perception of their dangers, and they are not aroused by God's wrath to
   an ardent and serious desire for that redemption which alone snatches
   us from the abyss of eternal destruction. In the meantime they are
   caught or rather fascinated by luxuries, pleasures, and other
   enticements, and pay no regard to the prospect of a happy eternity.
   Although there are many sects who contemptuously despise the teaching
   of the Gospel, some are remarkable for pride, others for imbecility,
   some for want of sobriety of mind, and others for a sleepy torpidly,
   yet we shall find that contempt flows from profane security, since no
   one descends into himself to shake off his own miseries by finding a
   remedy for them. Yet, when God's curse rests upon us, and his just
   vengeance urges us, it is the height of madness to cast aside all
   anxiety, and to please ourselves as if we need fear nothing. Yet it is
   a very common fault for those who are guilty of a thousand sins, and
   deserve a thousand eternal deaths, to discharge with levity a few
   frivolous ceremonies towards God, and then give themselves up to sloth
   and lethargy. Moreover, Paul denounces the savor of the Gospel (1
   Corinthians 2:16) to be deadly towards all whose minds are fascinated
   by Satan; so that to taste of its life-giving savor, it is necessary
   for us to stand at God's tribunal, and there also to cite out own
   consciences when wounded with serious terror.

   Thus, we esteem, according to its proper worth and value, that
   reconciliation which Christ procured for us by his precious blood.
   Thus, the angel, that he might acquire reverence and respect for
   Christ's authority, brings a message concerning eternal justice which
   he sealed by the sacrifice of his death, and expresses the mode and
   plant by which iniquity was abolished and expiated. Thus, while the
   world revels in its lusts, let the knowledge of the condemnation which
   we have deserved inspire us with fear, and humble us before God and
   while the profane involve themselves in the whirl of earthly
   gratification's, let us eagerly embrace this incomparable treasure, in
   which solid blessedness is laid up. Let our enemies jeer as they
   please, every man ought to take care to have God propitious to him, and
   it is clear that the very foundation of the faith is overthrown by
   those who think he is to be doubtfully invoked. Let them deride our
   faith with as much petulance as they please, but let us be sure of
   this, that no one obtains this privilege except by God's good gift, for
   men can only call God "Father" by relying on the advocacy of Christ,
   through a free and peaceful confidence. But the pursuit of piety will
   never flourish in us as it ought, until we learn to raise our minds
   upwards, since they are too inclined to grovel upon earth, and we
   should exercise them in continual meditation upon the heavenly life.
   And in this respect, the surprising vanity of the human race manifests
   itself, since though all speak eloquently, like philosophers, on the
   shortness of life, yet no one aspires to that perpetual existence. So
   that when Paul contends the faith and charity of the Colossians, he
   very truly says, that they were animated by a hope laid up in the
   heavens. (Colossians 1:5.) And when discussing elsewhere the results of
   the grace which is open to us in Christ, he says -- we must be so
   built. up therein, that all impiety and worldly desires must be
   mortified, and we must live soberly, justly, and piously in this world,
   and wait for the blessed hope, and glorious advent of the great God and
   our Savior Jesus Christ. (Titus 2:12, 13.)

   Let, then, this expectation free us from all hindrances, and draw us
   towards itself, and though the world is steeped in more than epicurean
   pollution, lest the contagion should reach us, we ought to strive the
   more earnestly until we arrive at the goal. Although it is truly a
   matter of grief, that so great a multitude should willfully perish, and
   rush devotedly on their own destruction, yet their foolish fury need
   not disturb us; for another admonition of Daniel should succor us,
   namely, that certain salvation is laid up for all who have been found
   written in the book. But although our election is hidden in God's
   secret counsel, which is the prime cause of our salvation, yet, since
   the adoption of all who are inserted into the body of Christ, by faith
   in the gospel, is by no means doubtful, be ye content with this
   testimony, and persevere in the course which ye have happily begun. But
   if ye must contend still longer, (and I announce, that contests more
   severe than ye contemplate yet remain for you,) by whatsoever attack
   the madness of the impious bursts forth, as if it stirred up the
   regions below, remember that your course has been defined by a heavenly
   Master of the contest, whose laws ye must obey the more cheerfully,
   since he will supply you with strength unto the end.

   Since, then, it is not lawful for me to desert the station to which God
   has appointed me, I have Dedicated to you this my labor, as a pledge of
   my desire to help you, until at the completion of my pilgrimage our
   heavenly Father, of his immeasurable pity, shall gather me together
   with you, to his eternal inheritance.

   May the Lord govern you by His Spirit, may He defend my most beloved
   brethren by His own protection, against all the plots of their enemies,
   and sustain them by his invisible power.

   John Calvin.
   Geneva, August 19, 1561
     __________________________________________________________________

   [61] The Cardinals and Bishops.

   [62] The Romish priesthood.

   [63] The monasteries.

   [64] The Sorbonne was a Popish seminary

   [65] Latine, "malam, bene positum:" the French translation takes the
   phrase as a proverbs" comme dit le proverb, un mal qui est bien en
   repos " Anglice, "well-poised."
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE PRAYER

   WHICH JOHN CALVIN WAS ACCUSTOMED TO USE AT THE C0MMENCEMENT OF HIS
   LECTURES.

   Grant unto us, O Lord, to be occupied in the mysteries of thy Heavenly
   wisdom, with true progress in piety, to thy glory and our own
   edification. -- Amen.

   This prayer is not inserted in the Geneva edition of 1617, but is found
   in that of 1571. The French Translation renders it as follows -- "May
   the Lord grant us grace so to treat the secrets of His celestial
   wisdom, that we may truly profit in the fear of his holy name, to His
   glory and to our edification. Amen"
     __________________________________________________________________

   COMMENTARIES

   ON

   THE PROPHET DANIEL.

   John Calvin's Preface

   TO HIS LECTURES ON DANIEL.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture First.

   The Book of The Prophet Daniel follows these Remarks, and its utility
   will be better understood as we proceed; since it cannot be
   conveniently explained all at once. I will, however, just present the
   Leader with a foretaste to prepare his mind, and render him attentive.
   But before I do so, I must make a brief Summary Of The Book. We may
   divide the Book into two part, and this partition will materially help
   us. For Daniel relates how he acquired influence over the unbelieving.
   It was necessary for him to be elevated to the prophetic office in some
   singular and unusual manner. The condition of the Jews, as is well
   known, was so confused, that it was difficult for any one to determine
   whether any Prophet existed. At first Jeremiah was alive, and after him
   Ezekiel. After their return, the Jews had their own Prophets but
   Jeremiah and Ezekiel had almost fulfilled their office, when Daniel
   succeeded them. Others too, as we have already seen, as Haggai,
   Malachi, and Zechariah, were created Prophets for the purpose of
   exhorting the people, and hence their duties were partially restricted.
   But Daniel would scarcely have been considered a Prophet, had not God,
   as we have said, appointed him in a remarkable way. We shall perceive
   at the close of the sixth chapter, that he was divinely endued with
   remarkable signs, so that the Jews might surely ascertain that he had
   the gift of prophecy, unless they were basely ungrateful to God. His
   name was known and respected by the inhabitants of Babylon. If the Jews
   had despised what even the profane Gentiles admired, was not this
   purposely to suffocate and trample on the grace of God? Daniel, then,
   had sure and striking marks by which he could by recognized as God's
   Prophet, and his calling be rendered unquestionable.

   A Second Part is afterwards added, in which God predicts by his agency
   the events which were to occur to his elect people. The Visions, then,
   from the seventh chapter to the end of the Book, relate peculiarly to
   the Church of God. There God predicts what should happen hereafter. And
   that admonition is the more necessary, since the trial was severe, when
   the Jews had to bear an exile of seventy years; but after their return
   to their country, instead of seventy years, God protracted their full
   deliverance till seventy weeks of years. So the delay was increased
   sevenfold. Their spirits might be broken a thousand times, or even
   utterly fail; for the Prophets speak so magnificently about their
   redemption, that the Jews expected their state to be especially happy
   and prosperous, as soon as they were snatched from the Babylonian
   Captivity. But since they were oppressed with so many afflictions, and
   that, too, not for a short period, but for more than four hundred
   years, their redemption might seem illusory since they were but seventy
   years in exile. there is no doubt, then, that Satan seduced the minds
   of many to revolt, as if God were mocking them by bringing them out of
   Chaldea back again to their own country. For these reasons God shews
   his servant in a Vision what numerous and severe afflictions awaited
   his elect people. Besides, Daniel, He prophesies that he describes
   almost historically events previously hidden. And this was necessary,
   since in such turbulent convulsions the people would never have tasted
   that these had been divinely revealed to Daniel, unless the heavenly
   testimony had been proved by the event. This holy man ought so to speak
   and to prophesy concerning futurity, as if he were relating what had
   already happened. But we shall see all these things in their own order.

   I return, then, to what I commenced with, that we may see in few words
   how useful this Book is to the Church of Christ. First of all, the
   matter itself shews how Daniel did not speak from his own discretion,
   but whatever he uttered was dictated by the Holy Spirit for whence
   could he conceive the things which we shall afterwards behold, if he
   were only endued with human prudence? for instance, that other
   Monarchies should arise to blot out that Babylonian Empire which then
   had the greatest authority in all the world? Then, again, how could he
   divine concerning Alexander the Great and his Successors? for long
   before Alexander was born, Daniel predicted what he should accomplish.
   Then he shows that his kingdom should not last, since it is directly
   divided into four horns. Other events also clearly demonstrate that he
   spoke by the dictation of the Holy Spirit. But our confidence in this
   is strengthened by other narratives, where he represents the various
   miseries to which the Church should be subject between two most cruel
   enemies, the kings of Syria and Egypt. He first recites their treaties,
   and then their hostile incursions on both sides, and afterwards so many
   changes, as if he pointed at the things themselves with his finger; and
   he so follows through their whole progress, that God appears to speak
   by his mouth. This, then, is a great step, and we shall not repent of
   taking it, when we acknowledge Daniel to have been only the organ of
   the Holy Spirit, and never to have brought anything forward by his own
   private inclination. The authority, too, which he obtained, and which
   inspired the Jews with perfect confidence in his teaching, extends to
   us also. Shameful, indeed, and base would be our ingratitude, if we did
   not embrace him as God's Prophet, whom the Chaldeans were compelled to
   honor -- a people whom we know to have been superstitious and full of
   pride. These two nations, the Egyptians and Chaldeans, placed
   themselves before all others; for the Chaldeans thought wisdom's only
   dwelling-place was with themselves hence they would never have been
   inclined to receive Daniel's, unless the reality had compelled them,
   and the confession of his being a true prophet of God had been extorted
   from them.

   Since Daniel's authority is thus established, we must now say a few
   words about the subjects which he treats. Respecting The Interpretation
   Of The Dreams, the first of; those of Nebuchadnezzar embraces a matter
   of great importance, as we shall see, namely, how all the splendor and
   power of the world vanish away, Christ's kingdom alone remaining
   stable, and that nothing else is self-enduring. In the Second Dream of
   Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel's admirable constancy is displayed. Very
   invidious, indeed, was the office of throwing down the mightiest
   Monarch of the whole world as he did "Thou excepts thyself from the
   number of men, and art worshipped like a god; thou shalt hereafter
   become a beast!" No man of these days would dare thus to address
   Monarchs; nay, who dares to admonish them even mildly, if they have
   sinned at all? When, therefore, Daniel intrepidly predicted to King
   Nebuchadnezzar the disgrace which awaited him, he thus gave a rare and
   memorable proof of his constancy. And in this way, again, his calling
   was sealed, since this fortitude sprang from God's Spirit.

   But the Second Part is peculiarly worthy of notice, since we there
   perceive how God cares for his Church. God's providence is, indeed,
   extended to the whole world. For if a sparrow does not fall to the
   ground without his permission, he, doubtness, is mindful of the human
   race! (Matthew 10, and Luke 12.) Nothing, therefore, happens to us by
   chance, but God in this Book affords us light, while we know His Church
   to be so governed by him, as to be the object. of His peculiar care. If
   matters ever were so disturbed in the world, that one could suppose God
   to be asleep in heaven, and to be forgetful of the human race, surely
   such were the changes of those times, nay, so multiform, so extensive,
   and so various were they, that even the most daring must be confounded,
   since there was no end to the wars. Egypt prevailed at one time, while
   at another there were commotion's in Syria. Seeing, then, all things
   turned up-side (down, what judgment could be passed, except that God
   neglected the world, and the Jews were miserably deceived in their
   hope? They thought that as God had been their deliverer, so would he
   have been the perpetual guardian of their safety. Although all nations
   were then subject in common to various slaughters, yet if the Syrians
   were victorious over the Egyptians, they abused their power against the
   Jews, and Jerusalem lay exposed as their prey, and the reward of their
   victory if, again, the opposite side were the conquerors, they revenged
   the injury, or sought compensation against rite Jews. Thus on every
   side those miserable people were fleeced, and their condition was much
   worse after their return to their country, than if they had always been
   exiles or strangers in other regions. When, therefore, they were
   admonished concerning the future, this was the best prop on which they
   could repose. But the use of the same doctrine is at this day
   applicable to us. We perceive, as in a glass or picture, how God was
   anxious about his Church, even when he seemed to cast away all regard
   for it, hence when the Jews were exposed to the injuries of their
   enemies, it was but, the accomplishment of his designs.

   From the Second Part we recognize their wonderful preservation, and
   that too, by a. greater and more surprising exercise of God's power,
   than if they had lived in peace, and no one had molested them. We learn
   this from the seventh to the ninth chapters. Now, when Daniel numbers
   the years till The Advent Of Christ, how clear and distinct is the
   testimony which we may oppose against. Satan, and all the taunts of the
   impious! and how certain it is that the Book of Daniel, was familiarly
   used by men before this event. But when he enumerates The Seventy
   Weeks, and says, that Christ should then come, all profane men may
   come, and boast, and swell with increased swaggering, yet they shall
   fall down convicted, since Christ is that true Redeemer whom God had
   promised from the beginning of the world. For He was unwilling to make
   him known without the most certain demonstration, such as all the
   mathematicians can never equal. First of all, it is worthy of
   observation, that Daniel afterwards discoursed on the various
   calamities of the Church, and prophesied the time at which God pleased
   to hew his only-begotten Son to the world. His dissertation on the
   office of Christ is one of the principal supports of our faith. For he
   not only describes his Advent, but announces the abolition of the
   shadows of the Law, since the Messiah would bring with him its complete
   fulfillment. And when he predicts the Death of Christ, he shows for
   what purpose he should undergo death, namely, to abolish Sin by his
   sacrifice, and to bring in Eternal Righteousness. Lastly, this also
   must be noticed, -- as he had instructed the people to bear their
   cross, so also he warns them that the Church's state would not be
   tranquil even when the Messiah came. The sons of God should be militant
   until the end, and not hope for any fruit of their victory until the
   dead should rise again, and Christ himself should collect us into his
   own Celestial Kingdom. Now, we comprehend in few words, or rather only
   taste how useful and fruitful this Book is to us.

   I now come to the words themselves, I wished, as I said, just to catch
   a foretaste of a few things, and the reading of the Book will show us
   better what advantage we may derive from each of its chapters.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 1
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:1-2

   1. In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came
   Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it.

   1. Anno tertio regni Jehoiakim regis Jehudah venit Nebuchadnezzar rex
   Jerosolyma Babylonis, et obsedit eam.

   2. And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part
   of the vessels of the house of God: which he carried into the land of
   Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the
   treasure house of his God.

   2. Et tradidit Deus in manum regis Jehoiakim Regem Jehuda, et partem
   vasorum domus Dei, et traduxit ea, [66] in terram Sinear in domum dei
   sui [67] quod vas a posuerit in domo thesauri dei sui.


   These are not two different things, but the Prophet explains and
   confirms the same sentiments by a change of phrase, and says that the
   vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had brought into the land of Shinar were
   laid up in the house of the treasury. The Hebrews, as we know,
   generally use the word "house" for any place, as they call the temple
   God's "house " Of the land of Shinar, it must be remarked, that it was
   a plain adjacent to Babylon; and the famous temple of Belus, to which
   the Prophet very probably refers, was erected there.

   Here Daniel marks the time in which he was led into captivity together
   with his companions, namely, in [3]the third year of Jehoiakim A
   difficult question arises here, since Nebuchadnezzar began to reign in
   the fourth year of Jehoiakim. How then could he have besieged Jerusalem
   in the third year, and then led away the people captives according to
   his pleasure? Some interpreters solve this difficulty by what appears
   to me a frivolous conjecture, that the four years ought to refer to the
   beginning of his reign, and so the time may be brought within the third
   year. But in the second chapter we shall see Daniel brought before the
   king in the second year of his reign. They explain this difficulty also
   by another solution. They say -- the years are not reckoned from the
   beginning of the reign, and, -- this was the second year from the
   Conquest of the Jews and the taking of Jerusalem; but this is too harsh
   and forced. The most probable conjecture seems to me, that the Prophet
   is speaking of [4]the first King Nebuchadnezzar, or at least uses the
   reign of the second, while his father was yet alive. We know there were
   two kings of the same name, father and son; and as the son did many
   noble and illustrious actions, he acquired the surname of Great.
   Whatever, therefore, we shall afterwards meet with concerning
   Nebuchadnezzar, cannot be understood except of the second, who is the
   son. But Josephus says [5]the son was sent by his father against the
   Egyptians and the Jews and this was the cause of the war, since the
   Egyptians often urged the Jews to a change of affairs, and enticed them
   to throw off the yoke Nebuchadnezzar the younger was carrying on the
   war in Egypt at the death of his father, and speedily returned home,
   lest any one should supersede him. When, however, he found all things
   as he wished, Josephus thinks he put off that expedition, and went to
   Jerusalem. There is nothing strange, nay, it is very customary to call
   him King who shares the command with his father. Thus, therefore, I
   interpret it. In the third year or the reign of Jehoiakim,
   Nebuchadnezzar came, under the command and direction of his father, or
   if any one prefers it, the father himself came. For there is nothing
   out of place, whether we refer it to the father or to the son.
   Nebuchadnezzar, then, king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem, that is, by
   the hand of his son besieged Jerusalem. But if a different explanation
   is preferred, since he was there himself and carried on the war in
   person, that view not be taken still, the events happened in the third
   year of Jehoiakim's reign. Interpreters make many mistakes in this
   matter. Josephus, indeed, says this was done in the eighth year, but he
   had never read the Book of Daniel. [68] He was an unlearned man, and by
   no means familiar with the Scriptures; nay, I think he had never read
   three verses of Daniel. It was a dreadful judgment of God for a priest
   to be so ignorant a man as Josephus. But in another passage on which I
   have commented, he seems to have followed Metasthenes and others whom
   he cites, when speaking of the destruction of that monarchy. And this
   seems to suit well enough, since in the third year of the reign of
   Jehoiakim the city was once taken, and some of the nobles of the royal
   race were led away in triumph, among whom were Daniel and his
   companions. When Jehoiakim afterwards rebelled, his treatment was far
   more severe, as Jeremiah had predicted. But while Jehoiakim possessed
   the kingdom by permission of King Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel was already a
   captive, so that Jeremiah's prediction was fulfilled -- the condition
   of the figs prematurely ripe was improved; for those who were led into
   exile last thought themselves better off than the rest. But the Prophet
   deprives them of their vain boast, and shows the former captives to
   have been better treated than the remnant of the people who as yet
   remained safe at. home. (Jeremiah 24:2, 8.) I assume, then, that Daniel
   was among the first fruits of the captivity; and this is an instance of
   God's judgments being so incomprehensible by us. For had there been any
   integrity in the whole people, surely Daniel was a remarkable example
   of it for Ezekiel includes him among the three just men by whom most
   probably God would be appeased. (Ezekiel 14:14.) Such, then, was the
   excellence of Daniel's virtues, that he was like a celestial angel
   among mortals; and yet he was led into exile, and lived as the slave of
   the king of Babylon. Others, again, who had provoked God's wrath in so
   many ways, remained quiet in their nests the Lord did not deprive them
   of their country and of that inheritance which was a sign and pledge of
   their adoption. [69]

   Should any wish here to determine why Daniel was among the first to be
   led into captivity, will he not betray his folly? Hence, let us learn
   to admire God's judgments, which surpass all our perceptions; and let
   us also remember the words of Christ,

   "If these things are done in the green tree,
   what will be done in the dry?" (Luke 23:31.)

   As I have already said, there was an angelic holiness in Daniel,
   although so ignominiously exiled and brought up among the kings
   eunuchs. Then this happened to so holy a man, who from his childhood
   was entirely devoted to piety, how great is God's indulgence in sparing
   us? What have we deserved? Which of us will dare to compare himself
   with Daniel? Nay, we are unworthy, according to the ancient proverb, to
   loosen the tie of his shoes. Without the slightest doubt Daniel,
   through the circumstances of the time, wished to manifest the singular
   and extraordinary gift of God, since this trial did not oppress his
   mind and could not turn him aside from the right course of piety. When,
   therefore, Daniel saw himself put forward as an example of integrity,
   he did not desist from the pure worship of God. As to his assertion
   that Jehoiakim was delivered into the hand of King Nebuchadnezzar by
   God's command, this form of speech takes away any stumbling block which
   might occur to the minds of the pious. Had Nebuchadnezzar been
   altogether superior, God himself might seem to have ceased to exist,
   and so his glory would have been depressed. But Daniel clearly asserts
   that King Nebuchadnezzar did not possess Jerusalem, and was not the
   conqueror of the nation by his own valor, or counsel, or fortune, or
   good luck, but because God wished to humble his people. Therefore,
   Daniel here sets before us the providence and judgments of God, that we
   may not think Jerusalem to have been taken in violation of God's
   promise to Abraham and his posterity. He also speaks by name of the
   vessels of the temple. Now, this might seem altogether out of place,
   and would shock the minds of the faithful. For what does it mean? That
   God's temple was spoiled by a wicked and impious man. Had not God borne
   witness that his rest was there? This shall be my rest for ever, here
   will I dwell because I have chosen it. (Psalm 132:14.) If any place in
   the world were impregnable, here truly honor ought to remain entire and
   untainted in the temple of God. When, therefore, it was robbed and its
   sacred vessels profaned, and when an impious king had also transferred
   to the temple of his own god what had been dedicated to the living God,
   would not, as I have said, such a trial as this cast down the minds of
   the holy? No one was surely so stout-hearted whom that unexpected trial
   would not oppress. Where is God, if he does not defend his own temple?
   Although he does not dwell in this world, and is not enclosed in walls
   of either wood or stone, yet he chose this dwelling-place for himself,
   (Psalm 80:1, and Psalm 99:1, and Isaiah 37:16,)and often by means of
   his Prophets asserted his seat to between the Cherubim. What then is
   the meaning of this? As I have already said, Daniel recalls us to the
   judgment of God, and by a single word assures us that we ought not to
   be surprised at God inflicting such severe punishments upon impious and
   wicked apostates. For under the name of God, there is a silent
   antithesis; as the Lord did not deliver Jehoiakim into the hand of the
   Babylonians without just reason: God, therefore, exposed him as a prey
   that he might punish him for the revolt of his impious people. It now
   follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [66] Or eos. Either may be read; for the Hebrews do not use the neuter
   gender; yet I had rather use the neuter gender, on account of what
   follows. -- Calvin.

   [67] This would not suit either the king or the captives: hence the
   Prophet seems to speak of "vessels;" and a repetition of the same
   sentence afterwards follows. -- Calvin,.

   [68] Calvin's expression is tam brutus homo in Latin, and si stupide et
   brutal in French; but he is evidently too severe on so valuable an
   analyst, who, in so many passages, confirms and elucidates the
   scriptural narrative. Besides, Calvin seems to have overlooked the
   passage in his Antiq., lib. 11. cap. 8, section 5, where this Book is
   mentioned, and its contents alluded to at length.

   [69] Much light has been. thrown upon the chronology of these times
   since the age of Calvin: later Commentators have dated from the third
   year of Jehoiakim's restoration to his kingdom after his rebellion. See
   2 Kings 24:2, 3. The subject is discussed with clearness by Bleek in
   his Theology. Zeitschrist. Pt. in. p. 28O, etc.; and R. Sal. Jarchi on
   this passage may be consulted, p. 735, edit. Gotham, 1713. See
   Dissertation at the end of this Volume.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:3

   3. And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he
   should bring certain of the children of Israel, and the of the king's
   seed, and of the princes;

   3. Et mandavit1 [70] Rex Aspenazo [71] principi eunuchorum, ut educeret
   e filiis Israel et ex semine regio, et ex principibus. [72]


   Here Daniel pursues his narrative, and shows the manner in which he was
   led away together with his companions. The king had demanded young men
   to be brought, not from the ordinary multitude, but from the principal
   nobility, who stood before him, that is, ministered to him. Hence, we
   ascertain why Daniel and his companions were chosen, because they were
   noble young men and of the royal seed, or at least of parents who
   surpassed others in rank. The king did this purposely to show himself a
   conqueror; he may also have taken this plan designedly, to retain
   hostages in his power; for he hoped, as we shall see, that those who
   were nourished in his palace would be degenerate and hostile to the
   Jews, and he thought their assistance would prove useful to himself. He
   also hoped, since they were born of a noble stock, that the Jews would
   be the more peaceable, and thus avoid all danger to those wretched
   exiles who were relations of the kings and the nobles. With regard to
   the words, he calls this Aspenaz the prince of eunuchs, under which
   name he means the boys who were nourished in the king's palace to
   become a seminary of nobles; for it is scarcely possible that this
   Aspenaz was set over other leaders. But we gather from this place, that
   the boys whom the king held in honor and regard were under his custody.
   The Hebrews calls eunuchs srysym, serisim, a name which belongs to
   certain prefects; for Potiphar is called by this name though he had a
   wife. So this name is everywhere used in Scripture for the satraps of a
   king; (Genesis 37:36; Genesis 40:2, 7;) but since satraps also were
   chosen from noble boys, they were probably called eunuchs, though they
   were not made so, yet Josephus ignorantly declares these Jewish
   children to have been made eunuchs. But when eunuchs existed among the
   luxuries of Oriental kings, as I have already said, those youths were
   commonly called by this name whom the king brought up as a kind of
   school of nobles, whom he might afterwards place over various province.

   The king, therefore, commanded some of the children of Israel of the
   royal seed and of the nobles to be brought to him. So the sentence
   ought to be resolved; he did not command any of the common people to be
   brought to him, but some of the royal race, the more plainly to show
   himself their conqueror by doing all things according to his will. He
   means those "elders" who yet were in chief authority under the king of
   Judah. And Daniel also was of that tribe, as we shall afterwards see.
   The word phrtmym, pharthmim, "princes," is thought to be derived from
   Perah, which is the Euphrates, and the interpreters understand
   prefects, to whom the provinces on the banks of the Euphrates were
   committed; but this does not suit the present passage where Jews are
   treated of. We now see the general signification of this name, and that
   all the elders ought to be comprehended under it. [73] -- The rest
   tomorrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [70] Or, declared -- Calvin.

   [71] Or, said to Aspenaz, as those who retain the Hebrew phrase
   translate it. -- Calvin.

   [72] Or, elders -- Calvin.

   [73] This word has caused great difference of opinion among
   commentators. Theodotion does not attempt to explain it. Symmaehus
   takes it for the Parthians. Jerome interprets it by tyranni, and
   Saadias by their off-spring. Aben-Ezra considers it a foreign word; and
   R. Salom. Jarehi calls it Persian, and translates it "leaders"
   Hottinger and Aug. Pfeiffer both treat it as Persian, but derive it
   from different roots. "Nobles" or "elders" seems its best English
   equivalent.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since thou settest before us so clear a mirror of
   thy wonderful providence and of thy judgments on thine ancient people,
   that we may also be surely persuaded of our being under thy hand and
   protection -- Grant, that relying on thee, we may hope for thy
   guardianship, whatever may happen, since thou never losest sight of our
   safety, so that we may invoke thee with a secure and tranquil mind. May
   we so fearlessly wait for all dangers amidst all the changes of this
   world, that we may stand upon the foundation of thy word which never
   can fail; and leaning on thy promises may we repose on Christ, to whom
   thou hast committed us, and whom thou hast made the shepherd of all thy
   flock. Grant that he may be so careful of us as to lead us through this
   course of warfare, however troublesome and turbulent it may prove,
   until we arrive at that heavenly rest which he has purchased for us by
   his own blood. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Second
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:4

   4. Children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in
   all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and
   such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace, and whom
   they might teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.

   4. Pueros, quibus nulla esset macula [74] et pulchros aspectu, [75] et
   intelligente in omni prudentia, [76] et intelligentes scientia et
   diserte exprimentes cognitionem, et in quibus vigor, ut starent in
   palatio regis, et ad docendum ipsos literaturam et linguam Chaldaeorum.


   In yesterday's Lecture we saw how the prefect or master of the eunuchs
   was commanded to bring up some noble youths, the offspring of the king
   and the elders; and Daniel now describes their qualities, according to
   Nebuchadnezzar's order. They were youths, not so young as seven or
   eight years, but growing up, in whom there was no spot; that is, in
   whom there was no defect or unsoundness of body. They were also of
   beautiful aspect, meaning of ingenuous and open countenance, he adds
   also, skilled in all prudence, and understanding knowledge; and then,
   expressing their thoughts I think those interpreters right who take
   this participle actively, otherwise the repetition would be cold and
   valueless. Their eloquence seems to me pointed out here; because there
   are some who inwardly understand subjects presented to them, but cannot
   express to others what they retain in their minds; for all have not the
   same dexterity in expressing exactly what they think Daniel, therefore,
   notices both qualifications here -- the acquisition of knowledge, and
   the power of communicating it.

   And in whom was vigor for kch, cach, usually signifies fortitude, as in
   Isaiah. (Isaiah 40:9.) Those who fear God shall change their fortitude,
   or renew their rigor. Then in Psalm 22, (Psalm 22:15,) my strength or
   rigor has failed." He adds, the fortitude or vigor of intelligence,
   knowledge, and eloquence; or a healthy habit of body, which is the same
   thing. [77] That they might stand in the king's palace, and be taught
   literature, (I cannot translate the particle sphr, sepher, otherwise,
   verbally it is a "letter," but it means learning or discipline,) and
   the language of the Chaldees We now see how the king regarded not only
   their rank, when he ordered the most excellent of the royal and noble
   children to be brought to him; but he exercised his choice that those
   who were to be his servants should be clever; they were of high birth,
   as the phrase is; so they ought to prevail in eloquence and give
   hopeful promise of general excellence in both body and mind. Without
   doubt he wished them to be held in great estimation, that he might win
   over other Jews also. Thus, if they afterwards obtained authority,
   should circumstances allow of it, they might become rulers in Judea,
   bearing sway over their own people, and yet remain attached to the
   Babylonian empire. This was the king's design; it affords no reason why
   we should praise his liberality, since it is sufficiently apparent that
   he consulted nothing but his own advantage.

   Meanwhile, we observe, that learning and the liberal arts were not then
   so despised as they are in this age, and in those immediately preceding
   it. So strongly has barbarism prevailed in the world, that it is almost
   disgraceful for nobles to be reckoned among the men of education and of
   letters! The chief boast. of the nobility was to be destitute of
   scholarship -- nay, they gloried in the assertion, that they were "no
   scholars," in the language of the day; and if any of their rank were
   versed in literature, they acquired their attainments for no other
   purpose than to be made bishops and abbots' still, as I have said, they
   generally despised all literature. We perceive the age in which Daniel
   lived was not so barbarous, for the king wished to have these boys whom
   he caused to be so instructed, among his own princes, as we have said,
   to promote his own advantage; still we must remark upon the habit of
   that age. As to his requiring so much knowledge and skill, it may seem
   out of place, and more than their tender age admitted, that they should
   be so accomplished in prudence, knowledge, and experience. But we know
   that kings require nothing in moderation when they order anything to be
   prepared, they often ascend beyond the clouds. So Nebuchadnezzar speaks
   here; and Daniel, who relates his commands, does so in a royal manner.
   Since the king commanded all the most accomplished to be brought before
   him, if they really manifested any remarkable qualities, we need not be
   surprised at their knowledge, skill, and prudence. The king simply
   wished those boys and youths to be brought to him who were ingenious
   and dangerous, and adapted to learn with rapidly; and then those who
   were naturally eloquent and of a healthy constitution of body. For it
   follows directly, that they might learn, or be taught the literature
   and language of the Chaldees We perceive that King Nebuchadnezzar did
   not demand teachers, but boys of high birth, and good talents, and of
   promising abilities; he wished them to be liberally instructed in the
   doctrine of the Chaldees he was unwilling to have youths of merely
   polished and cultivated minds without natural abilities. His desire to
   have them acquainted with the language of Chaldea arose from his wish
   to separate them by degrees from their own nation, to introduce them to
   forget their Jewish birth, and to acquire the Chaldean manners, since
   language is a singular bond of communication. Respecting their
   learning, we may ask, whether Daniel and his companions were permitted
   to learn arts full of imposition, which we know to be the nature of the
   Chaldean learning. For they professed to know every one's fate, as in
   these days there are many impostors in the world, who are called
   fortune-tellers. They abused an honorable name when they called
   themselves mathematicians, as if there were no scientific learning
   separate from those arts and diabolic illusions. And as to the use of
   the word, the Caesars, in their laws, unite Chaldeans and
   mathematicians, treating them as synonymous. But the explanation is
   easy, -- [6]the Chaldeans not only pursued that astrology which is
   called "Judicial," but were also skilled in the true and genuine
   knowledge of the stars. The ancients say, that the course of the stars
   was observed by the Chaldeans, as there was no region of the world so
   full of them, and none possessed so extensive an horizon on all sides.
   As the Chaldeans enjoyed this advantage of having the heavens so fully
   exposed to the contemplation of man, this may have led to their study,
   and have conduced to the more earnest pursuit of astrology. But as the
   minds of men are inclined to vain and foolish curiosity, they were not
   content with legitimate science, but fell into foolish and perverse
   imaginations. For what fortune-tellers predict of any one's destiny is
   merely foolish fanaticism. Daniel, therefore, might have learned these
   arts; that is, astrology and other liberal sciences, just as Moses is
   said to have been instructed in all the sciences of Egypt. We know how
   the Egyptians were infected with similar corruption's; but it is said
   both of Moses and of our Prophet, that they were imbued with a
   knowledge of the stars and of the other liberal sciences. Although it
   is uncertain whether the king commanded them to proceed far in these
   studies, yet we must hold that Daniel abstained, as we shall see
   directly, from the royal food and drink, and was not drawn aside nor
   involved in these Satanic impostures. Whatever the king's commandment
   was, I suppose Daniel to have been content with the pure and genuine
   knowledge of natural things. As far as the king is concerned, as we
   have already said, he consulted simply his own interests; wishing
   Daniel and his companions to pass over into a foreign tribe, and to be
   drawn away from their own people, as if they had been natives of
   Chaldea. It now follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [74] For I omit the Hebrewism which has already been explained. --
   Calvin.

   [75] Or countenance -- Calvin.

   [76] That is, skilled in all wisdom. -- Calvin.

   [77] It can scarcely be correct to confound bodily with mental
   endowments. Wintle explains the three clauses very appositely,
   referring the first to "excellent natural abilities," the second to
   "the greatest improvement from cultivation," and the last to" the
   communication of our perceptions in the happiest manner to others."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:5

   5. And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king's meat,
   and of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three years, that at
   the end thereof they might stand before the king.

   5. Et constituit illis rex demensum diei in die suo [78] ex frusto [79]
   cibi regis, et ex vino potus ejus. Et ut educarentur annis tribus et a
   fine illorum [80] starent coram rege.


   In this verse, Daniel shews that the king had ordered some youths to be
   brought to him from Judea, and to be so nourished as to be intoxicated
   with delicacies, and thus rendered forgetful of their own nation. For
   we know that wherever there is any cunning in the world, it reigns
   especially in kings palaces! So Nebuchadnezzar, when he perceived he
   was dealing with an obstinate people, (and we know the Jews to have
   been of a hard and unsubdued spirit,) wished to acquire servants
   spontaneously obedient, aid thus endeavored to soften them with
   luxuries. This was the reason why he provided for them an allotment of
   his own meat and drink; as at present it is the greatest honor at
   princes' tables to be served with a bon-bouche, as they say.
   Nebuchadnezzar wished this Daniel and his companions, though but
   captives and exiles, to be brought up not only splendidly but royally,
   if of the royal race. Through his right of conquest he, had drawn them
   away violently from their country, as we said yesterday. Hence he does
   not act thus from any feeling of liberality, and his feeding those
   miserable exiles from his own table should not be esteemed a virtuous
   action; but, as we have said, he cleverly reconciles the minds of the
   boys to be reckoned Chaldeans rather than Jews, and thus to deny their
   own race. This, then, was the king's intention; but we shall see how
   God governed Daniel and his companions by His Spirit, and how they
   became aware of these snares of the devil, and abstained from the royal
   diet, lest they should become polluted by it. This point will hereafter
   be treated in its place -- we are now only commenting on the craftiness
   of the king. He, commanded a daily portion of diet to be distributed to
   them, not that the spirit of parsimony dictated this daily portion, but
   the king wished their food should be exactly the same as his own and
   that of the chiefs.

   He adds, that they should be educated for three years; meaning, until
   they were thoroughly skilled in both the language and knowledge of the
   Chaldeans. Three years were sufficient for both these objects, since he
   had selected youths of sufficient talent to learn with ease both
   languages and sciences. As they were endued with such capacity, it is
   not surprising that the space of three years had been prescribed by the
   king. At length, he says, at the end of them, meaning of the three
   years. We have shown how this ought not to be referred to the boys, as
   if the king afterwards selected some of them, for we shall see in its
   own place that a distinct time was fixed beforehand; hence no long
   refutation is needed. It is certain, then, that the Prophet speaks of
   the close of the three years. It had been said just before, that they
   with stand in the palace; but this ought also to be understood of the
   time of which mention has been made. They did not stand before the king
   immediately, but were reserved for this purpose. Since the king
   commanded them to be brought up for the purpose of using their services
   afterwards Daniel twice repeats -- they were splendidly educated --
   seeing the king wished them to become his servants at table and in
   other duties.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [78] dvr, deber," the matter," for each day. -- Calvin. "The allotment
   for each day." -- Wintle. It means "daily bread," as in our Lord's
   Prayer, and occurs often in Exodus.

   [79] Verbally, it here signifies a portion. -- Calvin.

   [80] Some translate it "a part," meaning "some part of them," but there
   is no doubt that the Prophet means a space of time, as we shall soon
   see. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:6-7

   6. Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah,
   Mishael, and Azariah:

   6. Et fuit in illis ex filiis Jehudah Daniel, Hananiah, Misael, et
   Azariah.

   7. Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he gave unto
   Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to
   Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abednego.

   7. Et imposuit illis princeps eunuchorum [81] nomina imposuit inquam,
   Danieli Balthsazar, et Hananiae Sadrak, et Misael Mesack, et Azariae
   Abednego.


   The Prophet now comes to what properly belongs to his purpose. He did
   not propose to write a full narrative, but he touched shortly on what
   was necessary, to inform us how God prepared him for the subsequent
   discharge of the prophetic office. After he had stated their selection
   from the royal and noble seed, as excelling in talent, dexterity, and
   eloquence, as well as in rigor of body, he now adds, that he would his
   companions were among them. He leaves out the rest, because he had
   nothing to record of them worthy of mention; and, as I have said, the
   narrative hitherto is only subsidiary. The Prophet's object, then, must
   be noticed, since he was exiled, and educated royally and sumptuously
   in the palace of King Nebuchadnezzar, that he might afterwards be one
   of the prefects, and his companions be elevated to the same rank. He
   does not say that he was of the royal house, but only of the tribe of
   Judah; but he was probably born of a noble rather than of a plebeian
   family, since kings more commonly selected their prefects from their
   own relations than from others. Moreover, since the kingdom of Israel
   was cut off, perhaps through a feeling of modesty, Daniel did not
   record his family, nor openly assert his origin from a noble and
   celebrated stock. He was content with a single word, -- he and his
   companion were of the tribe of Judah, and brought up among the children
   of the nobility. He says -- their names were changed; so that by all
   means the king might blot out of their hearts the remembrance of their
   own race, and they might forget their own origin. As far as
   interpretations are concerned, I think I have said enough to satisfy
   you, as I am not willingly curious in names where there is any
   obscurity, and especially in these Chaldee words. As to the Hebrew
   names, we know Daniel's name to mean the judge, or judgment of God.
   Therefore, whether by the secret instinct of God, his parents had
   imposed this name, or whether by common custom, Daniel was called by
   this name, as God's judge. So also of the rest; for Hananiah has a
   fixed meaning, namely, one who has obtained mercy from God; so Misael
   means required or demanded by God; and so Azariah, the help of God, or
   one whom God helps. But all these flyings have already been better
   explained to you, so I have only just touched on these points, as the
   change has no adequate reason for it. It is enough for us that the
   names were changed to abolish the remembrance of the kingdom of Judah
   from their hearts. Some Hebrews also assert these to have been the
   names of wise men. Whether it was so or not, if, was the kings plan to
   draw away those boys that they should have nothing in common with the
   elect people, but degenerate to the manners of the Chaldeans. Daniel
   could not help [7]the prince or master of the eunuchs changing his
   name, for it was not in. his power to hinder it; the same must be said
   of his companions. But they had enough to retain the remembrance of
   their race, which Satan, by this artifice, wished utterly to blot out.
   And yet this was a great trial, because they suffered from their badge
   of slavery. Since their names were changed, either the king or his
   prefect Aspenaz wished to force them under the yoke, as if he would put
   before their eyes the, judgment of their own slavery as often as they
   heard their" names. We see, then, the intention of the change of name,
   namely, to cause these miserable exiles to feel themselves; in
   captivity, and cut off from the race of Israel; and by this mark or
   symbol they were reduced to slavery, to the, king of Babylon and his
   palace. This was, indeed, a hard trial, but it mattered not to the
   servants of God to be contemptuously treated before men, so long as
   they were not infected with any corruption; hence we conclude them to
   have been divinely governed, as they stood pure and spotless. For
   Daniel afterwards says --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [81] That is, the master of the eunuchs. -- Calvin
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:8

   8. But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself
   with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank:
   therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not
   defile himself.

   8. Et posuit Daniel super cor suum, [82] ne pollueretur in portione
   cibi regis, et in vine potuum ejus, et quaesivit a magistro [83]
   Eunuchorum, ne pollueretur.


   Here Daniel shows his endurance of what he could neither cast off nor
   escape; but meanwhile he took care that he did not depart from the fear
   of God, nor become a stranger to his race, but he always retains the
   remembrance of his origin, and remains a pure, and unspotted, and
   sincere worshipper of God. He says, therefore, -- he determined in his
   heart not to pollute himself with the kings food and drink, and that he
   asked the prefect, under whose charge he was, that he should not be
   driven to this necessity. It may be asked here, what there was of such
   importance in the diet to cause Daniel to avoid it? This seems to be a
   kind of superstition, or at least Daniel may have been too morose in
   rejecting the king's diet. We know that to the pure all things are
   pure, and this rule applies to all ages. We read nothing of this kind
   concerning Joseph, and very likely Daniel used all food promiscuously,
   since he was treated by the king with great honor. This, then, was not
   perpetual with Daniel; for he might seem an inconsiderate zealot, or
   this might be ascribed, as we have said, to too much moresoness. If
   Daniel only for a time rejected the royal food, it was a mark of levity
   and inconsistency afterwards to allow himself that liberty from which
   he had for the time abstained. But if he did this with judgment and
   reason, why did he not persist in his purpose? I answer, -- Daniel
   abstained at first from the luxuries of the court to escape being
   tampered with. It was lawful for him and his companions to feed on any
   kind of diet, but he perceived the king's intention. We know how far
   enticements prevail to deceive us; especially when we are treated
   daintily; and experience shows us how difficult it is to be moderate
   when all is affluence around us, for luxury follows immediately on
   plenty. Such conduct is, indeed, too common, and the virtue of
   abstinence is rarely exercised when there is an abundance of
   provisions.

   But this is not the whole reason which weighed with Daniel. Sobriety
   and abstinence are not simply praised here, since many twist this
   passage to the praise of fasting, and say Daniel's chief virtue
   consisted in preferring pulse to the delicacies of a palace. For Daniel
   not only wished to guard himself against the delicacies of the table,
   since he perceived a positive danger of being eaten up by such
   enticements; hence he simply determined in his hem not to taste the
   diet of the court, desiring by his very food perpetually to recall the
   remembrance of his country. He wished so to live in Chaldea, as to
   consider himself an exile and a captive, sprung from the sacred family
   of Abraham. We see, then, the intention of Daniel. He desired to
   refrain from too great an abundance and delicacy of diet, simply to
   escape those snares of Satan, by which he saw himself surrounded. He
   was, doubtless, conscious of his own infirmity, and this also is to be
   reckoned to his praise, since; through distrust of himself he desired
   to escape from all allurements and temptations. As far as concerned the
   king intention, this was really a snare of the devil, as I have said.
   Daniel rejected it, and there is no doubt that God enlightened his mind
   by his Spirit as soon as he prayed to him. Hence he was unwilling to
   cast himself into the snares of the devil, while he voluntarily
   abstained from the royal diet. This is; the full meaning; of the
   passage.

   It may also be asked, Why does Daniel claim this praise, as His own,
   which was shared equally with his companions? for he was not the only
   one who rejected the royal diet. It is necessary to take notice, how
   from his childhood he was, governed by the Spirit of God, that the
   confidence and influence of his teaching might be the greater; hence he
   speaks peculiarly of himself, not for the sake of boasting, but to
   obtain confidence in his teaching, and to show himself to have been for
   a long period formed and polished by God for the prophetic office. We
   must also remember that he was the adviser of his companions; for this
   course might never have come into their minds, and they might have been
   corrupted, unless they had been admonished by Daniel. God, therefore,
   wished Daniel to be a leader and master to his companions, to induce
   them to adopt the same abstinence. Hence also we gather, that as each
   of us is endued more fruitfully with the grace of the Spirit, so should
   we feel bound to instruct others. It will not be sufficient for any one
   to restrain himself and thus to discharge his own duty, under the
   teaching of God's Spirit, unless he also extend his hand to others, and
   endeavor to unite in an alliance of piety, and of the fear and worship
   of God. Such an example is here proposed to us in Daniel, who not only
   rejected the delicacies of the palace, by which he might be intoxicated
   and even poisoned; but he also advised and persuaded his companions to
   adopt the same course. This is the reason why he calls tasting the
   king's food pollution or abomination, though, as I have said, there was
   nothing abominable in it of itself. Daniel was at liberty to eat and
   drink at the loyal table, but the abomination arose from the
   consequences. Before the time of these four persons living in Chaldea.,
   they doubtless partook of ordinary food after the usual manner, and
   were permitted to eat whatever was offered to them. They did not ask
   for pulse when at an inn, or on their journey; but they began to desire
   it when the king wished to infect them with his delicacies, and to
   induce them if possible to prefer that condition to returning to their
   own friends. When they perceived the object of his snares, then it
   became both a pollution and abomination to feed on those dainties, and
   to eat, at the king's table. Thus we may ascertain the reason why
   Daniel thought himself polluted if he fared sumptuously and partook of
   the royal diet; he was conscious, as we have already observed, of his
   own infirmities, and wished to take timely precautions, lest he should
   be enticed by such snares, and fall away from piety and the worship of
   God, and degenerate into the manners of the Chaldeans, as if he were
   one of their nation, and of their native princes. I must leave the rest
   till tomorrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [82] Or in his heart: that is, determined or decreed with himself. --
   Calvin.

   [83] That is, asked the master. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, as long as our pilgrimage in this world continues,
   that we may feed on such diet for the necessities of the flesh as may
   never corrupt us; and may we never be led aside from sobriety, but may
   we learn to use our abundance by preferring abstinence in the midst of
   plenty. Grant also, that we may patiently endure want and famine, and
   eat and drink with such liberty as always to set before us the glory of
   thy Name. Lastly, may our very frugality lead us to aspire after that
   fullness by which we shall be completely refreshed, when the glory of
   thy countenance shall appear to us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our
   Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Third.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:9

   9. Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the
   prince of the eunuchs.

   9. Dederat autem Deus Danielem [84] in clement am et mistrationes coram
   prefecto eunuchorum.


   Daniel, yesterday, related what he had asked from the master to whose
   care he had been committed, he now inserts his sentence, to show this
   demand to be quite unobjectionable, since the prefect of the eunuchs
   treated him kindly. The crime would have been fatal had Daniel been
   brought into the king's presence. Although very probably he did not use
   the word "pollution," and openly and directly call the royal diet a
   "defilement," yet it, may be easily conjectured from these words which
   he now records, that he asked the prefect to be permitted to eat pulse,
   because he did not think himself permitted to partake of the royal
   diet. We yesterday gave the reason; but the king of Babylon would
   immediately have been angry, had he known this. What! he would say, I
   honor those captives, when I might abuse them as slaves; nay, I nourish
   them delicately like my own children. and yet they reject my food, as
   if I were polluted. This, therefore, is the reason why Daniel here
   relates his being in favor with that prefect. For, as we shall see in
   the next verse, the prefect simply denied his request. Where was then
   any favor shown? But though he was not willing to acquiesce in the
   prayers of Daniel, he showed a singular kindness in not taking him
   before the king, since courtiers are ready for any accusation for the
   sake of obtaining favor. Then, very probably, the prefect would know
   that this had been granted to Daniel by his servant. If then there was
   any connivance on the part of the prefect, this is the favor and pity
   of which Daniel now speaks. His intention, then, is by no means
   doubtful, since he did not hesitate to adopt a different course of
   life, in order to remain pure and spotless, and uncontaminated with the
   delicacies of the palace of Babylon. He expresses how he escaped the
   danger, because the perfect treated him kindly, when he might have
   instantly caused his death. But we must notice the form of speech here
   used; -- God placed him in favor and pity before that prefect He might
   have used the usual phrase, merely saying he was favorably treated;
   but, as he found a barbarian so humane and merciful, he ascribes this
   benefit to God. This phrase, as we have expounded it, is customary with
   the Hebrews; as when it is said, (Psalm 106:46,) God gave the Jews
   favor in the sight of the heathen who had led them captive; meaning, he
   took care that their conquerors should not rage so cruelly against them
   as they had done at first. For we know how the Jews were often treated
   harshly, roughly, and contemptuously. Since this inhumanity was here
   mitigated, the Prophet attributes it to God, who prepared mercies for
   his people. The result is this, -- Daniel obtained favor with the
   prefect, since God bent the heart of a man, otherwise unsoftened, to
   clemency and humanity. His object in this narrative is to urge us to
   greater earnestness in duty, if we have to undergo any difficulties
   when God calls us.

   It often happens that we cannot discharge everything which God requires
   and exacts without imminent danger to our lives. Sloth and softness
   naturally creep over us, and induce us to reject the cross. Daniel,
   therefore, gives us courage to obey God and his commands, and here
   states his favor with the prefect, since God granted his servant favor
   while faithfully performing his duty. Hence let us learn to cast our
   care upon God when worldly terror oppresses us, or when men forbid us
   with threats to obey God's commands. Here let us acknowledge the power
   of God's hand to turn the hearts of those who rage against us, and to
   flee us from all danger. This, then, is the reason why Daniel says the
   prefect was kind to him. Meanwhile, we gather the general doctrine from
   this passage, that men's hearts are divinely governed, while it shows
   us how God softens their iron hardness, and turns the wolf into the
   lamb. For when he brought his people out of Egypt, he gave them favor
   with the Egyptians, so that they carried with them their most precious
   vessels. It is clear enough that the Egyptians were hostile towards the
   Israelites. Why then did they so freely offer them the most valuable of
   their household goods? Only beck, use the Lord inspired their hearts
   with new affections. So, again, the Lord can exasperate our friends,
   and cause them afterwards to rise up in hostility against us. Let us
   perceive, then, that on both sides the will is in God's power, either
   to bend the hearts of men to humanity, or to harden those which were
   naturally tender. It is true, indeed, that every one has a peculiar
   disposition from his birth some are ferocious, warlike, and sanguinary;
   others are mild, humane, and tractable. This variety springs from God's
   secret ordination; but God not only forms every one's disposition at
   his birth, but every day and every moment, if it seems good to him,
   changes every one's affections. He also blinds men's minds, and rouses
   them again from their stupor. For we sometimes see the rudest men
   endued with much acuteness, and show a singular contrivance in action,
   and others who excel in foresight, are at fault when they have need of
   judgment and discretion. We must consider the minds and hearts of men
   to be so governed by God's secret instinct, that he changes their
   affections just as he pleases. Hence there is no reason why we should
   so greatly fear our enemies, although they vomit forth their rage with
   open mouth, and are overflowing with cruelty; for they can be turned
   aside by the Lord. And thus let us learn from the example of Daniel to
   go on fearlessly in our course, and not to turn aside, even if the
   whole world should oppose us; since God can easily and readily remove
   all impediments and we shall find those who were formerly most cruel,
   become humane when the Lord wishes to spare us. We now understand the
   sense of the words of this verse, as well as the Prophet's intention.
   It follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [84] Had put Daniel -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:10

   10. And the prince of the eunuchs and unto Daniel, I fear my lord the
   king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he
   see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort?
   then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.

   10. Et dixit praefectus eunuchorum Danieli, Timeo ego Dominum meum
   regem qui, constituit [85] cibum vestrum, et potus vestros, quare
   videbit facies vestros tristes, [86] prae pueris, qui sunt vobis
   similes, [87] et obnoxium [88] reddetis caput meum regi.


   Daniel suffers a repulse from the prefect; and truly, as I have lately
   remarked, his humanity is not praised through his listening to Daniel's
   wish and prayer; but through his burying in silence whatever might have
   brought him into difficulties. And his friendship appears in this; for
   although he denies his request, yet he does so mildly and civilly, as
   if he had said he would willingly grant it unless he had feared the
   king's anger. This, therefore, is the meaning, -- the prefect, though
   he did not dare to comply with Daniel's request, yet treated both him
   and his companions kindly by not endangering their lives. He says, --
   he was afraid of the king who had ordered the food He is not to be
   blamed as if he feared man more than the living God, for he could not
   have any knowledge of God. Although he may have been persuaded that
   Daniel made his request in the earnest, pursuit of piety, yet he did
   not think himself authorized to comply; for he thought the Jews had
   their peculiar method of worship, but meanwhile he clung entirely to
   the religion of Babylon. Just as many profane persons now think us
   quite right in casting away superstitions, but yet they slumber in this
   error, -- it is lawful for themselves to live in the ancient manner,
   since they were so brought up and instructed by their forefathers.
   Hence they use rites which they allow to be disapproved by us. So also
   this prefect might feel rightly concerning Daniel and his associates;
   at the same time he was not so touched by them as to desire to learn
   the difference between the two religions. Therefore he simply excuses
   himself, as not being at liberty to grant Daniel's request, since this
   would endanger his own head with the king. It now follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [85] For mnh, minneh, which is "to relate," means to "ordain,"
   "appoint" -- Calvin.

   [86] Or emaciated, or austere, or sullen: for, it is derived from the
   word zph, zegneph, which signifies "to be angry," and hence, by a
   change of object, faces are called emaciated, austere, of sullen. --
   Calvin.

   [87] Others translate "equals,' "those who are like you:" this may be
   the sense, because they are now like you, but will afterwards become
   fat and stout while you are lean. This change will endanger me. --
   Calvin.

   [88] For kvv, chob, in Hebrew is "debtor:" whence this word is derived:
   signifying to "render subject." -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:11-13

   11. Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set
   over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,

   11. Et dixit Daniel ad Meltsar, quem constituerat praefectus eunuchorum
   super Danielem, Hananiah, Misael, et Azariah,

   12. Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us
   pulse to eat, and water to drink.

   12. Proba [89] servos tuos diebus decem, et apponantur nobis de
   leguminibus, [90] et comedemus, [91] aet aquae, quas bibamus.

   13. Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the
   countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's meat:
   and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.

   13. Et inspiciantur coram facie tua vultus nostri, et vultus puero-
   rum, qui vescuntur portione [92] cibi regis et quemadmodum videris fac
   cum servis tuis.


   Since Daniel understood from the answer of the prefect that he could
   not obtain his wish, he now addresses his servant. For the prefect had
   many servants under him, according to the custom of important
   stewardships. Most probably the steward's duty was similar to that of
   the Chief Steward of the Household, [93] as it exists at this time in
   France. Daniel and his companions were under the care of one of these
   servants; Daniel descends to this remedy and obtains his wish, though,
   as we shall see, not without some artifice. And here Daniel's singular
   constancy is observable, who after trying the matter once in vain, did
   not cease to pursue the same object It is a clear and serious proof of
   our faith, when we are not fatigued when anything adverse occurs, and
   never consider the way closed against us. Then if we do not retrace our
   steps, but try all ways, we truly show the root of piety fixed in our
   hearts. It might have seemed excusable in Daniel, after he had met with
   his first repulse; for who would not have said he had discharged his
   duty, and that an obstacle had prevailed over him! But; since he did
   not prevail with the chief prefect, he goes to his servant. Thus
   voluntarily to incur risk was the result of no common prudence. For
   this servant could not make the same objection, as we have just heard
   the prefect did. Without doubt he had heard of Daniel's request, and of
   his repulse and denial; hence Daniel is beforehand with him, and shows
   how the servant may comply without the slightest danger; as if he had
   said, -- We, indeed, did not obtain our wish from the prefect because
   he was afraid of his life, but I have now thought of a new scheme by
   which you may both gratify us and yet not become chargeable with any
   crime, as the whole matter will be unknown. Try thy servants,
   therefore, for ten days, and prove them; let nothing but pulse be given
   us to eat and water to drink If after that time our faces are fresh and
   plump, no suspicion will attach to time, and no one will be persuaded
   that we are not treated delicately according to the king's commandment.
   Since, then, this proof will be sufficiently safe for thee, and
   cautious enough for us both, there is no reason why you should reject
   our prayers. Besides, without the slightest doubt, when Daniel brought
   this forward, he was directed by God's Spirit to this act of prudence,
   and was also impelled to make this request. By the singular gift of the
   Holy Spirit Daniel invented this method of bending the mind of the
   servant under whose care he was placed. We must hold, then, that this
   was not spoken rashly or of his own will, but by the instinct of the
   Holy Spirit. It would not have been duty but rashness, if Daniel had
   been the author of this plan, and had not been assured by the Lord of
   its prosperous issue. Without doubt he had some secret revelation on
   the subject; and if the servant allowed him and His associates to feed
   on pulse, it was a happy answer to his prayers. Hence, I say, he would
   not have spoken thus, except under the guidance and command of the
   Spirit. And this is worthy of notice, since we often permit ourselves
   to do many things which turn out badly, because we are carried away by
   the mere feelings of the flesh, and do not consider what is pleasing to
   God. It is not surprising, then, when men indulge in various
   expectations, if they feel themselves deceived at last, since every one
   occasionally imposes upon himself by foolish hopes, and thus frustrates
   his designs. Indeed, it is not our province to promise ourselves any
   success. Hence let us notice how Daniel had not undertaken or
   approached the present business with any foolish zeal; and did not
   speak without due consideration, but was assured of the event by the
   Spirit of God.

   But he says, let pulse be put before us to eat, and water to drink We
   see, then, that the foul youths did not abstain from the royal food for
   fear of pollution; for there was no law to prevent any one drinking
   wine, except the Nazarites, (Numbers 6:2,) and they might eat of any
   kind of flesh, of which there was abundance at the royal table. Whence
   then sprang this scrupulousness? because, as we said yesterday, Daniel
   was unwilling to accustom himself to the delicacies of the palace,
   which would cause him to become degenerate. He wished, therefore, to
   nourish his body not only frugally, but abstemiously, and not to
   indulge in these tastes; for although he was raised to the highest
   honors, he was always the same as if still among the most wretched
   captives. There is no occasion for seeking other reasons for this
   abstinence of Daniel's. For he might have fed on ordinary bread and
   other less delicate food; but he was content with pulse, and was
   continually lamenting and nourishing in his mind the remembrance of his
   country, of which he would have been directly forgetful if he had been
   plunged into those luxuries of the palace. It follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [89] Or try. -- Calvin.

   [90] Simply pulse. -- Calvin.

   [91] Which we may eat. -- Calvin.

   [92] A piece, as we said. -- Calvin.

   [93] Du grand Escuyer. -- Fr. Trans.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:14-15

   14. So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days.

   14. Et a audivit eos in hoc verbo, et probavit eos decem diebus.

   15. And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and
   fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the
   king's meat.

   15. Et a fine decem dierum visus est vultus eorum pulcher, [94] et ipsi
   pinguiores carne prae omnibus pueris, [95] qui comedebant portiones
   cibi regii.


   Now this surprising event took place, -- Daniel contracted neither
   leanness nor debility from that mean food, but his face was as shirting
   as if he had continued to feed most delicately; hence we gather as I
   have already said, that he was divinely impelled to persist firmly in
   his own design, and not to pollute himself with the royal diet. God,
   therefore, testified by the result that he had advised Daniel and his
   companions in this their prayer and proposal. It is clear enough that
   there is no necessary virtue in bread to nourish us; for we are
   nourished by God's secret blessing, as Moses says, Man lives not by
   bread alone, (Deuteronomy 8:3,) implying that the bread itself does not
   impart strength to men, for the bread has no life in it; how then can
   it afford us life? As bread possesses no virtue by itself, we are
   nourished by the word of God; and because God has determined that our
   life shall be sustained by nourishment, he has breathed its virtue into
   the bread -- but, meanwhile, we ought to consider our life sustained
   neither by bread nor any other food, but by the secret blessing of God.
   For Moses does not speak here of either doctrine or spiritual life, but
   says our bodily life is cherished by God's favor, who has endued bread
   and other food with their peculiar properties. This, at least, is
   certain, -- whatever food we feed on, we are nourished and sustained by
   God's gratuitous power. But the example which Daniel here mentions was
   singular. Hence God, as I have said, shews, by the event, how Daniel
   could not remain pure and spotless with his companions, otherwise than
   by being content with pulse and water. We must observe, for our
   improvement, in the first place, -- we should be very careful not to
   become slaves of the palate, and thus be drawn off from our duty and
   from obedience and the fear of God, when we ought to live sparingly and
   be free from all luxuries. We see a this day how many feel it a very
   great cross if they cannot indulge at the tables of the rich, which are
   filled with abundance and variety of food. Others are so hardened in
   the enjoyment of luxuries, that they cannot be content with moderation;
   hence they are always wallowing in their own filth, being quite unable
   to renounce the delights of the palate. But Daniel sufficiently shews
   us, when God not only reduces us to want, but when, if necessary, all
   indulgences must be spontaneously rejected. Daniel indeed, as we saw
   yesterday, does not attach any virtue to abstinence from one kind of
   food or another; and all we have hitherto learnt has no other object
   than to teach him to guard against imminent danger, to avoid passing
   over to the morals of a strange nation, and so to conduct himself at
   Babylon as not to forget himself as a son of Abraham. But still it was
   necessary to renounce the luxuries of the court. Although delicate
   viands were provided, he rejected them of his own accord; since, as we
   have seen, it would be deadly pollution, not in itself but in its
   consequences. Thus Moses, when he fled from Egypt, passed into a new
   life far different from his former one; for he had lived luxuriously
   and honorably in the king's palace, as if he had been the king's
   grandson. But he lived sparingly in the Desert afterwards, and obtained
   his support by very toilsome labor. He preferred, says the Apostle, the
   cross of Christ to the riches of Egypt. (Hebrews 11:26.) How so?
   Because he could not be esteemed an Egyptian and retain the favor which
   had been promised to the sons of Abraham. It was a kind of self-denial
   always to remain in the king's palace.

   We may take this test as a true proof of our frugality and temperance,
   if we are able to satisfy the appetite when God compels us to endure
   poverty and want; nay, if we can spurn the delicacies which are at hand
   but tend to our destruction. For it would be very frivolous to subsist
   entirely on pulse and water; as greater intemperance sometimes displays
   itself in pulse than in the best and most dainty dishes. If any one in
   weak health desires pulse and other such food which is injurious, he
   will surely be condemned for intemperance. But if he feeds on
   nourishing diet, as they say, and thus sustains himself, frugality will
   have its praise. If any one through desire of water, and being too
   voracious, rejects wine, this as we well know would not be
   praiseworthy. Hence we ought not to subsist on this kind of food to
   discover the greatness of Daniel's virtue. But we ought always to
   direct our minds to the object of his design, namely, what he wished
   and what was in his power -- so to live under the sway of the king of
   Babylon, that his whole condition should be distinct from that of the
   nation at large, and never to forget himself as an Israelite -- and
   unless there had been this great difference, Daniel would have been
   unable to sharpen himself and to shake off his torpor, or to rouse
   himself from it. Daniel necessarily kept before his mind some manifest
   and remarkable difference which separated him from the Chaldeans; he
   desired pulse and water, through the injurious effects of good living.

   Lastly, this passage teaches us, although we should meet with nothing
   but the roots and leaves of trees, and even if the earth herself should
   deny us the least blade of grass, yet God by his blessing can make us
   healthy and active no less than those who abound in every comfort.
   God's liberality, however, is never to be despised when he nourishes us
   with bread and wine and other diet; for Paul enumerates, among things
   worthy of praise, his knowing how to bear both abundance and penury.
   (Philippians 4:12) When, therefore, God bountifully offers us both meat
   and drink, we may soberly and frugally drink wine and cat savory food;
   but when he takes away from us bread and water, so that we suffer from
   famine, we shall find his blessing sufficient for us instead of all
   nutriment. For we see that Daniel and his companions were ruddy and
   plump, and even remarkably robust by feeding on nothing but pulse. How
   could this occur, unless the Lord, who nourished his people in the
   Desert on manna alone, when other diet was deficient, even at this day
   turns our food into manna, which would otherwise be injurious to us.
   (Exodus 16:4.) For if any one asks the medical profession, whether
   pulse and other leguminous plants are wholesome? they will tell us they
   are very injurious, since they know them to be so. But at the same
   time, when we have no choice of viands and cannot obtain what would
   conduce most to our health, if we are content with herbs and roots, the
   Lord, as I have said, can nourish us no less than if he put before us a
   table well supplied with every dainty. Temperance does not exist in the
   food itself, but in the palate -- since we are equally intemperate if
   pleasure entices us to gratify the appetite on inferior food -- so,
   again, we may remain perfectly temperate though feeding on the best
   diet. We must form the same opinion of the properties of various
   viands, which do not support us by their own inherent qualities, but by
   God's blessing, as he sees fit. We sometimes see the children of the
   rich very emaciated, although they may receive the greatest attention.
   We see also the children of the country people most beautiful in form,
   ruddy in countenance, and healthy in condition; and yet they feed on
   any kind of food, and sometimes upon what is injurious. But although
   they are deprived of tasty sauces, yet God gives them his blessing, and
   their unripe fruit, pork, lard, and even herbs, which seem most
   unwholesome, become more nourishing than if the people abounded in
   every delicacy. This, therefore, must be remarked in the words of
   Daniel. It follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [94] Or plump. -- Calvin.

   [95] Namely, the rest. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:16

   16. Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine that
   they should drink; and gave them pulse.

   16. Et factum est, ut Melsar tolleret sibi portionem cibi illorum et
   vinum potionum eorum, [96] et daret illis legumina.


   After Melsar saw it possible to gratify Daniel and his companions
   without danger and promote his own profit, he was humane and easily
   dealt with, and had no need of long disputation. For an intervening
   obstacle often deters us from the pursuit of gain, and we forbear to
   seek what we very much crave when it requires oppressive labor; but
   when our profit is at hand, and we are freed from all danger, then
   every one naturally pursues it. We see, then, what Daniel means in this
   verse, namely, when Melsar saw the usefulness of this plan, and the
   possibility of his gaining by the diet assigned by the king to the four
   youths, then he gave them pulse. But we must notice also Daniel's
   intention. He wishes to shew that we ought not to ascribe it to the
   kindness of man, that he and his companions could preserve themselves
   pure and unspotted. Why so? Because he never could have obtained
   anything from this man Melsar, until he perceived it could be granted
   safely. Since, therefore, Melsar consulted his own advantage and his
   private interest, and wished to escape all risks and hazards, we easily
   gather that the benefit is not to be ascribed entirely to him. Daniel
   and his companions obtained their wish, but God's providence rendered
   this man tractable, and governed the whole event. Meanwhile, God openly
   shews how all the praise was due to himself, purposely to exercise the
   gratitude of Daniel and his associates.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [96] That is wine, which the king had appointed them to drink. --
   Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we are now encompassed by so many enemies,
   and the devil does not cease to harass us with fresh snares, so that
   the whole world is hostile to us, that we may perceive even the devil
   himself to be restrained by thy bridle. Grant, also, that all the
   impious may be subjected to thee, that thou mayest lead them
   whithersoever thou wishest. Do thou direct their hearts, and may we be
   experimentally taught how safe and secure we are under the protection
   of thy hand. And may we proceed, according to thy promise, in the
   course of our calling, until at length we arrive at that blessed rest
   which is laid up for us in heaven by Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Fourth.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:17

   17. As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in
   all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions
   and dreams.

   17. Et pueris illis quatuor, dedit, inquam, illis Deus cognitionem et
   scientiam in omni literatura et sapientia et Daniel intellexit in omni
   visione et somniis.


   The Prophet here shows what we have already touched upon, how his
   authority was acquired for exercising the prophetic office with greater
   advantage. He ought to be distinguished by fixed marks, that the Jews
   first, and foreigners afterwards, might acknowledge him to be endued
   with the prophetic spirit. But a portion of this favor was shared with
   his three companions; yet he excelled them all, because God fitted him
   specially for his office. Here the end is to be noticed, because it
   would be incorrect to say that their reward was bestowed by God,
   because they lived both frugally and heavenly, and spontaneously
   abstained from the delicacies of the palace; for God had quite a
   different intention. For he wished, as I have already said, to extol
   Daniel, to enable him to shew with advantage that Israel's God is the
   only God; and as he wished his companions to excel hereafter in
   political government, he presented them also with some portion of his
   Spirit. But it is worthwhile to set Daniel before our eyes; because, as
   I have said, before God appointed him his Prophet, he wished to adorn
   him with his own insignia, to procure confidence in his teaching. He
   says, therefore, to those four boys, or youths, knowledge and science
   were given in all literature and wisdom Daniel was endued with a very
   singular gift -- he was to be an interpreter of dreams, and an
   explainer of visions. Since Daniel here speaks of literature, without
   doubt he simply means the liberal arts, and does not comprehend the
   magical arts which flourished then and afterwards in Chaldea. We know
   that nothing was sincere among unbelievers; and, on the other hand, I
   have previously admonished you, that Daniel was not imbued with the
   superstitions in those days highly esteemed in that nation. Through
   discontent with genuine science, they corrupted the study of the stars;
   but Daniel and his associates were so brought up among the Chaldeans,
   that they were not tinctured with those mixtures and corruptions which
   ought always to be separated from true science. It would be absurd,
   then, to attribute to God the approval of magical arts, which it is
   well known were severely prohibited and condemned by the law itself.
   (Deuteronomy 18:10.) Although God abominates those magical
   superstitions as the works of the devil, this does not prevent Daniel
   and his companions from being divinely adorned with this gift, and
   being very well versed in all the literature of the Chaldees. Hence
   this ought to be restricted to true and natural science. As it respects
   Daniel, he says, he understood even, visions and dreams and we know how
   by these two methods the Prophets were instructed in the will of God.
   (Numbers 12:6.) For while God there blames Aaron and Miriam, he affirms
   this to be his usual method; as often as he wishes to manifest his
   designs to the Prophets, he addresses them by visions and dreams. But
   Moses is treated out of the common order of men, because he is
   addressed face to face, and mouth to mouth. God, therefore, whenever he
   wished to make use of his Prophets, by either visions or dreams, made
   known to them what he wished to be proclaimed to the people. When,
   therefore, it is here said, -- Daniel understood dreams and visions, it
   has the sense of being endued with the prophetic spirit. While his
   companions were superior masters and teachers in all kinds of
   literature, he alone was a Prophet of God.

   We now understand the object of this distinction, when an acquaintance
   with visions and dreams was ascribed peculiarly to Daniel. And here our
   previous assertion is fully confirmed, namely, that Daniel was adorned
   with the fullest proofs of his mission, to enable him afterwards to
   undertake the prophetic office with greater confidence, and acquire
   greater attention to his teaching. God could, indeed, prepare the in a
   single moment, and by striking terror and reverence into the minds of
   all, induce them to embrace his teaching; but he wished to raise his
   servant by degrees, and to bring him forth at the fitting time, and not
   too suddenly so that all might know by marks impressed for many years
   how to distinguish him from the common order of men. It afterwards
   follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:18-20

   18. Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring
   them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before
   Nebuchadnezzar.

   18. Et a fine dierum, quibus edixerat Rex ut producerentur introduxit
   eos princeps [97] eunuchorum coram Nebuchadnezzar.

   19. And the king communed with them; and among them all was found none
   like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they
   before the king.

   19. Et loquutus est cum illis rex et non inventus est ex omnibus sicut
   Daniel, Hananiah, Misael, et Azariah, et steterunt coram rege.

   20. And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king
   enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians
   and astrologers that were in all his realm.

   20. Et in omni verbo, sapientia et intelligentia, quod sciscitatus est
   ab eis rex, invenit eos decuplo supra omnes genethliacos et astrologos
   [98] qui erant in toto regno ejus.


   Now, Daniel relates how he and his companions were brought forward at a
   fixed time, since three years was appointed by the king for their
   instruction in all the science of the Chaldees and on that account the
   prefect of the eunuchs produces them. He shews how he and his
   companions were approved by the king, and were preferred to all the
   rest. By these words he confirms my remark, that the Lord through a
   long interval had adorned them with much favor, by rendering them
   conspicuous throughout the royal palace, while the king himself
   acknowledged something uncommon in them. He, as well as the courtiers,
   ought all to entertain such an opinion concerning these four youths, as
   should express his sincere reverence for them. Then God wished to
   illustrate his own glory, since without doubt the king was compelled to
   wonder how they could surpass all the Chaldeans. This monarch had
   spared no expense on his own people, and had not neglected to instruct
   them; but when he saw foreigners and captives so superior, a spirit of
   rivalry would naturally spring up within him. But, as I have already
   said, God wished to extol himself in the person of his servants, so
   that the king might be compelled to acknowledge something divine in
   these young men. Whence, then, was this superiority? for the Chaldeans
   boasted of their wisdom from their birth, and esteemed other nations as
   barbarians. The Jews, they would argue, are eminent beyond all others;
   verily the God whom they worship distributes at his will talent and
   perception, since no one is naturally gifted unless he receives this
   grace from heaven. God, therefore, must necessarily be glorified,
   because Daniel and his comrades very far surpassed the Chaldeans. Thus
   God usually causes his enemies to gaze with wonder on his power, even
   when they most completely shun the light. For what did King
   Nebuchadnezzar propose, but to extinguish the very remembrance of God?
   For he wished to have about him Jews of noble family, who should oppose
   the very religion in which they were born. But God frustrated this plan
   of the tyrant's, and took care to make his own name more illustrious.
   It now follows.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [97] Or, prefect. -- Calvin.

   [98] That is, superior to all the soothsayers and astrologers. --
   Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 1:21

   21. And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus.

   2l. Et fuit Daniel usque ad annum primum Cyri regis.


   Expositors are puzzled with this verse, because, as we shall afterwards
   see, the Vision occurred to Daniel in the third year of [8]Cyrus's
   reign. Some explain the word hyh, haiah, by to be "broken;" but this is
   by no means in accordance with the history. Their opinion is right who
   say that Daniel continued to the first year of the reign of Cyrus in
   the discharge of the prophetic office, although expositors do not
   openly say so; but I state openly what they say obscurely. For since he
   afterwards set out into Media, they say this change is denoted here.
   But we may understand the words better in the sense of Daniel's
   flourishing among the Chaldeans and Assyrians, and being acknowledged
   as a celebrated Prophet; because he is known to have interpreted King
   Belshszzar's vision, on the very night on which he was slain. The word
   here is simple and complete -- he was -- but it depends on the
   succeeding ones, since he always obtained the confidence and authority
   of a Prophet with the kings of Babylon. This, then, is the true sense.
   [99]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [99] See the [9]Dissertations at the end of this Volume.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 2

   In this second chapter we are informed how God brought Daniel into a
   theater, to exhibit that prophetic office to which he had been
   destined. God had already engraven, as we have said, distinct marks by
   which Daniel might be acknowledged as a Prophet, but he wished really
   to prove the effect of the grace which he had conferred upon Daniel.
   First of all, a simple history is narrated, then Daniel proceeds to the
   interpretation of a dream. This is the heading of the chapter.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:1

   1. And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar Nebuchadnezzar
   dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep brake
   from him.

   1. Anno autem secundo regni Nebuchadnezzar somniavit Nebuchadnezzar
   somnia et contritus fuit spiritusejus, et somnus: ejus interruptus est
   ei. [100]


   Daniel here says, -- King Nebuchadnezzar dreamt in the second year of
   his reign. This seems contrary to the opinion expressed in the first
   chapter. For if Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem in the first year of
   his reign, how could Daniel be already reckoned among the wise men and
   astrologers, while he was as yet but a disciple? Thus it is easily
   gathered from the context that he and his companions were already
   brought forward to minister before the king. At the first glance these
   things are not in accordance, because in the first year of
   Nebuchadnezzar's reign Daniel and his companions were delivered into
   training; and in the second he was in danger of death through being in
   the number of the Magi. Some, as we have mentioned elsewhere, count the
   second year from the capture and destruction of the city, for they say
   Nebuchadnezzar was called king from the time at which he obtained the
   monarchy in peace. Before he had cut off the City and Temple with the
   Nation, his Monarchy could not be treated as united; hence they refer
   this to the capture of the city, as I have said. But I rather incline
   to another conjecture as more probable -- that of his reigning with his
   father, and I have shewn that when he besieged Jerusalem in the time of
   Jehoiachim, he was sent by his father; he next returned to Chaldea from
   the Egyptian expedition, through his wish to repress revolts, if any
   one should dare to rebel. In this, therefore, there is nothing out of
   place. Nebuchadnezzar reigned before the death of his father, because
   he had already been united with him in the supreme power; then he
   reigned alone, and the present narrative happened in the second year of
   his reign. In this explanation there is nothing forced, and as the
   history agrees with it, I adopt it as the best.

   He says -- [10]he dreamt dreams, and yet only one Dream is narrated;
   but since many things were involved in this dream, the use of the
   plural number is not surprising. It is now added, his, spirit was
   contrite, to shew us how uncommon the dream really was. For
   Nebuchadnezzar did not then begin to dream, and was not formerly so
   frightened every night as to send for all the Magi. Hence, in this
   dream there was something extraordinary, which Daniel wished to express
   in these words. The clause at the end of the verse which they usually
   translate his sleep was interrupted, does not seem to have this sense;
   another explanation which our brother D. Antonius gave you [101] suits
   it better; namely, -- his sleep was upon him, meaning he began to sleep
   again. The genuine and simple sense of the words seems to me -- his
   spirit was confused, that is, very great terror had seized on his mind.
   He knew, indeed, the dream to be sent from heaven; next, being
   astonished, he slept again, and became like a dead man, and when he
   considered the interpretation of the dream, he became stupified and
   returned to sleep and forgot the vision, as we shall afterwards see. It
   follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [100] As they translate, or "departed from him," or was upon him. --
   Calvin.

   [101] This clause "which our brother D. Antonius gave you," is omitted
   in the French editions of 1562 and 1569.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:2

   2. Then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the astrologers,
   and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew the king his dreams.
   So they came and stood before the king.

   2. Etedixit rex ut vocarentur [102] astrologi, et conjectores, et
   divini, et Chaldei, annuntiarent regi somnia sua [103] et venerunt et
   steterunt in conspectu regis.


   This verse more clearly proves what I have already said that the dream
   caused the king to feel God to be its author. Though this was not his
   first dream, yet the terror which God impressed on his mind, compelled
   him to summon all the Magi, since he could not rest even by returning
   to sleep. He felt as. it were a sing in his mind, since God did not
   suffer him to rest, but wished him to be troubled until he received an
   interpretation of the dream. Even profane writers very correctly
   consider dreams connected with divine agency. They express various
   opinions, because they could not know anything with perfect certainty;
   yet the persuasion was fixed in their minds relative to some divine
   agency in dreams. It would be foolish and puerile to extend this to all
   dreams; as we see some persons never passing by a single one without a
   conjecture, and thus making themselves ridiculous. We know dreams to
   arise from different causes; as, for instance, from our daily thoughts.
   If I have meditated on anything during the daytime, something occurs to
   me at night in a dream; because the mind is not completely buried in
   slumber, but retains some seed of intelligence, although it be
   suffocated. Experience also sufficiently teaches us how our daily
   thoughts recur during sleep, and hence the various affections of the
   mind and body produce, many dreams. If any one retires to bed in sorrow
   from either the death of a friend, or any loss, or through suffering
   any injury or adversity, his dreams will partake of the previous
   preparation of his mind. The body itself causes dreams, as we see in
   the case of those who suffer from fever; when thirst prevails they
   imagine fountains, burnings, and similar fancies. We perceive also how
   intemperance disturbs men in their sleep; for drunken men start and
   dream in their sleep, as if in a state of frenzy. As there are many
   natural causes for dreams, it would be quite out of character to be
   seeking for divine agency or fixed reason in them all; and on the other
   hand, it is sufficiently evident that some dreams are under divine
   regulation. I omit events which have been related in ancient histories;
   but surely the dream of Calphurnia, the wife of Julius Caesar, could
   not be fictitious; because, before he was slain it was commonly
   reported, "Caesar has been killed," just as she dreamt it. The same may
   be said of the physician of Augustus, who had ordered him to leave his
   tent the day of the battle of Pharsalia, and yet there was no reason
   why the physician should order him to be carried out of the tent on a
   litter, unless he had dreamt it to be necessary. What was the nature of
   that necessity? why, such as could not be conjectured by human skill,
   for the camp of Augustus was taken at that very moment. I doubt not
   there are many fabulous accounts, but here I may choose what I shall
   believe, and I do not yet touch on dreams which are mentioned in God's
   word, for I am merely speaking of what profane men were compelled to
   think on this subject. Although Aristotle freely rejected all sense of
   divination, through being prejudiced in the matter, and desiring to
   reduce the nature of Deity within the scope of human ingenuity, and to
   comprehend all things by his acuteness; yet he expresses this
   confession, that all dreams do not happen rashly but that mantike, that
   is "divination," is the source of some of them. He disputes, indeed,
   whether they belong to the intellectual or sensitive portion of the
   mind, and concludes they belong to the latter, as far as it is
   imaginative. Afterwards, when inquiring whether they are causes or
   anything of that kind, he is disposed to view them only as symptoms or
   accidents fortuitously contingent. Meanwhile, he will not admit dreams
   to be sent from heaven; and adds as his reason, that many stupid men
   dream, and manifest the same reason in them as the wisest. He notices
   next the brute creation, some of which, as elephants, dream. As the
   brutes dream, and wise men more seldom than the rudest idiots,
   Aristotle does not think it probable that dreams are divinely inspired.
   He denies, therefore, that they are sent from God, or divine, but
   asserts that they spring from the Daimones; [104] that is, he fancies
   them to be something between the natures of the Deity and the Daimones.
   We know the sense in which philosophers use that word, which, in
   Scripture, has usually a bad sense. He says that dreams were occasioned
   by those aerial inspirations, but are not from God.; because, he says,
   man's nature is not divine, but inferior; and yet more than earthly,
   since it, is angelic. Cicero discourses on this subject at great,
   length, in his first book on Divination; although he refutes in the
   second all he had said, while he was a disciple of the Academy. [105]
   For among other arguments in proof of the existence of deities, he adds
   dreams; -- if there is any divination in dreams, it follows that there
   is a. Deity in heaven, for the mind of man cannot conceive of any dream
   without divine inspiration. Cicero's reasoning is valid; if there is
   divination in dreams, then is there also a Deity. The distinction made
   by Macrobius is worthy of notice; although he ignorantly confounds
   species and genera, through being a person of imperfect judgment, who
   strung together in rhapsodies whatever he read, without either
   discrimination or arrangement. This, then, should remain fixed, -- the
   opinion concerning the existence of some kind of divine agency in
   dreams was not rashly implanted in the hearts of all men. Hence that
   expression of Homer's, a dream is from Jupiter. [106] He does not mean
   this generally and promiscuously of all dreams; but he takes notice of
   it, when bringing the characters of his heroes before us, since they
   were divinely admonished in their sleep.

   I now come to Nebuchadnezzar's Dream. In this, two points are worthy of
   remark. First, all remembrance of its subject was entirely obliterated;
   and secondly, no interpretation was; found for it. Sometimes the
   remembrance of a dream was not; lost while its interpretation was
   unknown. But here Nebuchadnezzar was not only perplexed at the
   interpretation of the dream, but even the vision itself had vanished,
   and thus his perplexity and anxiety was doubled. As to the next point,
   there is no novelty in Daniel making known the interpretation; for it
   sometimes, but rarely, happens that a person dreams without a figure or
   enigma, and with great plainness, without any need of conjurers -- a
   name given to interpreters of dreams. This indeed happens but seldom,
   since the usual plan of dreams is for God to speak by them
   allegorically and obscurely. And this occurs in the case of the profane
   as well as of the servants of God. When Joseph dreamt that he was
   adored by the sun and moon, (Genesis 37:9,) he was ignorant of its
   meaning; when he dreamt of his sheaf being adored by his brothers
   sheaves, he understood not its meaning, but related it simply to his
   brothers. Hence God often speaks in enigmas by dreams, until the
   interpretation is added. And such was Nebuchadnezzar's dream.

   We perceive, then, that God reveals his will even to unbelievers, but
   not clearly; because seeing they do not see, just as if they were
   gazing at a closed book or sealed letter; as Isaiah says, -- God speaks
   to unbelievers in broken accents and with a stammering tongue. (Isaiah
   28:11 and Isaiah 29:11.) God's will was so revealed to Nebuchadnezzar
   that he still remained perplexed and lay completely astonished. His
   dream would have been of no use to him, unless, as we shall see, Daniel
   had been presented to him as its interpreter. For God not only wished
   to hold the king in suspense, but he thus blotted out the remembrance
   of the dream from his mind, to increase the power of his sting. As
   mankind are accustomed to neglect the dreams which they do not
   remember, God inwardly fastened such a sting in the mind of this
   unbeliever, as I have already said, that he could not rest, but was
   always wakeful in the midst of his dreaming, because God was drawing
   him to himself by secret chains. This is the true reason why God denied
   him the immediate explanation of his dream, and blotted out the
   remembrance of it from his mind, until he should receive both from
   Daniel. We will leave the rest till tomorrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [102] I hardly know by what equivalent expressions to render these
   Hebrew words. I will speak, therefore, of the thing itself -- Calvin.

   [103] That is, to expound his dreams to the king. -- Calvin.

   [104] Calvin uses the Greek words theopempta, theia, and daimonia. The
   Greek Daimones corresponded with our idea of angels, and were said to
   be the origin of human souls. See most interesting passages in the
   Dialogues of Plato, also the Dissertation on this verse at the close of
   the Volume.

   [105] De Divin., lib. 1 21-23; and lib. 2:58, et seq.

   [106] Iliad, book 1, v. 63.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since every perfect gift comes from thee, and
   since some excel others in intelligence and talents, yet as no one has
   anything of his own, but as thou deignest to distribute to man a
   measure of thy gracious liberality, -- Grant that whatever intelligence
   thou dost confer upon us, we may apply it to the glory of thy name.
   Grant also, that we may acknowledge in humility and modesty what thou
   hast committed to our care to be thine own; and may we study to be
   restrained by sobriety, to desire nothing superfluous, never to corrupt
   true and genuine knowledge, and to remain in that simplicity to which
   thou callest us. Finally, may we not rest in these earthly things, but
   learn rather to raise our minds to true wisdom, to acknowledge thee to
   be the true God, and to devote ourselves to the obedience of thy
   righteousness; and may it be our sole object to devote and consecrate
   ourselves entirely to the glory of thy name throughout our lives,
   through Jesus Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Fifth.

   We yesterday saw the Magi sent for by the king's edict, not only in
   order to explain his dream to him, but also to narrate the dream itself
   which had slipt from his memory. But since four kinds of Magi are used
   here, or at least three, and their description is added in the fourth
   place, I shall briefly touch upon what seems to me their meaning.
   hrtmym Hartummim, is usually explained by "soothsayers," and afterwards
   'sphym, Assaphim, they think, means "physicians." I am unwilling to
   contend against the first interpretation; but I see no reason for the
   second. They interpret it as "physicians," because they judge of men's
   health by feeling the pulse, but having no better reason than this, I
   adopt the opinion that it refers to astrologers. In the third place,
   mksphym, Mecasphim, is used, meaning "sorcerers," though some change
   the signification, and say it; means "star-gazers," who indicate future
   events and predict unknown ones from the position of the stars. I have
   nothing to bring forward more probable than this, except the
   uncertainty of what the Hebrews meant by the word for since the matter
   itself is so buried in oblivion, who can distinguish between words
   which belong to the profession of an unknown art? ksdym, Casdim, is
   doubtless put for a race, for it is the name of a nation, yet on
   account of its excellence, the Magi appropriated it to themselves, as.
   if the nobility and excellence of the whole nation was in their power;
   and this name is known to be in common use in Greece and Italy. All who
   professed their ability to predict future or hidden events from the
   stars or other conjectures, were called Chaldees. With respect to the
   three other words, I do not doubt their honorable meaning, and for this
   red, son they called themselves Mathematicians, as if there were no
   science in the world except with them. Besides, although their
   principles were good, they were certainly stuffed with many
   superstitions, for they were soothsayers and diviners, and we know them
   to have given especial attention to augury. Although they were highly
   esteemed by their fellow-countymen, yet they are condemned by God's
   law, for all their pretense to science was complete imposture. They are
   generally called Magi, and also Chaldeans, as shortly afterwards, when
   Daniel will repeat what they have spoken before the king, he will not
   enumerate those three species, but will simply call them Chaldees. It
   is surprising that Daniel and his companions were not called among
   them, for he ought to have been called among the first, since the king,
   as we have, said, found these four to be ten times better than all the
   Magi and Diviners throughout his kingdom! Since their dexterity was not
   unknown to the king, why does he pass them completely by, while the
   other Magi are at hand and are called in to a case so arduous? Very
   probably the king omitted them because he trusted more in the natives;
   or suspected the captives, and was unwilling to entrust them with his
   secrets, as he had not yet sufficiently tried their fidelity and
   constancy. This might have been the reason, but it is better for us to
   consider the intention of the Almighty, for I have no doubt that this
   forgetfulness on the part of the king occurred by God's providence, as
   he was unwilling from the first to mingle his servant Daniel and the
   rest with the Magi and Soothsayers. This accounts for Daniel not being
   sent for with the rest; whence, as we shall see, his divination would
   afterwards become more illustrious. It now follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:3-4

   3. And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit
   was troubled to know the dream.

   3. Et dixit illis rex, Somnium somniavi, et contritus est spiritus
   meus, ad sciendum [107] somnium.

   4. Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live for
   ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation.

   4. Et dixerunt Chaldaei regi Syriace, Rex in eternum vive: dic somnium
   servis tuis, et expositionem indicabimus.


   Daniel relates first the great confidence of the Chaldeans, since they
   dared to promise the interpretation of a dream as yet unknown to them.
   The king says he was troubled through desire to understand the dream;
   by which he signifies that a kind of riddle was divinely set, before
   him. He confesses his ignorance, while the importance of the object may
   be gathered from his words. Since, then, the king testifies his desire
   to inquire concerning a matter obscure and profound, and exceeding his
   comprehension, and since he clearly expresses himself to be contrite in
   spirit, some kind of fear and anxiety ought to have touched these
   Chaldeans; yet they securely promise to offer the very best
   interpretation of the dream as soon as they understood it. When they
   say, O king live for ever, it is not a simple and unmeaning prayer, but
   they rather order the king to be cheerful and in good spirits, as they
   are able to remove all care and anxiety from his mind, because the
   explanation of the dream was at hand. We know how liberal in words
   those impostors always were; according to the language of an ancient
   poet, they enriched the ears and emptied the purses of others. And
   truly those who curiously court the breeze with their ears deserve to
   feed upon it, and to be taken in by such deceits. And all ages have
   proved that nothing exceeds the confidence of astrologers, who are not
   content with true science, but divine every one's life and death, and
   conjecture all events, and profess to know everything.

   We must hold generally that the art of conjecturing from dreams is rash
   and foolish; there is, indeed, a certain fixed interpretation of
   dreams, as we said yesterday, yet as we shall afterwards see, this
   ought not to be ascribed to a sure science, but to God's singular gift.
   As, therefore, a prophet will not gather what he has to say from fixed
   reasonings, but will explain God's oracles, so also he who will
   interpret dreams correctly, will not follow certain disthief rules; but
   if God has explained the meaning of the dream, he will then undertake
   the office of interpreting it according to his endowment with this
   gift. Properly speaking, these two flyings are opposite to each other
   and do not mutually agree, general and perpetual science, and special
   revelation. Since God claims this power of opening by means of a dream,
   what he has engraven on the minds of men, hence art and science cannot
   obtain it, but a revelation from the spirit must be waited for. When
   the Chaldeans thus boldly promise to become good interpreters of the
   dream, they not only betray their rashness, but become mere impostors,
   who pretend to be proficients in a science of which they know nothing,
   as if they could predict by their conjectures the meaning of the king's
   dream. It now follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [107] For understanding -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:5

   5. The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from
   me: if ye will not make known unto me the dream, with the
   interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses
   shall be made a dunghill.

   5. Respondit rex et dixit Chaldaeis, Sermo a me exiit, [108] si non
   indicaveritis mihi somnium et interpretationem ejus, frusla
   efficiemini, [109] et domus vestrae ponentur sterquilinium. [110]


   Here the king requires from the Chaldeans more than they professed to
   afford him; for although their boasting, as we have said, was foolish
   in promising to interpret any dream, yet they never claimed the power
   of narrating to any one his dreams. The king, therefore, seems to me to
   act unjustly in not regarding what they had hitherto professed, and the
   limits of their art and science, if indeed they had any science! When
   he says -- the matter or speech had departed from him, the words admit
   of a twofold sense, for mlth, millethah, may be taken for all "edict,"
   as we shall afterwards see; and so it might be read, has flowed away;
   but since the same form of expression will be shortly repeated when it
   seems to be, used of the dream, (Daniel 2:8,) this explanation is
   suitable enough, as the king says his dream had vanished so I leave the
   point undecided. It is worthwhile noticing again what we said
   yesterday, that terror was so fastened upon the king as to deprive him
   of rest, and yet he was not so instructed that the least taste of the
   revelation remained; just as if an ox, stunned by a severe blow, should
   toss himself about, and roll over and over. Such is the madness of this
   wretched king, because God harasses him with dreadful torments; all the
   while the remembrance of the dream is altogether obliterated from his
   mind. Hence he confesses -- his dream had escaped him; and although the
   Magi had prescribed the limits of their science, yet through their
   boasting themselves to be interpreters of the gods, he did not hesitate
   to exact of them what they had never professed. This is the just reward
   of arrogance, when men puffed up with a perverse confidence assume
   before others more than they ought, and forgetful of all modesty wish
   to be esteemed angelic spirits. Without the slightest doubt God wished
   to make a laughingstock of this foolish boasting which was conspicuous
   among the Chaldees, when the king sharply demanded of them to relate
   his dream, as well as to offer an exposition of it.

   He afterwards adds threats, clearly tyrannical; unless they expound the
   dream their life is in danger No common punishment is threatened, but
   he says they should become "pieces" -- if we take the meaning of the
   word to signify pieces. If we think it means "blood," the sense will be
   the same. This wrath of the king is clearly furious, nay,
   Nebuchadnezzar in this respect surpassed all the cruelty of wild
   beasts. What fault could be imputed to the Chaldeans if they did not
   know the king's dream? -- surely, they had never professed this, as we
   shall afterwards see; and no, king had ever demanded what was beyond
   the faculty of man. We perceive how the long manifested a brutal rage
   when he denounced death and every cruel torture on the Magi and
   sorcerers. Tyrants, indeed, often give the reins to their lust, and
   think all things lawful to themselves; whence, also, these words of the
   tragedian, Whatever he wishes is lawful. And Sophocles says, with
   evident truth, that any one entering a tyrant's threshold must cast
   away his liberty; but if we were to collect all examples, we should
   scarcely find one like this. It follows, then, that the king's mind was
   impelled by diabolic fury, urging him to punish the Chaldees who, with
   respect to him, were innocent enough. We know them to have been
   impostors, and the world to have been deluded by their impositions,
   which rendered them deserving of death, since by the precepts of the
   law it was a capital crime for any one to pretend to the power of
   prophecy by magic arts. (Leviticus 20:6.) But, as far as concerned the
   king, they could not be charged with any crime. Why, then, did he
   threaten them with death? because the Lord wished to shew the miracle
   which we shall afterwards see. For if the king had suffered the
   Chaldeans to depart, he could have buried directly that anxiety which
   tortured and excruciated his mind. The subject, too, had been less
   noticed by the people; hence God tortured the king's mind, till he
   rushed headlong in his fury, as we have said. Thus, this atrocious and
   cruel denunciation ought to have aroused all men; for there is no doubt
   that the greatest and the least trembled together when they heard of
   such vehemence in the monarch's wrath. This, therefore, is the complete
   sense, and we must mark the object of God's providence in thus allowing
   the king's anger to burn without restraint. [111] It follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [108] Or, has departed. -- Calvin.

   [109] Some translate hdmyn hedmin, by "blood; "but the received meaning
   is better, and since there is little difference in the matter itself, I
   shall not trouble you concerning it. -- Calvin.

   [110] "That is, shall be made a dunghill. -- Calvin.

   [111] Calvin is correct in preferring the sense of "pieces" to that of
   "blood;" for hdm, hedem, is a Chaldee word, and the yn is the Chaldee
   plural ending; his criticism, too, on mlh, meleh, is also correct; for
   it is the Chaldee equivalent for dvr, deber, a "word" or thing, and
   justly rendered "edict." As great light has been thrown upon the
   meaning and derivation of single words since Calvin's time, we may
   often find that modern knowledge has rendered his derivations
   untenable; still the soundness of his judgment is worthy of notice. It
   may be added, too, that the perplexity is increased when Chaldee forms
   are used, although there is a uniform change of single letters
   observable in the two languages. Thus s, sh, becomes t, th, as in
   Daniel 2:7 and Daniel 2:14; the Hebrew z, z, becomes d d, in Daniel
   2:26; so the ts, tz, becomes , gn; the final h, h, is turned into ', a,
   and the final m, m, into n, n.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:6

   6. But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall
   receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour, therefore shew me the
   dream, and the interpretation thereof.

   6. Et si somnium, et interpretationem ejus indicaveritis, donum, et
   munus, et honorem, vel pretium, magnum accipietis a facie mea: [112]
   propterea somnium, et interpretationem ejus indicate mihi.


   Here the king, on the other hand, desires to entice them by the hope of
   gain, to apply themselves to narrate his dream. He had already
   attempted to strike them with horror, that even if they are unwilling
   he may wrest the narration of the dream from them, as well as its
   interpretation. Meanwhile, if they could be induced by flattery, he
   tries this argument upon them; for he promises a gift, and reward, and
   honor, that is, he promises a large remuneration if they narrated his
   dream, and were faithful interpreters. Hence we gather, what all
   history declares, that the Magi made a gain of their predictions and
   guesses. The wise men of the Indies, being frugal and austere in their
   manner of living, were not wholly devoted to gain; for they are known
   to have lived without any need of either money, or furniture, or
   anything else. They were content with roots, and had no need of
   clothing, slept upon the ground, and were thus free from avarice. But
   the Chaldeans, we know, ran hither and thither to obtain money from the
   simple and credulous. Hence the king here speaks according to custom
   when he promises a large reward. We must remark here, how the Chaldeans
   scattered their prophecies for the sake of gain; and when knowledge is
   rendered saleable, it is sure to be adulterated with many faults. As
   when Paul speaks of corruptors of the Gospel, he says, -- they
   trafficked in it, (2 Corinthians 2:7,) because when a profit is made,
   as we have previously said, even honorable teachers must necessarily
   degenerate and pervert all sincerity by their lying. For where avarice
   reigns, there is flattery, servile obsequiousness, and cunning of all
   kinds, while truth is utterly extinguished. Whence it is not surprising
   if the Chaldeans were so inclined to deceit, as it became natural to
   them through the pursuit of gain and the lust for wealth. Some honest
   teachers may receive support from the public treasury; but, as we have
   said, when any one is drawn aside by lucre, he must necessarily pervert
   and deprave all purity of doctrine. And from this passage we gather,
   further, the anxiety of the king, as he had no wish to spare expense,
   if by this means he could click the interpretation of his dream from
   the Chaldeans; all the while he is furiously angry with them, because
   he does not obtain what the offered reward ought to procure. It now
   follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [112] That is, by me. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:7-9

   7. They answered again and said, Let the king tell his servants the
   dream, and we will shew the interpretation of it.

   7. Responderunt secundo, et dixerunt, Rex sonmium exponat [113] servis
   suis, et interpretationem indicabimus.

   8. The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye would gain
   the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.

   8. Respondit rex et dixit, Vere [114] novi ego [115] quod tempus
   redimitis, quia scitis quod exierit sermo a me. [116]

   9. But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but one
   decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak
   before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, and I
   shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.

   9. Propterea si somnium non indicaveritis mihi, una haec sententia est;
   et sermonem mendacem [117] et corruptum praeparastis ad dicendum coram
   me, donec tempus mutetur; [118] propterea somnium narrate mihi, et
   cognoscam quod interpretationem ejus mihi indicetis. [119]


   Here the excuse of the Magi is narrated. They state the truth that
   their art only enabled them to discover the interpretation of a dream;
   but the king wished to know the dream itself. Whence he appears again
   to have been seized with prodigious fury and became quite implacable.
   Kings sometimes grow warm, but are appeased by a single admonition, and
   hence this sentiment is very true, -- anger is assuaged by mild
   language. But since the fair reply of the Magi did not mitigate the
   king's wrath, he was quite hurried away by diabolical vehemence. And
   all this, as I have said, was governed by God's secret counsel, that
   Daniel's explanation might be more noticed. They next ask the king --
   to relate his dream, and then they promise as before to interpret it
   directly. And even this was too great a boast, as we have said, and
   they ought to have corrected their own conceit and foolish boasting
   when in such a difficulty. But since they persist in that foolish and
   fallacious self-conceit, it shews us how they were blinded by the
   devil, just as those who have become entangled by superstitious
   deceptions confidently defend their own madness. Such an example we
   have in the Magi, who always claimed the power of interpreting dreams.

   The king's exception now follows: -- I know, says he, that ye would
   gain time, since you are aware that the matter has gone from me, or the
   word has been pronounced, if we adopt the former sense. The king here
   accuses them of more disgraceful cunning, since the Magi have nothing
   to offer, and so desire to escape as soon as they know that the king
   has lost all remembrance of his dream. It is just as if he had said --
   You promised me to be sure interpreters of my dream, but this is false;
   for if I could narrate the dream, it would be easy to prove your
   arrogance, since ye cannot explain that enigma; but as lye know I have
   forgotten my dream, for that reason ye ask me to relate it; but this is
   only to gain time, says he; thus ye manage to conceal your ignorance
   and retain your credit for knowledge. But if my dream still remained in
   my memory I should soon detect your ignorance, for we cannot perform
   your boasting. We see, therefore, how the king here loads the Magi with
   a new crime, because they were impostors who deluded the people with
   false boastings; and hence he shews them worthy of death, unless they
   relate his dream. The argument indeed is utterly vicious; but it is not
   surprising when tyrants appear in the true colors of their cruelty.
   Meanwhile we must remember what I have said. -- the Magi deserved this
   reproof, for they were puffed up with vanity and made false promises,
   through conjecturing the future from dreams, auguries, and the like.
   But in the king's case, nothing was more unjust. than to invent such a
   crime against the Magi, since if they deceived others it arose from
   being self-deceived. They were blinded and fascinated by the foolish
   persuasion of their own wisdom, and had no intention of deceiving the
   king; for they thought something might immediately occur which would
   free his mind from all anxiety. But the king always pursued the
   blindest impulse of his rage. Meanwhile we must notice the origin of
   this feeling, -- he was divinely tormented, and could not rest a single
   moment till he obtained an explanation of his dream. He next adds, If
   ye do not explain my dream, this sentence alone remains for you, says
   he; that is, it is already decreed concerning you all, I shall not
   inquire particularly which of you is in fault and which wishes to
   deceive me; but I will utterly cut off all the tribe of the Magi, and
   no one shall escape punishment, unless ye explain to me both the dream
   and its interpretation.

   He adds again, Ye have prepared a fallacious and corrupt speech to
   relate here before me, as your excuse. Again, the king charges them
   with fraud and malice, of which they were not guilty; as if he had
   said, they purposely sought specious pretenses for practicing deceit.
   But he says, a lying speech, or fallacious and corrupt; that is, yours
   is a stale excuse, as we commonly say, and I loathe it. If there were
   any colorable pretext I might admit what. ye say, but I see in your
   words nothing but fallacies, and those too which savor of corruption.
   Now, therefore, we observe the king not only angry because the Magi
   cannot relate his dream, but charging it against them, as a greater
   crime, that they brought a stale excuse and wished purposely to deceive
   him. He next adds, tell me the dream and then I shall know it; or then
   I shall know that ye can faithfully interpret, its meaning. Here the
   king takes up another argument to convict the Magi of cunning. Ye
   boast, indeed, that you have no difficulty in interpreting the dream.
   How can ye be confident of this, for the dream itself is still unknown
   to you? If I had told it you, ye might then say whether ye could
   explain it or not; but when I now ask you about the dream of which both
   you and I are ignorant, ye say, when have related the dream, the rest
   is in your power; I therefore shall prove you to be good and true
   interpreters of dreams if ye can tell me mine, since the one thing
   depends on the other, and ye are too rash in presuming upon what is not
   yet discovered. Since, therefore, ye burst forth so hastily, and wish
   to persuade me that ye are sure of the interpretation, you are
   evidently quite deceived in this respect; and your rashness and fraud
   are herein detected, because ye are clearly deceiving me. This is the
   substance -- the rest to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [113] Narrate -- Calvin.

   [114] In truth. -- Calvin.

   [115] Now I know. -- Calvin.

   [116] That is, that the dream has fallen out of my mind, or the
   sentence has gone out of my lips. -- Calvin.

   [117] Or, fallacious -- Calvin.

   [118] That is, pass by. -- Calvin.

   [119] That is, ye may be able to explain to me -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER

   Grant, Almighty God, since during our pilgrimage in this world we have
   daily need of the teaching and government of thy Spirit, that with true
   modesty we may depend on thy word and secret inspiration, and not take
   too much on ourselves, -- Grant, also, that we may be conscious of our
   ignorance, blindness, and stupidity, and always flee, to thee, and
   never permit ourselves to be drawn aside in any way by the cunning of
   Satan and of the ungodly. May we remain so fixed in thy truth as never
   to turn aside from it, whilst thou dost direct us through the whole
   course of our vocation, and then may we arrive at that heavenly glory
   which has been obtained for us through the blood of thine only begotten
   Son. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Sixth
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:10

   10. The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a
   man upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore there is
   no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or
   astrologer, or Chaldean.

   10. Responderunt Chaldaei coram rege, et dixerunt, Non est homo super
   terram qui sermonem [120] regis posset explicare; propterea nullus rex,
   princeps, vel prefectus rem consimilem exquisivit ab ullo mago, et
   astrologo, et Chaldaeo.


   The Chaldeans again excuse themselves for not relating the king's
   dream. They say, in reality, this is not their peculiar art or science;
   and they know of no example handed down of wise men being asked in this
   way, and required to answer as well de facto as de jure, as the phrase
   is. They boasted themselves to be interpreters of dreams, but their
   conjectures could not be extended to discover the dreams themselves,
   but only their interpretation. This was a just excuse, yet the king
   does not admit it, but is impelled by his own wrath and by the divine
   instinct to shew the Magi, and sorcerers, and astrologers, to be mere
   impostors and deceivers of the people. And we must observe the end in
   view, because God wished to extol his servant Daniel, and to separate
   him from the common herd. They add, that no kings had ever dealt thus
   with Magi and wise men. It afterwards follows: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [120] Or, the matter. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:11

   11. And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none
   other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling
   is not with flesh.

   11. Et sermo de quo rex inquirit pretiosus est; [121] et nullus est qui
   possit exponere coram rege, nisi dii, quorum habitatio cum carne non
   est ipsis. [122]


   They add, that the object of the king's inquiry surpassed the power of
   human ingenuity. There is no doubt that they were slow to confess this,
   because, as we said before, they had acquired the fame of such great
   wisdom, that the common people thought nothing unknown to them or
   concealed from them. And most willingly would they have escaped the
   dire necessity of confessing their ignorance in this respect, but in
   their extremity they were compelled to resort to this subterfuge. There
   may be a question why they thought the matter about which the king
   inquired was precious; for as they were ignorant of the king's dream,
   how could they ascertain its value? But it is not surprising that men,
   under the influence of extreme anxiety and fear, should utter anything
   without judgment. They say, therefore, -- this matter is precious; thus
   they mingle flattery with their excuses to mitigate the king's anger,
   hoping to escape the unjust death which was at hand. The matter of
   which the king inquires is precious; and yet it would probably be said,
   since the, matter was uncommon, that the dream was divinely sent to the
   king, and was afterwards suddenly buried in oblivion. There certainly
   was some mystery here, and hence the Chaldeans very reasonably
   considered the whole subject to surpass in magnitude the common measure
   of human ability; therefore they add, -- there cannot be any other
   interpreters than gods or angels Some refer this to angels, but we know
   the Magi to have worshipped a multitude of gods. Hence it is more
   simple to explain this of the crowd of deities which they imagined.
   They had, indeed, lesser gods; for among all nations a persuasion has
   existed concerning a supreme God who reigns alone. Afterwards they
   imagined inferior deities, and each fabricated a god for himself
   according to his taste; hence they are called "gods," according to
   common opinion and usage, although they ought rather to be denoted
   genie or demons of the air. For we know that all unbelievers were
   imbued with this opinion concerning the existence of intermediate
   deities. The Apostles contended strongly against this ancient error,
   and we know the books of Plato [123] to be full of the doctrine that
   demons or genii act as mediators between man and the Heavenly Deity.

   We may, then, suitably understand these words that the Chaldeans
   thought angels the only interpreters; not because they imagined angels
   as the Scriptures speak of them clearly and sincerely, but the Platonic
   doctrine flourished among them, and also the superstition about the
   genii who dwell in heaven, and hold familiar intercourse with the
   supreme God. Since men are clothed in flesh, they cannot so raise
   themselves towards heaven as to perceive all secrets. Whence it
   follows, that the king acted unjustly in requiring them to discharge a
   duty either angelic or divine. This excuse was indeed probable, but the
   king's ears were deaf because he was carried away by his passions, and
   God also spurred him on by furies, which allowed him no rest. Hence
   this savage conduct which Daniel records.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [121] Or, rare -- Calvin.

   [122] Many words are superfluous, through the nature of the language.
   -- Calvin.

   [123] A most interesting and singular allegory on this subject occurs
   in Plato's Phoedrus, edit. Bekker, Section 51; edit. Priestley, (Lond.,
   182c,) p.71, et seq.; see also Cic. Tusc. Quoest. 1:16; Aristot.
   Metaph. 1:5; and De amima, i:2; Diog. Laert., 8:83.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:12

   12. For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded
   to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.

   12. Propterea rex in ira et indignatione magna edixit ut interficerent
   omnes sapientes Babylonis.


   The former denunciation was horrible, but now Nebuchadnezzar proceeds
   beyond it; for he not merely threatens the Chaldeans with death, but
   commands it to be inflicted. Such an example is scarcely to be found in
   history; but the cause of his wrath must be noticed, since God wished
   his servant Daniel to be brought forward and to be observed by all men.
   This was the preparation by which it became generally evident that the
   wise men of Babylon were proved vain, through promising more than they
   could perform; even if they had been endowed with the greatest wisdom,
   they would still have been destitute of that gift of revelation which
   was conferred upon Daniel. Hence it happened that the king denounced
   death against them all by his edict; for he might then perhaps
   acknowledge what he had never perceived before, namely, that their
   boasting was nothing but vanity, and their arts full of superstitions.
   For when superstition fails of success, madness immediately succeeds,
   and when those who are thought and spoken of as remarkably devout,
   perceive their fictitious worship to be of no avail, then they burst
   forth into the madness which I have mentioned, and curse their idols,
   and detest what they had hitherto followed. So it occurred here, when
   Nebuchadnezzar suspected imposture in so serious a matter, and no
   previous suspicion of it had entered his mind; but now, when he sees
   through the deception, in so perplexing a case, and hi such great
   anxiety, when left destitute of the advice of those from whom he hoped
   all things, then he is a hundredfold more infuriated than if he had
   been previously in a state of perfect calmness. It afterwards follows:
   --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:13-15

   13. And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and
   they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.

   13. Et edictum exiit et sapientes interficiebantur; et quaerebant
   Daniel et socios ejus ad interficiendum.

   14. Then Daniel answered with council and wisdom to Arioch the captain
   of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise men of
   Babylon:

   14. Et tunc Daniel sciscitatus est de consilio et edicto ab Arioch
   principe satellitum regis, qui exierat ad interficiendum sapientes
   Babylonis.

   15. He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain, Why is the
   decree so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to
   Daniel.

   15. Respondit et dixi t ipsi Arioch praefecto [124] regis, Ad quid edic
   tum festinat ev conspectu regis? Tunc rem [125] patefecit Arioeh ipsi
   Danieli.


   It appears from these words that some of the wise men had been slain,
   for Daniel at first is not required for slaughter; but when the Magi
   and Chaldeans were promiscuously dragged out for punishment, Daniel and
   his companions were in the same danger. And this is clearly expressed
   thus -- widen the edict had gone forth, that is, was published,
   according to the Latin phrase, and the wise mere were slain, then
   Daniel was also sought for; because the king would never suffer his
   decree to be despised after it had once been published; for if he had
   publicly commanded this to be done, and no execution had been added,
   would not this have been ridiculous? Hence, very probably, the
   slaughter of the Magi and Chaldeans was extensive. Although the king
   had no lawful reason for this conduct, yet they deserved their
   punishment; for, as we said yesterday, they deserved to be exterminated
   from the world, and the pest must be removed if it could possibly be
   accomplished. If Nebuchadnezzar had been like David, or Hezekiah, or
   Josiah, he might most justly have destroyed them all, and have purged
   the land from such defilements; but as he was only carried away by the
   fervor of his wrath, he was himself in fault. Meanwhile, God justly
   punishes the Chaldeans, and this admonition ought to profit the whole
   people. They were hardened in their error, and were doubtless rendered
   more excuseless by being blinded against such a judgment of God.
   Because Daniel was condemned to death, though he had not been called by
   the king, the injustice of the edicts of those kings who do not inquire
   into the causes of which they are judges, becomes more manifest.

   Nebuchadnezzar had often heard of Daniel, and had been compelled to
   admire the dexterity of his genius, and the singular gift of his
   wisdom. How comes it, then, that he passed him by when he had need of
   his singular skill? Although the king anxiously inquires concerning the
   dream, yet we observe he does not act seriously; since it would
   doubtless have come into his mind, "Behold, thou hadst formerly beheld
   in the captives of Judah the incredible gift of celestial wisdom --
   -then, in the first place, send for them!" Here the king's sloth is
   detected because he did not send for Daniel among the rest. We have
   stated this to be governed by the secret providence of God, who was
   unwilling that his servant should mix with those ministers of Satan,
   whose whole knowledge consisted in juggling and errors. We now see how
   the king had neglected the gift of God, and had stifled the light
   offered to him; but Daniel is next dragged to death. Therefore, I said,
   that tyrants are, for this reason, very unjust, and exercise a cruel
   violence because they will not undertake the labor and trouble of
   inquiry. Meanwhile we see that God wonderfully snatches his own people
   from the jaws of death, as it happened in Daniel's case; for we may be
   surprised at Arioch sparing his life when he slew the others who were
   natives. How can we account for Daniel meeting with more humanity than
   the Chaldeans, though he was a foreigner and a captive? Because his
   life was in the hand and keeping of God, who restrained both the mind
   and the hand of the prefect from being immediately savage with him. But
   it is said -- Daniel inquired concerning the counsel and the edict Some
   translate prudently and cunningly and t', gneta, signifies "prudence,"
   just as tm, tegem, metaphorically is received for "intelligence" when
   it signifies taste. [126] But we shall afterwards find this latter word
   used for an edict, and because this sense appears to suit better, I
   therefore adopt it, as Daniel had inquired of the prefect the meaning
   of the edict and the king's design. Arioch also is called the Prince of
   Satellites. Some translate it of executioners, and others of cooks, for
   tvch, tebech, signifies "to slay," but the noun deduced from this means
   a cook. Thus Potiphar is called, to whom Joseph was sold. (Genesis
   39:1.) It seems to me a. kind of absurdity to call him the prince of
   gaolers; and if we say the prefect of cooks, it is equally unsuitable
   to his office of being sent to slay the Chaldeans. I therefore prefer
   interpreting it more mildly, supposing him to be the prefect of the
   guards; for, as I have said, Potiphar is called rv tvchym, reb tebechi,
   and here the pronunciation only is changed. It follows:

   Daniel also had said, Whither does the edict haste from before the
   king? It seems by these words, that Daniel obliquely blames the king's
   anger and ingratitude, because he did not inquire with sufficient
   diligence before he rushed forward to that cruel punishment. Then he
   seems to mark his ingratitude, since he is now undeservedly doomed to
   death without being sent for, though the king might have known what was
   in him. As he refers to haste, I do not doubt his expostulating with
   the king, since he was neither called for nor listened to, and yet was
   to be slain with the rest, as if he were guilty of the same fault as
   the Chaldeans. The conclusion is, -- there was no reason for such
   haste, since the king would probably find what he desired, if he
   inquired more diligently. It is afterwards added, Arioch explained the
   matter to Daniel. Whence it appears that Daniel was formerly ignorant
   of the whole matter; and hence we may conjecture the amount of the
   terror which seized upon the pious man. For he had known nothing about
   it, and was led to punishment suddenly and unexpectedly, as if he had
   been guilty. Hence, it was necessary for him to be divinely
   strengthened, that he might with composure seek the proper time from
   both the prefect and the king, for relating the dream and adding its
   interpretation. Daniel's power of acting so composedly, arose from
   God's singular gift, since terror would otherwise have seized on his
   mind; for we are aware that in sudden events, we become deprived of all
   plan, and lose our presence of mind. Since nothing of this kind was
   perceived in Daniel, it becomes clear that his mind was governed by
   God's Spirit. It is afterwards added-
     __________________________________________________________________

   [124] It is the same noun which was lately used. -- Calvin.

   [125] Or, discourse -- Calvin.

   [126] So translated in Auth. Verses, Exodus 16:31; Numbers 11:8; Job
   6:6; and Jeremiah 48:11.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:16

   16. Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give him
   time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.

   16. Et Daniel ingressus est, et postulavit a rege, ut tempus daret
   sibi, et expositionem [127] afferret regi.


   This verse contains nothing new, unless we must notice what is not
   expressed, namely, that the prefect was not entirely without fear in
   giving Daniel an introduction to the king. For he knew the Icing to be
   very angry, and himself under serious displeasure, for not immediately
   executing the edict. But, as we have already said, God had taken Daniel
   into his confidence, and so bends and tames the mind of the prefect,
   that he no longer hesitates to introduce Daniel to the king. Another
   point is also gathered from the context, namely, Daniel's obtaining his
   request; for it is said, he returned home, doubtless, because he
   obtained a single day from the king with the view of satisfying his
   demands on the next day. And yet it is surprising that this favor was
   granted, since the king wished the dream narrated to him immediately.
   Although Daniel does not here relate the reasons which he used with the
   king, yet most probably he confessed what we shall afterwards observe
   in its own place, namely, that he was not endued with sufficient
   intelligence to expound the dream, but hoping in God's kindness, he
   would return next day with a new revelation. Otherwise the king would
   never have permitted this, if Daniel had petitioned doubtfully; or if
   he had not borne witness to his hopes of some, secret revelation from
   God, he would have been rejected immediately, and would have provoked
   still further the anger of the king. The Hebrews very commonly mention
   afterwards, in the context, whatever they omit in its proper place. So
   when he modestly confesses his inability to satisfy the king, till he
   has received from the Lord a faithful message, the king grants him the
   required time, as we shall see; more clearly afterwards. It follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [127] Interpretation -- Calvin
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:17-18

   17. Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to
   Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions:

   17. Tumc Daniel in domurn venit, [128] et Hananise, et Misaeli, et
   Azariae sociis suis sermonem [129] patefecit.

   18. That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this
   secret; that Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of
   the wise men of Babylon.

   18. Et misericordias ad petendurm [130] a facie Dei coelorum super
   arcano hoc, ut ne interficerentur Danielet socii ejuscum residuo
   sapientum Babylonis. [131]


   We observe with what object and with what confidence Daniel demanded an
   extension of time. His object was to implore God's grace. Confidence
   was also added, since he perceived a double punishment awaiting him, if
   he disappointed the king; if he had returned the next day without
   reply, the king would not have been content with an easy death, but
   would have raged with cruelty against Daniel, in consequence of his
   deception. Without the slightest doubt, Daniel expected what he
   obtained -- namely, that the king's dream would be revealed to him. He
   therefore urges his companions to implore unitedly mercy from God.
   Daniel had already obtained the singular gift of being an interpreter
   of dreams, and as. we, have seen, he alone was a Prophet. of God. God
   was accustomed to manifest his intentions to his Prophets by dreams or
   visions, (Numbers 12:6,) and Daniel had obtained both. Since Misael,
   Hananiah, and Azariah were united with him in prayer, we gather that
   they were not induced by ambition, to desire anything for themselves;
   for if they had been rivals of Daniel, they could not have prayed in
   concord with him. They did not pray about their own private concerns,
   but only for the interpretation of the dream being made known to
   Daniel. We observe, too, how sincerely they agree in their prayers, how
   all pride and ambition is laid aside, and without any desire for their
   own advantage. Besides, it is worthy of notice why they are said to
   have desired mercy from God Although they, do not hem come into God's
   presence as criminals, yet they hoped their request would be graciously
   granted, and hence the word "mercy" is used. Whenever we fly to God to
   bring assistance to our necessities, our eyes and all our senses ought
   always to be turned towards his nlerey, for his more good will
   reconciles him to us. When it is said, at. the close of the verse, --
   they should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon, some
   explain this, as if they had been anxious about the life of the Magi,
   and wished to snatch them also from death. But although they wished all
   persons to be safe, clearly enough they here separate themselves from
   the Magi and Chaldeans; their conduct was far different. It now follows
   --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [128] Departed -- Calvin.

   [129] Or, the matter. -- Calvin

   [130] Verbally, to implore mercy. Calvin

   [131] That is, with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. -- Calvin
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:19

   19. Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then
   Daniel blessed the God of heaven.

   19. Tunc Danieli in visione noctisarcanum patefactumest: tunc Daniel
   benedixit Deum coeli.


   Here it may be gathered, that Daniel did not vacillate nor pray with
   his companions through any doubt upon his mind. For that sentence of
   James ought to come into our memory, namely, Those who hesitate, and
   tremble, and pray to God with difference, are unworthy of being heard.
   Let not such a one, says James, think he shall obtain anything from the
   Lord, if he is driven about variously like the waves of the sea. (James
   1:6.) As God, therefore, shewed himself propitious to the prayers of
   Daniel, we conclude him to have prayed with true faith, and to be
   clearly persuaded that his life was in God's hands; hence, also, he
   felt that God did not vainly harass the mind of King Nebuchadnezzar,
   but was preparing some signal and remarkable judgment for him. Because
   Daniel was imbued with this firm persuasion, he exercises a sure
   confidence, and prays to God as if he had already obtained his request.
   On the other hand, we perceive that God never closes his ears when
   rightly and cordially invoked, as also it is said in the Psalms, (Psalm
   145:18,) He is near to all who pray to him in truth; for there cannot
   be truth when faith is wanting; but as Daniel brought faith and
   sincerity to his prayers, he was listened to, and the secret concerning
   the dream was made known to him in a vision by night. I cannot now
   proceed any further.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we are in danger every day and ever, moment,
   not merely from the cruelty of a single tyrant, but from the devil, who
   excites the whole world against us, arming the princes of this world,
   and impelling them to destroy us, -- Grant, I pray thee, that we may
   feel and demonstrate, by experience, that our life is in thy hand, and
   that under thy faithful guardianship thou wilt not suffer one hair of
   our heads to fall. Do thou also so defend us, that the impious
   themselves may acknowledge that we do not boast this day in vain in thy
   name, nor invoke thee without success. And when we have experienced thy
   paternal anxiety, through the whole course of our life, may we arrive
   at that blessed immortality which thou hast promised us, and which is
   laid up for us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Seventh
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:20

   20. Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for ever and
   ever: for wisdom and might are his:

   20. Loquutus est [132] Daniel et dixit, Sit nomen Dei benedicitum a
   seculo et in seculum ejus est sapientia, et robur ipsius. [133]


   Daniel here pursues his narrative, and thanks God after King
   Nebuchadnezzar's dream had been made known to him, while he relates the
   sense of the words which he had used. May God's name be blessed, says
   he, from age to age We ought daily to wish for this; for when we pray
   that God's name may be hallowed, continuance is denoted under this form
   of prayer. But Daniel here breaks forth into the praises of God with
   greater vehemence, because he acknowledges his singular benefit in
   being snatched away from death, together with his companions, beyond
   his expectation. Whenever God confers any remarkable blessing on his
   servants, they are the more stirred up to praise him, as David says,
   (Psalm 40:3,) Thou hast put a new song into my mouth. And Isaiah also
   uses this form of speech twice, (Isaiah 42:10,) as if God had given him
   material for a new and unusual song, in dealing so wonderfully with his
   Church. So also, there is no doubt that Daniel here wished to praise
   God in a remarkable manner, since he had received a rare proof of his
   favor in being delivered from instant death. Afterwards he adds, whose
   (or since his) is the wisdom and the strength; for the relative is here
   taken for the causal particle, and the sentence ought to be so
   expressed; the additional particles may avail to strengthen the
   expression, and be taken exclusively, as if he had said, -- to God
   alone ought the praise of wisdom and virtue to be ascribed. Without
   him, indeed, both are sought in vain; but these graces do not seem to
   suit the present purpose; for Daniel ought rather to celebrate God's
   praises, through this vision being opened, and this was enough to
   content him. But he may here speak of God's glory as well from his
   power as his wisdom; as, when, re Scripture wishes to distinguish the
   true God from all fictions, it takes these two principles -- first, God
   governs all things by his own hand, and retains them under his sway;
   and secondly, nothing is hid from him -- and these points cannot be
   separated when his majesty is to be proved. We see mankind fabricating
   deities for themselves, and thus multiplying gods, and distributing to
   each his own office; because they cannot rest in simple unity, when God
   is treated of. Some fancy God retains but half his attributes; as. for
   instance, the praters about bare foreknowledge. They admit nothing to
   be hidden to God, and his knowledge of all things; and this they prove
   by the prophecies which occur in the Scriptures. What they say is true;
   but they very much lessen the glory of God; nay, they tear it to pieces
   by likening him to Apollo, whose office it formerly was, hi the opinion
   of the heathen, to predict future events. When they sought predictions
   of future events, they endued Apollo with the virtue of making known to
   them future occurrences. Many at the present time think God able to
   foresee all things, but suppose him either to dissemble or purposely
   withdraw from the government of the world.

   Lastly, Their notion of God's foreknowledge is but a cold and idle
   speculation. Hence I said, they rob God of half his glory, and, as far
   as they can, tear him to pieces. But Scripture, when it wishes to
   assert what is peculiar to God, joins these two things inseparably;
   first, God foresees all things, since nothing is hidden from his eyes;
   and next, he appoints future events, and governs the world by his will,
   allowing nothing to happen by chance or without his direction. Daniel
   here assumes this principle, or rather unites the two, by asserting
   Israel's God alone to deserve the name, since both wisdom and strength
   are in his power. We must remember how God is defrauded of his just
   praise when we do not connect these two attributes together -- his
   universal foresight and his government of the world allowing nothing to
   happen without his permission. But as it would be too cold to assert
   that to God alone belongs wisdom and strength, unless his wisdom was
   conspicuous, and his strength openly acknowledged, hence it follows
   immediately afterwards --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [132] Verbally, answered. -- Calvin.

   [133] These particles are superfluous: there is nothing obscure in the
   sense. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:21

   21. And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and
   setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them
   that know understanding:

   21. Et ipse [134] mutat tempora, et articulos temporum, constituit
   reges et admovet reges: dat sapientiam sapientibus, et scientiam iis
   qui scientiam cognoscunt. [135]


   Daniel explains, in these words, what might have been obscure; for he
   teaches God to be the true fountain of wisdom and virtue, while he does
   not confine them to himself alone, but diffuses them through heaven and
   earth. And we must mark this diligently; for when Paul affirms God
   alone to be wise, this praise does not seem magnificent enough, (Romans
   16:27;) but when we think of God's wisdom, and set before our eyes all
   around and about us, then we feel more strongly the import of Paul's
   words, that God only is wise. God, therefore, as I have already stated,
   does not keep His wisdom confined to himself, but makes it flow
   throughout the whole world. The full sense of the verse is, -- whatever
   wisdom and power exists in the world, is a testimony to the Almighty's.
   This is man's ingratitude; whenever they find anything worthy of praise
   in themselves or others, they claim it directly as their own, and thus
   God's glory is diminished by the depravity of those who obtain their
   blessings from him. We are here taught not to detract anything from
   God's wisdom and power, since wherever these qualities are conspicuous
   in the world, they ought rather to reflect his glory. We now perceive
   the Prophet's meaning -- God places before our eyes, as in a glass, the
   proofs of his wisdom and power, when the affairs of the world roll on,
   and mankind become powerful through wisdom, and some are raised on
   high, and others fall to the ground. Experience teaches us these events
   do not proceed from human skill, or through the equable course of
   nature, while the loftiest kings are cast down and others elevated to
   the highest posts of honor. Daniel, therefore, admonishes us not to
   seek in heaven alone for God's wisdom and power, since it is apparent
   to us on earth, and proofs of it are daily presented to our
   observation. We now see how these two verses are mutually united He had
   stated wisdom to belong exclusively to God; he now shews that it is not
   hidden within him, but is made manifest to us; and we may perceive by
   familiar experience, how all wisdom flows from him as its exclusive
   fountain. We ought to feel the same concurring power also.

   It is he, then, who changes times and portions of time. We know it to
   be ascribed to fortune when the world passes through such uncertain
   changes that everything is daily changing. hence the profane consider
   all things to be acted on by blind impulse, and others affirm the human
   race to be a kind of sport to God, since men are tossed about like
   balls. But, as I have already said, it is not surprising to find men of
   a perverse and corrupt disposition thus perverting the object of all
   God's works. For our own practical improvement we should consider what
   the Prophet is here teaching, how revolutions, as they are called, are
   testimonies of God's power, and point out with the finger to the truth
   that the affairs of men are ruled by the Most High. For we must of
   necessity adopt one or the other of these views, either that nature
   rules over human events, or else fortune turns about in every
   direction, things which ought to have an even course. As far as nature
   is concerned, its course would be even, unless God by his singular
   counsel, as we have seen, thus changes the course of the times. Yet
   those philosophers who assign the supreme authority to nature are much
   sounder than others who place fortune in the highest rank. For if we
   admit for a moment this latter opinion that fortune directs human
   affairs by a kind of blind impulse, whence comes this fortune? If you
   ask them for a definition, what answer will they make? They will surely
   be compelled to confess this, the word "fortune" explains nothing. But
   neither God nor nature will have any place in this vain and changeable
   government of the world, where all things throw themselves into
   distinct forms without the least order or connection. And if this be
   granted, truly the doctrine of Ephcurus will be received, because if
   God resigns the supreme government of the world, so that all things are
   rashly mingled together, he is no longer God. But in this variety he
   rather displays his hand in claiming for himself the empire over the
   world. In so many changes, then, which meet us on every side, and by
   which the whole face of things is renewed, we must remember that the
   Providence of God shines forth; and things do not flow on in an even
   course, because then the peculiar property of God might with some shew
   of reason be ascribed to nature. God, I say, so changes empires, and
   times, and seasons, that we should learn to look up to him. If the sun
   always rose and set at the same period, or at least certain symmetrical
   changes took place yearly, without any casual change; if the days of
   winter were not short, and those of summer not long, we might then
   discover the same order of nature, and in this way God would be
   rejected from his own dominion. But when the days of winter not only
   differ in length from those of summer, but even spring does not always
   retain the same temperature, but is sometimes stormy and snowy, and at
   others warm and genial; and since summers are so various, no year being
   just like the former one; since the air is changed every hour, and the
   heavens put on new appearances -- when we discern all these things, God
   rouses us up, that we may not grow torpid in our own grossness, and
   erect nature into a deity, and de-wive him of his lawful honor, and
   transfer to our own fancy what he claims for himself alone. If then, in
   these ordinary events, we are compelled to acknowledge God's
   Providence, if any change of greater moment arises, as when God
   transfers empires from one hand to another, and all but transforms the
   whole world, ought we not then to be the more affected, unless we are
   utterly stupid? Daniel, therefore, very reasonably corrects the
   perverse opinion which commonly seizes upon the senses of all, that the
   world either rolls on by chance, or that nature is the supreme deity,
   when he asserts -- God changes times and seasons.

   It is evident from the context, that he is here properly speaking of
   empires, since he appoints and removes kings We feel great difficulty
   in believing kings placed upon their thrones by a divine power, and
   afterwards deposed again, since we naturally fancy that they acquire
   their power by their own talents, or by hereditary right, or by
   fortuitous accident Meanwhile all thought of God is excluded, when the
   industrly, or valor, or success, or any other quality of man is
   extolled! Hence it is said in the Psalms, neither from the east nor the
   west, but God alone is the judge. (Psalm 75:6, 7.) The Prophet there
   derides the discourses of those who call themselves Wise, and who
   gather up reasons from all sides to shew how power is assigned to man,
   by either his own counsel and valor, or by good fortune or other human
   and inferior instruments. Look round, says he, wherever you please,
   from the rising to the setting of the sun, and you will find no reason
   why one man becomes lord of his fellow-creatures rather than another.
   God alone is the judge; that is, the government must remain entirely
   with the one God. So also in this passage, the Lord is said to appoint
   kings, and to raise them from the rest of mankind as he pleases. As
   this argument is a most important one, it might be treated more
   copiously; but since the same opportunity will occur in other passages,
   I comment but shortly on the contents of this verse; for we shall often
   have to treat of the state of kingdoms and of their ruin and changes. I
   am therefore unwilling to add anything more at present, as it is
   sufficient to explain Daniel's intention thus briefly.

   He afterwards adds, -- he gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to
   those who are endued with it In this second clause, the Prophet
   confirms what we have already said, that God's wisdom is not shrouded
   in darkness, but is manifested to us, as he daily gives us sure and
   remarkable proofs of this. Meanwhile he here corrects the ingratitude
   of men who assume to themselves the praise of their own excellencies
   which spring from God, and thus become almost sacrilegious. Daniel,
   therefore, asserts that men have no wisdom but what springs from God.
   Men are, indeed, clever and intelligent, but the question arises,
   whether it springs from themselves? He also shews us how mankind are to
   be blamed in claiming anything as their own, since they have really
   nothing belonging to them, however they may be wrapt, in admiration of
   themselves. Who then will boast of becoming wise by his own innate
   strength? Has he originated the intellect with which he is endowed?
   Because God is the sole author of wisdom and knowledge, the gifts by
   which he has adorned men ought not to obscure his glory, but rather to
   illustrate it. He afterwards adds --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [134] Or, it is he who. -- Calvin.

   [135] That is, to those who are skilled in science. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:22

   22. He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the
   darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.

   22. Ipse patefecit profunda et abscondita cognoseit quod in tenebris,
   [136] et lux cum eo habitat. [137]


   He pursues the same sentiment, and confirms it, -- that all mortals
   receive from God's Spirit whatever intelligence and light they enjoy;
   but he proceeds a step further in this verse than in the last. He had
   said generally, that, men receive wisdom and understanding by God's
   good will; but here he speaks specially; for when a man's understanding
   is rare and unusual, there God's gift shines forth more clearly; as if
   he had said -- God not only distributes to every one according to the
   measure of his own liberality, whatever acuteness and ingenuity they
   possess, but he adorns some with such intelligence that they appear as
   his interpreters. He speaks, therefore, here, specially of the gift of
   prophecy; as if he had said, God's goodness is conspicuous, not only in
   the ordinary prudence of mankind, for no one is so made as to be unable
   to discover between justice and injustice, and to form some plan for
   regulating his life; but in Prophets there is something extraordinary,
   which renders God's wisdom more surprising. Whence, then, do Prophets
   obtain the power of prophesying concerning hidden events, and
   penetrating above the heavens, and surpassing all bounds? Is this
   common to all men? Surely this far exceeds the ordinary ability of man,
   while the Prophet here teaches that; God's beneficence and power
   deserve more praise, because he reveals hidden and secret things; and
   in this sense he adds -- light dwells with God; as if he had said, --
   God differs very much from us, since we are involved in many clouds and
   mists; but to God all things are clear; he has no occasion to hesitate,
   or inquire, and has no need to be hindered through ignorance. Now, we
   fully understand the Prophet's meaning.

   Let us learn from this passage to attribute to God that praise which
   the greater part of the world claims to itself with sacrilegious
   audacity, though God shews it to belong to himself. Whatever
   understanding or judgment we may possess, we should remember that it
   was first received from God. Hence, also, if we have but a small
   portion of common sense, we are still equally indebted to God, for we
   should be like stocks or stones unless by his secret instinct he endued
   us with understanding. But if any one excels others, and obtains the
   admiration of all men, he ought still modestly to submit himself to
   God, and acknowledge himself the more bound to him, because he has
   received more than others. For who knows himself fully but God? The
   more, therefore, he excels in understanding, the more he will lay aside
   all claims of his own, and extol the beneficence of God. Thirdly, let,
   us learn that the understanding of spiritual things is a rare and
   singular gift of the Holy Spirit, in which God's power shines forth
   conspicuously. Let us guard against that diabolical pride by which we
   see almost; the whole world to be swollen and intoxicated. And in this
   respect we should chiefly glorify God, as he has not, only adorned us
   with ordinary foresight, enabling us to discern between good and evil,
   but raised us above the ordinary level of human nature, and so
   enlightened us that we can understand things far exceeding our
   capacities. When Daniel pronounces light to be with God, we must supply
   a tacit antithesis; since he indicates, as I have already said, that
   men are surrounded by thick darkness, and grope about in obscurity. The
   habitation of men is here obliquely contrasted with the sanctuary of
   God; as if the Prophet had said, there is no pure and perfect light but
   in God alone. Hence, when we remain in our natural state, we must
   necessarily wander in darkness, or at least be obscured by many clouds.
   These words naturally lead us not to rest satisfied in our own
   position, but to seek from God that light in which he only dwells.
   Meanwhile, we should remember how God dwells in light unapproachable,
   (1 Timothy 6:16,) unless he deigns to stretch forth his hand to us.
   Hence, if we desire to become partakers of this divine light, let us
   be, on our guard against audacity, and mindful of our ignorance; let;
   us seek God's illumination. Thus his light will not be inaccessible to
   us, when, by his Spirit, he shall conduct us beyond the skies. He
   afterwards adds --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [136] Lies hid. -- Calvin.

   [137] Or, in his power. Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:23

   23. I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who hast
   given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we
   desired of thee: for thou hast now made known unto us the king's
   matter.

   23. Tibi confiteor, Deus patrum meorum et laudo ego, [138] qui dedisti
   mihi sapientiam et robur, et nunc notificasti mihi quae postulavimus
   abs te; qui negotium [139] regis patefecisti nobis.


   Daniel turns his discourse to God. I confess to thee, says he, O God of
   my fathers, and praise thee Here he more openly distinguishes the God
   of the Israelites from all the fictions of the nations. Nor does he use
   this epithet in vain, when he praises the God of his fathers; for he
   wishes to reduce to nothing all the fabrications of the Gentiles
   concerning a multitude of deities. Daniel rejects this as a vain and
   foolish thing, and shews how the God of Israel alone is worthy of
   praise. But he does not found the glory of God on the authority of
   their fathers, as the Papists, when they wish to ascribe the supreme
   power to either George, or Catharine, or any others, count up the
   number of ages during which the error has prevailed. Thus they wish
   whatever the consent of mankind has approved to be received as
   oracular. But if religion depended on the common consent of mankind,
   where would be its stability? We know nothing vainer than the minds of
   men. If man is weighed, says the Prophet, with vanity in a balance,
   vanity itself will preponderate. (Psalm 62:9.) Nothing, therefore, is
   more foolish than this principle of this king, -- what has prevailed by
   the consent of many ages must be religiously true. But here Daniel
   partially commends the God of their fathers, as their fathers were the
   sorts of God. For that sacred adoption prevailed among the Jews, by
   which God chose Abraham and his whole family for himself. Daniel,
   therefore, here does not extol the persons of men, as if they either
   could or ought to add anything they pleased to God; but this is the
   reason why he says, the God of Israel is the God of their fathers,
   since he was of that race which the Almighty had adopted. On the whole,
   he so opposes the God of Israel to all the idols of the Gentiles, that
   the mark of separation is in the covenant itself, and in the celestial
   doctrine by which he revealed himself to the sacred fathers. For while
   the Gentiles have no certain vision, and follow only their own dreams,
   Daniel here deservedly sets forth the God of their fathers.

   He afterwards adds, because thou hast given me wisdom and strength As
   far as relates to wisdom, the reason is. clear enough why Daniel thanks
   God, since he had obtained, as he soon afterwards says, the revelation
   of the dream. He had also formerly been endued with the prophetic
   spirit and with visions. as he related in the first chapter, (Daniel
   1:17.) We may here, inquire what he means by strength? He was not
   remarkable for his honor among men, nor was he ever a commander in
   military affairs, and he had no superior gift of magnificent power to
   cause him to return thanks to God. But Daniel regards this as the
   principal point, that the God. of Israel was then acknowledged as the
   true and only God; because, whatever wisdom and virtue exists in the
   world, it flows from him as its only source. For this reason he speaks
   of himself as well as of all others, as if he had said -- If I have any
   strength or understanding, I ascribe it all to thee; it is thine
   entirely. And, truly, though Daniel was neither a king nor a prefect,
   yet that unconquered greatness of mind which we have seen was not to be
   esteemed as without value. Hence he very properly acknowledges
   something of this kind to have been conferred upon him by heaven.
   Lastly, his intention is to debase himself and to attribute to God his
   own; but he speaks concisely, as we have said, since under the phrases
   "power" and "wisdom" he had previously embraced the proof of his
   divinity. He afterwards adds, Thou hast revealed to me what we demanded
   of thee; thou hast made known to us the king's inquiry There seems here
   a slight discrepancy, as he praises God for granting him a revelation
   of the dream, and then unites others to himself. Yet the revelation was
   not common to them, but peculiar to himself. The solution is easy; for
   he first expresses that this was given to himself specially, that he
   might know the king's dream and understand its interpretation. When he
   has confessed this, he extends the benefit to his companions, and
   deservedly so; because though they did not yet understand what God had
   conferred upon Daniel, yet he had obtained this in their favor,-they
   were all snatched from death, and all their prayers attended to. And
   this availed very much for the confirmation of their faith as it
   assured them they had not prayed in vain. For we said that there was no
   ambition in their prayers, as if any one desired any peculiar gift by
   which he might acquire honor and estimation for himself in the world.
   Nothing of the kind. It was enough for them to shew forth God's name
   among unbelievers; because by his kindness, they had been delivered
   from death. Hence Daniel very properly says, the king's dream was made
   known to him with its interpretation; and this he will afterwards
   transfer to his companions.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [138] And I also praise thee. -- Calvin.

   [139] Or, question. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we have so many testimonies to thy glory
   daily before our eyes, though we seem so blind as to shut out all the
   light by our ingratitude; grant, I pray, that we may at length learn to
   open our eyes; yea, do thou open them by thy Spirit. May we reflect on
   the number, magnitude, and importance of thy benefits towards us; and
   while thou dost set before us the proof of thy eternal divinity, grant
   that we may become proficient in this school of piety. May we learn to
   ascribe to thee the praise of all. virtues, till nothing remains but to
   extol thee alone. And the more thou deignest to declare thyself liberal
   towards us, may we the more ardently desire to worship thee. May we
   devote ourselves to thee without reserving the slightest self praise,
   but caring for this only, that thy glory may remain and shine forth
   throughout all the world, through Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Eighth
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:24

   24. Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had ordained to
   destroy the wise men of Babylon: he went and said thus unto him;
   Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in before the king, and I
   will shew unto the king the interpretation.

   24. Itaque ingressus est Daniel ad Arioch, quem prefecerat rex ad
   perdendum [140] sapientes Babylonis, venit ergo, et sic loquutus est
   ei, Sapientes Babylonis ne perdas, introduc me ad regem et
   interpretationem regi indicabo.


   Before Daniel sent his message to the king, as we saw yesterday, he
   discharged the duty of piety as he ought, for he testified his
   gratitude to God for revealing the secret. But he now says, that he
   came to Arioch, who had been sent by the king to, slay the Magi, and
   asked him not to kill them, for he had a revelation; of which we shall
   afterwards treat. Here we must notice that some of the Magi were slain,
   as I have said. For after Arioch had received the king's mandate, he
   would never have dared to delay it even a few days; but a delay
   occurred after Daniel had requested a short space of time, to be
   afforded him. Then Arioch relaxed from the severity of the king's order
   against the Magi; and now Daniel asks him to spare the remainder. He
   seems, indeed, to have done this with little judgment, because we ought
   to desire the utter abolition of magical arts, for we saw before that
   they were diabolical sorceries. It may be answered thus, -- although
   Daniel, saw many faults and corruptions in the Magi and their art, or
   science, or false pretensions to knowledge, yet, since the principles
   were true, he was unwilling to allow what had proceeded from God to be
   blotted out. But; it seems to me that Daniel's object was somewhat
   different, for although the Magi might have been utterly destroyed
   without the slightest difficulty, yet he looks rather to the cause, and
   therefore wished the persons to be spared. It will often happen that
   wicked men are called in question as well as those who have deserved a
   tenfold death; but if they are not punished for any just reason, we
   ought; to spare their persons, not through their worthiness, but
   through our own habitual sense of equity and rectitude. It is therefore
   probable that Daniel, when he saw the king's command concerning the
   slaughter of the Magi to be so tyrannical, went out to meet him, lest;
   they should all be slain with savage and cruel violence, without; the
   slightest reason. I therefore think that Daniel spared the Magi, but
   not through any personal regard; he wished them to be safe, but for
   another purpose, namely, to await their punishment from God. Their
   iniquity was not yet ripe for destruction through the indignation of
   the king. It is not surprising, then, that Daniel wished, as far as
   possible, to hinder this cruelty. It afterwards follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [140] To slay. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:25

   25. Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste, and said
   thus unto him, I have found a man of the captives of Judah, that will
   make known unto the king the interpretation.

   25. Tunc Arioch cum festinatione introduxit Danielem ad regem, et sic
   locutus est el, Inveni virum ex filiis captivitatis Jehudah, qui
   interpretationem regi notam faciet.


   It may here be a question, in what sense Arioch speaks of bringing
   Daniel before the king, as if it were something new. For Daniel had
   already requested from the king time for prayer, as we have seen. Why
   then does Arioch now boast of having found a man of the captives of
   Judah, as if he were speaking of all obscure and unknown person? But
   very probably Daniel requested the time for prayer from Arioch, since
   we learn from history how difficult it was to approach those kings; for
   they thought it a profanation of their majesty to be polite and humane.
   The conjecture, therefore, is probable, that Arioch was the channel
   through whom the king granted the time to Daniel; or, we may suppose
   the words of Arioch are not simply related, but that Daniel shews the
   great boasting of courtiers, who always praise their own good offices,
   and adorn them with the splendor of words. Hence Arioch reminds the
   king how he had met with Daniel, and had at length obtained what the
   king very urgently desired. I do not therefore dwell longer on this,
   since either Arioch then explained more clearly to the long that Daniel
   could interpret, his dream; or he joined what had formerly been done;
   or else Daniel had obtained this before; or he had begged of the king
   that some time should be given to Daniel. He puts sons of
   transmigration, or captivity, a usual scriptural phrase for captives,
   although this noun is collective. It now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:26

   26. The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar,
   Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I have seen, and
   the interpretation thereof?

   26. Respondit rex, et dixit Danieli cujus nomen erat Baltesazzar, Estne
   tibi facultas ad notificandum [141] mihi somnium quod vidi, et
   interpretationem ejus?


   The king uses these words through his despair of all interpretation,
   since he perceived all the Magi in this respect without judgment and
   understanding; for he was at first persuaded that the Magi alone were
   the possessors of wisdom. Since he had asked them in vain, the error
   with which he was imbued, as I have said, prevented him from hoping for
   anything better elsewhere. Through surprise, then, he here inquires, as
   if the thing were impossible, Have you that power? There is no doubt
   that God drew this interrogation from the proud king to render his
   grace in Daniel more illustrious. The less hope there was in the king
   himself, the more there was in the revelation of both dignity and
   reverence, as we shall afterwards see; for the, king was astonished,
   and fell prostrate through stupor upon the earth before a captive! This
   is the reason wily Daniel relates the use of this interrogation by the
   king. It now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [141] To declare -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:27

   27. Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret
   which the king hath demanded cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the
   magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king;

   27. Respondit Daniel regi, et dixit, Arcanum quod rex postulat
   sapientes, magi, astrologi, genethliasi non possunt indicare regi.

   28. But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh
   known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy
   dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these;

   28. Sed est Deus in coelis, qui revelat arcana; et indicavit regi
   Nebuchadnezzar quid futurum sit in fine [142] dierum somnium tuum, et
   visio capitis tuisuper lectum tuum, haec est.


   First, with respect to these names we need not trouble ourselves much,
   since even the Jews themselves are compelled to guess at them. They are
   very bold in their definitions and rash in their affirmations, and jet
   they cannot clearly distinguish how one kind of wise man differed from
   the others; hence it is sufficient for us to hold that the discourse
   now concerns those then esteemed "wise men," under the various
   designations of Magi, Soothsayers, and Astrologers. Now, as to Daniel's
   answer. He says it was not surprising that the king did not find what
   he hoped for among the Magi, since God had breathed into him this dream
   beyond the comprehension of human intellect. I know not whether those
   interpreters are right who think magical arts here simply condemned;
   for I rather think a comparison is instituted; between the king's dream
   and the substance of the science of the Magi. I always exclude
   superstitions by which they vitiated true and genuine science. But as
   far as the principles are concerned, we cannot precisely condemn
   astronomy and whatever belongs to the consideration of the order of
   nature. This appears to me the whole intention, -- the king's dream was
   not subjected to human knowledge, for mortals have no such natural
   skill as to be able to comprehend the meaning of the dream, and God
   manifests those secrets which need the peculiar revelation of the
   Spirit. When Daniel says the Magi, Astrologers, and the rest cannot
   explain to the king his dream, and are not suitable interpreters of it,
   the true reason is, because the dream was not natural and had nothing
   in common with human conjectures, but was the peculiar revelation of
   the Spirit. As when Paul disputes concerning the Gospel, he collects
   into order every kind of intelligence among men, because those who are
   endued with any remarkable acuteness or ability think they can
   accomplish anything. But the doctrine of the Gospel is a heavenly
   mystery (1 Corinthians 2:4) which cannot be comprehended by the most
   learned and talented among men. The real sense of Daniel's words is
   this, -- the Magi, Astrologers, and Soothsayers had no power of
   expounding the king's dream, since it was neither natural nor human.

   This is clearly evident from the context, because he adds,

   There is a God in heaven who reveals secrets For I take vrm, berem,
   here for the adversative particle. He opposes therefore the revelation
   of God to the conjectures and interpretations of the Magi, since all
   human sciences are included, so to speak, within their own bounds and
   bolts. Daniel, therefore, says that the matter requires the singular
   gift of the Holy Spirit. The same God also who revealed the king's
   dream to Daniel, distributes to each of us ability and skill according
   to his own pleasure. Whence does it arise that some are remarkable for
   quickness and others for stupidity and sloth? -- that some become
   proficients in human arts and learning, and others remain utterly
   ignorant, unless God shews, by this variety, how by his power and will
   the minds of men become enlightened or remain blunt and stupid? As the
   Almighty is the supreme origin of all intelligence in the world, What
   Daniel here says is not generally true; and this contrast, unless we
   come to particulars, is either cold or superfluous. We understand,
   therefore, why he said in the former verse that the Magi and
   Astrologers could not explain the king's dream, since the Almighty had
   raised King Nebuchadnezzar above the common level for the purpose of
   explaining futurity to him through his dream.

   There is then a God in heaven who reveals secrets; he shews to king
   Nebuchadnezzar what will come to pass. He confirms what I have said,
   that the king was utterly unable to comprehend the meaning of his own
   dream. It often happens that men's minds move hither and thither, and
   thus make clever guesses; but Daniel excludes all human media, and
   speaks of the dream as proceeding directly from God. He adds, what
   shall happen at the end or extremity of the days We may inquire what he
   means by the word "extremity." Interpreters think this ought to be
   referred to the advent of Christ; but they do not explain why this word
   signifies Christ's advent. There is no obscurity in the phrase; "the
   end of the days" signifies the advent of Christ, because it was a kind
   of renewal to the world. Most. truly, indeed, the world is still in the
   same state of agitation as it was when Christ was manifest in the
   flesh; but, as we shall afterwards see, Christ came for the very
   purpose of renovating the world, and since his Gospel is a kind of
   perfection of all things, we are said to be "in the last days." Daniel
   compares the whole period preceding Christ's advent with this extremity
   of the days. God therefore wished to shew the king of Babylon what
   should occur after one monarchy had destroyed another, and also that
   there should be an end of those changes whenever Christ's kingdom
   should arrive. At present I touch but briefly on this point, since more
   must; be said upon it by and bye.

   This, says he, is the dream and vision of thy head upon thy couch It
   may seem absurd for Daniel here to profess to explain to the king the
   nature of his dream and its interpretation, and yet to put in something
   else. But, as he will add nothing out of place, we ought not to
   question the propriety of his saying, this was the king's vision and
   his dream; for his object was to rouse the king the more urgently to
   attend to both the dream and its interpretation. Here we must; take
   notice how the Prophet persists in this, with the view of persuading
   the king that God was the author of the dream about. which he inquired
   of Daniel; for the words would be entirely thrown away unless men were
   thoroughly persuaded that the explanation given proceeded from God. For
   many in the present day will hear willingly enough what may be said
   about the Gospel, but they are not inwardly touched by it, and then all
   they hear vanishes away and immediately escapes them. Hence reverence
   is the principle of true and solid understanding. Thus Daniel does not
   abruptly bring forward either the explanation or the narration of the
   dream, but prepares the proud king to listen, by shewing him that he
   neither dreamt at, random nor in accordance with his own thoughts, but
   was divinely instructed and admonished concerning hidden events. It now
   follows,-
     __________________________________________________________________

   [142] In the extremity. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:29

   29. As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed,
   what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets
   maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.

   29. Tibi, rex, cogitationes tuae super lectum tuum ascenderunt, quid
   futurum esset posthac; et qui revelat arcana exposuit tibi quid futurum
   esset.


   He again confirms what I have just touched upon, for he wished to
   impress this upon the king's mind -- that God was the author of the
   dream, to induce the king to prepare for its interpretation with
   becoming sobriety, modesty, and docility. For unless he had been
   seriously affected, he would have despised Daniel's interpretation;
   just as we see men fail to profit through their own pride or
   carelessness even when God addresses. them familiarly. Hence we must
   observe this order, and be fully prepared to listen to God, and learn
   to put a bridle upon ourselves on hearing his sacred name, never
   rejecting whatever he proposes to us, but treating it with proper
   gravity. This is the true reason why Daniel repeats again that King
   Nebuchadnezzar was divinely instructed in future events. He says, in
   the first clause, The king's thoughts ascended, -- the phrase is Hebrew
   and. Chaldee. Thoughts are said to ascend when they are revolved in the
   brain or head, as we formerly saw -- this vision was in thy head; since
   the seat of the reasoning faculty is in the head. Daniel therefore
   asserts the king to be anxious about futurity, as the greatest monarchs
   think of what shall happen after their death, and every one dreams
   about enjoying the empire of the whole world. So King Nebuchadnezzar
   was very probably indulging these thoughts. But it follows immediately,
   that his thoughts could non profit him unless God unveiled the future,
   because it was his peculiar office, says the Prophet, to reveal
   secrets, Here we see clearly how vainly men disturb themselves when
   they turn over and over again subjects which surpass their abilities.
   King Nebuchadnezzar might have fatigued himself for a, long time
   without profit if he had not been instructed by the oracle. Hence there
   is weight in these words -- He who reveals secrets has explained to the
   king what shall happen; that is, thou canst not understand the dream by
   thine own thoughts, but God has deemed thee worthy of this peculiar
   favor when he wished to make thee conscious of mysteries which had been
   otherwise altogether hidden from thee, for thou couldst never have
   penetrated to such a depth.

   He afterwards adds --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:30

   30. But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom
   that I have more than any living, but for their sakes that shall make
   known the interpretation to the king, and that thou mightest know the
   thoughts of thy heart.

   30. Et ego, [143] non in sapientia quae sit in me prae cunctis
   viventibus, arcanum hoc patefactum est mihi; [144] sed ut
   interpretationem regi exponerem, et cogitationes cordis tui
   cognosceres.


   Here Daniel meets an objection which Nebuchadnezzar might make, -- If
   God alone can reveal secrets, how, I pray thee, canst thou, a mere
   mortal, do it? Daniel anticipates this, and transfers the whole glory
   to God, and ingenuously confesses that he has no interpretation of his
   own to offer, but represents himself as led forward by God's hand to be
   its interpreter; and as having nothing by his own natural talents, but
   acting as God pleased to appoint him his servant for this office,
   and-as using his assistance. This secret, then, says he, has been made
   known to me By these words he sufficiently declares, how his
   undertaking to interpret the dream was God's peculiar gift. But he more
   clearly expresses this gift to be supernatural, as it is called, by
   saying, not in the wisdom which belongs to me For if Daniel had
   surpassed the whole world in intelligence, yet he could never divine
   what; the king of Babylon had dreamt! He excelled, indeed, in superior
   abilities and learning, and was endowed, as we have said, with
   remarkable gifts; yet; he could never have obtained this power which he
   acquired from God through prayer, (I repeat it; again,) through his own
   study or industry, or any human exertions.

   We observe how Daniel here carefully excludes, not only what men
   foolishly claim as their own, but; also what God naturally confers;
   since we know the profane to be endowed with singular talents, and
   other eminent faculties; and these are called natural, since God
   desires his gracious gifts to shine forth in the human race by such
   examples as these. But while Daniel acknowledges himself endowed with
   no common powers, through the good pleasure and discipline of God,
   though he confesses this, I say, yet he places this revelation on a
   higher footing. We observe also how the gifts of the Spirit mutually
   differ, because Daniel acted in a kind of twofold capacity with regard
   to the endowments with which it pleased God to adorn him. First of all,
   he made rapid progress in all sciences, and flourished much in
   intellectual quickness, and we have already clearly shewn this to be,
   owing to the mere liberality of God. This liberality puts all things in
   their proper order, while it shews God's singular favor in the
   explanation of the dream.

   This secret, then, was not made known to me on account of any wisdom in
   me beyond the rest of mankind Daniel does not affirm himself to be
   superior to all men in wisdom, as some falsely twist these words, but
   he leaves this in doubt by saying, This ought not to be ascribed to
   wisdom, for if I were the acutest of all men, all my shrewdness would
   avail me nothing and, again, if I were the rudest idiot, still it is
   God who uses me as his servant, in interpreting the dream to you. You
   must not, therefore, expect anything human from me, but you must
   receive what I say to you, because I am the instrument of God's Spirit,
   just as if I had come down from heaven. This is the simple sense of the
   words. Hence we may learn to ascribe the praise to God alone, to whom
   it is due; for it is his peculiar office to illuminate our minds, so
   that we may comprehend heavenly mysteries. For although we are
   naturally endued with the greatest acuteness, which is also his gift,
   yet we may call it a limited endowment, as it does not reach to the
   heavens. Let us learn, then, to leave his own to God, as we are
   admonished by this expression of Daniel.

   He afterwards adds, But that I may make known to the king the
   interpretation, and thou mayest know the thoughts of thy heart Daniel
   uses the plural number, but indefinitely; as if he had said, God has
   left thee indeed hitherto in suspense; but yet he did not inspire thee
   with this dream in vain. These flyings, therefore, are mutually united,
   namely, -- God has revealed to thee this secret, and has appointed me
   his interpreter. Thus we perceive Daniel's meaning. For Nebuchadnezzar
   might object, Why does God torment me thus? What is the meaning of my
   perplexity; -- first I dream, and then my dream escapes me, and its
   interpretation is unknown to me? Lest, therefore, Nebuchadnezzar should
   thus argue with God, Daniel here anticipates him, and shows how neither
   the dream nor the vision occurred in vain; but God now grants what was
   there wanting, namely, the return of the dream to Nebuchadnezzar's
   memory, and at the same time his acknowledgment of its purport, and the
   reason of its being sent to him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [143] That is, to me. -- Calvin.

   [144] The repetition is superfluous, but it does not obscure the sense.
   -- Calvin
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since thou desirest us to differ from the brutes,
   and hence didst impress our minds with the light of intellect, --
   Grant, I pray thee, that we may learn to acknowledge and to magnify
   this singular favor, and may we exercise ourselves in the knowledge of
   those things which induce us to reverence thy sovereignty. Besides
   this, may we distinguish between that common sense which thou hast
   bestowed upon us, and the illumination of thy Spirit, and the gift of
   faith, that thou alone mayest be glorified by our being grafted by
   faith into the body of thine only-begotten Son. We entreat also from
   thee further progress and increase of the same faith, until at length
   thou bring us to the full manifestation of light. Then, being like
   thee, we shall behold thy glory face to face, and enjoy the same in
   Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Ninth
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:31-35

   31. Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image,
   whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof
   was terrible.

   31. Tu rex videbas, et ecce imago una grandis, imago illa magna, et
   splendor ejus [145] pretiosus [146] stabat coram te et species ejus
   terribilis.

   32. This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of
   silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,

   32. Hujus imaginis caput ex auro bono, [147] pectus ejus et brachia
   ejus ex argento, venter ejus et femora ejus ex aere, oes

   33. His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.

   33. Crura ejus ex ferro, [148] pedes ejus partim ex ferro, et partim
   testa.

   34. Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which
   smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake
   them to pieces.

   34. Videbas, quousque excisus fuit lapis, qui non ex manibus, [149] et
   percussit imaginem ad pedes qui erant ex ferro et testa, et contrivit
   eos.

   35. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold,
   broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer
   threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was
   found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great
   mountain, and filled the whole earth.

   35. Tunc contrita sunt simul ferrum, testa, aes, argentum, et aurum: et
   fuerunt quasi quisquiliae [150] ex area aestivali; et abstulit ea
   ventus, et non inventus est locus eorum; et lapis qui percusserat
   imaginem, fuit in montem magnum, et implevit totam terram.


   Although Daniel here records the dream, and does not touch on its
   interpretation, yet we must not proceed farther without discoursing on
   the matter itself. When the interpretation is afterwards added, we
   shall confirm what we have previously said, and amplify as the context
   may guide us. Here Daniel records how Nebuchadnezzar saw an image
   consisting of gold, silver, brass, and iron, but its feet were mixed,
   partly of iron and portly of clay. We have already treated of the name
   of the "Vision," but I briefly repeat again, -- king Nebuchadnezzar did
   not see this image here mentioned, with his natural eyes, but it was a
   specimen of the revelation which he knew with certainty to have been
   divinely offered to him. Otherwise, he might have thrown off all care,
   and acted as he pleased; but God held him down in complete torment,
   until Daniel came as its interpreter.

   Nebuchadnezzar then saw an image. All writers endowed with a sound
   judgment and candidly desirous of explaining the Prophet's meaning,
   understand this, without controversy, of the Four Monarchies, following
   each other in succession. The Jews, when pressed by this
   interpretation, confuse the Turkish with the Roman empire, but their
   ignorance and unfairness is easily proved. For when they wish to escape
   the confession of Christ having been exhibited to the world, they seek
   stale calumnies which do not require refutation; but still something
   must afterwards be said in its proper place. My assertion is perfectly
   correct, that interpreters of moderate judgment and candor, all explain
   the passage of the Babylonian, Persian, Macedonian, and Roman
   monarchies, and Daniel himself afterwards shews this sufficiently by
   his own words. A question, however, arises, why God represented these
   four monarchies under this image? for it does not seem to correspond
   throughout, as the Romans had nothing in common with the Assyrians.
   History has fully informed us how the Medes and Persians succeeded the
   Chaldeans; how Babylon was besieged by the enemy; and how Cyrus, after
   obtaining the victory, transferred the empire to the Medes and
   Persians. It may, perhaps, seem absurd that one image only should be
   proposed. But it is probable -- nay, it may be shewn -- that God does
   not here regard any agreement between these four monarchies, for there
   was none at all, but the state of the world at large. God therefore
   wished, under this figure, to represent the future condition of the
   world till the advent of Christ. This is the reason why God joined
   these four empires together, although actually different; since the
   second sprang from the destruction of the first, and the third from
   that of the second. This is one point, and we may now inquire,
   secondly, why Daniel calls the kingdom of Babylon by the honorable term
   golden. For we know the extent of its tyranny and the character of the
   Assyrians, and their union with the Chaldeans. We are also aware of the
   destruction of Nineveh, and how the Chaldeans made Babylon their
   capital city, to preserve the seat of empire among themselves. If we
   consider the origin of that monarchy, we shall surely find the
   Assyrians like savage beasts, full of avarice, cruelty, and rapacity,
   and the Chaldeans superior to all these vices. Why, then, is that
   empire called the head -- and why a golden head?

   As to the name, "head," since that monarchy arose first, there is
   nothing surprising in Daniel's assigning the highest place to it. And
   as to his passing by Nineveh, this is not surprising, because that city
   had been already cut off, and he is now treating of future events. The
   Chaldean empire, then, was first in the order of time, and is called
   "golden" by comparison; because the world grows worse as it becomes
   older; for the Persians and Medes who seized upon the whole East under
   the auspices of Cyrus, were worse than the Assyrians and Chaldeans. So
   profane poets invented fables about The Four Ages, the Golden, Silver,
   Brazen, and Iron. They do not mention the clay, but without doubt they
   received this tradition from Daniel. If any one object, that Cyrus
   excelled in the noblest qualities, and was of a heroic disposition, and
   celebrated by historians for his prudence and perseverance, and other
   endowments, I reply, we must not look here at the character of any one
   man, but at the continued state of the Persian empire. This is
   sufficiently probable on comparing the empire of the Medes and Persians
   with that of the Babylonians, which is called "silver;" since their
   morals were deteriorated, as we have already said. Experience also
   demonstrates how the world always degenerates, and inclines by degrees
   to vices and corruptions.

   Then as to the Macedonian empire, it ought not to seem absurd to find
   it compared to brass, since we know the cruelty of Alexander's
   disposition. It is frivolous to notice that politeness which has gained
   him favor with historians; since, if we reflect upon his natural
   character, he surely breathed cruelty from his very boyhood. Do we not
   discern in him, when quite a boy, envy and emulation? When he saw his
   father victorious in war, and subduing by industry or depraved arts the
   cities of Greece, he wept with envy, because his father left him
   nothing to conquer. As he manifested such pride when a boy, we conclude
   him to have been more cruel than humane. And with what purpose and
   intention did he undertake the expedition by which he became king of
   kings, unless through being discontented not only with his own power,
   but with the possession of the whole worm? We know also how tie wept
   when he heard from that imaginative philosophy, that there were more
   worlds than this. "What," said he, "I do not possess even one world!"
   Since, then, one world did not suffice for a man who was small of
   stature, he must indeed put off all humanity, as he really appeared to
   do. He never spared the blood of any one; and wherever he burst forth,
   like a devouring tempest, he destroyed everything. Besides, what is
   here said of that monarchy ought not to be restricted to the person of
   Alexander, who was its chief and author, but is extended to all his
   successors. We know that they committed horrible cruelties, for before
   his empire was divided into four parts, constituting the kingdoms of
   Asia, Syria, Egypt, and Macedonia, how much blood was sited! God took
   away from Alexander all his offspring. He might have lived at home and
   begotten children, and thus his memory would have been noble and
   celebrated among all posterity; but God exterminated all his family
   from the world. His mother perished by the sword at the age of eighty
   years; also his wife and sons, as well as a brother of unsound mind.
   Finally, it was a horrible proof of God's anger against Alexander's
   offspring, for the purpose of impressing all ages with a sense of his
   displeasure at such cruelty. If then we extend the Macedonian empire to
   the period when Perseus was conquered, and Cleopatra and Ptolemy slain
   in Egypt., and Syria, Asia, and Egypt reduced under the sway of Rome --
   if we comprehend the whole of this period, we shall not wonder at the
   prophet Daniel calling the monarchy "brazen."

   When he speaks of The Roman Empire as "iron," we must always remember
   the reason I have noticed, which has reference to the world in general,
   and to the depraved nature of mankind; whence their vices and
   immoralities always increase till they arrive at a fearful height. If
   we consider how the Romans conducted themselves, and how cruelly they
   tyrannized over others, the reason why their dominion is called "iron"
   by Daniel will immediately appear. Although they appear to have
   possessed some skill in political affairs, we are acquainted with their
   ambition, avarice, and cruelty. Scarcely any nation can be found which
   suffered like the Romans under those three diseases, and since they
   were so subject to these, as well as to others, it is not surprising
   that the Prophet detracts from their fame and prefers the Macedonians,
   Persians, Medes, and even Assyrians and Chaldeans to them.

   When he says, the feet of the image were partly of iron and partly of
   clay, this ought to be referred to the ruin which occurred, when God
   dispersed and cut in pieces, so to speak, that monarchy. The Chaldean
   power fell first; then the Macedonians, after subduing the East, became
   the sole monarchs to whom the Medes and Persians were subservient. The
   same event happened to the Macedonians, who were at length subdued by
   the, Romans; and all their kings who succeeded Alexander were cut off.
   But there was another reason why God wished to overthrow the Roman
   monarchy. For it fell by itself according to the prediction of this
   prophecy. Since, then, without any external force it fell to pieces by
   itself, it easily appears that it was broken up by Christ, according to
   this dream of King Nebuchadnezzar. It is positively certain, that
   nothing was ever stable from the beginning of the world, and the
   assertion of Paul was always true -- the fashion of this world passeth
   away. (1 Corinthians 7:31.) By the word "fashion" he means whatever is
   splendent in the world is also shadowy and evanescent, he adds, also,
   that all which our eyest gaze upon must vanish away. But, as I have
   said, the reason was different when God wished to destroy the empire of
   the Chaldees, the Persians, and the Macedonians; because this was more
   clearly shewn in the case of the Romans, how Christ by his advent took
   away whatever was splendid, and magnificent, and admirable in the
   world. This, therefore, is the reason why God assigns specially to the
   Romans feet of clay Thus much, then, with respect to the four empires.

   In the third place, it may be doubted why Christ is said to have broken
   this image from the mountains For if Christ is the eternal wisdom of
   God (Proverbs 8:15) by whom kings reign, this seems scarcely to accord
   with it; for how, by his advent, should he break up the political order
   which we; know God approves of, and has appointed and established by
   his power? I answer, -- earthly empires are swallowed and broken up by
   Christ accidentally, as they say. (Psalm 2:9.) For if kings exercise
   their office honestly, clearly enough Christ's kingdom is not contrary
   to their power. Whence, then, does it happen that Christ strikes kings
   with an iron scepter, and breaks, and ruins, and reduces them to
   nothing? Just because their pride is untamable, and they raise their
   heads to heaven, and wish, if possible, to draw down God from his
   throne. Hence they necessarily feel Christ's hand opposed to them,
   because they cannot and will not subject themselves to God.

   But another question may be raised: -- When Christ was made manifest,
   those monarchies had fallen long previously; for the Chaldean, the
   Persian, and that of the successors of Alexander, had passed away. The
   solution is at hand, if we understand what I have previously mentioned
   -- that under one image the whole state of the world is here depicted
   for us. Although all events did not occur at the same moment, yet we
   shall find the Prophet's language essentially true, that Christ should
   destroy all monarchies. For when the seat of the empire of the East was
   changed, and Nineveh destroyed, and the Chaldeans had fixed the seat of
   empire among themselves, this happened by God's just judgment, and
   Christ was already reigning as the king of the world. That monarchy was
   really broken up by his power, and the same may be said of the Persian
   empire. For when they degenerated from a life of austerity and sobriety
   into one of foul and infamous luxury; when they raged so cruelly
   against all mankind, and became so exceedingly rapacious, their empire
   necessarily passed away from them, and Alexander executed the judgment
   of God. The same occurred to Alexander and his successors. Hence the
   Prophet means, that before Christ appeared, he already possessed
   supreme power, both in heaven and earth, and thus broke up and
   annihilated the pride and violence of all men.

   But Daniel says -- the image perished when the Roman empire was broken
   up, and yet we observe in the East and the neighboring regions the
   greatest monarchs still reigning with very formidable prowess. I reply,
   we must remember what we said yesterday -- the dream was presented to
   King Nebuchadnezzar, that he might understand all future events to the
   renovation of the world. Hence God was not willing to instruct the king
   of Babylon further than to inform him of the four future monarchies
   which should possess the whole globe, and should obscure by their
   splendor all the powers of the world, and draw all eyes and all
   attention to itself; and afterwards Christ should come and overthrow
   those monarchies. God, therefore, wished to inform King Nebuchadnezzar
   of these events; and here we must notice the intention of the Holy
   Spirit. No mention is made of other kingdoms, because they had not yet
   emerged into importance sufficient to be compared to these four
   monarchies. While the Assyrians and Chaldeans reigned, there was no
   rivalry with their neighbors, for the whole of the East obeyed them. It
   was incredible that Cyrus, springing from a barbarous region, could so
   easily draw to himself such resources, and seize upon so many provinces
   in so short a time! For he was like a whirlwind which destroyed the
   whole East. The same may be said of the third monarchy; for if the
   successors of Alexander had been mutually united, there was then no
   empire in the world which could have increased their power. The Romans
   were fully occupied in struggling with their neighbors, and were not
   yet at rest on their own soil; and afterwards, when Italy, Greece,
   Asia, and Egypt were obedient to them, no other empire rivaled their
   fame; for all the power and glory of the world was at that period
   absorbed by their arms.

   We now understand why Daniel mentioned those four kingdoms, and why he
   places their close at the advent of Christ. When I speak of Daniel,
   this ought to be understood of the dream; for without doubt God wished
   to encourage the Jews not to despair, when first the brightness of the
   Chaldean monarchy, then that of the Persian, next the Macedonian, and
   lastly, the Romans overwhelmed the world. For what could they have
   determined by themselves at the time when Nebuchadnezzar dreamt about
   the four empires? The kingdom of Israel was then utterly destroyed, the
   ten tribes were exiles, the kingdom of Judah was reduced to desolation.
   Although the city Jerusalem was yet. standing, still where was the
   kingdom? It was full of ignominy and disgrace; nay, the posterity of
   David then reigned precariously in the tribe of Judah, and even there
   over but a part of it; and afterwards, although their return was
   permitted, yet we know how miserably they were afflicted. And when
   Alexander, like a tempest, devastated the East, they suffered, as we
   know, the greatest distress; they were frequently ravaged. by his
   successors; their city was reduced almost to solitude, and the temple
   profaned; and when their condition was at the best, they were still
   tributary, as we, shall afterwards see. It was certainly necessary for
   their minds to be supported in so great and such confused perturbation.
   This, therefore, was the reason why God sent the, dream about those
   monarchies to the king of Babylon. It Daniel had dreamt, the faithful
   would not have had so remarkable a subject-matter for the confirmation
   of their faith; but when the king's dream is spread abroad through
   almost the whole East, and when its interpretation is equally
   celebrated, the Jews might recover their spirits and revive their hopes
   at their own time, since they understood from the first that these four
   monarchies should not exist by any mere changes of fortune; for the
   same God who had foretold to King Nebuchadnezzar future events,
   determined also what he should do, and what he wished to take place.

   The Jews knew that; the Chaldeans were reigning only by the decree of
   heaven; and that another more destructive empire should afterwards
   arise; thirdly, that they must undergo a servitude under the
   Macedonians; lastly, that the Romans should be the conquerors and
   masters of the world -- and all this by the decree of heaven. When they
   reflected on these things, and finally heard of the Redeemer, as,
   according to promise, a perpetual King, and all the monarchies, then so
   refulgent, as without any stability-all this would prove no common
   source of strength. Now, therefore, we understand with what intention
   God wished what had hitherto been hidden, to be everywhere promulgated;
   the Jews, too, would hand down to their sons and grandsons what they
   had heard from Daniel, and afterwards this prophecy would be extant,
   and become an admiration to them throughout all ages.

   When we come to the words, he says, one image was great and large, its
   splendor was precious, and its form terrible By this phrase, God wished
   to meet a doubt which might creep into the minds of the Jews, on
   perceiving each of those empires prosperous in its turn. When the Jews,
   captive and forlorn, saw the Chaldeans formidable throughout the whole
   world, and, consequently, highly esteemed and all but adored by the
   rest of mankind, what could they think of it? Why, they would have no
   hope of return, because God had raised their enemies to such great
   power that their avarice and cruelty were like a deep whirlpool. The
   Jews might thus conclude themselves to be drowned in a very deep abyss,
   whence they could not hope to escape. But when the empire was
   transferred to the Medes and Persians, although they were allowed the
   liberty of returning, still we know how small a number used this
   indulgence, and the rest were ungrateful. Whether or not this was so,
   few of the Jews, returned to their country; and these had to make war
   upon their neighbors, and were subject to continual molestation. As far
   as common sense would guide them, it was easier for them not to stir a
   step from Chaldea, Assyria, and the other parts of the East, since
   their neighbors in their own country were all so hostile to them. As
   long as they were tributary and esteemed almost as serfs and slaves,
   and while their condition was so humiliating, the same temptation
   remained. For, if they were God's people, why did he not care for them
   so far as to relieve them from that cruel tyranny? Wily did he not
   restore them to calmness, and render them free from such various
   inconveniences, and from so many injuries? When the Macedonian. empire
   succeeded, they were more miserable than before; they were daily
   exposed as a prey, and every species of cruelty was practiced towards
   them. Then, with regard to the Romans, we know how proudly they
   domineered over them. Although Pompey, at his first assault, did not
   spoil the temple, yet at length he became bolder, and Crassus shortly
   afterwards destroyed everything till the most horrible and prodigious
   slaughter followed. As the Jews must suffer these things, this
   consolation must, necessarily be offered to them -- the Redeemer shall
   at length arrive, who shall break up all these empires.

   As to Christ being called the stone cut out without human, hands, and
   being pointed out by other phrases, I cannot explain them now.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [145] Or, appearance, in. common language -- its splendor, therefore.
   -- Calvin.

   [146] Or, excellent -- Calvin.

   [147] Pure gold -- Calvin.

   [148] Iron -- Calvin.

   [149] Which was cut out without human hands -- Calvin.

   [150] Or, chaff. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we so travel through this world that our
   attention is easily arrested, and our judgment darkened, when we behold
   the power of the impious refulgent and terrible to ourselves and
   others. Grant, I say, that we may raise our eyes upwards, and consider
   how much power thou hast conferred upon thine only-begotten Son. Grant,
   also, that he may rule and govern us by the might of his Spirit,
   protect us by his faithfulness and guardianship, and compel the whole
   world to promote our salvation; thus may we rest calmly under his
   protection, and fight with that boldness and patience which he both
   commands and commends, until at length we enjoy the fruit of the
   victory which thou hast promised, and which thou wilt provide for us in
   thy heavenly kingdom. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Tenth

   We have already explained God's intention in offering to King
   Nebuchadnezzar the dream concerning the four monarchies, and the
   kingdom of Christ which should put an end to them. We have shewn it to
   have been not for the king's sake so much as for the consolation and
   support of the remnant of the faithful in those very severe troubles
   which awaited them, and were close at hand. For when redemption had
   been promised to them, and the Prophets had extolled that remarkable
   beneficence of God in magnificent terms, their confidence might fail
   them amidst those revolutions which afterwards followed. For God wished
   to sustain their spirits, so that amidst such agitations and tumults
   they might remain constant, and patiently and quietly wait; for the
   promised Redeemer. Meanwhile God wished to render all the Chaldeans
   without excuse, because this dream of the king's was everywhere
   celebrated, and yet, none of them profited by it, as far as Christ's
   eternal reign is concerned. But this was the principal point in the
   dream, as we shall afterwards see. But God wished, in the first place,
   to consult the interests of his elect, lest they should despond among
   those so-called revolutions, which might seem contrary to those
   numerous prophecies, by which not merely simple liberty was promised,
   but perpetual and continued happiness under God's hand. We now
   understand the end which God intended by this dream. We must now treat
   its explanation. We have already touched upon some points, but Daniel
   himself shall lead the way along which we are to proceed. First of all
   he says-
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:36-38

   36. This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof
   before the king.

   36. Hoc est somnium; et interpretationem ejus dicemus coram rege.

   37. Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given
   thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

   37. Tu rex, rex regum es, cui Deus coelorum regnum, potentiam et robur
   dedit, et [151] gloriam tibi. [152]

   38. And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field
   and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and hath
   made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.

   38. Et ubicunque habitant filii hominum, bestia agri, et volucris
   coelorum, [153] dedit in manum tuam, et praefecit to omnibus [154] tu
   ipse caput es aureum.


   Daniel here declares "[11]the golden head of the image" to be the
   Babylonian kingdom. We know that the Assyrians were subdued before the
   monarchy was transferred to Babylon; but since they did not prevail
   sufficiently to be considered as supreme rulers in that eastern
   territory, the Babylonian empire is here mentioned first. It is also
   worthwhile to remark, that God was unwilling to refer here to what had
   already occurred, but he rather proposed that the people should in
   future depend on this prophecy and rest upon it. Here it would have
   been superfluous to say anything about the Assyrians, since that empire
   had already passed away. But the Chaldeans were still to reign for some
   time -- say seventy or at least sixty years. Hence God wished to hold
   the minds of his own servants in suspense till the end of that
   monarchy, and then to arouse them by fresh hopes, until the second
   monarchy should pass away, so that afterwards they might rest in
   patience under the third and fourth monarchies, and might perceive at
   length the time of Christ's advent to be at hand. This is the reason
   why Daniel places the Chaldean monarchy here in the first rank and
   order. And in this matter there is no difficulty, because he states
   King Nebuchadnezzar to be the golden head of the image. We may gather
   the reason of his being called the golden head from the context,
   namely, because its integrity was then greater than under the empire of
   the Medes and Persians. It is very true that the Chaldeans were the
   most cruel robbers, and we know how Babylon was then detested by all
   the pious and sincere worshippers of God. Still, since things usually
   become worse by process of time, the state of the world was; as yet
   tolerable under that sovereignty. This is the reason why Nebuchadnezzar
   is called "the head of gold;" but this ought not to be referred to him
   personally, but rather extended to his whole kingdom, and all his
   successors, among whom Belshazzar was the most hateful despiser of God;
   and by comprehension he is said to form part of this head of gold. But
   Daniel shews that he did not flatter the king, since he assigns this
   reason for Nebuchadnezzar being the golden head -- God had set him up
   above all the earth. But this seems to be common to all kings, since
   none of them reign without God's permission -- a sentiment which is
   partially true, but the Prophet implies that Nebuchadnezzar was raised
   up in an especial manner, because he excelled all other sovereigns. It
   now follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [151] Some translate the nouns by adjectives or epithets -- a strong
   and powerful kingdom. -- Calvin.

   [152] The word lk, lek, "to thee," is redundant -- Calvin.

   [153] That is, "birds;" there is a change of number -- Calvin.

   [154] Verbally, has made thee ruler over them all -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:39

   39. And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and
   another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the
   earth.

   39. Et post to exsurget regnum aliud inferius te, [155] et regnum
   tertium aliud quod erit aeneum, et dominabitur in tota terra.


   In this verse Daniel embraces the Second and Third Monarchies. He says
   the second should be inferior to the Chaldean in neither power nor
   wealth; for the Chaldean empire, although it spread so far and so wide,
   was added to that of the Medes and Persians. Cyrus subdued the Medes
   first; and although he made his father-in-law, Cyaxares, his ally in
   the sovereignty, yet he had expelled his maternal grandfather, and thus
   obtained peaceable possession of the kingdom throughout all Media. Then
   he afterwards conquered the Chaldeans and Assyrians, as well as the
   Lydians and the rest of the nations of Asia Minor. We see then that his
   kingdom is not called inferior through having less splendor or opulence
   in human estimation, but because the general condition of the world was
   worse under the second monarchy, as men's vices and corruptions
   increase more and more. Cyrus was, it is true, a prudent prince, but
   yet sanguinary. Ambition and avarice carried him fiercely onwards, and
   he wandered in every direction, like a wild beast, forgetful of all
   humanity. And if we scan his disposition accurately, we shall discover
   it to be, as Isaiah says, very greedy of human blood. (Isaiah 13:18.)
   And here we may remark, that he does not treat only of the persons of
   kings, but of their counselors and of the whole people. Hence Daniel
   deservedly pronounces the second state of the kingdom inferior to the
   first; not because Nebuchadnezzar excelled in dignity, or wealth, or
   power, but because the world had not degenerated so much as it
   afterwards did. For the more these monarchies extend themselves, the
   more licentiousness increases in the world, according to the teaching
   of experience. Whence the folly and madness of those who desire to have
   kings very powerful is apparent, just as if any one should desire a
   river to be most rapid, as Isaiah says when combating this folly.
   (Isaiah 8:7.) For the swifter, the deeper, and the wider a river flows
   on, the greater the destruction of its overflow to the whole
   neighborhood. Hence the insanity of those who desire the greatest
   monarchies, because some things will by positive necessity occur out of
   lawful order. when one man occupies so broad a space; and this did
   occur under the sway of the Medes and Persians.

   The description of the Third Monarchy now follows. It is called brazen,
   not so much from its hardness as from its being worse than the second.
   The Prophet teaches how the difference between the second and third
   monarchies is similar to that between silver and brass. The rabbis
   confound the two monarchies, through their desire to comprehend under
   the second what they call the kingdom of the Greeks; but they display
   the grossest ignorance and dishonesty. For they do not err, through
   simple ignorance, but they purposely desire to overthrow what Scripture
   here states clearly concerning the advent of Christ. Hence they are not
   ashamed to mingle and confuse history, and to pronounce carelessly on
   subjects unknown to them -- unknown, I say, not because they escape men
   moderately versed hi history, but through their being brutal
   themselves, and discerning nothing. For instead of Alexander the son of
   Philip, they put Alexander the son of Mammea, who possessed the Roman
   empire, when half its provinces had been already separated from it. He
   was a spiritless boy, and was slain in his tent with the greatest
   ignominy by his own soldiers; besides that, he never really governed,
   but lived as a minor under the sway of his mother. And yet the Jews are
   not ashamed to distort and twist what relates to the king of Macedon to
   this Alexander the son of Mammea. But their wickedness and ignorance is
   easily refuted by the context, as we shall afterwards see. Here Daniel
   states shortly that there shall be a third monarchy, he does not
   describe its character, nor explain it fully; but we shall see in
   another place the meaning of his prophecy. He now interprets the dream
   of the king of Babylon, as the vision of the four empires had been
   offered to him. But the angel afterwards confirms the same to him by a
   vision, and very clearly, too, as will be seen in its own place.
   Without doubt this narrative of the brazen image relates to the
   Macedonian kingdom. How, then, is all doubt removed? By the description
   of the fourth empire, which is much fuller, and clearly indicates what
   we shall soon see, that the Roman empire was like the feet, partly of
   clay and partly of iron. He says, therefore, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [155] The is, to thine -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:40-43

   40. And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron
   breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things; and as iron that breaketh
   all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.

   40. Et regnum quartum erit robustum instar ferri: quia sicuti ferrum
   conterit et comminuit omnia, et sicuti ferrum contundit omnia haec,
   conteret et contundet.

   41. And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay,
   and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in
   it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed
   with miry clay.

   41. Quod autem vidisti pedes et digitos partim ex luto fictili, [156]
   et partim ex ferro: regnum divisum erit, et de fortitudine ferri erit
   in eo, propterea vidisti ferrum mixtum cum testa luti. [157]

   42. And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay; so
   the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

   42. Et digiti pedum [158] partim ex ferro, et partim ex terra, [159] ex
   parte regnum illud erit robustum, et exparte erit fragile.

   43. And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall
   mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one
   to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

   43. Quod vidisti ferrum commixtum testae luteae, [160] commiscebunt se
   inter se in semine hominis, et non cohaerebunt alius cum alio, sicuti
   ferrum non miscetur cum testa.


   Here the Fourth Empire is described, which agrees only with the Roman,
   for we know that the four successors of Alexander were at length
   subdued. Philip was the first king of Macedon, and Antiochus the
   second; but yet Philip lost nothing from his own kingdom; he only
   yielded it to the free cities of Greece. It was, therefore, hitherto,
   entire, except as it paid tribute to the Romans for some years on
   account of the expenses of the war. Antiochus, also, when compelled to
   adopt the conditions imposed by the conqueror, was driven beyond Mount
   Taurus; but Macedonia was reduced to a province when Perseus was
   overcome and captured. The kings of Syria and Asia suffered in the same
   way; and, lastly, Egypt was seized upon by Augustus. For their
   posterity had reigned up to that period, and Cleopatra was the last of
   that race, as is sufficiently known. When, therefore, the three
   monarchies were absorbed by the Romans, the language of the Prophet
   suits them well enough; for, as the sword diminishes, and destroys, and
   ruins all things, thus those three monarchies were bruised and broken
   up by the Roman empire. There is nothing surprising in his here
   enumerating that popular form of government, among "monarchies," since
   we know how few were rulers among this people, and how customary it was
   to call every kind of government among them an empire, and the people
   themselves the rulers of the whole world! But the Prophet compares them
   to "iron," not only on account of its hardness, although this reason is
   clearly expressed, but also through another kind of similitude, -- they
   were worse than all others, and surpassed in cruelty and barbarity both
   the Macedonians. and the Medo-Persians. Although they boast much in
   their own prowess, yet if any one exercises a sound judgment upon their
   actions, he will discover their tyranny to be far more cruel than all
   the rest; although they boast in their senators being as great as
   ordinary kings, yet we shall find them no better than robbers and
   tyrants, for scarcely one in a hundred of them shewed a grain of
   equity, either then sent into any province or when discharging any
   magistracy; and with regard to the body of the empire itself, it was
   all horrible pollution. This, then, is the reason why the Prophet says
   that monarchy was partly composed of iron, and partly of potter's clay,
   since we know how they suffered under intestine disorders. The Prophet
   requires no other interpretation here, because, he says, this mixture
   of iron and clay, which unites so badly, is a sign of disunion, through
   their never mingling together.

   The kingdom, therefore, shall be divided, and he adds yet another
   mixture, -- they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men, that
   is., they shall be neighbors to others, and that mutual interchange
   which ought to promote true friendship, shall become utterly
   profitless. The opinion of those who introduce the alliance of Pompey
   and Caesar is farfetched, for the Prophet is speaking of a continued
   government. If stability is sought for in any kind of government, it
   surely ought to shine forth in a republic, or at least in an oligarchy
   in preference to a despotism; because, when all are slaves, the king
   cannot so confidently trust his subjects, through their constant fear
   for themselves. But when all unite in the government, and the very
   lowest receive some mutual advantage from their commonwealth, then, as
   I have said, superior stability ought to be conspicuous. But Daniel
   pronounces, that even if the superior power should reside in the senate
   and the people -- for there is dignity in the senate, and majesty in
   the people yet that empire should fall. Besides, although they should
   be mutually united in neighborhood and kindred, yet this would not
   prevent them from contending with each other with savage enmity, even
   to the destruction of their empire. Here then the Prophet furnishes us
   with a vivid picture of the Roman empire, by saying that it was like
   iron, and also mingled with clay, or mud, as they destroyed themselves
   by intestine discord after arriving at the highest pitch of fortune.
   Thus far concerning the four monarchies.

   We may now inquire why Daniel said, The stone which was to be cut out
   of the mountain should destroy all these empires; since it does not
   appear, at first sight, to suit the kingdom of Christ. The Babylonian
   monarchy had been previously abolished -- the Medes and Persians had
   been utterly prostrated by Alexander -- and after Alexander's
   conquests, had been divided into four kingdoms; the Romans subdued all
   those lands; and then it is objected that the Prophet's language is
   absurd, a stone shall come out of a mountain which shall break up all
   empires The solution, as I have said above is at hand. Daniel does not
   here state that; the events shall happen together, but simply wishes to
   teach how the empires of the world shall fail, and one kingdom shall be
   eternal. He does not regard, therefore, when or why the empire's of the
   Chaldees and of the Persians fell, but he compares the kingdom of
   Christ with all those monarchies which have been mentioned. And we must
   always remember what I have touched upon, that the Prophet speaks for
   the captive people, and accommodates his style to the faithful, to whom
   he wished to stretch forth the hand, and to strengthen them in those
   most serious concussions which were at hand. And hence, when he speaks
   of all lands and nations, if any one objects -- there were then. other
   empires in the world, the answer is easy, the Prophet is not here
   describing what should happen through all the ages of the world, but
   only what the Jews should see. For the Romans were the lords of many
   regions before they passed over into Greece; we know they had two
   provinces in Spain, and after the close of the second Punic war were
   masters of that upper sea, and held undisputed possession of all the
   islands, as well as of Cisalpine Gaul and other regions. No notice is
   taken of this empire, till it was made known to the Jews, as they might
   have given themselves up to, utter despair, when they could not
   perceive an end to those storms which almost ruined the world; and,
   meanwhile, they were the most miserable of all men, because the various
   and continual calamities of the world never ceased. We must remember
   this view of things, as otherwise the whole prophecy would be cold and
   profitless to us. I now return to the kingdom of Christ.

   The Kingdom or Christ is said to break up all the empires of the world,
   not directly, but only accidentally, as the phrase is. For Daniel here
   assumes a principle, sufficiently understood by the Jews; namely, those
   monarchies were opposed to Christ's; kingdom. For the Chaldees had
   overthrown God's temple, and had endeavored as far as possible to
   extinguish the whole of his worship, and to exterminate piety from the
   world. As far as concerns the Medes and Persians, although by their
   kindness a permission to return was granted to the people, yet very
   soon afterwards the kings of the Medes and Persians raged against that
   most miserable people, until the greater part of them preferred
   remaining; in exile to returning home. At length came the Macedonian
   fury; and although the Jews were spared for a short period, we know how
   impetuously the kings of Syria and Egypt overran Judea, how cruelly
   they treated the wretched people by rapine and plunder, and the
   shedding of innocent blood. Again, the extreme barbarity of Antiochus
   in ordering all the Prophetic Books to be burned, and in all but
   exterminating the religion itself (1 Maccabees 1:59) is well
   ascertained.

   No wonder, then, that Daniel here opposes the reign of Christ to such
   monarchies! Next, as to the Romans, we know how thoroughly and proudly
   they despised the name of "Christian!" nay, they endeavored by all
   means to root out from the world the Gospel and the doctrine of
   salvation, as an abominable thing. With all this we are familiar.
   Hence, to inform the faithful of their future condition until Christ's
   advent, Daniel shews how all the empires of the world should be adverse
   to God, and all its most powerful kings and sovereigns should be his
   very worst and most cruel enemies, and should use every means in their
   power to extinguish true piety. Thus he exhorts them to bear their
   cross, and never to yield to those wretched and sorrowful spectacles,
   but to proceed steadily in the course of their calling, until the
   promised Redeemer should appear. We stated this to be "accidental,"
   since all the kingdoms of this world are clearly founded on the power
   and beneficence of Christ; but a memorable proof of God's anger ought
   to exist against them all, because they raised themselves against the
   Son of God, the Supreme King, with such extreme fury and hostility.

   Now, Christ is compared to a stone cut out of a mountain Some restrict
   this, unnecessarily, to the generation of Christ, because he was born
   of a virgin, out of the usual course of nature. Hence he says, as we
   have seen, that it was cut out of a mountain without the hand of man;
   that is, he was divinely sent, and his empire was separated from all
   earthly ones, since it was divine and heavenly. Now, therefore, we
   understand the reason of this simile.

   With respect to the word "stone," Christ is not here called a stone in
   the sense of the word in Psalm 118:22, and Isaiah 8:14, and Zechariah
   9:15, and elsewhere. For there the name of a stone is applied to
   Christ, because his Church is founded on it. The perpetuity of his
   kingdom is denoted there as well as here; but, as I have already said,
   these phrases ought to be distinguished. It must now be added, --
   Christ is called a stone cut out without human hands, because he was
   from the beginning almost without form and comeliness, as far as human
   appearance goes. There is also a silent contrast between its magnitude,
   which the Prophet will soon mention, and this commencement. The stone
   cut out of the mountain shall descend, and it shall become a great
   mountain, and shall fill the whole earth. We see how the Prophet here
   predicts the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, as contemptible and abject
   before the world. It was not conspicuous for excellence, as it is said
   in Isaiah, A branch is sprung from the root of Jesse. (Isaiah 11:1.)
   When the posterity of David were deprived of all dignity, the royal
   name was utterly buried, and the diadem trodden under foot, as it is
   said in Ezekiel (Ezekiel 17:19.) Hence, Christ first appeared cast down
   and lowly; but the branch increased wonderfully and beyond all
   expectation and calculation, unto an immense size, till it filled the
   whole earth. We now perceive how appositely Daniel speaks of Christ's
   kingdom but we must treat the rest to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [156] Or, potter's clay -- Calvin.

   [157] Or, moist clay -- Calvin.

   [158] Or, if we repeat the verb, it is the accusative case. -- Calvin.

   [159] Or, of the clay which he mentioned. -- Calvin.

   [160] For vessels -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, that we may remember ourselves to be pilgrims in
   the world, and that no splendor of wealth, or power, or worldly wisdom
   may blind our eyes, but may we always direct our eyes and all our
   senses towards the kingdom of thy Son. May we always fix them there,
   and may nothing hinder us from hastening on in the course of our
   calling, until at length we pass over the course and reach the goal
   which thou hast set before us, and to which thou dost this day invite
   us by the heralding of thy gospel. Do thou at length gather us unto
   that happy eternity which has been obtained for us through the blood of
   the same, thy Son. May we never be separated from him, but, being
   sustained by his power, may we at last be raised by him to the highest
   heavens. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Eleventh

   WE must now explain more clearly what we yesterday stated concerning
   the eternal kingdom of Christ. In relating the dream, the Prophet said
   -- The stone cut out of the mountain without hands is the fifth
   kingdom, by which the four kingdoms were to be broken up and destroyed,
   according to the vision shewn to King Nebuchadnezzar. We must now see
   whether or not this is the kingdom of Christ. The Prophet's words are
   these:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:44-45

   44. And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
   kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be
   left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all
   these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

   44. Et in diebus illis regum illorum suscitabit Deus coelorum regnum,
   quod in seculum non dissipabitur, [161] et regnum hoe populo alieno non
   derelinquetur confringet et conteret omnia illa regna, et ipsum stabit
   perpetuo.

   45. Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain
   without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the
   clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the
   king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and
   the interpretation thereof sure.

   45. Propterea vidisti, nempe e monte excisum lapidem et absque manu,
   qui confregit [162] ferrum, aes, testam, argentum et aurum, Deus magnus
   patefecit regi quid futurum esset postero tempore, et verum est
   somnium, et fidelis interpretatio ejus.


   The Jews agree with us in thinking this passage cannot be otherwise
   understood than of the perpetual reign of Christ, and willingly and
   eagerly ascribe to the glory of their own nation whatever is written
   everywhere throughout the Scriptures; nay, they often cry down many
   testimonies of Scripture for the purpose of boasting in their own
   privileges. They do not therefore deny the dream to have been sent to
   King Nebuchadnezzar concerning Christ's kingdom; but they differ from
   us, in expecting a Christ of their own. Hence they are, compelled in
   many ways to corrupt this prophecy; because, if they grant that the
   fourth empire or monarchy was accomplished in the Romans, they must
   necessarily acquiesce in the Gospel, which testifies of the arrival of
   that Messiah who was promised in the Law. For Daniel here openly
   affirms that Messiah's kingdom should arrive at the close of the fourth
   monarchy. Hence they fly to the miserable refuge that by the fourth
   monarchy should be understood the Turkish empire, which they call that
   of the Ishmaelites; and thus they confound the Roman with the
   Macedonian empire. But what pretense have they for making only one
   empire out of two such different ones? They say the Romans sprang from
   the Greeks; and if we grant this, whence did the Greeks spring? Did
   they not arise from the Caspian Mountains and Higher Asia? The Romans
   referred their origin to Troy, and at the time when the prophecy ought
   to be fulfilled, this had become utterly obscure -- but what is this to
   the purpose when they had no reputation for a thousand years
   afterwards? But the Turks a long time afterwards, namely 600 years,
   suddenly burst forth like a deluge. In such a variety of circumstances,
   and at such a distance of time, how can they form one single kingdom?
   Then they shew no difference between themselves and the rest of the
   nations. For they recall us to the beginning of the world, and in this
   way make one kingdom out of two, and this mixture is altogether without
   reason, or any pretension to it. There is no doubt then, that Daniel
   intended the Romans by the fourth empire, since we yesterday saw, how
   in a manner contrary to nature, that empire ultimately perished by
   intestine discord. No single monarch reigned there, but only a
   democracy. All thought themselves to be equally kings, for they were
   all related. This; union ought to have been the firmest bond of
   perpetuity. But Daniel here witnesses beforehand, how, even if they
   were intimately related, that kingdom would not be social, but would
   perish by its own dissension's. Finally, it is now sufficiently
   apparent that the Prophet's words cannot be otherwise explained than of
   the Roman empire, nor can they be drawn aside, except by violence, to
   the Turkish empire.

   I shall now relate what our brother Anthony has suggested to me, from a
   certain Rabbi Barbinel, [163] who seems to excel others in acuteness.
   He endeavors to shew by six principal arguments, that the fifth kingdom
   cannot relate to our Christ -- Jesus, the son of Mary. He first assumes
   this principle, since the four kingdoms were earthly, the fifth cannot
   be compared with them, except its nature is the same. The comparison
   would be, he says, both inappropriate and absurd. As if Scripture does
   not always compare the celestial kingdom of God with those of earth!
   for it is neither necessary nor important for all points of a
   comparison to be precisely similar. Although God shewed to the king of
   Babylon the four earthly monarchies, it does not follow that the nature
   of the fifth was the same, since it might be very different. Nay, if we
   weigh all things rightly, it is necessary to mark some difference
   between those four and this. last one. The reasoning, therefore, of
   that rabbi is frivolous, when he infers that Christ's kingdom ought to
   be visible, since it could not otherwise correspond with the other
   kingdoms. The second reason, by which he opposes us, is this, -- if
   religion makes the difference between kingdoms, it follows that the
   Babylonian, and Persian, and Macedonian are all the same; for we know
   that all those nations worshipped idols, and were devoted to
   superstition! The answer to so weak an argument is easy enough, namely,
   these four kingdoms did not differ simply in religion, but God deprived
   the Babylonians of their power, and transfer-red the monarchy to the
   Medes and Persians; and by the same providence of God the Macedonians
   succeeded them; and then, when all these kingdoms were abolished, the
   Romans possessed the sway over the whole East. We have already
   explained the Prophet's meaning. He wished simply to teach the Jews
   this, -- they were not to despair through beholding the various
   agitation's of the world, and its surprising and dreadful confusion;
   although those ages were subject to many changes, the promised king
   should at length arrive. Hence the Prophet wished to exhort the Jews to
   patience, and to hold them in suspense by the expectation of the
   Messiah. He does not distinguish these four monarchies through
   diversity of religion, but because God was turning the, world round
   like a wheel while one nation was expelling another, so that the Jews
   might apply all their minds and attention to that hope of redemption
   which had been promised through Messiah's advent.

   The third argument which that rabbi brings forward may be refitted
   without the slightest trouble. He gathers from the words of the Prophet
   that the kingdom of our Christ, the son of Mary, cannot be the kingdom
   of which Daniel! speaks, since it is here clearly expressed that there
   should be no passing away or change of this kingdom, it shall not pass
   on to another or a strange people. But the Turks, says he, occupy a
   large portion of the world, and religion among Christians is divided,
   and many reject the doctrine of the Gospel. It follows, then, that
   Jesus, the son of Mary, is not, that king of whom Daniel prophesied --
   that is, about whom the dream which Daniel explained occurred to the
   king of Babylon. But he trifles very foolishly, because he assumes,
   what. we shall ever deny -- that Christ's kingdom is visible. For
   however the sons of God are dispersed, without any reputation among
   men, it is quite clear that Christ's kingdom remains safe and sure,
   since hi its own nature it is not outward but invisible. Christ did not
   utter these words in vain, "My kingdom is not of this world." (John
   18:36.) By this expression he wished to remove his kingdom from the
   ordinary forms of government. Although, therefore, the Turks have
   spread far and wide, and the world is filled with impious despisers. of
   God, and the Jews yet occupy a part of it, still Christ, kingdom exists
   and has not been transferred to any others. Hence this reasoning is not
   only weak but puerile.

   A fourth argument follows: -- It seems very absurd that Christ, who was
   born under Octavius or Augustus Caesar, should be the king of whom
   Daniel prophesied. For, says he, the beginning of the fourth and fifth
   monarchy was the same, which is absurd; for the fourth monarchy ought
   to endure for some time, and then the fifth should succeed it. But here
   he not only betrays his ignorance, but his utter stupidity, since God
   so blinded the whole people that they were like restive dogs. I have
   had much conversation with many Jews- I have never seen either a drop
   of piety or a grain of truth or ingenuousness -- nay, I have never
   found common sense in any Jew. But this fellow, who seems so sharp and
   ingenious, displays his own impudence to his great disgrace. For he
   thought the Roman monarchy began with Julius Caesar! as if the
   Macedonian empire was not abolished when the Romans took possession of
   Macedon and reduced it to a province, when also Antiochus was reduced
   into order by them -- nay, when the third monarchy, namely, the
   Macedonian, began to decline, then the fourth, which is the Roman,
   succeeded it. Reason itself dictates to us to reckon hi this way, since
   unless we confess the fourth monarchy to have succeeded directly on the
   passing away of the third, how could the rest follow on? We must
   observe, also, that the Prophet does not look to the Caesars when he
   treats of these monarchies; nay, as we saw concerning the mingling of
   races, this cannot in any way suit the Caesars; for we shewed yesterday
   how those who restrict this passage to Pompey and Caesar are only
   trifling, and are utterly without judgment in this respect. For the
   Prophet speaks generally and continuously of a popular state, since
   they were, all mutually related, and yet the empire was not stable,
   through their consuming themselves internally by intestine warfare.
   Since this is the case, we conclude this rabbi to be very foolish and
   palpably absurd in asserting the Christ not to be the son of Mary who
   was born under Augustus, although I do not argue for the kingdom of
   Christ commencing at his nativity.

   His fifth argument is this: -- Constantine and other Caesars professed
   the faith of Christ. If we receive, says he, Jesus the son of Mary as
   the fifth king, how will this suit? as the Roman Empire was still in
   existence under this king. For where rite religion of Christ
   flourishes, where he is worshipped and acknowledged as the only King,
   that kingdom ought not to be separated from his. When therefore Christ,
   under Constantine and his successors, obtained both glory and power
   among the Romans, his monarchy cannot be separated from theirs. But the
   solution of this is easy, as the Prophet here puts an end to the Roman
   Empire when it began to be torn in pieces. As to the time when Christ's
   reign began, I have just said it ought not to be referred to the time
   of his birth, but to the preaching of the Gospel. From the time when
   the Gospel began to be promulgated, we know the Roman monarchy to have
   been dissipated and at length to vanish away. Hence the empire did not
   endure through Constantine or other emperors, since their state was
   different; and we know that neither Constantine nor the other Caesars
   were Romans. From the time of Trojan the empire began to be transferred
   to strangers, and foreigners reigned at Rome. We also know by what
   monsters God destroyed the ancient glory [164] of the Roman people! --
   for nothing could be more abandoned or disgraceful than the conduct of
   many of the emperors. If any one will but run through their histories,
   he will discover immediately that no other people ever had such
   monsters for rulers as the Romans under Heliogabalus and others like
   him, -- I omit Nero and Caligula, and speak only of foreigners. The
   Roman Empire was therefore abolished after the Gospel began to be
   promulgated and Christ became generally known throughout the world.
   Thus we observe the same ignorance in this argument of the rabbi as in
   the others.

   The last assertion is, -- The Roman empire as yet partially survives,
   hence what is here said of the fifth monarchy cannot belong to the son
   of Mary; it is necessary for the fourth empire to be at an end, if the
   fifth king began to reign when Christ rose from the dead and was
   preached in the world. I reply, as I have said already, the Roman
   empire ceased, and was abolished when God transferred their whole power
   with shame and reproach to foreigners, who were not only barbarians,
   but horrible monsters! It would have been better for the Romans to
   suffer the utter blotting out of their name, rather than submit to such
   disgrace. We perceive how this sixth and last reason vanishes away. I
   wished to collect them together, to shew you how foolishly those Jewish
   reasoners make war with God, and furiously oppose the clear light of
   the Gospel.

   I now return to Daniel's words. He says A kingdom shall come and
   destroy all other kingdoms I explained yesterday the sense in which
   Christ broke up those ancient monarchies, which had come to an end long
   before his advent. For Daniel does not wish to state precisely what
   Christ would do at any one moment, but what should happen from the time
   of the captivity till his appearance. If we attend to this intention,
   all difficulty will be removed from the passage. The conclusion,
   therefore, is this; the Jews should behold the most powerful empires,
   which should strike them with terror, and utterly astonish them, yet
   they should prove neither stable nor firm, through being opposed to the
   kingdom of the Son of God. But Isaiah denounces curses upon all the
   kingdoms which do not obey the Church of God. (Isaiah 60:12.) As all
   those monarchs erected their crests against the Son of God and true
   piety, with diabolical audacity, they must be utterly swept away, and
   God's curse, as announced by the Prophet, must become conspicuous upon
   them. Thus Christ rooted up all the empires of the world. The Turkish
   empire, indeed, at this day, excels in wealth and power, and the
   multitude of nations under its sway; but. it was not God's purpose to
   explain future events after the appearance of Christ. He only wished
   the Jews to be admonished, and prevented from sinking under the weight
   of their burden, since they would be in imminent danger through the
   rise of so many fresh tyrannies in the world, and the absence of all
   repose. God wished, therefore, to brace their minds by fortitude. One
   reason was this -- to cause them to dwell upon the promised redemption,
   and to experience how evanescent and uncertain are all the empires of
   the world which are not founded in God, and not united to the kingdom
   of Christ. God, therefore, will set up the kingdoms of the heavens,
   which shall never be dissipated. It is here worthwhile to notice the
   sense in which Daniel uses the term "perpetuity " It ought not to be
   restricted to the person of Christ, but belongs to all the pious and
   the whole body of the Church. Christ is indeed eternal in himself, but
   he also communicates his eternity to us, because he preserves the
   Church in the world, and invites us by the hope of a better life than
   this, and begets us again by his Spirit to an incorruptible life. The
   perpetuity, then, of Christ's reign, is twofold, without considering
   his person. First, in the whole body of believers; for though the
   Church is often dispersed and hidden from men's eyes, yet it never
   entirely perishes; but God preserves it by his incomprehensible virtue,
   so that it shall survive till the end of the world. Then there is a
   second perpetuity in each believer, since each is born of incorruptible
   seed, and renewed by the Spirit of God. The sons of Adam are now not
   mortal only, but bear within them heavenly life; since the Spirit
   within them is life, as St. Paul says, in the Ephstle to the Romans.
   (Romans 8:10.) We hold, therefore, that whenever Scripture affirms
   Christ's reign to be eternal, this is extended to the whole body of the
   Church, and need not be confined to his person. We see, then, how the
   kingdom from which the doctrine of the Gospel began to be promulgated,
   was eternal; for although the Church was in a certain sense buried, yet
   God gave life to his elect, even in the sepulcher. Whence, then, did it
   happen that the sons of the Church were buried, and a new people and a
   new creation required, as in Psalm 102:18? Hence it easily appears that
   God is served by a remnant, although they are not evident to human
   observation.

   He adds, This kingdom shall not pass away to another people. By this
   phrase the Prophet means that this sovereignty cannot be transferred,
   as in the other instances. Darius was conquered by Alexander, and his
   posterity was extinguished, till at length God destroyed that ill-fated
   Macedonian race, until no one survived who boasted himself to be sprung
   from that-family. With respect to the Romans, although they continued
   to exist, yet they were so disgracefully subjected to the tyranny of
   strangers and barbarians, as to be completely covered with shame and
   utterly disgraced. Then, as to the reign of Christ, he cannot be
   deprived of the empire conferred upon him, nor can we who are his
   members lose the kingdom of which he has made us partakers. Christ,
   therefore, both in himself and his members, reigns without any danger
   of change, because he always remains safe and secure in his own person.
   As to ourselves, since we are preserved by his grace, and he has
   received us under his own care and protection, we are beyond the reach
   of danger; and, as I have already said, our safety is ensured, for we
   cannot be deprived of the inheritance awaiting us in heaven. We,
   therefore, who are kept by his power through faith, as Peter says, may
   be secure and calm, (1 Peter 1:5,) because whatever Satan devises, and
   however the world attempts various plans for our destruction, we shall
   still remain safe in Christ. We thus see how the Prophet's words ought
   to be understood, when he says that this fifth empire is not to be
   transferred and alienated to another people. The last clause of the
   sentence, which is this, it shall bruise and break all other kingdoms,
   and shall stand perpetually itself, does not require any long
   exposition. We have explained the manner in which Christ's kingdom
   should destroy all the earthly kingdoms of which Daniel had previously
   spoken; since whatever is adverse to the only-begotten Son of God, must
   necessarily perish and utterly vanish away. A Prophet exhorts all the
   kings of the earth to kiss the Son. (Psalm 2:12.) Since neither the
   Babylonians, nor Persians, nor Macedonians, nor Romans, submitted
   themselves to Christ, nay, even used their utmost efforts to oppose
   him, they were the enemies of piety, and ought to be extinguished by
   Christ's kingdom; because, although the Persian empire was not in
   existence when Christ appeared in the world, yet its remembrance was
   cursed before God. For Daniel does not here touch only on those things
   which were visible to men, but raises our minds higher, assuring us
   most clearly that no true support on which we can rest can be found
   except in Christ alone. Hence he pronounces, that without Christ all
   the splendor, and power, opulence, and might of the world, is vain, and
   unstable, and worthless. He confirms the same sentiment in the
   following verse, where God shewed the king of Babylon what should
   happen in the last times, when he pointed out a stone cut out of the
   mountain without hands We stated Christ to be cut out of the mountain
   without hands, because he was divinely sent, so that men cannot claim
   anything for themselves in this respect, since God, when treating of
   the redemption of his own people, speaks thus, by Isaiah, -- Since God
   saw no help in the world, he relied upon his own arm and his own power.
   (Isaiah 63:5.) As, therefore, Christ was sent only by his heavenly
   Father, he is said to be [12]cut out without hands

   Meanwhile, we must consider what I have added in the second place, that
   the humble and abject origin of Christ is denoted, since it was like a
   rough and unpolished stone. With regard to the word "mountain", I have
   no doubt Daniel here, wished to shew Christ's reign to be sublime, and
   above the whole world. Hence the figure of the mountain means, in my
   opinion, -- Christ should not spring out of the earth, but should come
   in the glory of his heavenly Father, as it is said in the Prophet. And
   thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, art the least among the divisions of Judah;
   yet out of thee shall a leader in Israel arise for me, and his reign
   shall be from the days of eternity. (Micah 5:2.) Daniel, then, here
   condescends to those gross imaginations to which our minds are
   subjected. Because, at the beginning, Christ's dignity did not, appear
   so great as we discern it in the kings of the world, and to this day it
   seems to some obscured by the shame of the cross, many, alas! despise
   him, and do not acknowledge any dignity in him. Daniel, therefore, now
   raises aloft our eyes and senses, when he says this stone should be cut
   out of the mountain Meanwhile, if any one prefers taking the mountain
   for the elect people, I will not object to it, but this seems to me not
   in accordance with the genuine sense of the Prophet. At length he adds,
   And the dream is true, and its interpretation trustworthy Here Daniel
   securely and intrepidly asserts, that he does not bring forward
   doubtful conjectures, but explains faithfully to King Nebuchadnezzar
   what he has received from the Lord. Here he claims for himself the
   Prophetic authority, to induce the king of Babylon to acknowledge him a
   sure and faithful interpreter of God. We see how the prophets always
   spoke with this confidence, otherwise all their teaching would be
   useless. If our faith depended on man's wisdom, or on anything of the
   kind, it would indeed be variable. Hence it is necessary to determine
   this foundation of truth, -- Whatever the Prophets set before us
   proceeds from God; and the reason why they so constantly insist on this
   is, lest their doctrine should be supposed to be fabricated by men.
   Thus also in this place, Daniel first says, the dream is true; as if he
   said, the dream is not a common one, as the poets fable concerning a
   gate of horn; the dream is not confused, as men imagine when scarcely
   sane, or stuffed with meat and drink, or through bodily constitution,
   either melancholy or choleric. He states, therefore, the king of
   Babylon's dream to have been a true oracle; and adds, its
   interpretation is certain Where, as in the next clause, the Prophet
   again urges his own authority, lest Nebuchadnezzar should doubt his
   divine instructions to explain the truth of his dream. It now follows,
   --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [161] Or, shall not be destroyed. -- Calvin.

   [162] Verbally," and broke," but the copula ought to be rendered as the
   relative. -- Calvin.

   [163] The Rabbi Barbinel, to whose opinion Calvin's attention was
   drawn, was the celebrated Jewish statesman and commentator, Isaac
   Abarbanel. He claimed descent from the family of King David, being born
   in Lisbon 1437, and died at Venice 1508. From Dr. M'Caul's preface to
   Tegg's Prideaux, (1845,) we learn that his "Commentary to Daniel" was
   entitled Mayene ha-yeshuah, and published after his death in 1551, 4to,
   and also at Amsterdam, 1647. The younger Buxtory translated it into
   Latin, and it was refuted at length by Carpzov, Hulsius, and Varenius.
   Several of his works are still unprinted. He was a strong opponent of
   the Christian interpretation of Daniel, and an equally determined
   combatant of the rationalistic views of Moses the Egyptian, the son of
   Maimon.

   [164] This word is omitted in the edition published at Geneva A.D.
   1667, but is correctly inserted in that of Bart. Vincentius, A.D. 1571.
   -- Tr.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:46

   46. Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped
   Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet
   odours unto him.

   46. Tunc rex Nebuchadnezer cecidit in faciem suam, et Danielem adoravit
   et oblationem, et suffitum odoriferum, [165] jussit illi sacrificari.


   When the king of Babylon fell upon his face, it is partly to be
   considered as worthy of praise and partly of blame. It was a sign of
   both piety and modesty, when he prostrated himself before God and his
   Prophet. We know the fierceness and pride of kings; nay, we see them
   act like madmen, because they do not reckon themselves among mortals,
   and become blinded with the splendor of their greatness. Nebuchadnezzar
   was really a very powerful monarch, and it was difficult for him so to
   regulate his mind as to attribute the glory to God. Thus the dream
   which Daniel explained could not be pleasing to him. He saw his
   monarchy cursed before God, and about to perish in ignominy others,
   too, which should succeed it were ordained in heaven; and though he
   might receive some comfort from the destruction of the other kingdoms,
   yet it was very harsh to delicate ears, to hear that a kingdom, which
   appeared most flourishing, and which all men thought would be
   perpetual, was of but short duration and sure to perish. As, therefore,
   the king so prostrated himself before Daniel, it is, as I have said, a
   sign of piety in thus reverencing God, and in embracing the prophecy,
   which would otherwise be bitter and distasteful. It was also a sign of
   modesty, because he humbled himself so before God's Prophet Thus far
   the king of Babylon is worthy of praise, and we will discuss tomorrow
   the deficiency in his reverence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [165] That is, a sweet-smelling fragrance -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast shewn us by so many, such clear
   and such solid testimonies, that we can hope for no other Redeemer than
   him whom thou hast set forth and as thou hast sanctioned his divine and
   eternal power by so many miracles, and hast sealed it by both the
   preaching of the Gospel and the seal of thy Spirit in our hearts, and
   dost confirm the same by daily experience, -- Grant that we may remain
   firm and stable in him. May we never decline from him may our faith
   never waver, but withstand all the temptations of Satan and may we so
   persevere in the course of thy holy calling, that we may be gathered at
   length unto that eternal blessedness and perpetual rest which has been
   obtained for us by the blood of the same, thy Son -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twelfth

   We said yesterday that King Nebuchadnezzar was worthy of praise,
   because he prostrated himself before Daniel after he had heard the
   narration of his dream and the interpretation which was added. For he
   gave them some testimony of piety, since in the person of Daniel he
   adored the true God, as we shall mention hereafter. Hence he shewed
   himself teachable, since the prophet might, exasperate his mind;
   because tyrants can scarcely ever bear anything to detract from their
   power. But he cannot be entirely excused. Although he confesses the God
   of Israel to be the only God, yet he transfers a part of his worship to
   a mortal man. Those who excuse this do not sufficiently remember how
   profane men mingle heavenly and earthly things; though they
   occasionally have right dispositions, yet they relax immediately to
   their own superstitions. Without doubt the confession, which we shall
   meet with directly, was confined to this single occasion.
   Nebuchadnezzar was not really and completely converted to true piety,
   so as to repent of his errors, but he partially recognized the supreme
   power to be with the God of Israel. This reverence, however, did not
   correct all his idolatries, but by a sudden impulse, as I have said, he
   confessed Daniel to be a servant of the true God. At the same time he
   did not depart from the errors to which he had been accustomed, and he
   afterwards returned to greater hardness, as we shall find in the next
   chapter. So also we see Pharaoh giving glory to God, but only for a
   moment, (Exodus 9:27, and Exodus 10:16;) meanwhile he continued
   determinately proud and cruel, and never put off his original
   disposition. Our opinion of the king of Babylon ought to be of the same
   kind, though different in degree. King Nebuchadnezzar's obstinacy was
   not equal to the pride of Pharaoh. Each, indeed, showed some sign of
   reverence, bug neither was truly and heartily submissive to the God of
   Israel. Hence he bows before Daniel, not thinking him a God, but
   mingling and confounding, as profane men do, black and white; and we
   know that from the beginning even the dullest men had some perception
   of the only God. For no one ever denied the existence of a Supreme
   Deity, but men afterwards fabricated for themselves a multitude of
   gods, and transferred a part of the divine worship to mortals. As King
   Nebuchadnezzar was involved in these errors, we are not surprised at
   his adoring Daniel, and at the same time confessing there is but one
   God! And at this day we see how all in the papacy confess this truth,
   and yet they tear up the name of God, not in word, but in reality; for
   they so divide the worship of God, that each has part of the spoil and
   the plunder. Daniel relates what experience even now teaches us. This
   adoration was, it is true, commonly received among the Chaldeans, since
   the Orientals were always extravagant in their ceremonies, and we know
   their kings to have been adored as gods. But since the word for
   sacrificing is here used, and the word, mnchh, mencheh, for "offering"
   also occurs, it is quite clear that Daniel was worshipped without
   consideration, as if he had been a demigod dropped down from heaven.
   Hence we must conclude that king Nebuchadnezzar did wrong in offering
   this honor to Daniel.

   There ought to be moderation in our respect for God's Prophets, as we
   should not extol them beyond their deserts; we know the condition on
   which the Lord calls us forth -- -that he alone may be exalted, while
   all his teachers, and prophets, and servants, should remain in their
   own position. A question arises concerning the Prophet himself, -- Why
   did he allow himself to be worshipped? For if Nebuchadnezzar sinned, as
   we have said, the Prophet had no excuse for allowing it. Some
   commentators labor anxiously to excuse him; but if he passed this by in
   silence, we must be compelled to confess him in some degree corrupted
   by the allurements of the court, since it is difficult to be familiar
   there without immediately being subject to its contagion. The defense
   of any man, however perfect, ought never to interfere With this fixed
   principle -- nothing must be subtracted from the honor of God, and --
   it is a mark of perverseness whenever and howsoever the worship which
   is peculiar to God is transferred to creatures. Perhaps Daniel
   decidedly refused this, and so restrained the folly of the king of
   Babylon; but I leave the point in doubt, as nothing is said about it.
   Although it is scarcely probable that he took no notice at the time,
   when he saw the honor of God partly transferred to himself; for this
   would have been to make himself a partaker of sacrilege and impiety. A
   holy Prophet could scarcely fall into this snare. We know many things
   are omitted in the narrative, and Daniel does not record what was done,
   but what the king ordered. He prostrated himself on his face; but
   perhaps Daniel shewed this to be unlawful. When he ordered sacrifice to
   be offered, Daniel might have rejected it as a great sill. For Peter
   properly corrected the error of Cornelius, which was more tolerable,
   since he wished to adore Peter after the common fashion. If, therefore,
   the Apostle did not endure this, but boldly rebuked the deed, (Acts
   10:26,) what must be said about the Prophet? But, as I have said, I
   dare not assert anything on either side, unless what conjecture renders
   probable, that God's servant rejected this preposterous honor. If,
   indeed, he allowed it, he had no excuse for his sin; but still, as we
   have said, it is very difficult for those who desire to retain their
   purity to have much intercourse with courts, without contracting some
   spots of corruption. We see this even in the person of Joseph. Although
   he was completely dedicated to God, yet in his language, as shown by
   his swearing, he was tainted by the Egyptian custom. (Genesis 42:15.)
   And since this was sinful in him, the same may be said of Daniel. Let
   us go on: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:47

   47. The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that
   your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of
   secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.

   47. Respondit rex Danieli, et dixil, Exvero Deusvester ipse est
   Deusdeorum, et dominus regum, et revelator arcanorum, quod potueris
   revelare arcanum hoc.


   This confession is quite pious and holy, and is fraught with rectitude
   and sincerity; it may even be taken as a proof of true conversion and
   repentance. But, as I have lately reminded you, profane men are
   sometimes seized with an admiration of God and then they profess
   largely and copiously whatever may be expected from God's true
   worshippers. Still this is but momentary, for all the while they remain
   wrapt up in their own superstitions. God, therefore, extorts this
   language from them, when they speak so piously; but they inwardly
   retain their faults, and afterwards easily fall back to their
   accustomed habits -- as a memorable example will shortly prove to us.
   Whatever sense be adopted, God wished his glory to be proclaimed by the
   mouth of the profane king, and desired him to be the herald of his own
   power and influence. But this was peculiarly profitable to those Jews
   who still remained firm in their allegiance; for the greater part had
   revolted -- notoriously enough, and had degenerated with great facility
   from the pure worship of God. When led into captivity, they became
   idolaters and apostates, and denied the living God; but a small number
   of the pious remained; God wished to promote their benefit, and to
   strengthen their minds when he drew this confession from the king of
   Babylon. But another object was gained, since the king as well as all
   the Chaldeans and Assyrians were rendered more excuseless. For if the
   God of Israel was truly God, why did Bel in the meantime retain his
   rank? He is the God of gods -- then it must be added at once, he is the
   enemy of false gods. We observe how Nebuchadnezzar here mingles light
   with darkness, and black with white, while he confesses the God of
   Israel to be supreme among gods, and set continues to worship other
   deities. For if the God of Israel obtains his right, all idols vanish
   away. Hence, Nebuchadnezzar contends with himself in this language.
   But, as I have said, he is seized by a violent impulse, and is not
   quite in his senses when he so freely declares the power of the only
   God.

   As far then as words go, he says, truly your God is himself a God of
   gods The particle truly is by no means superfluous here; it is strongly
   affirmative. For if any one had inquired of him whether Bel and other
   idols were to be worshipped as gods, he might answer, "yes;" but
   doubtfully, and according to pre-conceived opinion, since all
   superstitious worshippers are perplexed, and if ever they defend their
   superstitons, they do so with the rashness which the devil suggests,
   but not according to their judgment. In truth, their minds are not
   composed when they dare to assert their own superstitions to be pious
   and holy. But Nebuchadnezzar seems here formally to renounce his own
   errors; as if he had said -- Hitherto I acknowledged other gods, but I
   now change my opinion; I have discovered your God to be the chief of
   all gods. And, truly, if he really spoke his own mind, he might
   perceive he was doing injustice to his own idols, if there was any
   divinity in them; Israel's God was confessedly held in utter hatred and
   abomination by the profane nations. By extolling him above all gods, he
   degrades Bel and the whole crew of false gods which the Babylonian
   worshipped. But, as we have said, he was swayed by impulse and spoke
   without thinking. He was in a kind of enthusiasm, since God astonished
   him, and then drew him on to wonder at and to declare his own power. He
   calls him Lord of kings, by which eulogium he claims for him the
   supreme dominion over the world; he means to assert that Israel's God
   not only excels all others, but holds the reins of government over the
   world. For if he is the Lord of kings, all people are under his hand
   and dominion! and the multitude of mankind cannot be drawn away from
   his empire, if he rules their very monarchs. We understand, therefore,
   the meaning of these words, namely, whatever deity is worshipped is
   inferior to the God of Israel, because he is high above all gods; then
   his providence rules over the world, while he is Lord of all peoples
   and kings, and governs all things by his will.

   He adds, he is a revealer of secrets This is our proof of Divinity, as
   we have said elsewhere. For Isaiah, when wishing to prove the existence
   of only one God, takes these two principles, viz., Nothing happens
   without his permission; and his foreseeing all things. (Daniel 48:3-5.)
   These two principles have been inseparably unified. Although
   Nebuchadnezzar did not understand what was the true peculiarity of
   Divinity, yet he is here impelled by the secret instinct of God's
   Spirit clearly to set forth God's power and wisdom. Hence he confesses
   the God of Israel to excel all gods, since he obtains power in the
   whole world, and nothing whatever is concealed from him. He adds the
   reason -- Daniel could reveal that secret This reason does not seem
   very good one; for he infers the world to be governed by one God,
   because Daniel made this secret known. But, then "this has no reference
   to his power." The answer to this remark is easy; we shewed elsewhere
   how we ought not to imagine a god like Apollo who can only predict
   future events. And, truly, it is far too insipid to attribute to God
   simple prescience, as if the events of the world had any other
   dependence than upon his power; for God is said to have a previous
   knowledge of future events, because he determined what he wished to
   have done. Hence Nebuchadnezzar concluded the dominion of the whole
   world to be in God's hands, because he could predict futurity; for
   unless he had the full power over the future, he could not predict
   anything with certainty. As, therefore, he really predicts future;
   events, this clearly determines all things to be ordained by him, and
   disproves the existence of chance, while he fulfills whatever he has
   decreed.

   Let us learn from this passage, how insufficient it is to celebrate
   God's wisdom and power with noisy declamation, unless we at the same
   time reject all superstitions from our minds, and so cling to the only
   God as to bid all others heartily farewell. No fuller verbal confession
   can be required than is here set before us; and yet we observe how
   Nebuchadnezzar was always involved in Satan's impostures, because he
   wished to retain his false gods, and thought it sufficient to yield the
   first place to the God of Israel. Let us learn again, to do our best in
   purging the mind front all superstitions, that the only God may pervade
   all our senses. Meanwhile, we must observe how severe and dreadful a
   judgment awaits Papists, and all like them, who at least ought to be
   imbued with the rudiments of piety, while they confess the existence of
   but one supreme God, and yet; mingle together a great multitude of
   deities, and dishonor both his power and wisdom, and at the same time
   observe, what is here said by a profane king. For the Papists not; only
   divide God's power, by distributing it in parts to each of their
   saints; but also when they speak of God himself, they fancy him as
   knowing all things beforehand, and yet; leaving all things contingent
   on man's free will; first creating all things, and then leaving every
   event in suspense. Hence heaven and earth, as they bear either men's
   merits; or crimes, at one time become useful, and at another adverse to
   mankind. Truly enough, neither rain, nor heat, nor cloudy nor serene
   weather, nor anything else happens without God's permission; and
   whatever is adverse is a sign of his curse; whatever is prosperous and
   desirable is the sign of his favor. This, indeed, is true, but when the
   Papists lay their foundation in the will of man, we see how they
   deprive God of his rights. Let us learn, then, from this passage, not
   to attribute to God less than was conceded by this profane king.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:48

   48. Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great
   gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief
   of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon.

   48. Tunc rex Danielem magnificavit, et munera praeclara, et magna dedit
   ei, [166] et constituit eum super totam povinciam Babylonis, et
   magistrum procerum super omnes sapientes Babylonis.


   Here also another point is added, namely, how King Nebuchadnezzar
   raised God's Prophet and adorned him with the highest honors. We have
   spoken of that preposterous worship which he himself displayed and
   commanded others to offer. As far as concerns gifts and the discharge
   of public duties, we can neither condemn Nebuchadnezzar for honoring
   God's servant, nor yet Daniel for suffering himself to be thus exalted.
   All God's servants ought to take care not to make a gain of their
   office, and we know how very pestilent the disease is when prophets and
   teachers are addicted to gain, or easily receive the gifts offered
   them. For where there is no contempt of money, many vices necessarily
   spring up, since all avaricious and covetous men adulterate God's word
   and makes, traffic of it. (2 Corinthians 2:17.) Hence all prophets and
   ministers of God ought to watch against being covetous of gifts. But as
   far as Daniel is concerned, he might receive what the king offered him
   just as Joseph could lawfully undertake the government of the whole of
   Egypt. (Genesis 41:40.) There is no doubt that Daniel had other views
   than his private and personal advantage. We must not believe him
   covetous of gain while he bore his exile so patiently, and, besides
   this, when at the hazard of his life he had preferred abstinence from
   the royal food to alienating himself from the people of God. As he
   manifestly preferred the shame of the cross by which God's people were
   then oppressed, to opulence, luxury, and honor, who will think him
   blinded by avarice through receiving gifts? But since he saw the sons
   of God miserably and cruelly oppressed by the Chaldeans, he wished as
   far as he could to succor them in their miseries. As he well knew this
   would afford some consolation and support to his race, he allowed
   himself to be made prefect of a province. And the same reason
   influenced him to seek some place of authority for his companions, as
   follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [166] Or, gave him many gifts, as some translate -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 2:49

   49. Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach,
   and Abednego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel
   sat in the gate of the king.

   49. Et Daniel petiit a rege; et constituit super opus [167] provinciae
   Babylonis Sidrach, Mesach, et Abed-nego: Daniel antem erat in porta
   regis.


   Some ambition may be noticed here in the Prophet, since he procures
   honors for his own companions. For when the king spontaneously offers
   him a command, he is obliged to accept it; he need not offend the mind
   of the proud king. There was a necessity for this, because he himself
   seeks from the king prefectships for others. What shall we say was the
   origin of this conduct? As I have already hinted, Daniel may be here
   suspected of ambition, for it might be charged against him as a crime
   that he made a gain of the doctrine which he had been divinely taught.
   But, he rather regarded his people, and wished to bring some comfort to
   them when oppressed. For the Chaldeans treated their slaves
   tyrannically, and we are aware how the Jews were utterly hated by the
   whole world. When therefore Daniel, through the feeling of pity, seeks
   some consolation from the people of God, there is no reason for
   accusing him of any fault, because he was not drawn aside by private
   advantage, and did not desire honors for either himself or his
   companions; but he was intent on that object to enable his companions
   to succor the Jews in their troubles. Hence the authority which he
   obtains for them has no other object than to cause the Jews to be
   treated a little more humanely, as their condition would not be so
   harsh and bitter while they have prefects of their own people who
   should study to treat them as brethren. We now see how Daniel may be
   rightly acquitted of this charge without any difficulty or argument;
   for the matter itself is sufficiently clear, and we may readily collect
   that Daniel was both pious and humane, and free from all charge of sin.
   From the words -- was in the king's gate, we ought not to understand
   his being a gate-keeper. Some suppose this phrase to be used, because
   they were accustomed to exercise justice there; but they transfer to
   the Chaldeans what Scripture teaches us of the Jews. I take it more
   simply. Daniel was chief over the king's court, since he held the
   supreme command there; and that sense is more genuine. Besides, we are
   fully aware of the custom of the Chaldeans and Assyrians to make the
   approach to the king difficult. Daniel is therefore said to be at the
   gate, to prevent any entrance into the king's palace, unless by his
   permission. It now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [167] Or, administration. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 3
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:1

   1. Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was
   threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in
   the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.

   1. Nebuchadnezer rex fecit imaginem ex auro, altitudo ejus cubitorum
   sexaginta, latitudo cubitorum sex: erexit eam in planitie Dura, [168]
   in provincia Babylonis.


   Very probably [13]this statue was not erected by King Nebuchadnezzar
   within a short period, as the Prophet does not notice how many years
   had passed away; for it is not probable that it was erected within a
   short time after he had confessed the God of Israel to be the Supreme
   Deity. Yet as the Prophet is silent, we need not discuss the matter.
   Some of the rabbis think this statue to have been erected as an
   expiation; as if Nebuchadnezzar wished to avert the effect of his dream
   by this charm, as they say. But their guess is most frivolous. We may
   inquire, however, whether Nebuchadnezzar deified himself or really
   erected this statue to Bel the principal deity of the Chaldeans, or
   invented some new-fangled divinity? Many incline to the opinion that he
   wished to include himself in the number of the deities, but this is not
   certain -- at least I do not think so. Nebuchadnezzar seems to me
   rather to have consecrated this statue to some of the deities; but, as
   superstition is always joined with ambition and pride, very likely
   Nebuchadnezzar was also induced by vain glory and luxury to erect this
   statue. As often as the superstitious incur expense in building temples
   and in fabricating idols, if any one asks them their object, they
   immediately reply -- they do it in honor of God! At the same time they
   are all promoting their own fame and reputation. All the superstitious
   reckon God's worship valueless, and rather wish to acquire for
   themselves favor and estimation among men. I readily admit this to have
   been Nebuchadnezzar's intention, and indeed I am nearly certain of it.
   But at the same time some pretense to piety was joined with it; for he
   pretended that he wished to worship God. Hence, also, what I formerly
   mentioned appears more clear, namely, -- King Nebuchadnezzar was not
   truly and heartily converted, but rather remained fixed in his own
   errors, when he was attributing glory to the God of Israel. As I have
   already said, that confession of his was limited, and he now betrays
   what he nourished in his heart; for when he erected the statue he did
   not return to his own natural disposition, but; rather his impiety,
   which was hidden for a time, was then detected. For that remarkable
   confession could not be received as a proof of change of mind. All
   therefore would have said he was a new man, if God had not wished it to
   be made plain that he was held bound and tied by the chains of Satan,
   and was still a slave to his own errors. God wished then to present
   this example to manifest Nebuchadnezzar to be always impious, although
   through compulsion he gave some glory to the God of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [168] Some make this word a noun appellative, and translate it,
   "habitable land," but the following translation is more correct: -- He
   placed an image on the plains of Dura. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since our minds have so many hidden recesses that
   nothing is more difficult than thoroughly to purge them from all
   fiction and lying, -- Grant, I say, that we may honestly examine
   ourselves. Do thou also shine upon us with the light of thy Holy
   Spirit; may we truly acknowledge our hidden faults and put them far
   away from us, that thou mayest be our only God, and our true piety may
   obtain the palm of thine approbation. May we offer thee pure and
   spotless; worship, and meanwhile may we conduct ourselves in the world
   with a pure conscience; and may each of us be so occupied in our duties
   as to consult our brother's advantage as well as our own, and at length
   be made partakers of that true glory which thou hast prepared for us in
   heaven through Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Thirteenth

   WE began in the last Lecture to treat of [14]The Golden Statue which
   Nebuchadnezzar erected, and placed in the plain or open country of
   Dura. We stated this statue to have been erected for a religious
   reason, when the ambition of that king or tyrant was at its full sway,
   which we may always observe in the superstitious. For although they
   always put forward the name of God, and persuade themselves that they
   are worshipping God, yet pride always impels them to desire the
   approbation of the world. Such was the desire of King Nebuchadnezzar in
   erecting this statue, as its very magnitude displays. For the Prophet
   says, the height of the statue was sixty cubits, and its breadth six
   cubits. Such a mass must have cost much expense, for the image was made
   of gold. Probably this gold was acquired by much rapine and plunder;
   but whether it was so or not, we may here view, as I have said, the
   profane king so worshipping God as to propagate the remembrance of his
   own name to posterity. The region in which he placed the image seems to
   imply this. Without doubt the Prophet here points out some celebrated
   place which men were accustomed to frequent for the sake of merchandise
   and other necessities. But as far as the king's special intention is
   concerned, we stated their conjecture to be out of place who think the
   statue to have been erected for the sake of expiating his dream. It is
   more probable, since the Jews were dispersed throughout Assyria and
   Chaldea, that this image was erected, lest those foreigners who were
   exiles from their country should introduce any novelty. This conjecture
   carries some weight with it; for Nebuchadnezzar knew the Jews to be so
   attached to the God of their fathers as to be averse to all the
   superstitions of the Gentiles. He feared, therefore, lest they should
   seduce others to their own opinions, and he wished to counteract this
   by erecting a new statue, and commanding all his subjects to bow down
   to it. Meanwhile, we see how quickly the acknowledgment of Israel's
   God, whose glory and power he had so lately celebrated, had vanished
   from his mind! Now this trophy is erected to reproach him, as if he had
   been vanquished as well as the idols of the heathen. But, we have said
   elsewhere, Nebuchadnezzar never seriously acknowledged the God of
   Israel, but by a sudden impulse was compelled to confess him to be the
   Supreme and only God, though he was all the while drowned in his own
   superstitions. Hence his confession was rather the result of
   astonishment, and did not proceed from true change of heart. Let us now
   come to the remainder:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:2

   2. Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes,
   the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the
   counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come
   to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set
   up.

   2. Tunc Nebuchadnezer rex misit ad congregandum satrapas, duces, et
   quaestores, primates, vel proceres, judices, magistratus, optinates, et
   omnes praefectos provinciarum, ut venirent ad dedicationem imaginis,
   quam erexerat Nebuchadnezer rex.


   I do not know the derivation of the word "Satrap;" but manifestly all
   these are [15]names of magistracies, and I allow myself to translate
   the words freely, since they are not Hebrew, and the Jews are equally
   ignorant of their origin. Some of them, indeed, appear too subtle; but
   they assert nothing but what is frivolous and foolish. We must be
   content with the simple expression -- he sent to collect the satraps
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:3

   3. Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the
   treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the
   provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that
   Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the image
   that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

   3. Tunc congregati sunt satrapae, duces, proceres, quaestores,
   magistratus, judices, optimates, et onmes praefecti provinciarum ad
   dedicationem imaginis, quam erexerat Nebuchadnezer rex: et steterunt
   coram imagine quam erexerat Nebuchadnezer.


   Let us add the context as the subject is continued
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:4-5

   4. Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people,
   nations, and languages,

   4. Et praeco clamabat in fortitudine: [169] Vobis edicitur, populi,
   gentes, et linguae, [170]

   5 That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp,
   sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and
   worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up.

   5. Simulae audieritis vocem cornu, vel, tuboe, fistulae, citharae,
   sambucae, psalterii, symphoniae, et omnia instrumenta musices: ut
   procidatis, et adoretis imaginem auream, quam erexit Nebuchadnezer rex.


   I do not know of what kind [16]these musical instruments were.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [169] Or, in the midst of the multitude; for hyl, hil, may be explained
   both ways. -- Calvin.

   [170] That is, nations of all languages. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:6-7

   6. And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, shall the same hour be
   cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

   6. Et quisquis non prociderit [171] et adoraverit, caderm hora, [172]
   projicietur in inedium fornacem ignis ardentis, vel, ardenteng.

   7. Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of the
   cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick, all
   the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped
   the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

   7. Itaque simulatque, aedem hora atque, audierint omnes populi vocem
   cornu, fistulea, citharea, sambucae, psalterii et omniurm
   instrumentorum musices, prociderunt omnes populi, gentes et linguae
   adorantes imagmem auream, quam erexerat Nebuchad nezer rex.


   We see how Nebuchadnezzar wished to establish among all the nations
   under his sway a religion in which there, should be no mixture of
   foreign novelty. He feared dissension as a cause of disunion in his
   empire. Hence we may suppose the king to have consulted his own private
   ease and advantage, as princes are accustomed to consult their own
   wishes rather than God's requirements in promulgating edicts concerning
   the worship of God. And from the beginning, this boldness and rashness
   have increased in the world, since those who have had supreme power
   have always dared to fabricate deities, and have proceeded beyond this
   even to ordering the gods which they have invented to be worshipped.
   The different kinds of gods are well known as divided into three -- the
   Philosophical, the Political, and the Poetical. They called those gods
   "Philosophical" which natural reason prompts men to worship. Truly,
   indeed, philosophers are often foolish when they dispute about the
   essence or worship of God; but since they follow their own fancies they
   are necessarily erroneous. For God cannot be apprehended by human
   senses, but must be made manifest to us by his own word; and as he
   descends to us, so we also in turn are raised to heaven. (1 Corinthians
   2:14.) But yet philosophers in their disputes have some pretexts, so as
   not to seem utterly insane and irrational. But the poets have fabled
   whatever pleases them, and thus have filled the world with the grossest
   and at the same time the foulest errors. As all theaters resounded with
   their vain imaginations, the minds of the vulgar have been imbued with
   the same delusions; for we know human dispositions are ever prone to
   vanity. But when the devil adds fire to the fuel, we then see how
   furiously both learned and unlearned are carried away. So it; happened
   when they persuaded themselves of the truth of what they saw
   represented in their theaters. Thus, that; religion which was founded
   on the authority of the Magi was considered certain by the heathen, as
   they called those gods "Political" which were received by the common
   consent of all. Those also who were considered prudent said it was by
   no means useful to object to what the philosophers taught concerning
   the nature of the gods, since this would tear asunder all public rites,
   and whatever was fixed without; doubt in men's minds. For both the
   Greeks and Latins, as well as other barbarous nations, worshipped
   certain gods as he mere offspring of opinion, and these they confessed
   to have once been mortal. But philosophers at least retained this
   principle -- the gods are eternal; and if the philosophers had been
   listened to, the authority of the Magi would have fallen away. Hence
   the most worldly-wise were not ashamed, as I have mentioned, to urge
   the expulsion of philosophy from sacred things.

   With regard to the Poets, the most politic were compelled to succumb to
   the petulance of the common people, and yet they taught at the same
   time what the poets reigned and fabled concerning the nature of the
   gods was pernicious. This, then, was the almost universal rule
   throughout the world as to the worship of God, and the very foundation
   of piety -- namely, no deities are to be worshipped except those which
   have been handed down from our forefathers. And this is the tendency of
   the oracle of Apollo which Xenophon [173] in the character of Socrates
   so greatly praises, namely, every city ought, to worship the gods of
   its own country! For when Apollo was consulted concerning the best
   religion, with the view of cherishing the errors by which all nations
   were intoxicated, he commanded them not to change anything in their
   public devotions, and pronounced that religion the best for every city
   and people which had been received from the furthest antiquity. This
   was a wonderful imposture of the devil, as he was unwilling to stir up
   men's minds to reflect upon what was really right, but he retained them
   in that old lethargy -- "Ha! the authority of your ancestors is
   sufficient for you!" The greatest wisdom among the profane was, as I
   have said, to cause consent to be taken for reason. Meanwhile, those
   who were supreme either in empire, or influence, or dignity, assumed to
   themselves the right of fashioning new deities; for we see how many
   dedicated temples to fictitious deities, because they were commanded by
   authority. Hence it is by no means surprising for Nebuchadnezzar to
   take this license of setting up a new deity. Perhaps he dedicated this
   statue to Bel, who is considered as the Jupiter of the Chaldeans; but
   yet he wished to introduce a new religion by means of which his memory
   might be celebrated by posterity. Virgule [174] derides this folly when
   he says:

   And he increases the number of deities by altars. For he means, however
   men may erect numerous altars on earth, they cannot increase the number
   of the gods in heaven. Thus, therefore, Nebuchadnezzar increased the
   number of the deities by a single altar, that is, introduced a new rite
   to make the statue a monument to himself, and his own name famous as
   long as that religion flourished. Here we perceive how grossly he
   abused his power; for he did not consult his own Magi as he might have
   done, nor even reflect within himself whether that religion was lawful
   or not; but through being blinded by pride, he wished to fetter the
   minds of all, and to compel them to adopt what he desired. Hence we
   gather how vain profane men are when they pretend to worship, God,
   while at the same time they wish to be superior to God himself. For
   they do not admit any pure thought, or even apply themselves to the
   knowledge of God, but they make their will law, just as it pleases
   them. They do not adore God, but rather their own fiction. Such was the
   pride of King Nebuchadnezzar, as appears from his own edict.

   King Nebuchadnezzar sent to collect all the satraps, generals, and
   prefects, to come to the dedication of the image, which King
   Nebuchadnezzar had erected. The name of the king is always added,
   except in one place, as though the royal power raised mortals to such a
   height that they could fabricate deities by their own right! We observe
   how the king of Babylon claimed the right of causing the statue to be
   worshipped as a god, while it was not set up by any private or ordinary
   person but by the king himself. While, the royal power is rendered
   conspicuous in the world, kings do not acknowledge it to be their duty
   to restrain themselves within the bounds of law, so long as they remain
   obedient to God. And at this day we see with what arrogance all earthly
   monarchs conduct themselves. For they never inquire what is agreeable
   to the word of God, and in accordance with sincere piety; but they
   defend the errors received from their forefathers, by the interposition
   of the royal name, and think their own previous decision to be
   sufficient, and object to the worship of any god, except by their
   permission and decree. With respect to the dedication, we know it to
   have been customary among the heathens to consecrate their pictures and
   statues before they adored them. And to this day the same error is
   maintained in the Papacy. For as long as images remain with the
   statuary or the painter, they ax not venerated; but as soon as an image
   is dedicated by any private ceremony, (which the Papists call a
   "devotion,") or by any public and solemn rite, the tree, the wood, the
   stone, and the colors become a god! The Papists also have fixed
   ceremonies among their exorcisms in consecrating statues and pictures.
   Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, when he wished his image to be esteemed in
   the place of God, consecrated it by a solemn rite, and as we have said,
   this usage was customary among the heathen. He does not here mention
   the common people, for all could not assemble in one place; but the
   prefects and elders were ordered to come, and they would bring numerous
   attendants with them then they bring forward the king's edict, and each
   takes care to erect some monument in his own province, whence it may
   spread the appearance of all their subjects worshipping as a god the
   statue which the king had erected.

   It now follows -- All the satraps, prefects, generals, elders,
   treasurers, and magistrates came and stood before the image which King
   Nebuchadnezzar had set up. It is not surprising that the prefects
   obeyed the king's edict, since they had no religion but what they had
   received from their fathers. But obedience to the king weighed with
   them more then reverence for antiquity; as in these times, if any king
   either invents a new superstition, or departs from the papacy, or
   wishes to restore God's pure worship, a sudden change is directly
   perceived in all prefects, and in all countries, and senators. Why so?
   Because they had neither fear God nor sincerely reverence him, but
   depend on the king's will and flatter him like slaves, and thus they
   all approve, and if need be applaud, whatever pleases the king. It is
   not surprising then if the Chaldean elders, who knew nothing
   experimentally of the true God or of true piety, are so prone to
   worship this statue. Hence also, we collect the great instability of
   the profane, who have never been taught true religion in the school of
   God. For they will bend every moment to any breezes, just as leaves are
   moved by the wind blowing among trees; and because they have never
   taken root in God's truth, they are necessarily changeable, and are
   borne hither and thither with every blast. But a king's edict is not
   simply a wind, but a violent tempest, and no one can oppose their
   decrees with impunity; consequently those who are not solidly based
   upon God's word, do not act from true piety, but are borne away by the
   strength of the storm.

   It is afterwards added -- A herald cried out lustily, or among the
   multitude. This latter explanation does not suit so well -- the herald
   crying amidst the multitude -- -since there were a great concourse of
   nations, and the kingdom of Babylon comprehended many provinces. The
   herald, therefore, cried with a loud voice, An edict is gone forth for
   you, O nations, peoples, and tongues. This would strike them with
   terror, since the king made no exception to his command for every
   province to worship his idol; for each person would observe the rest,
   and when every one sees the whole multitude obedient, no one would dare
   to refuse; hence all liberty is at an end. It now follows, -- When ye
   hear the sound of the [17]trumpet or horn, harp, pipe, psaltery,
   sackbut, etc., ye must fall down and adore the image. But whoever did
   not fall down before it, should be cast the same hour into a burning
   fiery furnace. This would excite the greater terror, since King
   Nebuchadnezzar sanctioned this impious worship with a punishment so
   severe; for he was not content with a usual kind of death, but
   commanded every one who did not worship the statue to be cast into the
   fire. Now, this denunciation of punishment sufficiently demonstrates
   now the king suspected some of rebellion. There would have been no
   dispute if Jews had not been mixed with Chaldeans and Assyrians, for
   they always worshipped the same gods, and it was a prevailing custom
   with them to worship those deities whom their kings approved. Hence it
   appears that the statue was purposely erected to give the king an
   opportunity of accurately ascertaining whether the Jews, as yet
   unaccustomed to Gentile superstitions, were obedient to his command. He
   wished to cause the sons of Abraham to lay aside sincere piety, and to
   submit to his corruption's, by following the example of others, and
   framing their conduct according to the king's will and the practice of
   the people among whom they dwelt. But we shall treat this hereafter.

   Respecting the required adoration, nothing but outward observance was
   needed. King Nebuchadnezzar did not exact a verbal profession of belief
   in this deity, that is, in the divinity of the statue which he
   commanded to be worshipped; it was quite sufficient to offer to it
   merely outward worship. We here see how idolatry is deservedly
   condemned in those who pretend to worship idols, even if they mentally
   refrain and only act through fear and the compulsion of regal
   authority; that excuse is altogether frivolous. We see, then, how this
   king or tyrant, though he fabricated this image by the cunning of the
   devil, exacted nothing else than the bending the knees of all the
   people and nations before the statue. And truly he had in this way
   alienated the Jews from the worship of the one true God, if this had
   been extorted from them. For God wishes first of all for inward
   worship, and afterwards for outward profession. The principal altar for
   the worship of God ought to be situated in our minds, for God is
   worshipped spiritually by faith, prayer, and other acts of piety. (John
   4:24.) It is also necessary to add outward profession, not only that we
   may exercise ourselves in God's worship, but offer ourselves wholly to
   him, and bend before him both bodily and mentally, and devote ourselves
   entirely to him, as Paul teaches. (1 Corinthians 7:34; 1 Thessalonians
   5:23.) Thus far, then, concerning both the adoration and the penalty.

   It follows again, -- As soon as the burst of the trumpets was heard and
   the sound of so many instruments, all nations, peoples, and tongues
   fell down and adored the image which King Nebuchadnezzar had set up
   Here I may repeat what I said before -- all men were very obedient to
   the injunctions of their monarchs; whatever they ordered was obeyed, so
   long as it did not cause complete ruin; and they often bore the
   heaviest burdens with the view of perfect conformity. But we must
   remark how our propensities have always a vicious tendency. If King
   Nebuchadnezzar had commanded the God of Israel to be worshipped, and
   all temples to be overthrown, and all altars throughout his empire to
   be thrown down, very great tumults would doubtless have arisen; for the
   devil so fascinates men's minds that they remain pertinaciously fixed
   in the errors which they have imbibed. Hence the Chaldeans, Assyrians,
   and others would never have been induced to obey without the greatest
   difficulty. But now, on the appearance of the signal, they directly
   fall down and adore the golden statue. Hence we may learn to reflect
   upon our own character, as in a mirror, with the view of submitting
   ourselves to God's Word, and of being immovable in the right faith, and
   of standing unconquered in our consistency, whatever kings may command.
   Although a hundred deaths may threaten us, they must not weaken our
   faith, for unless God restrain us by his Curb, we should instantly
   start aside to every species of vanity; and especially if a king
   introduces corruption's among us, we are immediately carried away by
   them, and, as we said, are far too prone to vicious and perverse modes
   of worship. The Prophet repeats again the king's name to shew us how
   little the multitude thought of pleasing God; never considering whether
   the worship was sacred and sound, but simply content; with the king's
   nod. The Prophet deservedly condemns this easy indifference.

   We should learn also from this passage, not to be induced, by the will
   of any man to embrace any kind of religion, but diligently to inquire
   what worship God approves, and so to use our judgment as not rashly to
   involve ourselves in any superstitions. Respecting the use of musical
   instruments, I confess it to be customary in the Church even by God's
   command; but the intention of the Jews and of the Chaldeans was
   different. For when the Jews used trumpets and harps and other
   instruments in celebrating God's praises, they ought not to have
   obtruded this custom on God as if it was the proof of piety; but it
   ought to have another object, since God wished to use all means of
   stirring men up from their sluggishness, for we know how cold we grow
   in the pursuits of piety, unless we are aroused. God, therefore, used
   these stimulants to cause the Jews to worship him with greater fervor.
   But the Chaldeans thought to satisfy their god by heaping together many
   musical instruments. For, like other persons, they supposed God like
   themselves, for whatever delights us, we think must also please the
   Deity. Hence the immense heap of ceremonies in the Papacy, since our
   eyes delight in such splendors; hence we think this to be required of
   us by God, as if he delighted in what pleases us. This is, indeed, a
   gross error. There is no doubt that the harp, trumpet, and other
   musical instruments with which Nebuchadnezzar worshipped his idol,
   formed a part of his errors, and so also did the gold. God, indeed,
   wished his sanctuary to manifest some splendor; not that gold, silver,
   and precious stones please him by themselves, but he wished to commend
   his glory to his people, since under this figure they might understand
   why everything precious should be offered to God, as it is sacred to
   him. The Jews, indeed, had many ceremonies, and much of what is called
   magnificent splendor in the worship of God, and still the principle of
   spiritual worship yet remained among them. The profane, while they
   invented gross deities which they reverenced according to their
   pleasure, thought it a proof of perfect sanctity, if they sang
   beautifully, if they used plenty of gold and silver, and if they
   employed showy utensils in these sacrifices. I must leave the rest for
   tomorrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [171] That is, instantly -- Calvin.

   [172] That is, instantly. -- Calvin.

   [173] Xenophon in Comment., et Cicero de Legibus, lib. 2: Section 8.

   [174] AEneid, lib. 7 211, ".et numerum Divorum altaribus addit." Heyne
   reads "addit;" Calvin, "auget."
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we always wander miserably in our thoughts,
   and in our attempts to worship thee we only profane the true and pure
   reverence of thy Divinity, and are easily drawn aside to depraved
   superstition, -- Grant that we may remain in pure obedience to thy
   word, and never bend aside from it in any way. Instruct us by the
   unconquered fortitude of thy Spirit. May we never yield to any terrors
   or threats of man, but persevere in reverencing thy name even to the
   end. However the world may rage after its own diabolic errors, may we
   never turn out of the right path, but continue in the right course in
   which thou invitees us, until, after finishing our race, we arrive at
   that happy rest which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our
   Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Fourteenth
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:8-12

   8. Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the
   Jews.

   8. Itaque statim, [175] appropinquarunt viri Chaldaei, et vociferati
   sunt accusationem contra Iudaeos. [176]

   9. They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for
   ever.

   9. Loquuti sunt, et dixerut Nebuchadnezer regi, Rex, in aeternum vive.

   10. Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear
   the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer,
   and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image:

   10. Tu, rex, posuisti edictum, ut omnis homo cum audiret vocem cornu,
   vel, tuboe, fistulae, citharae, sambucae, psalterii, et symphoniae, et
   omnium instrumentorum musices, procideret, et adoraret imaginem auream.

   11. And who so falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be cast
   into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

   11. Et qui non prociderit, et adoraverit, projiciatur in medium, vel,
   intra, fornacem ignis ardentis.

   12. There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the
   province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; these men, O
   king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the
   golden image which thou hast set up.

   12. Sunt viri Iudaei, quos ipsos posuisti, id est, proefecisti, super
   administrationem, vel, opus, provineiae Babylonis, Sadrach, Mesach, et
   Abednego, viri isti non posuerunt ad to, rex, cogitationem [177] deum
   tuum [178] non colunt, et imaginem auream quam tu erexisti non adorant.


   Although their intention is not here expressed who accused Shadrach,
   Meshach, and Abednego, yet we gather from this event that the thing was
   most probably done on purpose when the king set up the golden image. We
   see how they were observed, and, as we said yesterday, Nebuchadnezzar
   seems to have followed the common practice of kings. For although they
   proudly despise God, yet they arm themselves with religion to
   strengthen their power, and pretend to encourage the worship of God for
   the single purpose of retaining the people in obedience. When,
   therefore, the Jews were mingled with Chaldeans and Assyrians, the king
   expected to meet with many differences of opinion, and so he placed the
   statue in a celebrated place by way of trial and experiment, whether
   the Jews would adopt the Babylonian rites. Meanwhile this passage
   teaches us how the king was probably instigated by his counselors, as
   they were indignant at strangers being made prefects of the province of
   Babylon while they were slaves; for they had become exiles by the right
   of warfare. Since then the Chaldeans were indignant, they were impelled
   by envy to suggest this advice to the king. For how did they so
   suddenly discover that the Jews paid no reverence to the statue, and
   especially Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego? Truly, the thing speaks for
   itself. These men watched to see what the Jews would do and hence we
   readily ascertain how they, from the beginning, laid the snare by
   advising the king to fabricate the statue. And when they tumultuously
   accuse the Jews, we perceive how they were filled with envy and hatred.
   It may be said, they were inflamed with jealousy, since superstitious
   men wish to impose the same law upon all, and then their passion is
   increased by cruelty. But simple rivalry, as we may perceive, corrupted
   the Chaldeans, and caused them clamorously to accuse the Jews.

   It is uncertain whether they spoke of the whole nation generally,
   namely, of all the exiles, or pointed out those three persons only. The
   accusation was probably restricted to Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego.
   If these three could be broken down, the victory over the rest was
   easy. But few could be found in the whole people hardy enough to
   resist. We may well believe these clamorers wished to attack those whom
   they knew to be spirited and consistent beyond all others, and also to
   degrade them from those honors which they could not bear them to enjoy.
   It may be asked, then, why did they spare Daniel, since he would never
   consent to dissemble by worshipping the statue which the king commanded
   to be set up? They must have let Daniel alone for the time, since they
   knew him to be in favor wig the king; but they brought the charge
   against these three, because they could be oppressed with far less
   trouble. I think them to have been induced by this cunning in not
   naming Daniel with the other three, lest his favor should mitigate the
   king's wrath. The form of accusation is added -- O king, live for ever!
   It was the common salutation. Thou, O king! -- this is emphatic, as if
   they had said, "Thou hast uttered this edict from thy royal authority,
   whoever hears the sound of the trumpet, or horn, harp, pipe, psaltery,
   and other musical instruments, shall fall down before the golden
   statue; whoever should refuse to do this should be cast into the
   burning fiery furnace. But here are some Jews whom thou hast set over
   the administration of the province of Babylon They add this through
   hatred, and through reproving the ingratitude of men admitted to such
   high honor and yet despising the king's authority, and inducing others
   to follow the same example of disrespect. We see then how this was said
   to magnify their crime. The king has set them over the province of
   Babylon, and yet these men do not adore the golden image nor worship
   the gods. Here is the crime. We see how the Chaldeans, throughout the
   whole speech, condemn Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego of this single
   crime -- a refusal to obey the king's edict. They enter into no dispute
   about their own religion, for it would not have suited their purpose to
   allow any question to be raised as to the claim their own deities had
   to supreme adoration. They omit, therefore, everything which they
   perceive would not suit them, and seize upon this weapon -- the king is
   treated with contempt, because Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego do not
   worship the image as the king's edict ordered them to do.

   Here, again, we see how the superstitious do not apply their minds to
   the real inquiry how they should piously and properly worship God; but
   they neglect this duty and follow their own audacity and lust. Since
   therefore the Holy Spirit sets before us such rashness, as in a mirror,
   let us learn. that God cannot approve of our worship unless it be
   offered. up with truth. Here human authority is utterly unavailing,
   because unless we are sure that our religion is pleasing to. God,
   whatever man can do for us will only add to our weakness. While we
   observe those holy men charged with the crime of ingratitude and
   rebellion, we in these times ought not to be grieved by it. Those who
   calumniate us reproach us with despising the edicts of kings who wish
   to bind us by their errors; but, as we shall see by and bye, our
   defense is obvious and easy. Meanwhile we ought to undergo this infamy
   before the world, as if we were disobedient and unmanageable; and with
   respect to ingratitude, even if a thousand wicked men should lead us
   with reproaches, we must bear their calumnies for the time patiently,
   until the Lord shall shine upon us as the assertor of our innocence. It
   now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [175] The same hour -- Calvin.

   [176] That is, accused them clamorously and with tumult. Others
   translate, "brought forward an accusation." For 'kl, akel, signifies
   to, "devour," and they say that it is used metaphorically for "to
   accuse" when joined to this noun. But since it also signifies "to cry
   out," this sense is suitable, as the accusers were clamorous. --
   Calvin.

   [177] Others translate, "reason." -- Calvin.

   [178] Or, "thy gods," but there is not much difference -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:13-15

   13. Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought these men before the
   king.

   13. Tunc Nebuchadnezer cum iracundia et excandescentia, [179] jussit
   adduci Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego: viri autem illi adduxerunt coram
   rege. [180]

   14. Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O Shadrach,
   Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden
   image which I have set up?

   14. Loquutus est Nebuchadnezer, et dixit illis, Verumne, Sadrach,
   Mesach, et Abed-nego, deos meos non colitis, [181] et imaginem auream
   quam statui, [182] non adoratis?

   15. Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the
   cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of
   musick, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made, well: but
   if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a
   burning fiery furnace; and who is that God that shall deliver you out
   of my hands?

   15. Nunc ecce parati eritis, [183] simulac audiveritis vocem cornu,
   vel, tuboe, fistulae, citharae, sambucae, psalterii, symphoniae, et
   omnium instrumentorum musices, ut procidatis, et adoretis imaginem quam
   feci. Quoad si non adoraveritis, eadem hora projiciemini in medium
   fornacis ignis ardentis; et quis ille Deus qui cruat vos e manu mea?


   This narrative clearly assures us, how kings consult only their own
   grandeur by a show of piety, when they claim the place of their
   deities. For it seems very wonderful for King Nebuchadnezzar to insult
   all the gods, as if there was no power in heaven unless what he
   approved off What god, says he, can pluck out of my hand? Why then did
   he worship any deity? Simply to retain the people by a curb, and fires
   to strengthen his own power, without the slightest affection of piety
   abiding within his mind. At the beginning Daniel relates how the king
   was inflamed with wrath. For nothing is more troublesome to kings than
   to see their authority despised; they wish every one to be obedient to
   themselves, even when their commands are most unjust After the king is
   cool again, he asks Shadraeh, Meshaeh, and Abed-nego, whether they were
   prepared to worship his god and his golden image? Since he addresses
   them doubtfully, and gives them a free choice, his words imply
   moderation. He seems to free them from all blame, if they will only bow
   themselves down hereafter. He now adds directly, if ye are not
   prepared, behold I will throw you into a furnace of burning fire; and
   at length breaks forth into that sacrilegious and dreadful blasphemy --
   There is no god who can deliver the saints alive out of his hand!

   We see, then, in the person of Nebuchadnezzar, how kings swell with
   pride, while they pretend some zeal for piety; since in reality no
   reverence for God influences them, while they expect all men to obey
   every command. And thus, as I have said, they rather substitute
   themselves for God, than desire to worship him and promote his glory.
   This is the meaning of the words, the statue which I have created, and
   which I have made; as if he had said, You are not allowed to deliberate
   about worshipping this image or not,; my orders ought to be sufficient
   for you. I have erected it purposely and designedly; it was your duty
   simply to obey me. We see then how he claims the supreme power, by
   fashioning a god. Nebuchadnezzar is not now treating matters of state
   policy; he wishes the statue to he adored as a deity, because he had
   decreed it, and had promulgated his edict. And we must always remember
   what I have touched upon, namely, this example of pride is set before
   us, to shew us not to attach ourselves to any religion with rashness,
   but to listen to God and depend on his authority and commands, since if
   we listen to man, our errors would be endless. Although kings are so
   proud and ferocious, yet we must be guided by this rule -- Nothing
   pleases God but what he has commanded in his word; and the principle of
   true piety is the obedience which we ought to render to him alone. With
   respect to blasphemy, it clearly demonstrates my previous assertion,
   however kings put forward some desire for piety, yet they despise every
   deity, and think of nothing but extolling their own magnificence.
   Hence, they traffic in the name of God to attract greater reverence
   towards themselves; but at the same time, if they choose to change
   their deities a hundred times a-day, no sense of religion will hinder
   them. Religion, then, is to the kings of the earth nothing but a
   pretext; but they have neither reverence nor fear of God in their
   minds, as the language of this profane king proves. What God? says he,
   clearly there is no God. If any one reply -- he speaks comparatively,
   since he here defends the glory of his own god whom he worshipped,
   still he utters this blasphemy against all gods, and is impelled by
   intolerable arrogance and diabolical fury. We are now coming to the
   principal point where Daniel relates the constancy with which Shadraeh,
   Meshach, and Abed-nego were endued.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [179] Some translate, fury -- Calvin.

   [180] We must understand, them. -- Calvin.

   [181] Or rather, my god. -- Calvin

   [182] Or, I have erected -- Calvin.

   [183] Some read it interrogatively, Are ye prepared? -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:16-18

   16. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said to the king, O
   Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.

   16. Responderunt Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego, et dixerunt regi;
   Nebuchadnezer, non sumus soliciti super hoc sermone, [184] quid
   respondeamus tibi. [185]

   17. If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
   burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O
   king.

   17. Ecce est Deus noster, quem nos colimus, potens, id est, potest,
   liberare nos e fornace ignis ardentis, et e manu tua, rex eruet.

   18. But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve
   thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

   18. Et si non, notum sit tibi, O rex, quod deos tuos nos non colimus,
   et imaginem auream quam erexisti, non adorabimus.


   In this history it; is necessary to observe with what unbroken spirit
   these three holy men persisted in the fear of God, though they knew
   they were in danger of instant death. When, therefore, this kind of
   death was placed straight before their eyes, they did not turn aside
   from the straightforward course, but treated God's glory of greater
   value than their own life, nay, than a hundred lives, if they had so
   many to pour forth, and opportunity had been given them. Daniel does
   not relate all their words, but only their import, in which the
   unconquered virtue of that Holy Spirit, by which they had been
   instructed, is sufficiently evident; for that denunciation was
   certainly dreadful, when the king said, If ye are not prepared to fall
   down at the sound of the trumpet before the image, its all over with
   you, and ye shall be directly cast into a furnace of fire. When the
   king had so fulminated, they might have winced, as men usually do,
   since life is naturally dear to us, and a dread of death seizes upon
   our senses. But Daniel relates all these circumstances, to assure us of
   the great fortitude of God's servants when they are led by his Spirit,
   and yield to no threats, and succumb to no terrors. They answer the
   king, We do not need any long deliberation. For when they say they care
   not, they mean by this word, the matter is settled; just as that
   sentence of Cyprian is related by Augustine, [186] when courtiers
   persuaded him to preserve his life, for it was with great reluctance
   that the emperor devoted him to death, when flatterers on all sides
   urged him to redeem his life by the denial of piety, he answered, There
   can be no deliberation in a matter so sacred! Thus those holy men say,
   We do not care, we do not enter into the consideration of what is
   expedient or useful, no such thing! for we ought to settle it with
   ourselves never to be induced by any reason to withdraw from the
   sincere worship of God.

   If you please to read -- we ought not to answer you, the sense will be
   the same. They imply that the fear of death was set before them in
   vain, because they had determined and resolved in their inmost souls,
   not to depart a single inch from the true and lawful worship of God.
   Besides they here give a double reason for rejecting the king's
   proposal. They say God has sufficient power and strength to liberate
   them; and then, even if they must die, their life is not of so much
   value as to deny God for the sake of preserving it. Hence they declare
   themselves prepared to die, if the king persists in urging his wish for
   the adoration of the image. This passage is therefore worthy of the
   greatest attention. First of all we must observe the answer -- for when
   men entice us to deny the true God we must close our ears, and refuse
   all deliberation; for we have already committed an atrocious insult
   against God, when we even question the propriety of swerving from the
   purity of his worship through any impulse or any reason whatever. And I
   heartily wish every one would observe this! How excellent and striking
   is the glory of God, and how everything ought to yield to it, whenever
   there is danger of its being either diminished or obscured. But at this
   day, this fallacy deceives the multitude, since they think it lawful to
   debate whether it is allowable to swerve front the true worship of God
   for a time, whenever any utility presents itself on the opposite side.
   Just as in our days, we see how hypocrites, of whom the world is full,
   have pretenses by which they cloak their delinquencies, when they
   either worship idols with the impious, or deny at one time openly, and
   at another obliquely, true piety. "Oh! what can happen? -- such a one
   will say -- of what value is consistency? I see some evident advantage
   if I can only dissemble a little, and not betray what I am.
   Ingenuousness is injurious not only to me privately, but to all around
   me!" If a king has none around him who endeavor to appease his wrath,
   the wicked would give way to their passions, and by their greater
   license would drive him to the extremity of cruelty. It is, therefore,
   better to have, some mediators on the watch to observe whether the
   wicked are planning anything. Thus, if they cannot openly, they may
   covertly avert danger from the heads of the pious. By such reasoning as
   this, they think they can satisfy God. As if Shadraeh, Meshaeh, and
   Abed-nego, had not the same excuse; as if the following thought would
   not occur to them -- "Behold! we are armed with some power in favor of
   our brethren; now what barbarity, what cruelty will be exercised
   against them, if the enemies of the religion which they profess succeed
   us? For as far as they can, they will overthrow and blot out our race
   and the very remembrance of piety. Is it not better for us to yield for
   a time to the tyranny and violent edict of the king than to leave our
   places empty? which the furious will by and bye occupy, who will
   utterly destroy our wretched race which is now dreadfully oppressed."
   Shadraeh, Meshaeh, and Abed-nego might, I say, collect all these
   pretenses and excuses to palliate their perfidy if they had bent the
   knee before the golden image for the sake of avoiding danger; but they
   did not act thus. Hence, as I have already said, God retains his rights
   entire when his worship is upheld without the slightest doubt, and we
   are thoroughly persuaded that nothing is of such importance as to
   render it lawful and right to swerve from that profession which his
   word both demands and exacts.

   On the whole, that security which ought to confirm the pious in the
   worship of God is opposed here to all those tortuous and mistaken
   counsels which some men adopt, and thus, for the sake of living, lose
   life itself, according to the sentiment of even a profane poet. For of
   what use is life except to serve God's glory? but we lose that object
   in life for the sake of the life itself -- that is, by desiring to live
   entirely to the; world, we lose the very purpose of living! Thus, then,
   Daniel opposes the simplicity which ought to mark the sons of God to
   all those excuses which dissemblers invent with the view of hiding
   their wickedness by a covering. We are not anxious, say they, and why
   not? Because we have already determined God's glory to be of more
   consequence than a thousand lives, and the gratification of a thousand
   senses. Hence, when this magnanimity flourishes, all hesitation will
   vanish, and those who are called upon to incur danger through their
   testimony for the truth need never trouble themselves; for, as I before
   said, their ears are closed to all the enticements of Satan.

   And when they add -- God is sufficiently powerful to preserve us; and
   if not, we are prepared for death, they point out to us what ought to
   raise our minds above all trials, namely, the preciousness of our life
   in God's sight, since he can liberate us if he pleases. Since,
   therefore, we have sufficient protection in God, let us not think any
   method of preserving our life better than to throw ourselves entirely
   on his protection, and to cast all our cares upon him. And as to the
   second clause, we must remark this, even if the Lord should wish to
   magnify his own glory by our death, we ought to offer up this as a
   lawful sacrifice; and sincere piety does not flourish in our hearts
   unless our minds are always prepared to make this sacrifice. Thus I
   wished to remark these things shortly now, and with God's permission, I
   will explain them fully to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [184] Or, business. -- Calvin.

   [185] Others translate, we ought not to answer thee about this
   business; and they think l, the letter L, to be superfluous, as it
   often is. -- Calvin.

   [186] Cyprian was martyred under the edict of Valerian, A.D. 257. --
   See Euseb. Eccl. Hist., lib. 7, chapter 10.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we see the impious carried away by their
   impure desires with so strong an impulse; and while they are so puffed
   up with arrogance, may we learn true humility, and so subject ourselves
   to thee that we may always depend upon thy word and always attend to
   thy instructions. When we have learned what worship pleases thee, may
   we constantly persist unto the end, and never be moved by any threats,
   or dangers, or violence, from our position, nor drawn aside from our
   course; but by persevering: obedience to thy word, may we shew our
   alacrity and obedience, until thou dost acknowledge us as thy sons, and
   we are gathered to that eternal inheritance which thou hast prepared
   for all members of Christ thy Son. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Fifteenth

   WE said yesterday that the constancy of Shadrach, Meshach, and
   Abed-nego, was based upon these two reasons:-Their certain persuasion
   that God was the guardian of their life, and would free them from
   present death by his power if it were useful. And also their
   determination to die boldly and fearlessly, if God wished such a
   sacrifice to be offered. What Daniel relates of these three men belongs
   to us all. Hence we may gather this general instruction. When our
   danger for the truth's sake is imminent, we should learn to place our
   life in God's hand, and then bravely and fearlessly devote ourselves to
   death. As to the first point, experience teaches us how very many turn
   aside from God and the profession of faith, since they do not feel
   confidence in God's power to liberate them. It may be said with truth
   of us all -- God takes care of us, since our life is placed in his hand
   and will; but scarcely one in a hundred holds this deeply and surely
   fixed in his heart, since every one takes his own way of preserving his
   life, as if there were no virtue in God. Hence he has made some
   proficiency in God's word who has learnt to place his life in God's
   care, and to consider it safe under his protection. For if he has made
   progress thus far, he may be in danger a hundred times, yet he will
   never hesitate to follow whenever he is called. This one feeling frees
   him from all fear and trembling, since God can extricate his servants
   from a thousand deaths, as it is said in the Psalm, (Psalm 68:20,) The
   issues of death are in his power. For death seems to consume all
   things; but God snatches from that whirlpool whom he pleases. So this
   persuasion ought to inspire us with firm and unassailable constancy,
   since it is necessary for those who so repose the whole care of their
   life and safety upon God, to be thoroughly conscious and undoubtedly
   sure that God will defend a good cause. And this is also expressed by
   these words of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego Behold our God whom we
   worship When they bring forward God's worship, they bear testimony to
   the surliness of their support, when they undertake nothing rashly, but
   are worshippers of the true God, and labor for the defense of piety.
   For this is the difference, between martyrs and malefactors, who are
   often compelled to suffer the penalty of their madness for attempting
   to overthrow all things. We see, indeed, the majority tossed about by
   their own intemperance. If they happen to suffer punishment, they are
   not to be reckoned among God's martyrs; for, as Augustine says, the
   martyr is made by his cause, and not by his punishment. Hence the
   weight of these words, when these three men attest their worship of
   God, since in this way they boast in their power of enduring any urgent
   danger not rashly, but only as supported by the sure worship of God. I
   now come to the second point.

   If God be unwilling to deliver us from death, be it known to thee, O
   king, we will not worship thy gods I said first of all, we should be
   constantly prepared to undergo every conflict, to commit our life to
   his charge, to submit to his will and hand, and to the protection of
   his custody. But the desire of this earthly and fading life ought not;
   to retain its hold upon us, and to hinder us from the free and candid
   confession of the truth. For God's glory ought to be more precious to
   us than a hundred lives. Hence we cannot be witnesses for God without
   we lay aside all desire of this life, and at least prefer God's glory
   to it. Meanwhile, we must. remark the impossibility of doing this,
   without the hope of a better life drawing us towards itself. For where
   there is no promise of any eternal inheritance implanted in our hearts,
   we. shall never be torn away from this world. We are naturally desirous
   of existence, and that feeling cannot be eradicated, unless faith
   overcome it; as Paul says, Not that we wished to be unclothed, but
   clothed upon. (2 Corinthians 5:4.) Paul confesses that men cannot be
   naturally induced to wish for departure from the world, unless, as we
   have said, through the power of faith. But when we understand our
   inheritance to be in heaven, while we are strangers upon earth, then we
   put off that clinging to the life of this world to which we are too
   much devoted.

   These then are the two points which prepare the sons of God for
   martyrdom, and remove hesitation as to their offering their life in
   sacrifice to God. First, if they are persuaded that God is the
   protector of their life and will certainly liberate them should it be
   expedient; and secondly, when they live above the world and aspire to
   the hope of eternal life in heaven, while prepared to renounce the
   world. This magnanimity is to be remarked in their language, when they
   say, Be it known to thee, O king, that we do not worship thy gods nor
   adore the statue which, thou hast set up Here they obliquely accuse the
   king of arrogating too much to himself, and of wishing religion to
   stand or fall by his own will. Thou hast erected the statue, but thy
   authority is of no moment to us, since we know it to be a fictitious
   deity whose image thou wishest us to worship. The God whom we worship
   has revealed himself to us we know him to be the maker of heaven and
   earth, to have redeemed our fathers from Egypt, and to intend our
   chastisement by driving us into exile. Since, therefore, we have a firm
   foundation for our faith hence we reckon thy gods and thy sway
   valueless. It follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:19-20

   19. Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage
   was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: therefore he
   spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times
   more than it was wont to be heated.

   19. Tunc Nebuchadnezer repletus fuit iracundia, et forma faciei ejus
   mutata fuit [187] erga Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego: loquutus est,
   jussit, vel, edixit, accendi fornacem uno septies, hoc est, septuplo,
   magis; quam solebat accendi.

   20. And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to bind
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the burning
   fiery furnace.

   20. Et viris praestantibus robore, vel, robustis virtute, qui erant in
   ejus satellitio [188] mandavit ut vincirent Sadrach, Mesach, et
   Abednego, ut Projicerent illos in fornacem ignis ardentis.


   Here, at; first sight, God seems to desert his servants, since he does
   not openly succor them. The king orders them to be thrown into a
   furnace of fire: no help from heaven appears for them. This was a
   living and remarkably efficacious proof of their faithfulness. But they
   were prepared, as we have seen, to endure everything. These bold
   answers were not prompted simply by their trust in God's immediate
   help, but by a determination to die; since a better life occupied their
   thoughts, they willingly sacrificed the present life. Hence they were
   not frightened at this terrible order of the king's, but followed on
   their course, fearlessly submitting to death for the worship of God. No
   third way was opened for them, when a choice was granted either to
   submit to death, or apostatize from the true God. By this example we
   are taught to meditate on our immortal life in times of ease, so that
   if God pleases, we may not hesitate to expose our souls by the
   confession of the true faith. For we are so timorous when we are
   attacked by calamity, we are seized with fear and torpor, and then when
   we are not pressed by any urgency we feign for ourselves a false
   security. When we are allowed to be at ease, we ought to apply our
   minds to meditation upon a future life, so that this world may become
   cheap to us, and we may be prepared when necessary to pour forth our
   blood in testimony to the truth. And this narrative is not set before
   us simply to lead us to admire and celebrate the courage of these three
   holy ones, but their constancy is proposed to us as an example for
   imitation.

   With reference to King Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel here shews, as in a
   glass, the pride and haughtiness of kings when they find their decrees
   disobeyed. Surely a mind of iron ought to grow soft by the answer which
   we have just narrated, on hearing Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego
   committing their lives to God; but when it heard how they could not be
   drawn aside from their faithfulness by the fear of death, its anger was
   only increased. In considering this fury, we ought to take into account
   the power of Satan in seizing and occupying the minds of men. For there
   is no moderation in them, even if they shew some great and remarkable
   hope of virtues, -- for, as we have seen, Nebuchadnezzar was endued
   with many virtues; but as Satan harassed him, we discern nothing but
   cruelty and barbarity. Meanwhile, let us remember how pleasing our
   constancy is to God, though it may not produce any immediate fruit
   before the world. For many indulge in pleasure through thinking they
   would be rash in devoting themselves to death, without any apparent
   utility. And on this pretext, they excuse themselves from not
   contending more boldly for the glory of God, by supposing they would
   lose their labor, and their death would be fruitless. But we hear what
   Christ pronounces, namely, this sacrifice is pleasing to God, when we
   die for the testimony of the heavenly doctrine, although the generation
   before which we bear witness to God's name is adulterous and perverse,
   nay, even hardened by our constancy. (Matthew 5:11, and Matthew 10:32,
   and Mark 8:38.)

   And such an example is here set before us in these three holy men;
   because, although Nebuchadnezzar was more inflamed by the freedom of
   their confession, yet that; liberty pleased God, and they did not
   repent of it, though they did not discern the fruit of their constancy
   which they wished. The Prophet also expresses this circumstance to
   demonstrate the king's fury, since he ordered the furnace to be heated
   seven times hotter than before; and then, he chose from his own
   servants the strongest of all to bind these holy men, and cast them
   into the furnace of fire

   But from the result it is very evident, that this did not occur without
   God's secret impulse; for the devil will sometimes throw discredit on a
   miracle, unless all doubt is removed. Since therefore the king ordered
   the furnace to be heated sevenfold more than before, next when he chose
   the strongest attendants, and commanded them to follow him, God thus
   removed all doubts, by liberating his servants, because light emerges
   more clearly from the darkness, when Satan endeavors to shut it out.
   Thus God is accustomed to frustrate the impious; and the more impious
   they are in opposing his glory, the more he makes his honor and
   doctrine conspicuous. In like manner, Daniel here paints, as in a
   picture, how King Nebuchadnezzar passed nothing by, when he wished to
   strike terror into the minds of all the Jews by this cruel punishment.
   And yet he obtained nothing else by his plans than a clearer
   illustration of God's power and grace towards his servants. It now
   follows: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [187] tslm, tzelem, is here taken in a different sense from its
   previous one, for Daniel sometimes uses it for "image," but here for
   the "figure" or, "countenance" of the king, which was changed. --
   Calvin.

   [188] hyl, hil, is here used for "attendants," or "servants," properly
   it means "army," but as the king is not at war, it doubtless means
   "attendants;" he chose, therefore, the strongest of his attendants. --
   Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:21-23

   21. Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their
   hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the
   burning fiery furnace.

   21. Tunc viri illi vincti sunt, vel, ligati, in suis chlamydibus, [189]
   et cum tiaris suis: [190] in vestitu suo: et projecti sunt in fornacem
   ignis ardentis.

   22. Therefore because the king's commandment was urgent, and the
   furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that took
   up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

   22. Propterea quod urgebat, vel, festinabat, ud verbum praeceptum
   regis, et fornacem vehementer jusserat accendi, viros illos qui
   extulerant Sadrach, Mesach, et Abed-nego occidit t kavilla, alii
   vertunt fammam, ignis.

   23. And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down
   bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

   23. Et viri illi tres Sadrach, Mesach et Abednego ceciderant in medium
   fornacis ignis, [191] ardentis vincti.


   Here Daniel relates the miracle by which God liberated his servants. He
   has two parts: first, these three holy men walked untouched in the
   midst of the flame; and the fires consumed those attendants who east
   them into the furnace. The Prophet diligently enumerates whatever tends
   to prove the power of God. He says, since the king's command was
   urgent, that is, since the king ordered in such anger the furnace to be
   heated, the flames devour the men who executed his orders. For in Job,
   (Job 18:5,) svyv, shebib, means "spark," or the extremity of a flame.
   The sense of the Prophet is by no means obscure, since the extremity of
   the flame consumed those strong attendants by playing round them, while
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego walked through the fuel in the fire
   and flame. They were not in the extremity of the flame; for it is as if
   the Prophet had said -- the king's slaves were consumed by the very
   smoke, and the fire was without the slightest effect on the servants of
   God. Hence he says, these three fell down in the furnace of fire By
   saying they fell, it means they could not take care of themselves or
   attempt to escape; for he adds, they were bound. This might at first
   naturally suffocate them, till they were immediately consumed; but they
   remained untouched, and then walked about the furnace loose. We hereby
   see how conspicuous was God's power, and how no falsehood of Satan's
   could obscure it. And next, when the very points of the flame, or the
   fiery sparks, devour the servants, here again the deed is proved to be
   of God. Meanwhile, the result of the history is the preservation of
   these three holy men, so surprisingly beyond their expectation.

   This example is set before us, to show us how nothing can be safer than
   to make God the guardian and protector of our life. For we ought not to
   expect to be preserved from every danger because we see those holy men
   delivered; for we ought to hope for liberation from death, if it be
   useful, and yet we ought not to hesitate to meet it without fear, if
   God so please it. But we should gather from our present narrative the
   sufficiency of God's protection, if he wishes to prolong our lives,
   since we know our life to be precious to him; and it is entirely in his
   power, either to snatch us from danger, or to withdraw us to a better
   existence, according to his pleasure. We have an example of this in the
   case of Peter; for he was on one day led forth from prison, and the
   next day put to death. Even then God shewed his care of his servant's
   life, although Peter at length suffered death. How so? Because he had
   finished his course. Hence, as often as God pleases, he will exert his
   power to preserve us; if he leads us onwards to death, we must be
   assured it is best for us to die, and injurious to us to enjoy life any
   longer. This is the substance of the instruction which we may receive
   from this narrative. It now follows: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [189] Some translate sandals, or, shoes, others hose; but the majority
   take the second noun for hose; but we need not trouble ourselves too
   much about the words, if we only understand the thing itself. --
   Calvin.

   [190] We know that the Orientals then wore turbans as they do now, for
   they wrap up he head; and though we do not see many of them, yet we
   know the Turkish dress; then the general name is added. -- Calvin. See
   also the note on this passage in Wintle's translation, which is full of
   good explanatory notes.

   [191] That is, within the furnace of fire. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:24-25

   24. Then Nebchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and
   spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound
   into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True,
   O king.

   24. Tunc Nebuchadnezer rex contremuit, [192] et surrexit in
   festinatione, celeriter: loquutus est, et dixit consiliariis suis:
   [193] An non viros tres projecimus in fornacem ligatos? vinctos.
   Responderunt, et dixerunt regi, Vere, rex.

   25. He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the
   midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is
   like the Son of God.

   25. Respondit, et dixit, Atqui ego video viros quatuor solutos,
   ambulantes in igne, et nulla noxa in ipsis est: et facies quarti
   similis est filio Dei.


   Here Daniel relates how God's power was manifest to the profane -- to
   both the king and his courtiers, who had conspired for the death of
   these holy men. He says, then, the king trembled at that miracle; since
   God often compels the impious to acknowledge his power, and when they
   stupidity themselves, and harden all their senses, they are compelled
   to feel God's power whether they will or not. Daniel shews how this
   happened to King Nebuchadnezzar. He trembled, says he, and rose up
   quickly, and said to his companions, Did we not cast three men bound
   into the fire? When they say, It is so, Nebuchadnezzar was doubtless
   impelled by Divine impulse, and a secret instinct, to inquire of his
   companions to extract this confession from them. For Nebuchadnezzar
   might easily approach the furnace, but God wished to extract this
   confession from his enemies, that both they and the king might allow
   the rescue of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, to have proceeded from
   no earthly medium, but from the admirable and extraordinary power of
   God. We may here remark, how the impious are witnesses to God's power,
   not willingly, but because God placed this question in the king's
   mouth, and also in his not permitting them to escape or turn aside from
   the confession of the truth. But Nebuchadnezzar says, four men walked
   in the fire, and the face of the fourth is like the son of a god No
   doubt God here sent one of his angels, to support by his presence the
   minds of his saints, lest they should faint. It was indeed a formidable
   spectacle to see the furnace so hot, and to be cast into it. By this
   consolation God wished to allay their anxiety, and to soften their
   grief, by adding an angel as their companion. We know how many angels
   have been sent to one man, as we read of Elisha. (2 Kings 6:15.) And
   there is this general rule -- He, has given his angels charge over
   thee, to guard thee in all the ways; and also, The camps of angels are
   about those who fear God. (Psalm 91:11, and Psalm 34:7.) This, indeed,
   is especially fulfilled in Christ; but it is extended to the whole
   body, and to each member of the Church, for God has his own hosts at
   hand to serve him. But we read again how an angel was often sent to a
   whole nation. God indeed does not need his angels, while he uses their
   assistance in condescension to our infirmities. And when we do not
   regard his power as highly as we ought, he interposes his angels to
   remove our doubts, as we have formerly said. A single angel was sent to
   these three men; Nebuchadnezzar calls him a son of God; not because he
   thought him to be Christ, but according to the common opinion among all
   people, that angels are sons of God, since a certain divinity is
   resplendent in them; and hence they call angels generally sons of God.
   According to this usual custom, Nebuchadnezzar says, the fourth man is
   like a son of a god. For he could not recognize the, only-begotten
   [18]Son of God, since, as we have already seen, he was blinded by so
   many depraved errors. And if any one should say it was enthusiasm, this
   would be forced and frigid. This simplicity, then, will be sufficient
   for us, since Nebuchadnezzar spoke in the usual manner, as one of the
   angels was sent to those three men -- since, as I have said, it was
   then customary to call angels sons of God. Scripture thus speaks,
   (Psalm 89:6, and elsewhere,) but God never suffered truth to become so
   buried in the world as not to leave some seed of sound doctrine, at
   least as a testimony to the profane, and to render them more
   inexcusable -- as we shall treat more at length in the next lecture.
   [194]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [192] Or, was terrified -- Calvin.

   [193] Some translate, to his companions; and the word may be derived
   from either consilium or consuetudo: hence it might mean companions who
   were around the king; but soon afterwards it means counselors, and
   there is no need of variety. -- Calvin.

   [194] See [19]Dissertation 13 at the end of this volume.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since our life is only for a moment, nay, is only
   vanity and smoke, that we may learn to cast all our care upon thee, and
   so to depend upon thee, as not to doubt time as our deliverer from all
   urgent perils, whenever it shall be to our advantage. Grant us also to
   learn to neglect and despise our lives, especially for the testimony of
   thy glory; and may we be prepared to depart as soon as thou callest us
   from this world. May the hope of eternal life be so fixed in our
   hearts, that we may willingly leave this world and aspire with all our
   mind towards that blessed eternity which thou hast testified to be laid
   up for us in heaven, through the gospel, and which thine only-begotten
   Son has procured for us through his blood. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Sixteenth
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:26

   26. Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery
   furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye
   servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither. Then
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth of the midst of the fire.

   26. Tunc accessit Nebuchadnezer ad ostium fornacis ignis ardentis:
   loquutus est et dixit, Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego servi Dei excelsi,
   egredimini, et venite. Tunc egressi sunt Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego e
   medio ignis.


   HERE a sudden change is described in the mood of this cruel and proud
   king. We have already seen how confidently he extracted worship from
   the servants of God, and when he saw them disobedient to his command,
   how mightily he raged against them. Now Daniel shews in how short a
   time this pride was subdued and this cruelty appeased; but we must
   remark that the king was not so changed as entirely to put his
   disposition and manners. For when he was touched with this present
   miracle, he gave God the glory, but only for a moment; and still he did
   not return to wisdom. We cannot take too diligent notice of examples of
   this kind, as many estimate the characters of others from a single
   action. But the worst despisers of God can submit to him for a short
   time, not merely by feigning to do so before men, but in real
   seriousness, since God compels them by his power, but meanwhile they
   retain their pride and ferocity within their breasts. Of this kind,
   then, was the conversion of King Nebuchadnezzar. For when astonished by
   the miracle, he could no longer resist the Almighty, he was still
   inconsistent, as we shall afterwards see. We may also notice how the
   impious, who are unregenerate by God's Spirit, are often impelled to
   worship God; but this is only temporary, and this equable tenor never
   remains through their whole life. But when God renews his own, he
   undertakes to govern them even to the end; he animates them to
   perseverance, and confirms them by his Spirit.

   We must here remark how God's glory is illustrated by this temporary
   and vanishing conversion of the reprobate; because, whether they will
   or not, yet they yield to God for a time, and thus the greatness of his
   power is acknowledged. God, therefore, turns an event which does not
   profit the reprobate to his own glory, and at the same time punishes
   them more severely. For Nebuchadnezzar's conduct was less excusable
   after his once acknowledging the God of Israel to be the supreme and
   only God, and then relapsing into his former superstitions. He says,
   therefore, -- He approached the door of the furnace, and spoke thus, --
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, servants of the most high God, come
   forth and come hither A short time before, he wished his own statue to
   be worshipped, and his own name to be esteemed the only one in heaven
   and earth, since this was pleasing to him. We then saw how he claimed
   the right of subjecting the religion and worship of God to his own will
   and lust; but now, as if he were a new man, he calls Shadrach, Meshach,
   and Abed-nego, servants of the most high God! What place, then, was
   left to him and to all the Chaldeans? How could they now worship those
   fictitious gods and idols which they had fabricated? But God extracted
   these words from the proud and cruel king, as when criminals and
   compelled, by tortures, to say what they would otherwise refuse. Thus
   Nebuchadnezzar confessed God to be the most high God of Israel, as if
   he had been tortured, but not of his own accord, or in a composed state
   of mind. He does not pretend this before men, as I have said; but his
   mind was neither pure nor perfect, since it was in a ferment with this
   temporary commotion. And this must also be added -- the instinct was
   rather violent; than voluntary.

   Daniel afterwards relates -- His companions came forth from the midst
   of the fire By these words he again confirms the miracle; for God could
   extinguish the fire of the furnace, but he wished it to burn in the
   sight of all, to render the power of this deliverance the more
   conspicuous. Meanwhile we must notice the three men walking in the
   furnace, until the king commanded them to come forth, because God had
   issued no command. They saw themselves perfectly safe and. sound in the
   midst of the furnace; they were content with God's present benefit, but
   still they had no free departure, until fetched by the king's voice. As
   when Noah, in the ark, saw safety prepared for him in that tomb, yet he
   did not try anything until commanded to come forth. (Genesis 8:16.) So
   also Daniel asserts that his companions did not, come forth from the
   furnace till the king commanded them. Then at length they understood
   how what they had heard from the king was pleasing to God; not because
   he was a Prophet or teacher, but because they were cast into the
   furnace by his command. So also when he recalls them, they know the end
   of their cross to be arrived, and thus they pass from death unto life.
   It follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:27

   27. And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's
   counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies
   the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither
   were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.

   27. Et congregati sunt satrapae, duces, praefecti, et consiliarii regis
   [195] ad conspiciendos viros illos, quod non dominatus esset ignis
   corporibus eorum, et pilus capitis eorum non adustus esset, et vestibus
   eorum non esset mutatus, et odor ignis non pervasisset, vel, non,
   penetrasset, ad eos. [196]


   Daniel relates how the satraps were gathered together with the leaders,
   prefects, and councilors of the king. The gathering was simply a
   collection of numbers, and if they deliberated about anything of
   importance, they all agreed. And this confirms the miracle, since if
   they had been stupefied, how could the great power of God be proposed
   to the eyes of the blind? Although they were so astonished, they were
   not altogether foolish, And Daniel implies this by saying, they were
   assembled together After they had discussed the matter, he says, they
   came to behold that specimen of the incredible power of God. Then he
   enumerates many reasons, which clearly shew these three men not to have
   been preserved by any other means than God's singular good will. He
   says, The fire had no power over their bodies then, a hair of their
   head was not burnt thirdly, their garments were unchanged lastly, the
   smell of fire had not penetrated to themselves or their garments He
   expresses more by the word smell than if he had simply said, -- the
   fire had not penetrated. For fire must naturally consume and burn up
   whatever is submitted to it; but when not even the smell of fire has
   passed over any substance, the miracle is more conspicuous. Now, we
   understand the Prophet's intention. On the whole, he shews how the
   benefit of freedom was no, small one, since Shadrach, Meshach, and
   Abed-nego came out of the furnace. Besides, these satraps, prefects,
   and. governors, were witnesses of the power of God. Their testimony
   would be the more valuable, as all the Jews were, spectators of this
   grace of God, which even they scarcely believed. But since these men
   were clearly and professedly enemies to true piety, they would
   willingly have concealed the miracle, had it been in their power. But
   God draws them against their wills, and compels them to be
   eye-witnesses, and they are thus obliged to confess what cannot be in
   the slightest degree doubtful. It follows-
     __________________________________________________________________

   [195] Some translate the last "prefects," but badly: it properly
   signifies either counselors or familiar friends, as appears from many
   passages. -- Calvin.

   [196] Or," to them," for the relative may apply either to their persons
   or their clothing, and it is of little consequence to which. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:28

   28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed be the God of
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered
   his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and
   yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god,
   except their own God.

   28. Loquutus est Nebuchadnezer, et dixit, Benedictus Deus ipsorum,
   nempe Sadrach, Mesach, et Abed-nego, qui misit angelum suum, et
   eripuit, servavit, servos suos, qui confisi sunt in ipso, et verbum
   regis mutarunt, [197] et tradiderunt corpora sua, ne colerent, vel
   adorarent omnem deum, [198] praeter Deum suum.


   This, indeed, is no common confession, but the event proved how
   suddenly King Nebuchadnezzar was acted on by impulse, without having,
   the living root of the fear of God in his heart. And I repeat this
   again, to shew that repentance does not consist in one or two works,
   but in perseverance, as Paul says, --

   "If ye live in the Spirit, walk also in the Spirit."
   (Galatians 5:25.)

   Here he requires constancy in the faithful, by which they may shew
   themselves to be truly born again of God's Spirit. Nebuchadnezzar
   celebrated the God of Israel as if inspired by an enthusiasm, but at
   the same time he mingled his idols with the true God, so that there was
   no sincerity in him. So when the impious feel God's power, they do not
   dare to proceed with obstinacy against him, but wish to appease him by
   a false repentance, without putting off their natural disposition. Thus
   we readily conclude Nebuchadnazzar to be always the same, although God
   extracted from him this confession, -- Blessed, says he, be the God of
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego! Why does he not rather speak of him
   as his own God? This may be excused, had he really devoted himself to
   the God of Israel, and abjured his former superstitions. As he does not
   act thus, his confession is worthless; not because he wished to obtain
   men's favor or good opinion by what he said, but he deceived himself
   after the manner of hypocrites. He pronounces the God of Shadrach,
   Meshach, and Abed-nego to be blessed if he really felt this, he must at
   the same time curse his idols, for the glory of the one true God cannot
   be extolled without all idols being reduced to nothing. For how can
   God's praise exist without his being solely conspicuous? If any other
   deity is opposed to him, his majesty is already buried in complete
   obscurity. Hence we may collect that Nebuchadnezzar was not touched
   with true repentance when he blessed the God of Israel. He adds, Who
   sent his angel, and delivered his servants. Here Daniel shews more
   clearly the absence of conversion in Nebuchadnezzar, and his failure to
   embrace the God of Israel, and worship him with sound and complete
   surrender of his affections. Why so? Because piety is always founded
   upon the knowledge of the true God, and this requires instruction.
   Nebuchadnezzar knew the God of Israel to be majestic from the display
   of his power, for he had such a spectacle presented to him as he could
   not despise, if he wished. Here he confesses that Israel's God was
   mighty, since he was taught it by a miracle; but this, as I have
   reminded you, is not sufficient for solid piety, unless instruction is
   added, and occupies the first place. I allow, indeed, that miracles
   prepare men to believe, but if miracles only occurred without the
   knowledge of God being added from his Word, faith will vanish away --
   as the example sufficiently remarkable here sets before us. We term the
   faith of Nebuchadnezzar to be but momentary, because while his senses
   were fixed upon the miracle, he was content with the spectacle, without
   inquiring into the character of the God of Israel, and the bearing of
   his law. He was not anxious about a Mediator; hence he neglected the
   chief point of piety, and rashly seized upon one part of it only. We
   clearly observe this in many profane men, for God often humbles them,
   to induce them suppliantly to fly to him for safety; but meanwhile,
   they remain perplexed by their own senses; they do not deny their own
   superstitions, nor regard the true worship of God. To prove our
   obedience to God, we must, uphold this principle -- nothing pleases him
   which does not spring from faith. (Romans 14:23.) But faith cannot be
   acquired by any miracle, or any perception of the Divine power; it
   requires instruction also. The miracles avail only to the preparation
   for piety or for its confirmation; they cannot by themselves bring men
   to worship the true God. This is surprising indeed, when a profane king
   says the angel was sent by God

   It is sufficiently evident from heathen writings that something was
   always known about angels. This was, as it were, a kind of anticipation
   and previous persuasion, since all people are persuaded that angels
   exist, so that they had some idea of angels, although but a partial
   one. For, when a short time ago Daniel said the fourth appearance in
   the furnace was called by the king of Babylon "a son of a god," then,
   as I have explained it, Nebuchadnezzar professed some belief in angels.
   He now says more expressly, God sent his angel As angels afford
   supplies to the elect and the faithful, I treat the subject here but
   shortly, since I am not in the habit of dwelling upon ordinary
   passages. It is enough for the present passage to shew how the impious,
   who have learnt nothing from either God himself or from piety at large,
   were yet imbued with these principles, since God is accustomed to use
   the assistance of angels to preserve his people. For this reason
   Nebuchadnezzar now says; the angel was sent by God to deliver his
   servants He next adds, who trusted in him; and this is worthy of
   notice, since it is added as a reason why these three men were so
   wonderfully preserved, through reposing all their hopes on God.
   Although Nebuchadnezzar was very like a log or a stone with relation to
   the doctrine of faith, yet God wished by means of this stone and log to
   instruct us, to inspire us with shame, and to reprove us of
   incredulity, since we are unable to conform our lives to his will, and
   to approach all dangers boldly, whenever it becomes necessary. For if
   we are thoroughly persuaded that God is the guardian of our life,
   surely no threats, nor terrors, nor death itself, should hinder us from
   persevering in our duty. But distrust is the cause of slothfulness, and
   wherever we deflect from a straightforward course, we deprive God of
   his honor, by becoming backsliders, while some want of faith betrays
   itself and is palpably apparent. Hence let us learn, if we wish our
   life to be protected by God's hand, to commit ourselves entirely to
   him, since he will never disappoint us when we confide in him. We saw
   how doubtful about the event Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were; but
   their doubt did not diminish their hope and confidence. They were
   placed in this alternative -- either God will take us from rite
   furnace, or, if we must die, he will preserve us for some better state,
   and gather us into his kingdom. Although they dared not persuade
   themselves that he would notice them yet they reposed their lives in
   the hand and care of God. Hence they are deservedly complimented by
   Nebuchadnezzar, when he said, -- They trusted in their God, and
   afterwards, they changed the king's edict, that is, reduced it to
   nothing, and abrogated it, because they were endued with greater power.
   For whoever rests in God, easily despises all mankind, and whatever is
   lofty and magnificent in the world. And this context is worthy of
   observation, since faith ought to be put as a foundation, and then
   fortitude and constancy must be added, with which Shadrach, Meshach,
   and Abed-nego were endowed; because any one who reposes upon God can
   never be moved aside from the discharge of his duty; and however
   numerous the impediments which may occur, he will be borne aloft on the
   wings of his confidence. He who knows God to be on his side, will be
   superior to the whole world, and will neither wonder at the scepter and
   diadems of kings, nor dread their power, but rather surpass all the
   majesty of the earth which may oppose him, and never to turn aside from
   this course.

   He afterwards adds, they delivered up their bodies instead of
   worshipping or adoring any god except their own God. That very thing
   which the king is compelled to praise in these three men, at this day
   many who boast themselves to be Christians wish to escape. For they
   fancy their faith to be buried in their hearths, and bring forth no
   fruit of their profession. There is no doubt God wished these things to
   be related by his Prophet, to shew the detestable cunning of those who
   wish to defraud God of his lawful honor, and at the same time shelter
   themselves from his gaze, lest he should notice their insult. Such as
   these are unworthy of being convinced by the word of God, but
   Nebuchadnezzar is here appointed their master, censor, and judge. And
   we must diligently remark this, -- Nebuchadnezzar praises these three,
   because they refused to worship any other god except their own. Why
   then did he mingle together a great multitude of deities? For he did
   not depart from his own errors and give himself up entirely to the God
   of Israel, and embrace his worship in its purity. Why then does he
   praise in others what he does not imitate? But this is far too common;
   for we see virtue praised and yet frozen to death, as in this instance,
   for many are willing to offer him lip-service. (Juvenal, Sat. 1.)
   Although Nebuchadnezzar seemed here to speak seriously, yet he did not
   consider himself; but he took away all pretext for excuse, since he
   could not afterwards pretend ignorance and error, after asserting with
   his own mouth that no other god ought to be worshipped. Hence he may
   cause those who now wish to be called Christians to be ashamed, unless
   they depart far away from all superstitions, and consecrate themselves
   entirely to God, and retain his worship in its sincerity. We must
   remember then how King Nebuchadnezzar does not simply praise the
   constancy of these three men, because he does not acknowledge any god,
   for he does reckon the God of Israel to be a true deity. Hence it
   follows, that all others were fictitious and utterly vain. But he spoke
   to no purpose, because God did not thereby touch his heart, as he
   usually works in his elect when he regenerates them. It follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [197] Transgressed, that is, deprived the king's edict of its
   confidence and authority -- Calvin.

   [198] That is, adore any other god. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:29

   29. Therefore I make a decree, That every people, nation, and language,
   which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and
   Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a
   dunghill: because there is no other God that can deliver after this
   sort.

   29. Et a me positum est, hoc est, onitur, edictum, [199] ut omnis
   populus, natio, [200] et lingua quae protulerit aliquid transversum,
   [201] contra Deum ipsorum, nempe Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego, in
   frusta fiet, et domus ejus in latrinam, vel, in sterquilinium,
   redigetur: quia non est Deus alius qui possit servare hoc modo.


   Here Nebuchadnezzar is urged further forward -- for we must use this
   phrase -- since he does not take up the worship of one God from his
   heart, and bid his errors finally farewell. Hence it is as if God was
   thrusting him violently forward, while he promulgates this edict. The
   edict is by itself pious and praiseworthy; but, as we have already
   said, Nebuchadnezzar is borne along by a blind and turbulent impulse,
   because piety had no root in his heart. Though he is always intent on
   this miracle, his faith is only momentary, and his fear of God but
   partial. Why then is Nebuchadnezzar now seen as the patron of God's
   glory? Because he was frightened by the miracle, and thus being acted
   on by impulse alone, he could not; be soundly restrained by the fear of
   God alone. And finally, this desire which he expresses is nothing but
   an evanescent movement. It is useful to remark this, since we see many
   born along by impetuous zeal and rage to vindicate God's glory; but
   they lack tact and judgment, so that they deserve no praise. And many
   wander still further -- as we see in the Papacy -- when many edicts of
   kings and princes fly about; and if any one should ask them why they
   are so eager as not to spare even human blood, they put forth indeed a
   zeal for God, but it is mere madness without a spark of true knowledge.
   We must hold, therefore, that no law can be passed nor any edict
   promulgated concerning religion and the worship of God, unless a real
   knowledge of God shines forth. Nebuchadnezzar indeed had a reason for
   this edict, but, as I have already said, there was a special motive for
   his conduct. Some, indeed, now wish to be thought Christian princes,
   and yet are only inflamed by a hypocritical zeal, and so they pour
   forth innocent blood like cruel beasts. And why so? Because they make
   no distinction between the true God and idols. But I shall discuss this
   point at greater length to-morrow, and so pass over casually what I
   shall treat at length, when the fit opportunity arrives.

   Every people, therefore, and nation, and language, which shall have
   offered a perverse speech against their God Nebuchadnezzar again
   extolled the God of Israel, but how was he taught the majesty of God?
   By this one proof of his power, for he neglected the chief point -- the
   ascertaining from the law and the prophets the nature of God and the
   power of his will. Thus we see, on one side, how God's glory is
   asserted here, and yet the principal point in his worship, and in true
   piety, is neglected and omitted. No light punishment is added -- -he
   must be cut in pieces, next, his house must be turned into a dunghill,
   since he has spoken reproachfully of the God of Israel Hence we gather
   how this severity is not to be utterly condemned, when God's worship is
   defended by severe punishments; yet a correct sentence ought to be
   passed in each case. But I put this off also till to-morrow. It is now
   added, because there is no other God who can deliver after this manner;
   and. this confirms what I have formerly touched upon, namely, King
   Nebuchadnezzar does not regard the law in his edict, nor yet the other
   requisites of piety; but he is only impelled and moved by the miracle,
   so as not to bear or desire anything to be said opprobriously against
   the God of Israel. Hence the edict is deserving of blame in this point,
   since he does not inquire what God's nature is, with the view of
   obtaining a sufficient reason for issuing it. It is added at length, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [199] Or, decree, -- we have already explained this word. -- Calvin.

   [200] Some translate, family. -- Calvin.

   [201] slh slelch, signifies to err; hence the noun is derived, which
   many translate error, and others rashness; but it means a perverse
   speech -- whoever, therefore, utters a perverse speech. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 3:30

   30. Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the
   province of Babylon.

   30. Tunc rex prosperare fecit, [202] Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego, in
   provincia Babylonis.


   This seems to be of slight consequence; but yet it was not added in
   vain. We are to understand that the miracle was confirmed throughout
   the whole province and region, because all the Chaldeans knew those
   three men were cast into the furnace, and then afterwards shared in the
   imperial sway and were restored to their former honors. In consequence
   of this event, God's power could not be unknown. It was just as it God
   had sent forth three heralds through the whole region, who everywhere
   proclaimed how they were wonderfully delivered from death by God's
   special interposition. Whence, also, it would be understood how
   worthless were all the deities then worshipped in Chaldea, and how that
   great deity whose statue Nebuchadnezzar had set up had been despised,
   and how the true God proved his consistency in snatching his servants
   from death.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [202] Verbally, fortslch , tzelech, signifies "to prosper;" hence the
   word is deduced, which signifies "to rest in a state of prosperity;"
   that is, he caused those three men to become prosperous. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast instructed us by the doctrine of
   thy law and Gospel, and dost daily deign to make known thy will to us
   with familiarity, that we may remain fixed in the true obedience of
   this teaching, in which thy perfect justice is manifested; and may we
   never be moved away from thy worship. May we be prepared, whatever
   happens, rather to undergo a hundred deaths than to turn aside from the
   profession of true piety, in which we know our safety to be laid up.
   And may we so glorify thy name as to be partakers of that glory which
   has been acquired for us through the blood of thine only-begotten Son.
   -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 4
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:1-3

   1. Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages,
   that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.

   1. Nebuchadnezer rex omnibus populis, nationibus, et linguis; quae;
   habitant in tota terra, pax vobiscum. multiplicetur.

   2. I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high God
   hath wrought toward me.

   2. Signa et mirabilia quae fecit mecum Deus excelsus pulchrum coram me
   enarrare.

   3. How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! his kingdom
   is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to
   generation.

   3. Signa ejus quam magna sunt! et mirabilia ejus quam fortia! regnum
   ejus regnum seculare, [203] et dominatio ejus cum rotate, et rotate.

     __________________________________________________________________

   [203] That is, perpetual. -- Calvin
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Seventeenth.

   Some join these verses to the end of the third chapter, but there is no
   reason for this; and it will clearly appear from the context that the
   edict is here set forth in the king's name, and other events are
   inserted. Daniel, therefore, here, speaks in the person of the king; he
   afterwards narrates what happened to the king, and then returns to his
   own person. Those who separate these three verses from the context of
   the fourth chapter, do not seem to have sufficiently considered the
   intention and words of the Prophet. This passage may seem harsh and
   rough, when Daniel introduces the king of Babylon as speaking -- then
   speaks in his own name -- and afterwards returns to the person of the;
   king. But since this variety does not render the sense either doubtful
   or obscure, there is no reason why it should trouble us. We now see how
   all the sentences which we shall explain in their places are mutually
   united.

   The contents of this chapter are as follow: Nebuchadnezzar was
   sufficiently instructed in the worship of the God of Israel as one God,
   and was compelled at the time to confess this; yet he did not depart
   from his own superstitions; his conceptions of the true God were but
   momentary, and hence he suffered the punishment due to such great
   ingratitude. But God intended him to become more and more blinded, as
   he is accustomed to treat the reprobate and even his elect at times.
   When men add sin to sin, God loosens his reins and allows them to
   destroy themselves. Afterwards he either extends his hand towards them,
   or withdraws them by his hidden virtue, or reduces them to order by his
   rod, and completely humbles them. He treated the king of Babylon in
   this way. We shall afterwards discuss the dream; but we must here
   briefly notice the king's admonition, that he might feel himself
   without excuse when he was so utterly broken down. God indeed might
   justly punish him as soon as he saw he was not truly converted; but
   before he inflicted the final chastisement -- as we shall see in its
   place -- he wished to admonish him, if there were any hope of his
   repentance. Although he seemed to receive with the greatest modesty
   what God had manifested by his dream through Daniel's interpretation of
   it, yet he professed with his mouth what he did not really possess. And
   he shews this sufficiently, because, when he ought to be afraid and
   cautious, he does not lay aside his pride, but glories in himself as a
   king of kings, and in Babylon as the queen of the whole world! Since,
   then, he spoke so confidently after being admonished by the Prophet, we
   perceive how little he had profited by his dream. But God wished in
   this way to render him more inexcusable, and although he did not bring
   forth fruit immediately, yet a long time afterwards, when God touched
   his mind, he very properly recognized this punishment to have been
   divinely inflicted. Hence this dream was a kind of entrance and
   preparation for repentance, and as seed seems to lie putrid in the
   earth before it brings forth its fruit, and God sometimes works by
   gentle processes, and provides for the teaching, which seemed for a
   long time useless, becoming both efficacious and fruitful.

   I now come to the words themselves; the preface to the edict is,
   Nebuchadnezzar the king to all peoples, nations, and languages, which
   dwell in the whole earth, namely, under his sway. He does not mean this
   to be extended to Scythia, or Gaul, or other distant regions; but since
   his empire extended far and wide, he spoke boastingly. Thus we see the
   Romans, whose sway did not reach near so far, called Rome itself the
   seat of the empire of the whole world! Here Nebuchadnezzar now
   predicts. the magnificence and mightiness of his own monarchy. Hence he
   sends his edict to all peoples, and nations, and languages, which dwell
   on the earth He afterwards adds, it seemed to me good to relate the
   signs and wonders which the mighty God hath wrought with me No doubt he
   feels himself to have paid the penalty of his ingratitude, since he had
   so punctiliously ascribed the glory to one true God, and yet had
   relapsed into his own superstitions, and had never really said farewell
   to them. We see how often King Nebuchadnezzar was chastised before he
   profited by the rod of the Almighty. Hence we need not be surprised if
   God often strikes us with his hand, since the result of experience
   proves us to be dull, and, to speak truly, utterly slothful. When God,
   therefore, wishes to lead us to repentance, he is compelled to repeat
   his blows continually, either because we are not moved when he
   chastises us with his hand, or we seem roused for the time, and then we
   return again to our former torpor. He is therefore compelled to
   redouble his blows. And we perceive this in the narrative before us, as
   in a glass. But the singular benefit of God was this, Nebuchadnezzar,
   after God had often chastised him, yielded at length. It is unknown
   whether or not this confession proceeded front true and genuine
   repentance: I must leave it in doubt. Yet without the slightest doubt
   Daniel recited this edict, to shew the king so subdued at length, as to
   confess the God of Israel to be the only God, and to bear witness to
   this among all people under his sway.

   Meanwhile we must remark, how this edict of the king of Babylon
   receives the testimony of the Spirit; for Daniel has no other object or
   purpose in relating the edict, than to shew the fruit of conversion in
   King Nebuchadnezzar. Hence, without doubt, King Nebuchadnezzar bore
   witness to his repentance when he celebrated the God of Israel among
   all people, and when he proclaimed a punishment to all who spoke
   reproachfully against God. Hence this passage is often cited by
   Augustine against the Donatists. [204] For they wished to grant an act
   of impunity to themselves, when they disturbed the Church with rashness
   and corrupted pure doctrine, and even permitted themselves to attack it
   like robbers. For some were then discovered to have been slain by them,
   and others mutilated in their limbs. Since, then, they allowed
   themselves to act so licentiously and still desired to commit crimes
   with impunity, yet they held this principle as of first importance. No
   punishment ought to be inflicted on those who differ from others in
   religious doctrine; as we see in these days, how some contend far too
   eagerly about this subject. What they desire is clear enough. If any
   one carefully observes them, he will find them impious despisers of
   God; they wish to render everything uncertain in religion, and as far
   as they can they strive to tear away all the principles of piety. With
   the view then of vomiting forth their poison, they strive eagerly for
   freedom from punishment, and deny the right of inflicting punishment on
   heretics and blasphemers.

   Such is that dog Castalio [205] and his companions, and all like him,
   such also were the Donatists; and hence, as I have mentioned, Augustine
   cites this testimony in many places, and shews how ashamed Christian
   princes ought to be of their slothfulness, if they are indulgent to
   heretics and blasphemers, and do not vindicate God's glory by lawful
   punishments, since King Nebuchadnezzar who was never truly converted:
   yet promulgated this decree by a kind of secret instinct. At all
   events, it ought to be sufficient for men of moderate and quiet tastes
   to know how King Nebuchadnezzar's edict was praised by the approval of
   the Holy Spirit. If this be so, it follows that kings are bound to
   defend the worship of God, and to execute vengeance upon those who
   profanely despise it, and on those who endeavor to reduce it to
   nothing, or to adulterate the true doctrine by their errors, and so
   dissipate the unity of the faith and disturb the Church's peace. This
   is clear enough from the Prophet's context; for Nebuchadnezzar says at
   first, it pleases me to relate the signs and wonders which God has
   prepared for me He had already explained how wonderfully God had
   treated him; but this had passed away. Now God seizes him a second and
   even a third time, and then he confesses it to be his boast to explain
   the wonderful signs of God. He afterwards breaks forth into the
   exclamation, How mighty are his signs! How remarkable his miracles! His
   kingdom, is a kingdom of an age, and his dominion is from age to age
   Without doubt Nebuchadnezzar wished to excite his subjects to the
   attentive perusal of this edict, and to the acknowledgment of its
   value, and thus to subject themselves to the true and only God. He
   calls him The High God, meaning, doubtless, the God of Israel;
   meanwhile, we do not know whether he cast away his superstitions. I
   however incline to the opposite conjecture, since he did not put off
   his errors, but was compelled to give glory to the Most High God. He so
   acknowledged the God of Israel as to join inferior deities with him as
   allies and companions, just as all unbelievers, while admitting one
   supreme deity, imagine a multitude of others. So also Nebuchadnezzar
   confessed Israel's God to be Most High; yet, he did not correct the
   idolatry which still flourished under his sway; nay, he mingled and
   confused the false gods with the God of Israel. Thus he did not leave
   behind his own corruption's. He celebrates indeed with magnificence the
   glory of the supreme God, but this is not sufficient without;
   abolishing all superstitions, and promoting that religion alone which
   is prescribed by the word of God, and causing his pure and perfect
   worship to flourish.

   In fine, this preface might seem a proof of an important conversion;
   but we shall directly see how far Nebuchadnezzar was from being
   entirely purged of his errors. It ought, indeed, to affect us
   exceedingly to behold the king wrapt up in so many errors, and yet
   seized with admiration of the Divine virtue, since he cannot express
   his thoughts, but exclaims, -- His signs how mighty! his wonders how
   powerful! He added, His kingdom is a perpetual kingdom, and his
   dominion is from age to age Here he confesses God's power not to be
   dependent upon man's will, since he had just before said, the statue
   which he had erected was to be worshipped, because he had chosen so to
   decree it. Now, however, he remits much of this pride by confessing
   God's kingdom to be a perpetual one. The narrative now follows. Thus
   far we have merely a preface, because the edict was diffused among his
   subjects to render them attentive to the most important subjects.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [204] Ep. 166. ad Donat. et alibi

   [205] Sebastian Castalio is here referred to. He was an opponent of
   Calvin, and banished from Geneva by his influence. Being a man of
   extensive learning he was appointed Greek professor at Basil. See
   Mosheim, cent. 16. section. 3, pt. 2, and the authorities there quoted.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:4-6

   4. I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in my
   palace:

   4. Ego Nebuchadnezer quietus, aut, felix, eram domi meae, et florens
   aut, viridis in palatio meo.

   5. I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and
   the visions of my head troubled me.

   5. Somnium vidi, et exterruit me, [206] et cogitationes super cubile
   meum et visiones capitis mei conturbaverunt me.

   6. Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon
   before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the
   dream.

   6. Et a me positum fuit decretum, ut adducerentur, hoc est,
   accerserentur, coram me omnes sapientes Babylonis, qui interpretationem
   sorenii patefacerent mihi.


   Nebuchadnezzar here explains how he acknowledged the Supreme God. He
   does not relate the proofs which he had previously received; but since
   his pride was subdued in this last dream, he makes a passing allusion
   to it. Meanwhile, as he doubtless recalled his former dreams to mind,
   and condemned himself for his ingratitude, in burying in oblivion this
   great power of God, and in wiping away the remembrance of those
   benefits by which God had adorned him. Here, however, he speaks only of
   his last dream, which we shall see in its own place. But before he
   comes as far as the dream, he says, he was at rest. slh, seleh,
   signifies "rest" and "happiness;" and since prosperity renders men
   secure, it is metaphorically used for "security." David, when he
   pronounces the same sentence upon himself, uses the same words: (Psalm
   30:6,) "I said in my prosperity," or rest; slvh, selueh, which some
   translate "abundance;" but it rather signifies a quiet or prosperous
   state. Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, here marks the circumstance of time;
   hence we may know him to have been divinely seized, because prosperous
   fortune had rendered him stupid and drunken. There is nothing
   surprising in this, for the old and common proverb is, "fullness is the
   parent of ferocity," as we see horses when too much fed, prance about
   and throw their riders. Thus also it happens with men. For if God
   treats them rather indulgently and liberally, they become fierce and
   insolent towards all men, and strike off God's yoke, and forget
   themselves to be but men. And when this happened to David, what shall
   happen to the profane and to others who are still too much devoted to
   the world? For David confesses himself to have been so deceived by his
   quiet and felicity, as to determine within himself that he had nothing
   else to fear, -- "I said in my happiness," or my quiet, "I shall not be
   removed;" and he afterwards adds,

   "O Lord, thou didst chastise me, and I was laid low." (Psalm 38:7.)

   Since, therefore, David promised himself perpetual quiet in the world,
   because God spared him for a time, how ought our tranquillity to be
   suspected lest we should grow torpid on our lees? Nebuchadnezzar, then,
   does not recite this in vain -- I was quiet at home, I flourished in my
   palace, since this was the cause of his confidence and pride, and of
   his carelessly despising God. He afterwards adds, he saw a dream and
   was disturbed He, doubtless, wished here to distinguish his dreams from
   common ones, which often arise from either a disturbance of the brain,
   or our daily thoughts, or other causes, as we have elsewhere seen. It
   is not necessary to repeat what we have already treated more copiously.
   It is sufficient to state, briefly, how this dream, in which God
   previously informed him of the future punishment at hand, is separated
   from others which are either troubled:, or fluctuating, or without
   reason. He, says, therefore, he saw a dream, and was disturbed, while
   he was awake. He adds, his thoughts were upon his bed; and then, he was
   disturbed by visions of the head These expressions only look towards
   that heavenly oracle, or vision, or dream, of which we shall afterwards
   speak more fully. It follows, he put forth a decree to summon all the
   wise men of Babylon to explain, or make manifest, the interpretation of
   the dream Doubtless the king often dreamt, and did not always call
   together the Magi and soothsayers, and astrologers, and others who were
   skilled in the science of divination, or at least professed to be so.
   He did not consult them on all his dreams; but because God had
   inscribed in his heart a distinct mark by which he had denoted this
   dream, hence the king could not rest till he heard its interpretation.
   As we previously saw the authority of the first dream about the Four
   Monarchies and the Eternal Kingdom of Christ confirmed, so the king
   perceived this one to have proceeded from heaves. There is another
   difference between this dream and the one formerly explained. For God
   blotted out the remembrance of the dream about the Four Monarchies from
   King Nebuchadnezzar, so that it became necessary for Daniel to bring
   his dream before the king, and at the same time to add the
   interpretation. Daniel was then more obscure, for although he proved
   himself to have excelled all the Chaldeans, yet King Nebuchadnezzar
   would have wondered at him less if he had only been an interpreter of a
   dream. God wished, therefore, to acquire greater reverence for his
   Prophet and his doctrine, when he enjoined upon him two duties; first,
   the divination of the dream itself, and then the explanation of its
   sense and purpose. In this second dream Daniel is only an interpreter.
   God had already sufficiently proved him to be endued with a heavenly
   spirit, when Nebuchadnezzar not only called him among the rest of the
   Magi, but separated him from them all. He afterwards says:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [206] Or, I was terrified. The copula may be resolved into the relative
   pronoun, "I saw a dream which frightened or terrified me." -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:7

   7. Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans and the
   soothsayers: I told the dream before them; but they did not make known
   unto me the interpretation thereof.

   7. Tunc ingressi sunt magi, astrologi, Chaldaei, hoc est, sapientes, et
   physici, vel, mathematici, et somnium, inguit, exposui ego coram ipsis,
   et interpretationem ejus non patefecerunt mihi.


   With respect to the words used above, we have formerly freed ourselves
   from all trouble, because we cannot accurately define what science each
   professed. Clearly enough they covered their shamelessness by honorable
   titles, although they gave themselves up to every possible imposture.
   They called themselves by the usual name of learned men, when they were
   really unacquainted with any art or science, and deluded mankind by
   miserable predictions; hence, by these words, Daniel comprehended all
   the Magi, soothsayers, astrologers, and augurs, who professed the art
   of divination. Here Nebuchadnezzar confesses that he sent; for these
   men in vain. Hence it follows, this whole science was a fallacy, or,
   at, least, Daniel's exposition of the dream was not by human skill, but
   by revelation from heaven. I embrace this opinion, since Nebuchadnezzar
   wished clearly to express that Daniel's power of interpreting his dream
   did not spring from man, but was a singular gift of the Spirit. He had
   considered it a settled point that, if any knowledge or skill in
   divination existed, it must belong to the Magi, soothsayers, augurs,
   and other Chaldeans who boasted in the possession of perfect wisdom.
   This, therefore, was with. out controversy--that the astrologers and
   the rest were most powerful in divination, and as far as human
   faculties would allow, nothing escaped them. Hence it follows, on the
   other hand, that Daniel was divinely instructed, since if he had been
   only an astrologer or magician, he must, like others, have required a
   long' apprenticeship to this science. Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, wishes
   here to extol Daniel beyond all the Magi, as if he had said--He is a
   heavenly Prophet! And this, also, will appear better from what is
   added, as follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:8-9

   8. But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was
   Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom is the
   spirit of the holy gods, and before him I told the dream, saying,

   8. Quousque tandem coram me introductus est Daniel cujus nomen
   Beltsazar secundum nomen dei mei, et in quo spiritus deorum sanctorum:
   et somnium coram ipso narravi.

   9. O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the
   spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell
   me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation
   thereof.

   9. Beltsazar princeps, vel, magister, magorum, quia ego novi quod
   spiritus deorum sanctorum in te sit, et nullum arcanum to anxium
   reddit, [207] visiones somnii mei quod vidi, et interpretationem ejus
   expone.


   Here the king of Babylon addresses Daniel kindly, since he saw himself
   deserted by his own teachers. And hence we gather that no one comes to
   the true God, unless impelled by necessity. Daniel was not either
   unknown or far off; for we saw him to have been in the palace. Since
   then the king had Daniel with him from the first, why did he pass him
   over? Why did he call the other Magi from all quarters by his edict?
   Hence, as I have said, it clearly appears he would never have given
   glory to God, unless when compelled by extreme necessity. Hence he
   never willingly submitted to the God of Israel; and his affections were
   clearly but momentary, whenever they manifested any sign of piety.
   Because he besought Daniel so imploringly, we see his disposition to
   have been servile; just as all proud men swell out when they do not
   need any one's help, and become overbearing in their insolence; but
   when they are reduced to extremity, they would rather lick the dust
   than not obtain the favor which they need. Such was the king's
   disposition, since he willingly despised Daniel, and purposely
   preferred the Magi. But as soon as he saw himself left in difficulties,
   and unable to find any remedy except in Daniel, this was his last
   refuge; and he now seems to forget his own loftiness while speaking
   softly to God's holy Prophet. But I shall proceed with the rest
   to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [207] Some translate, "may be troublesome to thee," but I shall treat
   this word by and bye -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since thou here proposest a remarkable example
   before our eyes, that we may learn thy power to be so great as not to
   be sufficiently celebrated by any human praises: and since we hear how
   its herald was a profane king, nay, even a. cruel and proud one, and
   thou hast afterwards deigned to manifest thyself to us familiarly in
   Christ, -- Grant, that in the spirit. of humility we may desire to
   glorify thee, and to cleave entirely to thee. May we declare thee to be
   ours, not only in mouth and tongue, but also in works; not only as our
   true and only God, but our Father, since thou hast adopted us in thine
   only-begotten Son, until at length we enjoy that eternal inheritance
   which is laid up for us in heaven by the same Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Eighteenth.

   9. O Belteshazzar, master of the Magi, since I know that the spirit of
   the holy gods is in thee, and no secret can escape thee -- or overcome
   thee, as I shall soon explain the word -- relate the visions of my
   sleep which I saw, and their interpretation We yesterday shewed King
   Nebuchadnezzar to be a suppliant to Daniel, when reduced to extremity.
   He did not seek him at first, but consulted his Magicians, and he is
   now compelled to venerate the person whom he had despised. He calls him
   Belteshazzar, and doubtless the name severely wounded the Prophet's
   mind; for another name had been imposed upon him by his parents from
   his earliest infancy; whence he could recognize himself as a Jew, and
   could draw his origin from a holy and elect nation. For his change of
   name was doubtless made by the tyrant's cunning, as we have previously
   said, as to cause him to forget his own family. King Nebuchadnezzar
   wished, by changing his name, to render this holy servant of God
   degenerate. Hence, as often as he was called by this name, he was
   clearly offended in no slight degree. But this evil could not be
   remedied, since he was a captive, and knew he had to deal with a people
   victorious, proud, and cruel. Thus, in the last verse, Nebuchadnezzar
   had used this name according to the name of his god. Since then Daniel
   had a name of his own, which his parents had given him by God's
   appointment, Nebuchadnezzar wished to blot out that sacred name, and so
   called him as a mark of respect Belteshazzar, which we may believe to
   have been deduced from the name of an idol. Hence this doubled the
   Prophet's grief, when he was stained with that base spot in bearing an
   idol's mark on his name; but it was his duty to endure this scourge of
   God among his other trials. Thus God exercised his servant in every way
   by enduring a cross.

   He now calls him Prince of the Magi, and this doubtless wounded the
   holy Prophet's feelings. He wished nothing better than separation from
   the Magi, who deceived the world by their impostures and soothsaying.
   For although they were skilled in the science of astrology, and knew
   some principles worthy of praise, yet we are sure they corrupted all
   the sciences. Hence Daniel did not willingly hear himself included
   among them; but he could not free himself from this infamy. Thus we see
   his patience to have been divinely proved in various ways. Now,
   Nebuchadnezzar adds, because I know the spirit of the holy gods to be
   in thee. Many understand this of angels; and this interpretation is not
   objectionable, as I have hinted elsewhere. For the existence of a
   supreme God was known to all the nations, but they fancied angels to be
   inferior deities. Whatever be the true meaning, Nebuchadnezzar here
   betrays his own ignorance, since he had made no real progress in the
   knowledge of the true God; because he was entangled in his former
   errors, and retained many gods, as from the beginning he had been
   imbued with that superstition. This passage might have been translated
   in the singular number, as some do, but it would be too forced, and the
   reason for such a translation is too weak; for they think
   Nebuchadnezzar to have been truly converted; but the vanity of this is
   proved by the whole context; and being occupied by this opinion, they
   wish to relieve him from all fault. But since it is clear that in this
   edict of Nebuchadnezzar many proofs of his old ignorance are
   comprehended, there is no reason why we should depart from the simple
   sense of the words. Hence he attributes a divine spirit to Daniel, but
   meanwhile imagines many gods. Since, therefore, the spirit of the holy
   gods is in thee, he says, and no secret overcomes thee Some translate
   'ns, anes, to be troublesome; it properly signifies to compel, or to
   force; for those who translate "there is no secret which can surpass
   thee," depart from the correct sense. Others translate it, "to be
   troublesome." This would be a more tolerable translation, but they
   would do better by translating, "no secret renders thee anxious or
   perplexed." If the rules of grammar would allow the ' aleph, to be a
   servile letter, the sense would be more suitable. For nsh, neseh,
   signifies to try, or prove, and also to elevate. We may translate it,
   "No secret is loftier than thy understanding;" or, "No secret proves
   thee;" if he had said, -- Daniel was endued with a divine spirit; -- he
   does not examine any proposition, and has no need to make an experiment
   in any science, since his answer is easy and at hand. But. it is
   necessary to remember what I said,--No secret renders thee anxious, or
   confounds thee. Nebuchadnezzar knew this. Then why did he not directly
   call him to himself in his perplexity? As Daniel could free him from
   all perplexity, the king's ingratitude is proved, because he admitted
   the Magi to his counsels, and neglected Daniel. We see then how he
   always endeavored to avoid God, till he was drawn along by a violent
   hand, and thereby displayed the absence of conversion. For repentance
   is voluntary, and those only are said to repent, who willingly return
   by a change of mind to the God from whom they had revolted; and this
   cannot be done without faith and the love of God. He then asks him to
   relate his dream and its interpretation But the dream was not unknown,
   and he relates it to Daniel. There is, therefore, something superfluous
   in these words, but no doubt about the sense -- as Nebuchadnezzar only
   asks for the explanation of his dream. It follows: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:10-12

   10. Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed: I saw, and behold a
   tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great.

   10. Visiones autem capitis mei super cubile meum, Videbam, et ecce
   arborem in medio terrae, et altitudo ejus magna.

   11. The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto
   heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth:

   11. Crevit, multiplicata est, arbor, et invaluit, et altitudo ejus
   pertigit, hoc est, et altitudo ejus pertingeret, ad coelos, et
   conspectus ejus ad extremum totius, vel, universae, terrae.

   12. The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it
   was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the
   fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed
   of it.

   12. Ramus ejus pulcher, et fructus ejus copiosus, [208] et esca omnibus
   in ea: sub ea umbrabat [209] bestia agri: et in ramis ejus habitabant
   [210] aves coelorum, et ex ea alebatur omnis caro.


   The following verses ought to be joined on: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [208] sgy', segua, signifies large, or much. -- Calvin

   [209] Verbally, took shelter -- Calvin.

   [210] Or, nestled. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:13-16

   13. I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher
   and an holy one came down from heaven;

   13. Videbam etiam in visionibus capitis mei super cubile meum, et ecce
   vigil et sanctus descendit e coelis.

   14. He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his
   branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the beasts
   get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches:

   14. Clamavit in fortitudine, hoc est, fortiter, et ita loquutus est,
   Succidite arborem, et diripite folia ejus, [211] excutite ramos ejus,
   et dispergite fructus ejus: fugiat bestia ex umbra ejus, de subtus, ad
   verbum, et aves ex frondibus ejus, vel ex ramis ejus.

   15. Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth, even with a
   band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be
   wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in
   the grass of the earth:

   15. Tandem imum radicum ejus in terra relinquite, et in vinculo ferri,
   hoc est, ferreo, et aeneo, in herba agri, et pluvia coelorum irrigetur,
   etcum bestia sit portio ejus in herba terrae.

   16. Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be
   given unto him; and let seven times pass over him.

   16. Cor ejus ab humano, simpliciter, ab heroine, mutent, [212] et cor
   bestiae detur ei: et septem tempora transeant super eam.


   Here Nebuchadnezzar relates his dream, of which the interpretation will
   follow in its place. Yet because this narrative is cold and useless
   unless we should say something of the subject itself, it is necessary
   to make some remarks -- the rest shall be deferred. First of all, under
   the figure of a tree Nebuchadnezzar himself is intended, not because it
   fully represents the king's office, but because God appointed the
   existence of governments in the world for this purpose--to be like
   trees on whose fruits all men feed, and under whose shadow they rest.
   Hence this ordinance of God flourishes, because tyrants, however they
   are removed from the exercise of just and moderate dominion, whether
   they wish it or not, are compelled to be like trees; since it is better
   to live under the most cruel tyrant than without any government at all.
   Let us suppose all to be on one equal level, what would such anarchy
   bring forth? No one would wish to yield to others; every one would try
   the extent of his powers, and thus all would end in prey and plunder,
   and in the mere license of fraud and murder, and all the passions of
   mankind would have full and unbridled sway. Hence I have said, tyranny
   is better than anarchy, and more easily borne, because where there is
   no supreme governor there is none to preside and keep the rest in
   check. Wherefore they philosophize too minutely who think this to be a
   description of a king endued with superior virtues; for there was no
   such superiority in justice and equity in King Nebuchadnezzar. God
   principally wished to shew, by this figure, with what intention and
   with what political order he desires the world to be governed; and why
   he sets over it kings and monarchies and other magistrates. Then he
   desired to shew, secondly, although tyrants and other princes forget
   their duty, it is still divinely enjoined upon them, and yet God's
   grace always shines forth in all governments. Tyrants endeavor to
   extinguish the whole light of equity and justice, and to mingle all
   things; but the Lord meanwhile restrains them in a secret and wonderful
   manner, and thus they are compelled to act usefully to the human race,
   whether they will or not. This then is the meaning of the figure or
   image of the tree.

   It is now added, the birds of heaven dwelt amidst the branches, and the
   beasts lived by its sustenance--which ought to be referred to mankind.
   For although even the beasts of the field profit by political order,
   yet we know society to have been ordained by God for the benefit of
   men. There is no doubt at all of the whole discourse being
   metaphorical, --nay, properly speaking, it is an allegory, since an
   allegory is only a continued metaphor. If Daniel had only represented
   the king under the figure of a tree, it would have been a metaphor; but
   when he pursues his own train of thought in a continuous tenor, his
   discourse becomes allegorical. He says, therefore, the beasts of the
   field dwelt under the tree, because we are sheltered by the protection
   of magistrates; and no heat of the sun so parches and burns up
   miserable men as living deprived of that shade under which God wished
   them to, repose. The birds of heaven also nestled in its boughs and
   leaves Some distinguish, with too much subtlety, between birds and
   beasts. It is sufficient for us to observe the Prophet noticing how men
   of every rank feel no small utility in the protection of princes; for
   if they were deprived of it, it were better for them to live like wild
   beasts than mutually to confide in each other. Such protection is
   needful, if we reflect upon the great pride natural to all, and the
   blindness of our self-love, and the furiousness of our lusts. As this
   is the case, God shews, in this dream, how all orders among us need the
   protection of magistrates; while pasture and food and shelter signify
   the various forms of usefulness which political order provides for us.
   For some might object--they have no need of government either for one
   reason or another; for if we discharge properly all the duties of life,
   we shall always. find God's blessing sufficient for us.

   It is now added, its height was great; then, it grew till it reached
   even to heaven, and its aspect extended itself to the furthest bounds
   of the land. This is restricted to the Babylonian monarchy, for there
   were then other empires in the world, but they were either powerless or
   but slightly important. The Chaldeans, also, were then so powerful that
   no prince could approach to such majesty and power. Since, therefore,
   King Nebuchadnezzar was so pre-eminent, the loftiness of the tree here
   described is not surprising, though it reached to heaven; while the
   altitude rendered it visible throughout the whole land. Some of the
   rabbis place Babylon in the middle of the earth, because it was under
   the same line or parallel with Jerusalem -- which is very foolish.
   Those also who place Jerusalem in the center of the earth are equally
   childish; although Jerome, Origen, and other ancient authors, treat
   Jerusalem as in the center of the world. In this conjecture of theirs
   they deserve the laughter of the Cynic who, when asked to point out the
   middle of the earth:, touched the ground with his staff immediately
   under his feet! Then when the questioner objected to this determination
   of the center of the earth, he said," Then do you measure the earth!"
   As far as concerns Jerusalem, their conjectures are not worth
   mentioning. That proud Barbinel [Abarbanel] wished to seem a
   philosopher, but nothing is more insipid than the Jews where they
   depart from their own rules of grammar; and the Lord so blinded them
   and delivered them up to a reprobate sense, when he wished them to be
   spectacles of horrible blindness and prodigious stupidity, -- and in a
   small and minute matter that silly fellow shews his absurdity.

   He now says, Its boughs were beautiful, and its fruit copious This must
   be referred to the common opinion of the vulgar; for we know men's eyes
   to be dazzled by the splendor of princes. For if any one excels others
   in power, all men adore him and are seized with admiration, and are
   incapable of judging correctly. When the majesty of a general or a king
   comes before them, they are all astonished and perceive nothing, and
   they do not think it lawful for them to inquire strictly into the
   conduct of princes. Since, then, the power and wealth of King
   Nebuchadnezzar were so great, no wonder the Prophet says, His branches
   were beautiful, and their fruit copious But meanwhile we must remember
   what I lately said, namely, God's blessing shines forth in princes,
   even if they materially neglect their duty, because God does not suffer
   all his grace in them to be extinguished; and hence they are compelled
   to bring forth some fruit. It is much better, therefore, to preserve
   the existence of some kind of dominion than to have all men's condition
   equal, when each attracts the, eyes of his neighbors. And this is the
   meaning of what I have said--there was food and provision for all, as I
   have lately explained it.

   The second part of the dream follows here. Hitherto Nebuchadnezzar has
   described the beauty and excellency of his state under the figure of a
   lofty tree which afforded shade to the beasts and on whose fruit they
   fed, and next as giving, nests to the birds of heaven under its boughs.
   The cutting down of the tree now follows. I saw, says he, in the
   visions of my head upon my couch, and, behold, a watcher and a holy one
   came down from heaven No doubt we ought to understand an angel by a
   watcher. He is called "a holy one," which is only another form of
   expression for an angel; and they are worthy of this name, because they
   are perpetually watchful in the performance of God's commands. They are
   not subject to slumber, they are not nourished by either food or drink,
   but live a spiritual life; hence they have no use for sleep, which is
   the result of drink and food. Lastly, as angels have no bodies, their
   very spiritual nature makes them watchful. But this phrase not only
   expresses their nature but also their duty; because God has them at
   hand to fulfill his bidding, and destines them to the performance of
   his commands, hence they are called "watchers." (Psalm 103:20.) In this
   Psalm angels are said to do his bidding, because, by an agility
   incomprehensible to us, they run about hither and thither, and fly
   directly from heaven to earth, from one end of the world to another --
   from the rising even to the setting sun. Since, therefore, angels can
   so easily and promptly fulfill God's orders, they are deservedly called
   "[20]watchers " They are called "holy ones," because they are not
   infected by human infirmities. But we are filled with really sins, not
   merely because we are earthly, but since we have contracted pollution
   from our first parents, which vitiates alike the whole body and mind.
   By this expression, then, Nebuchadnezzar desired to distinguish between
   angels and mortals. For although God here sanctifies his elect, yet as
   long as they dwell in the prison of the body they never arrive at the
   holiness of angels. Here then we mark the difference between angels and
   men. Nebuchadnezzar could not understand this by himself, but he was
   taught of God to perceive the destruction of the tree to arise not from
   man but from the Almighty.

   He afterwards adds--the angel cried with a loud voice, cut down the
   tree, strip off the leaves, cut off its boughs, scatter its fruits, (or
   throw them away,) and let the beasts flee from its shadow, and the
   birds of heaven dwell no longer under its branches By this figure God
   meant to express that King Nebuchadnezzar should be for a time like a
   beast. This ought not to seem absurd, although it is but rough to speak
   of a tree being deprived of a human heart, since men know trees to have
   no other life than that usually called vegetable. The dignity or
   excellence of the tree cannot be lessened by its being without a human
   heart, for it never had one originally. But though this is rather a
   rough mode of expression., yet it contains in it nothing absurd,
   although Daniel bends a little aside from the strictness of the
   allegory; nay, Nebuchadnezzar himself had an allegorical dream, and yet
   God mingled something with it by which he might comprehend the meaning
   veiled under the image of a tree. The angel, then, orders the tree to
   be deprived of its human heart, and its bough and fruit to be torn down
   and cast away, after it had been cut down; next he orders the heart of
   a beast to be given to it, and thus its portion might be with the wild
   animals of the woods. But as this must be repeated elsewhere, I now
   pass it by rather hastily. The general meaning is this; King
   Nebuchadnezzar was to be deprived for a time not only of his empire but
   even of his human sense, and to be in no way different from the beasts,
   since he was unworthy of holding even the lowest place among mankind.
   Although he seemed to surpass the human race in his elevation, yet he
   must be cast down and thrown below even the lowest mortals!

   The reason for this punishment follows, when it is added, seven times
   shall pass over him; and then, do not cut off its lowest root, but let
   the rain of heaven water it; and next; his portion shall be with the
   wild beasts. Although the chastisement is hard and horrible, when
   Nebuchadnezzar is expelled from the society of men, and rendered like
   wild beasts; but it is something in his favor when God does not tear
   him up by the roots, but allows the root to remain, for the tree to
   spring up again and flourish, and be planted again in its own place,
   and recover new vigor through its roots. Here Daniel reviews the
   punishment inflicted on King Nebuchadnezzar, in which God afforded a
   specimen of his clemency, in sparing him and not utterly cutting him
   down, but in allowing his root to remain. Some here discourse about the
   mitigation of penalties when God sees those repent whom he has
   chastised with rods; but I do not think it applicable here. There was
   no true conversion in King Nebuchadnezzar, as we said before, and shall
   see again more clearly. God did not wish to press him too hard, and
   this we must attribute to his clemency; because when he seems to set no
   bounds to his punishment of men's sins, yet in all temporal punishments
   he allows men to taste his pity; so that even the reprobate remain
   without excuse. The assertion of some--that punishments are not
   remitted without the fault being excused, is false; as we see in the
   example of Ahab. For God remitted the fault to the impious king, but
   because he seemed to shew some signs of repentance, God abstained from
   greater punishment. (1 Kings 21:29.) So also we may see the same in the
   case of Nebuchadnezzar. God was unwilling utterly to root him out--for
   the metaphor of the tree shews this--but he desired seven times to pass
   over him Some understand seven weeks, others seven years; but we shall
   treat this point more copiously by and bye. Lastly, we must notice
   this; in the midst of the time during which God's wrath seemed to rage
   against this wretched king, his benefits were also mingled with it. We
   learn this from the words, his portion shall be with the beasts of the
   field; that is, he shall feed upon some food by which life shall be
   preserved; and then, it shall be watered or irrigated with the rain of
   heaven. For God signifies--though he wished to punish King
   Nebuchadnezzar, and to render him a remarkable example of his
   wrath--his knowledge of what he could bear; hence, he so tempers his
   punishment as to leave hope remaining for the future, Thus he took his
   food even with the beasts of the earth, but he is not deprived of the
   irrigation of the dew of heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [211] It is better not to repeat boughs twice, as some do. I confess
   the word nph, gnef, here used, means leaf as well as bough, but ph',
   gnefa, means bough; hence the repetition is not superfluous -- seize or
   cut off its leaves -- Calvin.

   [212] That is, shall be changed, as elsewhere appears. -- Calvin
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we see it so difficult for us. to bear
   prosperity without injury to the mind, that we may remember ourselves
   to be mortal -- may our frailty be ever present to our eyes, and tender
   us humble, and lead us to ascribe the glory to thee. Being advised by
   thee, may we learn to walk with anxiety and fear, to submit ourselves
   to thee, and to conduct ourselves modestly towards our brethren. May
   none of us despise or insult his brother, but may we all strive to
   discharge our duties with moderation, until at length thou gatherest us
   into that glory which has been obtained for us by the blood of thine
   only-begotten Son. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Nineteenth.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:17

   17. This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the
   word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that the
   most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he
   will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.

   17. In decreto vigilum verbum, [213] et in sermone sanctorum
   postulatio, ut cognoscant viventes, quod dominator sit excelsus in
   regno hominum: et cui voluerit tradet illud, et humilem, [214] hominum
   [215] eriget super ipsum.


   In this verse God confirms what he had shewn to the king of Babylon by
   means of a dream. He says, then, the king was instructed in a certain
   thing; since it had been so determined before God and his angels. The
   full meaning is this, --Nebuchadnezzar must know it to be impossible to
   escape the punishment whose image he had seen in the dream. There is,
   however, some ambiguity in the words, since interpreters find great
   difficulties with the second clause; for they say the angels ask the
   question, to afford proof to the king of Babylon, and that all men may
   acknowledge the supreme power of the one God. But this seems to me too
   forced. As far as the word phtgm', pethegma, is concerned, it signifies
   "word" in Chaldee; but here I think it properly used for "edict," as in
   the first chapter of Esther, (Esther 1:20;) and this is a very suitable
   sense, as the edict was promulgated in the decree so that the "word" or
   vision might not prove vain and inefficient; since God wished to point
   out to the king what was already fixed and determined in heaven. We now
   understand the Prophet's intention. But a new question still remains,
   because it seems absurd to attribute power and authority to those
   angels, lest in this way they seem to be equal to God. We know God to
   be judge alone, and hence it is his proper office to determine what
   pleases him; and if this is transferred to angels, it seems as if it
   lessened his supreme authority, because it is not becoming to make them
   companions of his Majesty. But we know it to be no new thing in
   Scripture for God to join angels with himself, not as equals but as
   attendants, and to attribute to them so much honor as to deign to call
   them into counsel. Hence angels are often called God's counselors. As
   in this place they are said to decree together with God; and not by
   their own will or pleasure, as they say, but because they subscribe to
   God's judgment. Meanwhile, we must remark the double character assigned
   to them. In the first clause, Daniel makes them subscribe to the
   decree, and afterwards uses the word demand. And this suits the sense
   well enough; because the angels urge God by their prayers to humble all
   mortals and to exalt himself alone. Thus, whatever obscures his glory
   may be reduced into order. It is right for angels constantly to desire
   this, since we know them to desire nothing in comparison with the
   adoration of God by themselves in alliance with all mankind. But when
   they see God's authority diminished by man's pride and audacity, the
   object of their demand is that God would reduce under his yoke the
   proud who erect their crests against him.

   We now see why Daniel says, this was declared in, the decree of the
   watchers, and was demanded in their speech; as if he should. say; "thou
   hast all angels opposed to thee; for by one consent and with Gale mouth
   they accuse thee before God, for as far as possible thou obscurest his
   glory; and God, assenting to their prayers, has determined to cast thee
   away, and to render thee an object of contempt and reproach before the
   whole world; and this decree has been signed by all the angels, as if
   it were common between him and them. For by their subscription and
   agreement he might prevail[ in confirming the confidence of the profane
   king. Without doubt God, after his usual manner, accommodated the
   vision to the understanding of a man who never was taught in his law,
   but only imbued with a confused notion of his divinity, so that he
   could not distinguish between God and angels. Meanwhile, this sentiment
   is true -- the edict was promulgated at the united consent and demand
   of the whole celestial host; for angels bear with the greatest
   reluctance whatever detracts from God's glory, and all the folly of
   mankind when they wish to draw and attract to themselves the peculiar
   attributes of the only God. This seems to be flute genuine sense. The
   following sentence flows very suitably, -- mortals must know God to be
   a ruler in the kingdoms of men For Daniel marks the end of the demand,
   since angels desire God's rights to remain entire, and to be quite
   unaffected by the ingratitude of mankind. But men cannot ascribe even
   the slightest merit to themselves without detracting from God's praise;
   hence angels continually seek from God the casting down of all the
   proud, and that he will not permit himself to be defrauded of his
   proper rights, but maintain in all its integrity his own sovereign
   powers. This also must. be diligently observed -- mortals should notice
   how the Lord reigns in the kingdoms of men. For even the worst of men
   confess the mighty power of God; they dare not draw him down from his
   heavenly throne by their blasphemies, but they imagine themselves able
   to obtain and defend their worldly kingdoms, by either their exertions
   or their wealth, or by some other means. Unbelievers, therefore,
   willingly shut up God in heaven, just as Ephcurus fancied him to be
   enjoying his own delights at his ease. Hence Daniel shews God to be
   deprived of his rights, unless he is recognized as a ruler in the
   kingdoms of men, that is, on earth to humble all whom he pleases. So
   also it is said in the Psalms, (Psalm 75:7,) Power springs not from
   either the east or the west, but; from heaven; and elsewhere, God
   raises the poor out of the mire, (Psalm 113:6.) Then in the sacred
   Canticle of the Virgin, he casts down the proud from their seat, and
   exalts the abject and the humble. (Luke 1:52.) All indeed confess this,
   but scarcely one in a hundred feels in his mind the dominion of God
   over the earth, and that no man can raise himself, or remain in any
   post of honor, since this is the peculiar gift of God. Because men are
   persuaded of this with difficulty. Daniel eloquently expresses it, the
   Lord shall be lofty in the kingdoms of men; that is, shall not; only
   exercise his power in heaven, but also govern the human race, and
   assign to every one his own grade and position. He will give it to whom
   he wills He speaks of different empires in the singular number; just as
   if God had said, some: are raised up by God's will, and others are cast
   down; and the whole happens according to God's pleasure. The meaning is
   this -- -every one has his own condition divinely assigned to him; and
   thus a, man's ambition, or skill, or prudence, or wealth, or the help
   of others, do not profit men in aspiring to any altitude, unless God
   raises them by his stretched out hand. Paul also teaches the same thing
   in other words; there is no power but from God, (Romans 13:1,) and
   afterwards Daniel often repeats the same sentiment.

   He adds, he raises up the humble man above himself In a change so
   remarkable as this, God's power shines forth better while he raises
   from the dust those who were formerly obscure and contemptible, and
   even sets them above kings. When this happens, profane men say, God is
   playing with them, and rolls men about like balls in his hand, which
   are first tossed upwards and then thrown down upon the ground. But they
   do not consider the reason why God by open proofs wishes to shew how we
   are under his absolute power, on which our condition entirely depends;
   when we do not comprehend this of our own accord, examples are
   necessarily set before us by which we are compelled to perceive what
   almost all are willingly ignorant of. We now understand the whole
   intention of the Prophet. Angels seek from God by continual prayers to
   declare his own power to mortals, and thus to lay prostrate the proud
   who think to excel by their own power and industry, or else by chance,
   or by the help of men. To induce God to punish men for their
   sacrilegious deeds, the angels desire him to prostrate them, and thus
   to shew himself to be not only the king and ruler of heaven, but also
   of earth. Now, this not only happens in the case of a single king, but
   we know history to be full of such proofs. Whence, then, or from what
   order have kings often been created? And when there was no greater
   pride in the world than in the Roman empire, we see what happened. For
   God brought forward certain monsters which caused the greatest
   astonishment among the Greeks and all the 0rien.tals, the Spaniards,
   Italians, and Gauls; for nothing was more monstrous than some of the
   emperors. Then their origin was most base and shameful, and God could
   not shew more clearly their empires were not transferred by the will of
   man, nor even acquired by valor, counsel, and powerful troops, but
   remained under his own hand to bestow upon whomsoever he pleased. Let
   us go on:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [213] Or, edict, for it may be conveniently translated so. -- Calvin.

   [214] Or, abject. -- Calvin.

   [215] Or, among men. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:18

   18. This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now thou, O
   Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the
   wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the
   interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy gods is
   in thee.

   18. Hoc somnium vidi ego Rex Nebuchadnezer: et tu Beltsazar,
   interpretationem enarra, [216] quoniam cuncti sapientes regni mei non
   potuerunt interpretationem patefacere mihi: tu vero potes: quia
   spiritus deorum sanctorum in te.


   Here Nebuchadnezzar repeats what he had formerly said about seeking an
   interpretation for his dream. He understood the figure which was shewn
   to him, but he could not understand God's intentions nor even determine
   its relation to himself. On this point he implores Daniel's confidence;
   he affirms his vision in a dream to induce Daniel to pay great
   attention to its interpretation. Then he adds, with the same purpose,
   All the wise men of his kingdom could not explain the dreary; where he
   confesses all the astrologers, and diviners, and others of this kind to
   be utterly vain and fallacious, since they professed to know
   everything. For some were augurs, some conjectures, some interpreters
   of dreams, and others astrologers, who not only discoursed on the
   course, distances, and orders of the stars, and the peculiarities of
   each, but wished to predict futurity from the course of the stars.
   Since, therefore, they boasted so magnificently in their superior
   knowledge of all events, Nebuchadnezzar confesses them to have been
   impostors. But he ascribes this power in reality to Daniel, because he
   was endued by the divine Spirit. Hence he excludes all the wise men of
   Babylon from so great a gift through his having proved them destitute
   of God's Spirit. He does not assert this in so many words, but this
   meaning is easily elicited from his expressions implying all the
   variety of the Chaldean wise men. Then in the second clause he exempts
   Daniel from their number, and states the reason to be his excelling in
   the divine Spirit. Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, here asserts what is
   peculiar to God, and acknowledges Daniel to be his Prophet and
   minister. When he calls angels holy deities, we have mentioned this
   already as an expression which ought not to seem surprising in a
   heathen, uninstructed in the true doctrine of piety, and only just
   initiated in its elements. But we know this common opinion respecting
   angels being mingled together with the one God. Hence Nebuchadnezzar
   speaks in the ordinary and received language when he says, the spirit
   of the holy gods dwells in Daniel. It now follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [216] Verbally, say. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:19

   19. Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was astonied for one
   hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said,
   Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble
   thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream be to them
   that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.

   19. Tunc Daniel, cui nomen Beltsazar, obstupefactus fuit circiter horam
   unam: et cogitationes ejus turbabant eum. Respondit rex et dixit,
   Beltsazar, somnium et interpretatio ejus ne conturbet to, terreat.
   Respondit Beltsazar et dixit, Domine mi, somnium sit inimicis tuis, et
   interpretatio ejus hostibus tuis.


   Here Daniel relates how he was in some sense astonished. And I refer
   this to the sorrow which the holy Prophet had endured from that
   horrible punishment which God had shewn under a figure; nor ought it to
   seem surprising for Daniel to be grievously afflicted on account of the
   calamity of the king of Babylon; for although he was a cruel tyrant,
   and had harassed and all but destroyed God's Church, yet since he was
   under his Sway, he was bound to pray for him. But God had deafly taught
   the Jews this, by means of Jeremiah, Pray ye for the prosperous state
   of Babylon, because your peace shall be in it. (Jeremiah 29:7.) At the
   close of seventy years it was lawful for the pious worshippers of God
   to beg him to free them; but until the time predicted by the Prophet
   had elapsed, it was not lawful either to indulge in hatred against the
   king, or to invoke God's wrath upon him. They knew him to be the
   executor of God's just vengeance, and also to be their sovereign and
   lawful ruler. Since then Daniel was treated kindly by the king when by
   the rights of warfare he was dragged into exile, he ought to be
   faithful to his own king, although he exercised tyranny against the
   people of God. This was the reason why he suffered so much sorrow from
   that sad oracle. Others think he was in an ecstasy; but this seems to
   suit better because he does not simply speak of being astonished, but
   even disturbed and terrified in his thoughts. Meanwhile, we must
   remark, how variously the Prophets were affected when God uses them in
   denouncing his approaching judgments. Whenever God appointed his
   Prophets the heralds of severe calamities, they were affected in two
   ways; on the one side, they condoled with those miserable men whose
   destruction they saw at hand, and still they boldly announced what had
   been divinely commanded; and thus their sorrow never hindered them from
   discharging their duty freely and consistently. In Daniel's case we see
   both these feelings. The sympathy, then, was right in his condoling
   with his king and being silent for about an hour. And when the king
   commands him to be of good courage and not to be disturbed, we have
   here depicted the security of those who do not apprehend the wrath of
   God. The Prophet is terrified, and yet he is free from all evil; for
   God does not threaten him, nay, the very punishment which he sees
   prepared for the king, afforded the hope of future deliverance. Why
   then is he frightened? because the faithful, though God spares them and
   shews himself merciful and propitious, cannot view his judgments
   without fear, for they acknowledge themselves subject to similar
   penalties, if God did not treat them with indulgence. Besides this,
   they never put off human affections, and so pity takes possession of
   them, when they see the ungodly punished or even subject to impending
   wrath. For these two reasons they suffer sorrow and pain. But the
   impious, even when God openly addresses and threatens them, are not
   moved, but remain stupid, or openly deride his power and treat his
   threats as fabulous, till they feel them seriously. Such is the example
   which the Prophet sets before us in the king of Babylon.

   Belteshazzar, he says, let not thy thoughts disturb thee; let not the
   dream and its interpretation frighten thee/ Yet Daniel was afraid for
   his sake. But, as I have already said, while the faithful are afraid
   though they feel God to be propitious, yet the impious sleep in their
   security, and are unmoved and unterrified by any threats. Daniel adds
   the cause of his grief, -- O my lord, he says, may the dream be for
   thine enemies, and its interpretation to thy foes! Here Daniel explains
   why he was so astonished -- because he wished so horrible a punishment
   to be turned away from the person of the king; for although he might
   deservedly have detested him, yet he reverenced the power divinely
   assigned to him. Let us learn, therefore, from the Prophet's example,
   to pray for blessings on our enemies who desire to destroy us, and
   especially to pray for tyrants if it please God to subject us to their
   lust; for although they are unworthy of any of the feelings of
   humanity, yet we must modestly bear their yoke, because they could not
   be our governors without God's permission; and not only for wrath, as
   Paul admonishes us, but for conscience' sake, (Romans 13:5,) otherwise
   we should not only rebel against them, but against God himself. But, on
   the other hand, Daniel shews the impossibility of his being changed or
   softened by any sentiment of pity, and thus turned from his intended
   course:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:20-22

   20. The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height
   reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the earth;

   20. Arborquam vidisti, quae magna erat et robusta, et cujus magnitudo
   pertingebat ad coels, et aspectus ejus ad totam terram.

   21. Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was
   meat for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose
   branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation:

   21. Et folium ejus pulchrum erat, [217] et fructus ejus copiosus: et in
   qua, [218] cibus cunctis: sub qua habitabant bestiae agri, et in cujus
   ramis quiescebant aves coeli.

   22. It is thou, O king, that art grown and become strong: for thy
   greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the
   end of the earth.

   22. Tu es ipsc rex, qui multiplicatus es et roboratus, [219] ita ut
   magnitudo tua multiplicata fuerit, et pertigerit ad coelos, et potestas
   tua ad fines terrae.


   Here we see what I have touched upon, namely, how Daniel acted
   respectfully to the king, and thus was mindful of his prophetic duty,
   while he punctually discharged the commands of God. We must notice this
   distinction, for nothing is more difficult for ministers of the Word
   than to maintain this middle course. Some are always fulminating
   through a pretense of zeal, and forget themselves to be but men: they
   shew no sign of benevolence, but indulge in mere bitterness. Hence they
   have no authority, and all their admonitions are hateful. Next, they
   explain God's Word with pride and boasting, when they frighten sinners
   without either humanity, or pain, or sympathy. Others, again, who are
   wicked and perfidious flatterers, gloss over the grossest iniquities;
   they object to both Prophets and Apostles, esteeming the fervor of
   their zeal to have driven away all human affections! Thus they delude
   miserable men, and destroy them by their flattery. But our Prophet, as
   all the rest, here shews how God's servants ought to take a middle
   course. Thus Jeremiah, when prophesying adversity, feels sorrow and
   bitterness of spirit, and yet does not turn aside from unsparing
   reproof of the severest threats, as both sprang from God. (Jeremiah
   9:1.) The rest of the prophets also act in the same manner. Here
   Daniel, on the one hand, pities the king, and on the other, through
   knowing himself to be the herald of God's anger, he is not frightened
   by any danger while setting before the king the punishment which he had
   despised. Hence we gather why he was not astonished. He felt no fear of
   the tyrant, although many do not dare to discharge their duty when an
   odious message is entrusted to them, which stimulates the impious and
   the unbelievers to madness. Daniel, however, was not astonished with
   any fear of this kind; he only wished God to act mercifully towards his
   king. For he says here, Thou art king thyself. He does not speak with
   any doubt or hesitation, neither does he use obscurity nor a number of
   excuses, but plainly announces king Nebuchadnezzar to be intended by
   the tree which he saw. Hence the tree which thou sawest is large and
   strong, under the shade of which the beasts of the field were dwelling,
   and in the boughs of which the birds of the air were making their
   nests: thou, says he, art the king. Why so? Thou hast become great and
   strong; thy magnitude has extended to the heavens, and thy power to the
   ends of the earth Now, what follows?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [217] That is, whose leaves were beautiful. -- Calvin.

   [218] Verbally, "in it." -- Calvin.

   [219] That is, who hast become great and strong. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:23-24

   23. And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from
   heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave the
   stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and
   brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew
   of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till
   seven times pass over him;

   23. Et quod vidit rex, vigilem, et sanctum descendere e coelis, qui
   dixit: [220] Suceidite arborem, et dispergite eam: tantummodo imum
   radicum ejus in terra relinquite: et sit in vinculo ferri et aeris in
   herba agri, et rore coelorum proluatur, et eum bestiis agri portio
   ejus, donec septem tempora transcant super cam.

   24. This is the interpretation, O king, and this is the decree of the
   most High, which is come upon my lord the king:

   24. Haec interpretatio, rex, et decretum excelsi est, quod spectat ad
   dominum meum regem.


   Daniel follows up what he had begun with perseverance, shewing judgment
   to be overhanging the king of Babylon. He calls him lord, indeed, with
   cordiality; meanwhile he was the ambassador of the Supreme King, he did
   not hesitate to elevate his discourse above the king's command -- as
   all the prophets do who rise up against mountains and hills, as
   Jeremiah does in Jeremiah 1:10. Thus this sentence is worthy of notice,
   -- "I have appointed thee over kingdoms and peoples, to pluck them up
   and to plant them, to build and to destroy." God, therefore, wishes to
   assert so great a reverence for his Word, because there is nothing in
   the world so magnificent or splendid which does not yield to it.
   Daniel, then, as far as concerns human events and political order,
   confesses the king to be his master; but meanwhile he goes on with the
   embassy entrusted to him. The king then, says he, saw a watcher descend
   from heaven, he always speaks of an angel [221] We have stated why
   Scripture calls angels "watchers," since they are at hand to perform
   God's commands; and we know God executes his decrees by their agency: I
   said angels always discharge this duty, and keep watch over the
   faithful. But the name "watcher" is a general one, and implies the
   promptness with which angels are endued, to enable them to discharge
   with the utmost celerity whatever God enjoins upon them. Thou hast
   seen, then, one descend from heaven, who said, Cut down the tree, and
   scatter it abroad He repeats what he had said before, namely, the time
   of his punishment was defined here, because God would destroy the king
   of Babylon and all remembrance of him. An exception is then added, --
   Until seven times pass over I have said nothing of those times, but
   their opinion is probable who take it for an indefinite number,
   meaning, until a long time shall pass away. Others think months
   denoted; others, years; but I willingly incline to this interpretation,
   since God wishes for no short time to punish King Nebuchadnezzar. It
   may not seem customary, indeed, but as he wished to put forth an
   example for all ages, he desired to prolong his punishment. This,
   therefore, seems the meaning of the seven years; for we know the number
   seven years to signify a long time in Scripture, since it denotes
   perfection.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [220] Verbally, "and he said," for the copula ought to be resolved into
   the relative pronoun. -- Calvin.

   [221] See [21]Dissertation 14 at the end of this Volume.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since thou settest before us our sins, and at the
   same time announcest thyself as our judge, that we may not abuse thy
   forbearance and lay up for ourselves a treasure of greater wrath
   through our sloth and torpor. Grant, also, that we may fear thee
   reverently, and be anxiously cautious ourselves: may we be frightened
   by thy threats, and enticed by thy sweetness, and be willing and
   submissive to thee: may we never desire more than to consecrate
   ourselves entirely to obey thee, and to glorify thy name through Jesus
   Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twentieth
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:25

   25. That they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with
   the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen,
   and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall
   pass over thee, till thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom
   of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

   25. Et to expellent ab hominibus, et cum bestiis agrestibus erit
   habitatio tua: et herba sicut boves to pascent, et rote coelorum to
   irrigabunt: et septem tempora transibunt super re, donec cognoseas,
   quod dominator sit excelsus in regno hominum, et eui voluerit det
   illud.


   Daniel proceeds with the explanation of the king's dream, to whom the
   last verse which I explained yesterday applies. This ought to be
   expressed, because this message was sorrowful and bitter for the king.
   We know how indignantly kings are usually compelled not only to submit
   to orders, but even to be cited before God's tribunal, where they must
   be overwhelmed in shame and disgrace. For we know how prosperity
   intoxicates the plebeian race. What, then, can happen to kings except
   forgetfulness of the condition of our nature when they attempt to free
   themselves from all inconvenience and trouble? For they do not consider
   themselves subject to the common necessities of mankind. As, therefore,
   Nebuchadnezzar could scarcely bear this message, here the Prophet
   admonishes him in a few words concerning the cutting down of the tree
   as the figure of that ruin which hung over him. He now follows this up
   at length, when he says, They shall cast thee out from among men, and
   thy habitation shall be with the beasts of the field. When Daniel had
   previously discoursed upon the Four Monarchies, there is no doubt about
   the king's mind being at first exasperated; but this was far more
   severe, and in the king's opinion far less tolerable, as he is compared
   to wild beasts, and cut off from the number of mankind, and then he was
   driven into the fields and woods to feed with the wild beasts. If
   Daniel had only said the king was to be despoiled of his royal dignity,
   he would have been greatly offended by that disgrace, but when he was
   subject to such extreme shame, he was, doubtless, inwardly maddened by
   it. But God still restrained his fury lest he should desire to be
   revenged upon the supposed injury which he suffered. For we shall
   afterwards see from the context that he did not grow wise again. Since,
   therefore, he always cherished the same pride, there is no doubt of his
   cruelty, for these two vices were united; but the Lord restrained
   [22]his madness, and spared his holy Prophet. Meanwhile, the constancy
   of God's servant is worthy of observation, as he does not obliquely
   hint at what should happen to the king, but relates clearly and at
   length how base and disgraceful a condition remained for him. They
   shall cast thee out, says he, from among men If he had said, thou shalt
   be as it were one of the common herd, and shalt not differ from the
   very dregs of the people, this would have been very severe. But when
   the king is ejected from the society of mankind, so that not a single
   corner remains, and he is not allowed to spend his life among ox-herds
   and swineherds, every one may judge for himself how odious this would
   be; nor does Daniel here hesitate to pronounce such a judgment.

   The following clause has the same or at least similar weight, -- Thy
   dwelling, says he, shall be with the beasts of the field, and its herb
   shall feed thee The plural number is used indefinitely in the original;
   and hence it may be properly translated, "Thou shalt feed on grass;
   thou shalt be watered by the dew of heaven; thy dwelling shall be with
   wild beasts." I do not wish to philosophize with subtlety, as some do,
   who understand angels. I confess this to be true; but the Prophet
   simply teaches punishment to be at hand for the king of Babylon, while
   he should be reduced to extreme ignominy, and differ in nothing from
   the brutes. This liberty, therefore, as I have said, is worthy of
   notice, to shew us how God's servants, who have to discharge the duty
   of teaching, cannot faithfully act their part unless they shut their
   eyes and despise all worldly grandeur. Hence, by the example of the
   king, let us learn our duty, and not be stubborn and perverse when God
   threatens us. Although, as we have said, Nebuchadnezzar did not grow
   wise, as the context will shew us, yet we shall see how he bore the
   terrible judgment denounced against him. If, therefore, we, who are but
   as refuse compared to him, cannot bear God's threats when they are set
   before us,-he will be our witness and judge, who, though possessed of
   such mighty power, dared nothing against the Prophet. Now, at the end
   of the verse, the sentence formerly explained is repeated, -- Until
   thou dost acknowledge, says he, how great a Lord there is in the
   kingdom of men, who delivers it to whomsoever he will. This passage
   teaches us again how difficult it is for us to attribute supreme power
   to God. In our language, indeed, we are great heralds of God's glory,
   but still every one restricts his power, either by usurping something
   to himself, or by transferring it to some one else. Especially when God
   raises us to any degree of dignity, we forget ourselves to be men, and
   snatch away God's honor from him, and desire to substitute ourselves
   for him. This disease is cured with difficulty, and the punishment
   which God inflicted on the king of Babylon is an example to us. A
   slight chastisement would have been sufficient unless this madness had
   been deeply seated in his bowels and marrow, since men claim to
   themselves the peculiar property of God. Hence they have need of a
   violent medicine to learn modesty and humility. In these days,
   monarchs, in their titles, always put forward themselves as kings,
   generals, and counts, by the grace of God; but how many falsely pretend
   to apply God's name to themselves, for the purpose of securing the
   supreme power! For what is the meaning of that title of kings and
   princes -- "by the grace of God?" except to avoid the acknowledgment of
   a superior. Meanwhile, they willingly trample upon that God with whose
   shield they protect themselves, -- so far are they from seriously
   thinking themselves to reign by his permission! It is mere pretense,
   therefore, to boast that they reign through God's favor. Since this is
   so, we may easily judge how proudly profane kings despise God, even
   though they make no fallacious use of his name, as those triflers who
   openly fawn upon him, and thus profane the name of his grace! It now
   follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:26

   26. And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots;
   thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known
   that the heavens do rule.

   26. Et quod dixerunt de relinquenda radice stirpiuus arboris, regnum
   tuum tibi stabit, ex quo cognoveris quod potestas sit coelorum. [222]


   Here Daniel closes the interpretation of the dream, and shews how God
   did not treat King Nebuchadnezzar so severely by not giving way to
   clemency. He mitigates, indeed, the extreme rigor of the punishment, to
   induce Nebuchadnezzar to call upon God and repent, through indulging
   the hope of pardon, as a clearer exhortation will afterwards follow.
   But Daniel now prepares him for penitence, by swing His kingdom should
   stand For God might cast him out from intercourse with mankind, and
   thus he would always remain among wild beasts. He might instantly
   remove him from the world; but this is a mark of his clemency, since he
   wished to restore him, not to a merely moderate station, but to his
   former dignity, as if it had never been trenched upon. We see,
   therefore, how useful the dream was to King Nebuchadnezzar, so long as
   he did not despise the Prophet's holy admonition, through ingratitude
   towards God; because Daniel not only predicted the slaughter which was
   at hand, but brought at the same time a message of reconciliation. God,
   therefore, had instructed the king to some purpose, unless he had been
   unteachable and perverse, like the majority of mankind. Besides, we may
   gather from this the general doctrine of our being invited to
   repentance when God puts an end to his chastisements; since he sets
   before us a taste of his clemency to induce in us the hope of his being
   entreated, if we only fly to him heartily and sincerely, We must notice
   also what Daniel adds in the second part of the verse, from which thou
   mayest know that there is power in heaven: for under these words the
   promise of spiritual grace is included. Since God will not only punish
   the king of Babylon, to humble him, but will work in him and change his
   mind, as he afterwards fulfilled, though at a long interval.

   From which thou shalt know, then, says he, that power is in heaven I
   have stated the grace of the Spirit to be here promised, as we know how
   badly men profit, even if God repeats his stripes an hundredfold. Such
   is the hardness and obstinacy of our hearts -- for we rather grow more
   and more obdurate, while God calls us to repentance. And, doubtless,
   Nebuchadnezzar had been like Pharaoh, unless God had humbled him, not
   only with outward penalties, but had added also the inward instinct of
   his Spirit, to allow himself to be instructed, and to submit himself to
   the judgment and power of heaven. Daniel means this when he says,
   Wherefore thou shalt know; for Nebuchadnezzar would never have acquired
   this knowledge of his own accord, unless he had been touched by the
   secret movement of the Spirit. He adds, That there is power in heaven;
   meaning, God governs the world and exercises supreme power; for he here
   contrasts heaven with earth, meaning all mankind. For if kings see all
   filings tranquil around them, and if no one causes them terror, they
   think themselves beyond all chance of danger, as they say; and through
   being desirous of certainty in their station, they look round on all
   sides, but never raise their eyes upwards to heaven, as if God did not
   concern himself to behold the kingdoms of the earth, and to set up whom
   he would, and to prostrate all the proud. The princes of this world
   never consider their power to be from heaven, as if this were entirely
   out of God's hands; but, as I have said, they look right and left,
   before and behind. This is the reason why Daniel said, Power is from
   heaven. There is a contrast then between God and all mankind, as if he
   had said, Thou shalt know God reigns -- as we have formerly seen. It
   follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [222] Or, that there is dominion in the heavens. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:27

   27. Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and
   break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing
   mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity.

   27. Propterea, rex, consilium meum placeat apud to, [223] et peccata
   tua [224] justitia redimas [225] et iniquitatem tuam in misericordia
   erga pauperes: ecce erit prolongstio pact tuae. [226]


   Since interpreters do not agree about the sense of these words, and as
   the doctrine to be derived from them depends partly upon that, we must
   remark, in the first place, that mlky, meleki, means "my counsel." Some
   translate it "my king," and both words are derived from the same, root
   mlk, melek, signifying "to reign; but it also signifies counsel". There
   is no doubt flint this passage ought to be explained thus: -- May my
   counsel therefore please thee, and mayest thou redeem thy sins. The
   word phrvq, peruk, is here translated "to redeem;" it often signifies
   "to break off," or "separate," or "abolish." In this passage it may
   conveniently be translated, "separate or break off thy sins" by pity
   and humanity; as if he had said, Thus thou shalt make an end of sin,
   and enter upon a new course, and thus thy cruelty may be changed into
   clemency, and thy tyrannical violence into pity. But this is not of
   much consequence. The verb often signifies to free and to preserve; the
   context does not admit the sense of preserving, and it would be harsh
   to say, Free thy sins by thy righteousness. Hence I readily embrace the
   sense of Daniel exhorting the king of Babylon to a change of life, so
   as to break off his sins in which he had too long indulged. With
   respect to the clause at the end of the verse, behold there shall be a
   cure for thine error, as I have mentioned, the Greeks translate, "if by
   chance there should be a cure;" but the other sense seems to suit
   better; as if he had said, "this is the proper and genuine medicine,"
   some translate, "a promulgation," since 'rk, arek, signifies "to
   produce;" and at the same time they change the signification of the
   other noun, for they say, "there shall be a prolongation to thy peace
   or quiet." That sense would be tolerable, but the other suits better
   with the grammatical construction; besides, the more received sense is,
   this medicine may be suitable to the error A different sense may be
   elicited without changing the words at all; there shall be a medicine
   for thine errors; meaning, thou mayest learn to cure thine errors. For
   length of indulgence increases the evil, as we have sufficiently
   noticed. Hence this last part of the verse may be taken, and thus
   Daniel may proceed with his exhortation; as if he had said, -- it is
   time to cease from thine errors, for hitherto thou hast deprived
   thyself of all thy senses by giving unbridled license to thy lusts. If,
   therefore, there is any moderation in thine ignorance, thou mayest open
   thine eyes and understand at length how to repent.

   I now return to the substance of the teaching. May my counsel please
   thee! says he. Here Daniel treats the profane king more indulgently
   than if he had addressed his own nation; for he used the prophetic
   office. But because he knew the king did not hold the first rudiments
   of piety, he here undertakes only the office of a counselor, since he
   was not an ordinary teacher. As to Nebuchadnezzar sending for him, this
   was not a daily thing, nor did he do this, because he wished to submit
   to his doctrine. Daniel therefore remembers the kind of person with
   whom he was treating, when he tempers his words and says, may my
   counsel be acceptable to thee! He afterwards explains his counsel in a
   few words, -- Break away, says he, thy sins -- or cast them away -- by
   righteousness, and thy iniquities by pity to the poor These is no doubt
   that Daniel wished to exhort the king to repentance; but he touched on
   only one kind, which we know was very customary with the Prophets. For
   when they recall the people to obedience by repentance, they do not
   always explain it fully, nor define it generally, but touch upon it by
   a figure of speech, and treat only of the outward duties of penitence.
   Daniel now follows this custom. If inquiry is made concerning the
   nature of repentance, it is the conversion of man towards God, from
   whom he had been alienated. Is this conversion then only in the hands,
   and feet, and tongue. Does it not rather begin in the mind and the
   heart, and then pass on to outward works? Hence true penitence has its
   source in the mind of men, so that he who wished to be wise must set
   aside his own prudence, and put away his foolish confidence in his own
   reason. Then he must subdue his own depraved affections and submit them
   to God, and thus his outward life will follow the inward spirit.
   Besides this, works are the only testimonies to real repentance; for it
   is a thing too excellent to allow its root to appear to human
   observation. By our fruits therefore we must testify our repentance.
   But because the duties of the second table, in some sense, open the
   mind of man; hence the Prophets in requiring repentance, only set
   before us the duties of charity, as Daniel says. Redeem, therefore, thy
   sins, says he, or break away, or east them away -- but how? namely, by
   righteousness. Without doubt the word "justice" means here the same as
   "grace" or "pity." But those who here transfer "grace" to "faith,"
   twist the Prophet's words too violently; for we know of nothing more
   frequent among the Hebrews than to repeat one and the same thing under
   two forms of speech. As, therefore, Daniel here uses sins and
   iniquities in the same sense, we conclude justice and pity ought not to
   be separated, while the second word expresses more fully the sense of
   justice. For when men see their life must be changed, they feign for
   themselves many acts of obedience which scarcely deserve the name. They
   have no regard for what pleases God, nor for what he commands in his
   word; but just as they approve of one part or another, they thrust
   themselves rashly upon God, as we see in the Papacy. For what is a holy
   and religious life with them? To run about here and there; to undertake
   pilgrimages imposed by vows; to set up a statue; to found masses, as
   they call it; to fast on certain days; and to lay stress on trifles
   about which God has never said a single word. As, therefore, men err so
   grossly in the knowledge of true righteousness, the Prophet here adds
   the word "pity" by way of explanation; as if he had said, Do not think
   to appease God by outward pomps, which delight mankind because they are
   carnal and devoted to earthly things, and fashion for them. selves a
   depraved idea of God according to their own imagination; let not then
   this vanity deceive you; but learn how true justice consists in pity
   towards the poor. In this second clause, then, only a part of the idea
   is expressed, since true just. ice is not restricted simply to the
   meaning of the word, but embraces all the duties of charity. Hence we
   ought to deal faithfully with mankind, and not to deceive either rich
   or poor, nor to oppress any one, but to render every one his own. But
   this manner of speaking ought to be familiar to us, if we are but
   moderately versed in the prophetic writings.

   The meaning of the phrase is this: -- Daniel wished to shew the king of
   Babylon the duty of living justly, and cultivating faith and integrity
   before men, without forgetting the former table of the law. For the
   worship of God is more precious than all the righteousness which men
   cultivate among themselves. But true justice is known by its outward
   proofs, as I have said. But he treats here the second table rather than
   the first: for, while hypocrites pretend to worship God by many
   ceremonies, they allow themselves to commit all kinds of cruelty,
   rapine, and fraud, without obeying any law of correct living with their
   neighbors. Because hypocrites cover their malice by this frivolous
   pretense, God sets before them a true test to recall them to the duties
   of charity. This, then, is the meaning of the verse from which we have
   elicited a double sense. If we retain the future time, behold, there
   shall be a medicine! it will be a confirmation of the former doctrine;
   as if he had said, We must not travel the long and oblique circuits --
   there is this single remedy: or, if we are better pleased with the word
   of exhortation, the context will be suitable; may there be a medicine
   for thine errors! Mayest thou not indulge thyself hereafter as thou
   hast hitherto done, but thou must open thine eyes and perceive how
   miserably and wickedly thou hast lived, and so desire to heal thine
   errors. As the Papists have abused this passage, to shew God to be
   appeased by satisfactions, it is too frivolous and ridiculous to refute
   their doctrine; for when they speak of satisfactions, they mean works
   of supererogation. If any one could fulfill God's law completely, yet
   he could not satisfy for his sins. The Papists are compelled to confess
   this; what then remains? -- The offering to God more than he demands,
   which they call works not required! But Daniel does not here exact of
   King Nebuchadnezzar any work of supererogation; he exacts justice, and
   afterwards shews how a man's life cannot be justly spent unless
   humanity prevails and flourishes among men, and especially when we are
   merciful to the poor. Truly there is no supererogation here! To what
   end then serves the law? Surely this has no reference to satisfactions,
   according to the ridiculous and. foolish notions of the Papists! But if
   we grant them this point, still it does not follow that their sins are
   redeemed before God, as if works compensated either their fault or
   penalty, as they assert; for they confess their fault not to be
   redeemed by satisfactions -- this is one point gained -- and then as to
   the penalty, they say it is redeemed; but we must see whether this
   agrees with the Prophet's intention.

   I will not contend about a word; I will allow it to mean "to redeem" --
   Thou mayest redeem thy sins; but we must ascertain, whether this
   redemption is in the judgment of God or of man? Clearly enough, Daniel
   here regards the conduct of Nebuchadnezzar as unjust and inhuman, in
   harassing his subjects, and in proudly despising the poor and
   miserable. Since, therefore, he had so given himself up to all
   iniquity, Daniel shews the remedy; and if this remedy is treated as a
   redemption or liberation, there is nothing absurd in saying, we redeem
   our sins before men while we satisfy them. I redeem my sins before my
   neighbor, if after I have injured him, I desire to become reconciled to
   him, I acknowledge my sins and seek for pardon. If, therefore, I have
   injured his fortunes, I restore what I have unjustly taken, and thus
   redeem my transgression. But this does assist us in expiating sin
   before God, as if the beneficence which I put in practice was any kind
   of expiation. We see, therefore, the Papists to be foolish and silly
   when they wrest the Prophet's words to themselves. We may now inquire
   in the last place, to what purpose Daniel exhorted King Nebuchadnezzar
   to break away from or redeem his sins? Now this was either a matter of
   no consequence -- which would be absurd -- or it was a heavenly decree,
   as the king's dream was a promulgation of the edict, as we have
   formerly seen. But this was determined before God, and could not be
   changed in any way; it was therefore superfluous to wish to redeem
   sins. If we follow a different explanation, no difficulty will remain;
   but even if we allow the Prophet to be here discoursing of the
   redemption of sins, yet the exhortation is not without its use.

   In whatever way Nebuchadnezzar ought to prepare to bear God's
   chastisement, yet this would prove most useful to him, to acknowledge
   God to be merciful. And yet the time might be contracted, during which
   his obstinate wickedness should extend; not as if God changed his
   decree, but because he always warns by threatening, for the purpose of
   treating men more kindly, and tempering vigor with his wrath, as is
   evident from many other examples. This would not have been without its
   use to a teachable disposition, nor yet without fruit, when Daniel
   exhorted King Nebuchadnezzar to redeem his sins, because he might
   obtain some pardon, even if he had paid the penalty, since not even a
   single day had been allowed out of the seven years. Yet this was a
   great progress, if the king had at last humbled himself before God, so
   as to be in a fit state for receiving the pardon which had been
   promised. For as a certain time had been fixed beforehand, or at least
   shewn by the Prophet, hence it would have profited the king, if through
   wishing to appease his judge he had prepared his mind for obtaining
   pardon. This doctrine was therefore in every way useful, because the
   same reason avails with us. We ought always to be prepared to suffer
   God's chastisements; yet it is no slight or common alleviation of our
   sufferings, when we so submit ourselves to God, as to be persuaded of
   his desire to be propitious to us, when he sees us dissatisfied with
   ourselves, and heartily detesting our transgressions.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [223] sphr, shepher, signifies to be beautiful; but it is
   metaphorically transferred to approbation or complacency, as the phrase
   is, "therefore my counsel shall please thee." -- Calvin.

   [224] Or, "that" for v, vau, may be used in this way. -- Calvin.

   [225] So it is usually translated: we shall discuss the word by and
   bye. -- Calvin.

   [226] The Greeks translate -- if by chance -- or a medicine for their
   error. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, that we may learn to bear patiently all adverse
   misfortunes, and know that thou exercisest towards us the duties of a
   judge, as often as we are afflicted in this world. Thus may we prevent
   thy wrath, and so condemn ourselves with true humility, that trusting
   in thy pity we may always flee to thee, relying upon the mediation of
   thy only-begotten Son, which thou hast provided for us. Grant, also,
   that we may beg pardon of thee, and resolve upon a true repentance, not
   with vain and useless fictions, but by true and serious proofs,
   cultivating true charity and faith among ourselves, and testifying in
   this way our fear of thy name, that thou mayest be truly glorified in
   us by the same our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twenty-first.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:28-32

   28. All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.

   28. Hoc totum impletum fuit, vel, incidit, super Nebuchadnezer regem

   29. At the end of twelve months he walked in the palace of the kingdom
   of Babylon.

   29. In fine mensiron duodeeim, [227] in palatio regni, quod est in
   Babylone, deambulabat.

   30. The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have
   built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for
   the honour of my majesty?

   30. Loquutus est rex et dixit, An non haec est Babylon magna, quam ego
   aedificavi in domum regni, [228] in robore fortitudinis meae, et in
   pretium, vel, excellentiam, decoris mei?

   31. While the word was in the king's mouth, there fell a voice from
   heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; The
   kingdom is departed from thee:

   31. Adhuc sermo erat in ore regis, [229] vox e coelis cecidit, Tibi
   dicunt, rex Nebuchadnezer, regnum tuum migravit, vel, discessit, abs
   to.

   32. And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with
   the beasts of the field: they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and
   seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High
   ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

   32. Et ex hominibus to ejicient, et cum bestia agri habitatio tua:
   herbam sicuti bores gustare to facient: [230] aet septem tempora
   transibunt super to, donec cognoscas quod dominator sit excelsus in
   regno hominum, et cui voluerit det illud.


   After Nebuchadnezzar has related Daniel to be a herald of God's
   approaching judgment, he now shews how God executed the judgment which
   the Prophet had announced. But he speaks in the third person, according
   to what we know to be a common practice with both the Hebrews and
   Chaldees. Thus Daniel does not relate the exact words of the king, but
   only their substance. Hence he first introduces the king as the
   speaker, and then he speaks himself in his own person. There is no
   reason why this variety should occasion us any trouble, since it does
   not obscure the sense. In the first, verse, Nebuchadnezzar shews the
   dream which Daniel had explained not to have been in vain. Thus the
   miracle shews itself to be from heaven, by its effects; because dreams
   vanish away, as we know well enough. But since God fulfilled, at his
   own time, what he had shewn to the king of Babylon by his dream, it is
   clear there was nothing alarming in the dream, but a sure revelation of
   the future punishment which fell upon the king. Its moderation is also
   expressed. Daniel says, when a year had passed away, and the king was
   walking in his own palace, and boasting in his greatness, at that
   moment a voice came down from heaven, and repeated what he had already
   heard in the dream. He afterwards relates how he had been expelled from
   human society, and dwelt for a long time among the brutes, so as to
   differ from them in nothing. As to the use of words, since mhlk,
   mehelek, occurs here, some think that he walked upon the roof of his
   palace, whence he could behold all parts of the city. The inhabitants
   of the east are well known to use the roofs of their houses in this
   way; but I do not interpret the phrase with such subtlety, since the
   Prophet seems to wish nothing else than to shew how the king enjoyed
   his own ease, luxury, and magnificence. There is nothing obscure in the
   rest of the language.

   I now approach the matter before us. Some think Nebuchadnezzar to have
   been touched with penitence when instructed by God's anger, and thus
   the time of his punishment was put off. This does not seem to me
   probable, and I rather incline to a different opinion, as God withdrew
   his hand till the end of the year, and thus the king's pride was the
   less excusable. The Prophet's voice ought to have frightened him, just
   as if God had thundered and lightened from heaven. He now appears to
   have been always like himself. I indeed do not deny that he might be
   frightened by the first message, but I leave it doubtful. Whichever way
   it is, I do not think God spared him for a time, because he gave some
   signs of repentance. I confess he sometimes indulges the reprobate, if
   he sees them humbled. An example of this, sufficiently remarkable, is
   displayed in King Ahab. (1 Kings 21:29.) He did not cordially repent,
   but God wished to shew how much he was pleased with his penitence, by
   pardoning a king impious and obstinate in his wickedness. The same
   might be said of Nebuchadnezzar, if Scripture had said so; but as far
   as we can gather from these words of the Prophet, Nebuchadnezzar became
   prouder and prouder, until his sloth arrived at its height. The king
   continued to grow proud after God had threatened him so, and this was
   quite intolerable. Hence his remarkable stupidity, since he would have
   been equally careless had he lived an hundred years after he heard that
   threat! Finally, I think although Nebuchadnezzar perceived some
   dreadful and horrible punishment to be at hand, yet, while frightened
   for the time, he did not lay aside his pride and haughtiness of mind.
   Meanwhile, he might think this prediction to be in vain; and what he
   had heard probably escaped from his mind for a long time, because he
   thought he had escaped; just as the impious usually abuse God's
   forbearance, and thus heap up for themselves a treasure of severer
   vengeance, as Paul says. (Romans 2:5.) Hence he derided this prophecy,
   and hardened himself more and more. Whatever sense we attach to it,
   nothing else eau be collected from the Prophet's context, than the
   neglect of the Prophet's warning, and the oracle rendered nugatory by
   which Nebuchadnezzar had been called to repentance. If he had possessed
   the smallest particle of soundness of mind, he ought to flee to the
   pity of God, and to consider the ways in which he had provoked his
   anger, and also to devote himself entirely to the duties of charity. As
   he had exercised a severe tyranny towards all men, so he ought to study
   benevolence; yet when the Prophet exhorted him, he did not act thus,
   but uttered vain boastings, which shew his mind to have been swollen
   with pride and contempt for God. As to the space of time here denoted,
   it shews how God suspended his judgments, if perchance those who are
   utterly deplorable should be reclaimed; but the reprobate abuse God's
   humanity and indulgence, as they make this an occasion of hardening
   their minds, while they suppose God to cease from his office of judge,
   through his putting it off for a time. At the end, then, of twelve
   months, the king was walking in his palace; he spoke, and said This
   doubling of the phrase shews us how the king uttered the feelings of
   premeditated pride. The Prophet might have said more simply, The king
   says, -- but he says, he spoke, and said. I know how customary it is
   with both the Hebrews and Chaldees to unite these words together; but I
   think the repetition emphatic in this place, since the king then
   uttered what he had long ago conceived and concealed in his mind; Is
   not this great Babylon, which I have built for a royal palace, and that
   too in the mightiness of my valor; as I have built it in the splendor
   of my excellency? In these words we do not see any open blasphemy which
   could be very offensive to God, but we must consider the king by this
   language to claim to himself supreme power, as if he were God! We may
   gather this from the verse, "Is not this great Babylon? says he. He
   boasts in the magnitude of his city, as if he wished to raise it
   giant-like to heaven; which I, says he -- using the pronoun with great
   emphasis -- which I have built, and that too in the greatness of my
   valor We see that by claiming all things as his own, he robs God of all
   honor.

   Before I proceed further, we must see why he asserts Babylon to have
   been founded by himself. All historians agree in the account of the
   city being built by Semiramis. A long time after this event,
   Nebuchadnezzar proclaims his own praises in building the city. The
   solution is easy enough. We know how earthly kings desire, by all means
   in their power, to bury the glory of others, with the view of exalting
   themselves and acquiring a perpetual reputation. Especially when they
   change anything in their edifices, whether palaces or cities, they wish
   to seem the first founders, and so to extinguish the memory of those by
   whom the foundations were really laid. We must believe, then, Babylon
   to have been adorned by King Nebuchadnezzar, and so he transfers to
   himself the entire glory, while the greater part ought to be attributed
   to Semiramis or Ninus. Hence this is the way in which tyrants speak, as
   all usurpers and tyrants do, when they draw towards themselves the
   praises which belong to others. I, therefore, says he, have built it,
   by the strength of my hand Now it is easy to see what had displeased
   God in this boasting of the king of Babylon, namely, his sacrilegious
   audacity in asserting the city to have been built by his own
   mightiness. But God shews this praise to be peculiar to himself and
   deservedly due to him. Unless God builds the city, the watchman watches
   but in vain. (Psalm 127:1.) Although men labor earnestly in founding
   cities, yet they never profit unless God himself preside over the work.
   As Nebuchadnezzar here extols himself and opposes the strength of his
   fortitude to God and his grace, this boasting was by no means to be
   endured. Hence it happened that God was so very angry with him. And
   thus we perceive how this example proves to us what Scripture always
   inculcates, -- God's resistance of the proud, his humbling their
   superciliousness, and his detestation of their arrogance. (Psalm
   18:27.) Thus God everywhere announces himself as the enemy of the
   proud, and he confirms it by the present example, as if he set before
   us in a mirror the reflection of his own judgment. (James 4:6; 1 Peter
   5:5.) This is one point. The reason also must be noticed why God
   declares war on all the proud, because we cannot set ourselves up even
   a little, without declaring war on God; for power and energy spring
   from him. Our life is in his hands; we are nothing and can do nothing
   except through him. Whatever, then, any one assumes to himself he
   detracts from God. No wonder then if God testifies his dislike of the
   haughty superciliousness of men, since they purposely weary him when
   they usurp anything as their own. Cities, indeed, are truly built by
   the industry of men, and kings are worthy of praise who either build
   cities or adorn them, so long as they allow God's praise to be
   inviolate. But when men exalt themselves and wish to render their own
   fortitude conspicuous, they bury as far as they can the blessing of
   God. Hence it is necessary for their impious rashness to be judged by
   God, as we have already said. The king also confesses his vanity when
   he says, I have built it for a royal palace, and for the excellency of
   my splendor. By these words he does not dissemble how completely he
   looked at his own glory in all those buildings by which he hoped to
   hand down his name to posterity. Hence, on the whole, he wishes to be
   celebrated in the world, both during his life and after his death, so
   that God may be nothing in comparison with himself, as I have already
   shewn how all the proud strive to substitute themselves in the place of
   God.

   It now follows, -- While the speech was in the mouth of the king, a
   voice descended from heaven -- They say unto thee, O King
   Nebuchadnezzar, thy kingdom has departed from thee! God does not now
   admonish the king of Babylon by either the mouth of a Prophet or a
   dream by night; but he sends forth his own voice from heaven; and as if
   he had not tamed down the pride by which the king was puffed up, a
   voice is now heard from heaven which inspires greater terror than
   either the Prophet's oracle or interpretation. Thus God is in the habit
   of dealing with the hardened and impenitent, since he causes his own
   prophets to denounce the penalty which hangs over them. Besides, when
   he sees them untouched or unaffected, he doubles the terror, until the
   final execution follows, as in. the case of this tyrant. The word was
   in the king's mouth when, the voice was heard. We see how God restrains
   in a moment the madness of those who raise themselves extravagantly.
   But it is not surprising that the voice was so suddenly heard, because
   time for repentance was allowed to King Nebuchadnezzar. In the form of
   speech, they say to thee, it is not necessary to inquire anxiously to
   whom these words apply. Some restrict them to angels; but I do not
   agree to this; it seems rather to be used in the customary way, they
   say -- meaning "it is said," as if sanctioned by common consent. Hence
   they say to thee, O King Nebuchadnezzar; God does not simply call him
   by his name, but uses the word king -- not for the sake of honor, but
   of ridicule, and to strike away from the king all the allurements by
   which he deceived himself. Thou indeed art intoxicated by thy present
   splendor, for while all adore thee, thou art forgetful of thy frailty;
   but this royal majesty and power will not hinder God from laying thee
   prostrate; for since thou: wilt not humble thyself, thy kingdom shall
   be taken from thee! This indeed appeared incredible, since
   Nebuchadnezzar had the tranquil possession of the kingdom in his hand;
   no one dared to shew himself his enemy; he had subdued all his
   neighbors; his monarchy was terrible to all nations; hence God
   pronounces, The kingdom has gassed away from thee! And this shews the
   certainty of the oracle; and thus Nebuchadnezzar may know the time to
   be fulfilled, and the punishment to be no longer delayed, because he
   had trifled with God's indulgence.

   It follows, -- They shall expel thee from among men, and thy habitation
   shall be with the beasts of the field -- or of the country, -- they
   shall make thee eat grass like oxen! Some think Nebuchadnezzar to have
   been changed into a beast; but this is too harsh and absurd. We need
   not fancy any change of nature; but he was cut off from all intercourse
   with men, and with the exception of a human form, he did not differ
   from the brutes, -- nay, such was his deformity in his exile that, as
   we shall afterwards see, he became a horrid spectacle; -- all the hairs
   of his body stood up and grew like eagles' feathers; his claws were
   like those of birds. In these points he was like the beasts, in others
   like the rest of mankind. It is uncertain whether God struck this king
   with madness, causing him to escape and he hid for a length of time, or
   whether he was cast forth by a tumult and conspiracy of nobles, or even
   the consent of the whole people. All this is doubtful, since the
   history of those times is unknown to us. Whether, then, Nebuchadnezzar
   was snatched away by madness, and while he continued a maniac was
   separated from the society of men, or was cast forth as many tyrants
   have been, his dwelling with beasts for a time, becomes a memorable
   example to us. He was probably rendered stupid, by God's leaving him a
   human form while be deprived him of reason, as the context will make
   evident to us. They shall cast thee out from human society; thy
   dwelling shall be with wild beasts; they shall make thee eat grass like
   an ox! that is, when deprived of all delight, nay, of the commonest and
   plainest food, thou wilt find no other sustenance than that of oxen.
   Thou shalt eat the grass like an animal, and seven times shall pass
   over thee. Of the "seven times" we have spoken before. Some restrict
   this to days, but this is contrary not only to every reason, but to
   every pretext. Nor do I explain it of months; the space of time would
   have been much too short. Hence the opinion of those who extend it to
   seven years is more probable. If Nebuchadnezzar had been cast out by a
   tumult, he would not have been so quickly recalled: then, since God
   wished to make an example of him for all generations, I suppose him to
   have been driven out from common society for a length of time. For if
   the penalty had been for seven months only, we see how coolly God's
   judgments would be received in the world. Hence, with the view of
   engraving this penalty more deeply in the hearts of all, he wished to
   protract it longer -- I will not say to seven years, since I have
   previously expounded the certain number as put for an uncertain one,
   implying a long space of time.

   Seven years, then, shall pass away, says he, until thou shalt know that
   there is a lofty ruler in the kingdoms of men. This is the end of the
   punishment, as we have previously said, for I need not repeat my former
   remarks. But we must remember this -- God mitigates the bitterness of
   the penalty by making it temporary. Then he proposed this end to induce
   Nebuchadnezzar to repent, as he required many blows for this purpose,
   according to the old proverb about the fool who can never be recalled
   to a sound mind without suffering calamity. Thus King Nebuchadnezzar
   ought to be beaten with stripes, to render him submissive to God, as he
   never profited by any holy admonition or any heavenly oracle. God does
   not treat; all in this way. Hence we have here a special example of his
   clemency, which provides for the punishment inflicted on King
   Nebuchadnezzar, being both useful and profitable. For the reprobate are
   more and more hardened against God, and are ever stirred up and excited
   to madness. It was an act, then, of special grace, when Nebuchadnezzar
   was chastised for the time by the hand of God, to cause his repentance
   and his owning God's entire sway over the whole world.

   He says, that God may be Lord in the kingdom of men; because nothing is
   more difficult than to persuade tyrants to submit to the power of God.
   On the one side they confess themselves to reign by his grace; but at
   the same time, they suppose their own sway to be obtained by either
   valor or good fortune, and to be retained by their own guards,
   counsels, and wealth. Hence, as far as they can, they shut God out from
   the government of the world, while they are puffed up with a false
   conceit of themselves, as if all things were maintained in their
   present state by their valor or advice. This, then, was an ordinary
   effect when Nebuchadnezzar began to feel God to be the ruler in the
   kingdom of men, since kings wish to place him somewhere between
   themselves and the multitude. They confess the people to be subject to
   God's power, but think themselves exempt from the common order of
   events, and in possession of a privilege in favor of their lusts,
   relieving them from the hand and empire of God. Hence, as I have said,
   it was no common thing for Nebuchadnezzar to acknowledge God to reign
   in the earth; for tyrants usually enclose God in heaven, and think him
   content with his own happiness, and careless about mingling in the
   concerns of men. Hence thou mayest know him to be the ruler. He
   afterwards adds the kind of dominion, because God raises up whomsoever
   he pleases, and casts down others: God is not only supreme in the sense
   of sustaining' all things by his universal providence, but because no
   one without his will obtains empire at all. He binds some with a belt,
   and looseth the bonds of others, as it is said in the book of Job. (Job
   12:18.) We ought not, therefore, to imagine God's power to be at rest,
   but we should join it with present action, as the phrase is. Whether
   tyrants obtain power, or sovereigns are pious and just, all are
   governed by God's secret counsel, since otherwise there could be no
   king of the world. It follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [227] That is, after twelve months. -- Calvin.

   [228] That is, that it may be a royal seat. -- Calvin.

   [229] That is, when the speech was in the king's mouth. -- Calvin.

   [230] Or, the grass shall feed thee as it does oxen. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:33

   33. The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he
   was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet
   with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles'
   feathers, and his nails like birds' claws.

   33. In ilia hora sermo completus fuit super Nebuchadnezer, et ab
   hominibus ejectus est, et herbam tanquam boves comedit, et rore
   coelorum corpus ejus irrigatum fuit, donec pilus.ejus quasi a.quilae
   crevit, et ungues ejus quasi avium.


   The Prophet concludes what he had said: As soon as the voice had come
   down from heaven, Nebuchadnezzar was cast out from mankind! Some
   occasion of expelling him might have preceded this; but since the
   divination is uncertain, I had rather leave undetermined what the Holy
   Spirit has not revealed. I only wished to touch upon this point
   shortly, when he boasted in the foundation of Babylon by the fortitude
   of his own energy; since his own nobles must have become disgusted when
   they saw him carried away with such great pride; or he might have
   spoken in this way when he thought snares were prepared for him, or
   when he felt some crowds moved against him. Whatever be the meaning,
   God sent forth his voice, and the same moment he expelled King
   Nebuchadnezzar from the company of mankind. Hence, in the same hour,
   says he, the speech was fulfilled If a long period had interposed, it
   might have been ascribed to either fortune or other inferior means, as
   a reason; but when such is the connection between the language and its
   effect, the judgment is too clear to be obscured by the malignity of
   mankind, tie says, therefore, He was cast forth and fed with herbs,
   differing in nothing from oxen: his body was soaked in, rain, since he
   lay out in the open air. We are ourselves often subject to the
   drenching shower, and in the fields are sure to meet with it, and
   travelers often reach their inn wet through. But the Prophet speaks of
   the continuance of God's judgment, since he had no roof to shelter him,
   and always lay out in the fields. Hence he says, he was moistened by
   the dew of heaven until, says he, his nails became claws, and his hair
   like the wings of eagles This passage confirms what has been said
   concerning the explanation of the seven times as a long period, for his
   hair could not have grown so in seven months, nor could such great;
   deformity arise. Hence this change, thus described by the Prophet,
   sufficiently shews King Nebuchadnezzar to have suffered his punishment
   for a length of time, for he could not be so quickly humbled, because
   pride is not easily tamed in a man of moderate station, how much less
   then in so great a monarch! It afterwards follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:34

   34. And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes
   unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the
   most High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose
   dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation
   to generation:

   34. Eta fine dierum, [231] ego Nebuchadnezer oculos meos in coelum
   extuli, et intellectus meus ad me rediit, et excelsum benedixi, et
   viventem in secula laudavi et glorificavi, quia potestas eius potestas
   seculi, [232] et regnum ejus eum aetate et tetate. [233]


   The Prophet again introduces King Nebuchadnezzar as the speaker. He
   says, then, After that time had elapsed, he raised his eyes to heaven
   Without doubt, he means those seven years. As to his then beginning to
   raise his eyes to heaven, this shews how long it takes to cure pride,
   the disease under which he labored. For when any vital part of the body
   is corrupt and decaying, its cure is difficult and tedious; so also
   when pride exists in men's hearts, and gains an entrance within the
   marrow, and infects the inmost soul, it is not easily plucked out; and
   this is worthy of notice. Then we are taught how God by his word so
   operated upon King Nebuchadnezzar, as not immediately and openly to
   withdraw the effect of his grace. Nebuchadnezzar profited by being'
   treated disgracefully during those seven years or times, and by being
   driven from the society of mankind; but he could not perceive this at
   once till God opened his eyes. So, therefore, God often chastises us,
   and invites us by degrees, and prepares us for repentance, but his
   grace is not immediately acknowledged. But lest I should be too prolix,
   I will leave the rest till to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [231] That is, when the time was passed over. -- Calvin.

   [232] That is, eternal. -- Calvin.

   [233] That is, of perpetual duration. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, (since we are nothing in ourselves, and yet we
   cease not to please ourselves, and so are blinded by our vain
   confidence, and then we vainly boast in our virtues, which are
   worthless,) that we may learn to put off these perverse affections. May
   we so submit to thee as to depend upon thy mere favor: may we know
   ourselves, to stand and be sustained by thy strength alone: may we
   learn so to glorify thy name that we may not only obey thy word with
   true and pure humility, but also earnestly implore thy assistance, and
   distrusting ourselves, may rely upon thy favor as our only support,
   until at length thou gather-est us into thy heavenly kingdom, where we
   may enjoy that blessed eternity which has been obtained for us by thine
   only-begotten Son -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twenty-Second.

   I SHALL now continue the comments which were interrupted yesterday.
   From Nebuchadnezzar saying, he raised his eyes to heaven, and his
   intellect returned to him, we understand him to have been for the time
   deprived of his mind. He is much astonished, in my opinion, by feeling
   his own evils, but meanwhile he bites the bit and is like a madman.
   Some think him to have been a complete maniac; I do not contend about
   this; it is enough for me to know he was deprived of his senses and was
   altogether like the brutes. But it is probable there was no
   intelligence remaining, to cause him to feel torture at his slaughter.
   Meanwhile, he did not raise his eyes to heaven until God drew him to
   himself. God's chastisements do not profit us unless they work inwardly
   by his Spirit, as we said yesterday. The phrase only means, he began to
   think God to be a just judge. For while at the time he felt the sting
   of his own disgrace, yet as it is said elsewhere, he did not regard the
   hand of the striker. (Isaiah 9:13.) He began, therefore, to acknowledge
   God to be the avenger of pride, after the aforesaid time had elapsed.
   For those who east their eyes down to the earth raise their eyes to
   heaven. As Nebuchadnezzar ought to awake from his stupor and rise up
   towards God, of whom he had been formerly forgetful, so he ought to
   prostrate himself to the earth, as he had already received the reward
   of his haughtiness. He had dared to raise his head above the lot of
   man, when he assumed to himself what was peculiar to God. He does not
   raise his eyes to heaven by any vain confidence, as he had formerly
   been intoxicated by the splendor of his monarchy; but he looked up to
   God, while mentally east down and prostrate.

   He afterwards adds, and I blessed him on high, and praised and
   glorified him living for ever This change shews the punishment to have
   been chiefly and purposely inflicted on King Nebuchadnezzar, since he
   spoiled God of his just honor. He here describes the fruit of his
   repentance. If this feeling flowed from repentance, and Nebuchadnezzar
   really blessed God, it follows that he was formerly sacrilegious, as he
   had deprived God of lawful honor and wished to raise himself into his
   place, as we have already said. Hence, also, we must learn what the
   true praise of God really is; namely, when reduced to nothing, we
   acknowledge and determine all firings to be according to his will; for,
   as we shall afterwards see, he is the Governor of heaven and earth, and
   we should esteem his will as the source of law and reason, and the
   final appeal of justice. Per we may sometimes celebrate the praises of
   God with ostentation, but it will then be mere pretense; for no one can
   sincerely and heartily praise him, without ascribing to him all the
   properties which we shall afterwards see. First of all, Nebuchadnezzar
   says, Because his power is eternal, and his kingdom from age to age. In
   the first place, he here confesses God to be an eternal king; which is
   a great step. For human frailty is opposed to this perpetuity; because
   the greatest monarchs, who excel in power, have nothing firm; they are
   not only subject to chance and change, as profane men express it -- or
   rather depend upon the will of God -- but they utterly fade away
   through their vanity. We see the whole world fluctuating like the waves
   of the sea. If there be any tranquillity, in one direction or another,
   yet every moment something new and sudden may happen, quite
   unexpectedly. As a tempest arises directly in a calm and serene sky, so
   also we see it occur in human affairs. Since it is so, no condition
   upon earth is firm, and monarchs especially disturb themselves by their
   own turbulent agitation's. This is, therefore, the perpetuity which is
   here predicted by King Nebuchadnezzar; because God as an absolute
   sovereign rules his own empire for himself, and is thus beyond all
   danger of change. This is the first point. It now follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:35

   35. And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he
   doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
   inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him,
   What doest thou?

   35. Et omnes habitatores terrae quasi nihil reputantur, et secundum
   voluntatem suam facit in exercitu coelorum, et in habitatoribus terrae;
   et non est qui prohibeat manure ejus, [234] et dicat ei, Quid fecisti?
   [235]


   Now the opposite clause is added to complete the contrast, because
   though it follows that nothing is firm or solid in mankind, yet this
   principle flourishes, namely, God is eternal; yet few reason thus,
   because in words all allow God to be firm and everlasting, yet they do
   not descend into themselves and seriously weigh their own frailty.
   Thus, being unmindful of their own lot, they rage against God himself.
   The explanation then which occurs here is required; for after
   Nebuchadnezzar praises God, because his power is eternal, he adds by
   way of contrast, all the dwellers on the earth are considered as
   nothing. Some take klh, keleh, for a single word, meaning "anything
   complete," for klh, keleh, is to "finish," or "complete;" it also
   signifies to "consume" sometimes, whence they think the noun to be
   derived, because men are limited within their own standard, but God is
   immense. This is harsh; the more received opinion is, that h, he, is
   put for ', a, here; and thus Nebuchadnezzar says, men are esteemed as
   of no value before God. Already, then, we see how suitably these two
   clauses agree together; for God is an eternal king, and men are as
   nothing in comparison with him. For if anything is attributed to men as
   springing from themselves, it so far detracts from the supreme power
   and empire of God. It follows, then, that God does not; entirely
   receive his rights, until all mortals are reduced to nothing. For
   although men make themselves of very great importance, yet
   Nebuchadnezzar here pronounces himself by the Spirit's instinct, to be
   of no value before God; for otherwise they would not attempt to raise
   themselves, unless they were utterly blind in the midst of their
   darkness. But when they are dragged into the light they feel their own
   nothingness and utter vanity. For whatever we are, this depends on
   God's grace, which sustains us every moment, and supplies us with new
   vigor. Hence it is our duty to depend upon God only; because as soon as
   he withdraws his hand and the virtue of his Spirit, we vanish away. In
   God we are anything he pleases, in ourselves we are nothing.

   It now follows: God does according to his pleasure in the army of the
   heavens, and among the dwellers upon earth This may seem absurd, since
   God is said to act according to his will, as if' there were no
   moderation, or equity, or rule of justice, with him. But we must bear
   in mind, what we read elsewhere concerning men being ruled by laws,
   since their will is perverse, and they are borne along in any direction
   by their unruly lust; but God is a law to himself, because his will is
   the most perfect justice. As often, then, as Scripture sets before us
   the power of God, and commands us to be content with it, it does not
   attribute a tyrannical empire to God, according to the calumnies of the
   impious. But because we do not cease to cavil against God, and oppose
   our reason to his secret counsels, and thus strive with him, as if he
   did not act justly and fairly when he does anything which we
   disapprove; hence God pronounces all things to be done according to his
   own will, so that the Holy Spirit may restrain this audacity. We should
   remember then, when mention is made of God, how impossible it is for
   anything either perverse or unjust to belong' to him; his will cannot
   be turned aside by any affection, for it is the perfection of justice.
   Since this is so, we should remember how extremely unbridled and
   perverse our rashness is, while we dare object to anything which God
   does; whence the necessity of this teaching which puts the bridle of
   modesty upon us is proved, since God does all things according to his
   will, as it is said in Psalm 115:3, Our God in heaven does what he
   wishes. From this sentence we gather that nothing happens by chance,
   but every event in the world depends on God's secret providence. We
   ought not to admit any distinction between God's permission and his
   wish. For we see the Holy Spirit -- the best master of language -- here
   clearly expresses two things; first, what God does; and next, what he
   does by his own will. But permission, according to those vain
   speculators, differs from will; as if God unwillingly granted what he
   did not wish to happen! Now, there is nothing more ridiculous than to
   ascribe this weakness to God. Hence the efficacy of action is added;
   God does what he wishes, says Nebuchadnezzar. He does not speak in a
   carnal but in a spiritual sense, or instinct, as we have said; since
   the Prophet must be attended to just as if he had been sent from
   heaven. Now, therefore, we understand how this world is administered by
   God's secret providence, and that nothing happens but what he has
   commanded and decreed; while he ought with justice to be esteemed the
   Author of all things.

   Some object here to the apparent absurdity of saying God is the author
   of sin, if nothing is done without his will; nay, if he himself works
   it! This calumny is easily answered, as the method of God's action
   differs materially from that of men. For when any man sins, God works
   in his own manner, which is very different indeed from that of man,
   since he exercises his own judgment, and thus is said to blind and to
   harden. As God therefore commands both the reprobate and the evil one,
   he permits them to indulge in all kinds of licentiousness, and in doing
   so, executes his own judgments. But he who sins is deservedly guilty,
   and cannot implicate God as a companion of his wickedness. And why so?
   Because God has nothing in common with him in reference to sinfulness.
   Hence we see how these things which we may deem contrary to one
   another, are mutually accordant, since God by his own will governs all
   events in the world, and yet is not the author of sin. And why so?
   Because he treats Satan and all the wicked with the strict justice of a
   judge. We do not always see the process, but we must hold this
   principle with firmness -- supreme power is in God's hands; hence we
   must not cavil at his judgments, however inexplicable they may appear
   to us. Wherefore this phrase follows, There is no one who can hinder
   his hand, or can say unto him, Why dost thou act thus? When
   Nebuchadnezzar says, God's hand cannot be hindered, he uses this method
   of deriding human folly which does not hesitate to rebel against God.
   Already they raise their finger to prevent, if possible, the power of
   his hand; and even when convicted of weakness, they proceed in their
   own fury. Nebuchadnezzar, then, deservedly displays their ridiculous
   madness in conducting themselves so intemperately in wishing to
   restrain the Almighty, and to confine him within their bounds, and to
   fabricate chains for the purpose of restricting him. When mankind thus
   burst forth into sacrilegious fury, they deserve to be laughed at, and
   this is here the force of Daniel's words.

   He afterwards adds, No one can say, Why dost thou act thus? We know how
   they gave way to the language of extreme petulance; since scarcely one
   man in a hundred restrains himself with such sobriety as to attribute
   the glory to God, and to confess himself just in his works. But
   Nebuchadnezzar does not here consider what men are accustomed to do,
   but what they ought to do. He says therefore, and with strict justice,
   God cannot be corrected; since however the reprobate chatter, their
   folly is self-evident, for it has neither reason nor the pretense of
   reason to support it.

   The whole sense is -- God's will is our law, against which we strive in
   vain; and then, if he permits us sufficient license, and our infirmity
   breaks forth against him, and we contend with him, all our efforts will
   be futile. God himself will be justified in his judgments, and thus
   every human countenance must submit to him. (Psalm 51:6.) This is the
   general rule.

   We must now notice the addition, God's will must be done as well in the
   army of heaven as among the inhabitants of earth By "the army of
   heaven" I do not understand, as in other places, the sun, moon, and
   stars, but angels and even demons, who may be called heavenly without
   absurdity, if we consider their origin, and their being "princes of the
   air." Hence Daniel means to imply angels, demons, and men, to be
   equally governed by God's will; and although the impious rush on
   intemperately, yet they are restrained by a secret bridle, and are
   prevented from executing whatever their lusts dictate. God therefore is
   said to do in the army of the heavens and also among men whatsoever he
   wishes; because he has the elect angels always obedient to him, and the
   devils are compelled to obey his command, although they strive in the
   contrary direction. We know how strongly the demons resist God, but yet
   they are compelled to obey him, not willingly, but by compulsion. But
   God acts among angels and demons just as among the inhabitants of the
   earth. He governs others by his Spirit, namely, his elect, who are
   afterwards regenerated by his Spirit, and they are so treated by him
   that his justice may truly shine forth in all their actions. He also
   acts upon the reprobate, but in another manner; for he draws them
   headlong by means of the devil; he impels them with his secret virtue;
   he strikes them by a spirit of dizziness; he blinds them and casts upon
   them a reprobate spirit, and hardens their hearts to contumacy. Behold
   how God does all things according to his own will among men and angels!
   There is also another mode of action, as far as concerns our outward
   condition; for God raises one aloft and depresses another. (Psalm
   113:7.) Thus we see the rich made poor, and others raised from the
   dunghill, and placed in the highest stations of honor. The profane call
   this the sport of fortune! But the moderation of God's providence is
   most just, although incomprehensible. Thus God acts according to his
   will among men and angels; but that interior action must be put in the
   first place, as we have said. It now follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [234] Or, who can abolish; for mch', mecha, signifies either to blot
   out or to prohibit. -- Calvin.

   [235] Or, why hast thou done so? -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:36

   36. At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of
   my kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me; and my
   counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my
   kingdom; and excellent majesty was added unto me.

   36. Et in tempore illo [236] intellectus meus rediit ad me, et ad
   excellentiam regni mei, [237] decor meus et dignitas mea reversa est ad
   me: et me consiliarii mei et proceres mei requisierunt: et in regno meo
   confirmatus sum, et dignitas mea amplior Aucta [238] fuit mihi.


   Here Nebuchadnezzar explains at length what he had previously touched
   upon but shortly; for he had recovered his soundness of mind, and thus
   commends God's mercy in being content with a moderate and temporary
   chastisement; and then he stretched forth his hand, and out of a beast
   formed a man again! He was not changed into a brute, as we have said,
   but he was treated with such ignominy, and made like wild beasts, and
   pastured with them. This deformity, then, was so dreadful, that his
   restoration might be called a kind of new creation. Hence with very
   good reason Nebuchadnezzar celebrates this grace of God. At that time,
   therefore, my intellect returned to me; he had said this once before,
   but since understanding and reason are inestimable blessings of God,
   Nebuchadnezzar inculcates this truth, and confesses himself to have
   experienced God's singular grace, because he had returned to a sound
   mind. And at the same time he adds, he had returned to the honor and
   glory of his kingdom; because he had been consulted again by his
   counselors and elders How this was accomplished is unknown, since the
   memory of those times is buried, unless the princes of his kingdom were
   inclined to clemency -- which is very probable -- and desired among
   them the king who had been cast out. We do not say this was done by
   them on purpose, because God made use of them, and they were ignorantly
   carrying out his purposes. They had heard the voice from heaven, O King
   Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is said, thy kingdom is departed from thee!
   This indeed would be universally known and understood among all men;
   but we know how easily oblivion creeps over men when God speaks. These
   princes, then, were unaware of their doing God's work when they
   demanded their king. In this way he returned to the dignity of his
   kingdom; and even additional dignity was next conferred upon him. At
   length it follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [236] Although zmn', zemena, properly is a time fixed before hand and
   determined. -- Calvin.

   [237] Namely, "I returned;" for the phrase is elliptical. -- Calvin.

   [238] Was added. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 4:37

   37. Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of
   heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those
   that walk in pride he is able to abase.

   37. Nunc ego Nebuchadnezer laudo, et extollo, et glorifico Regem
   coelorum: quia omnia opera ejus veritas, et viae ejus judicium: et eos
   qui ambulant in superbia potest humiliare. [239]


   At the close of [23]the edict, Nebuchadnezzar joins the ingenuous
   confession of his faults with the praises of God! What he says of the
   proud, he doubtless applies properly to himself; as if he had said, God
   wished to constitute me a remarkable monument of his method of humbling
   the proud for the instruction of all mankind. For I was inflated with
   pride, and God corrected this by so remarkable a punishment, that my
   example ought to profit the world at large. Hence I said, King
   Nebuchadnezzar does not simply return thanks to God, but at the same
   time confesses his fault, for though subdued with deserved harshness,
   yet his haughtiness could not be arrested by any lighter remedy. First
   of all he says, I praise, extol, and glorify the king of heaven! This
   heaping together of words doubtless proceeded from vehement affection.
   At the same time a contrast must be understood, on the principle
   formerly mentioned; since God is never rightly praised unless the
   ignominy of men is detected; he is not properly extolled, unless their
   loftiness is cast down; he is never glorified unless men are buried in
   shame and he prostrate in the dust. Hence, while Nebuchadnezzar here
   praises, extols, and glorifies God, he also confesses himself and all
   mortals to be nothing -- as he did before -- to deserve no praise but
   rather the utmost ignominy.

   He adds, since all his works are truth Here qsvt, kesot, is taken for
   "rectitude or integrity." For dyny-'mt, dini-ameth, mean true
   judgments, but refer here to equity. God's works are therefore all
   truth, that is, all integrity, as if he had said, none of God's works
   deserve blame. Then the explanation Follows, All his ways are judgments
   We see here the praise of God's perfect justice; this ought to be
   referred to Nebuchadnezzar personally, as if he had said, God does not
   deal with me too strictly; I have no reason for expostulating with him,
   or for murmuring as if he were too severe with me. I confess,
   therefore, that I deserve whatever punishment I sustain. And why so?
   All his ways are justice; meaning the highest rectitude. Then, All his
   works are truth; that is, nothing contrary to equity is found there,
   nothing crooked, but everywhere the highest justice will shine forth.
   We see then how Nebuchadnezzar by this language condemns himself out of
   his own mouth by declaring God's justice to be in all his works. This
   general form of expression does not prevent Nebuchadnezzar from openly
   and freely confessing himself a criminal before God's tribunal; but it
   acquires greater force by his example, which admonishes us by the
   general confession of God's justice, rectitude, and truthfulness in
   whatever he does. And this is worthy of notice, since many find no
   difficulty in celebrating God's justice and rectitude when they are
   treated just as they like; but if God begins to treat them with
   severity, they then vomit forth their poison, and begin to quarrel with
   God, and to accuse him of injustice and cruelty. Since therefore
   Nebuchadnezzar here confesses God to be just and true in all his works,
   without any exception, notwithstanding his own severe chastisements,
   this confession is not feigned; for he necessarily utters what he says
   from the lowest depths of his heart, through his having experienced the
   rigor of the divine judgment.

   He now adds at last, He can humble those who walk in pride. Here
   Nebuchadnezzar more openly displays his own disgrace, for he is not
   ashamed to confess his fault before the whole world, because his
   punishment was known to every one. As God then wished his folly to be
   universally detested, by making so horrible an example of him by his
   punishment, so Nebuchadnezzar now brings his own case forward, and
   bears witness to the justice of the penalty, in consequence of his
   extreme pride. Here then we see God's power joined with his justice, as
   we have previously mentioned. He does not attribute to God a tyranny
   free from all law; for as soon as Nebuchadnezzar had confessed all
   God's ways to be just, he condemns himself of pride directly
   afterwards. Hence he does not hesitate to expose his disgrace before
   mankind, that God may be glorified. And this is the true method of
   praising God, not only by confessing ourselves to be as nothing, but
   also by looking back upon our failings. We ought not only to
   acknowledge ourselves inwardly guilty before him, but also openly to
   testify the same before all mankind whenever it is necessary. And when
   he uses the word "humility," this may be referred to outward dejection;
   for Nebuchadnezzar was humbled when God east him out into the woods to
   pass his life in company with the wild beasts. But he was also humbled
   for another reason, as if he had been a son of God. Since this humbling
   is twofold, Nebuchadnezzar wishes here to express the former kind,
   because God prostrates and throws down the proud. This is one kind of
   humiliation; but it becomes profitless unless God afterwards governs us
   by a spirit of submission. Hence Nebuchadnezzar does not here embrace
   the grace of God, which was worthy of no common praise and exaltation;
   and in this edict he does not describe what is required of a pious man
   long trained in God's school; yet he shews how he had profited under
   God's rod, by attributing to him the height of power. Besides this, he
   adds the praise of justice and rectitude, while he confesses himself
   guilty, and bears witness to the justice of the punishment which had
   been divinely inflicted on him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [239] That is, for humbling the proud. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since the disease of pride remains fixed in us all
   through our original corruption in our father Adam, -- Grant, I say,
   that we may learn to mortify our spirits, and to be displeased with our
   conduct, as we ought; may we feel ourselves to be deprived of all
   wisdom and rectitude without thee alone. May we fly to thy pity, and
   confess ourselves utterly subject to eternal death; may we rely on thy
   goodness which thou hast deigned to offer us through thy Gospel; may we
   trust in that Mediator whom thou hast given us; may we never hesitate
   to fly to thee, to call upon thee as our Father, and having been
   renewed by thy Spirit, may we walk in true humility and modesty, till
   at length thou shalt raise us to that heavenly kingdom which has been
   obtained for us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twenty-Third.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 5
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:1

   1. Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords,
   and drank wine before the thousand.

   1. Beltsazar rex fecit convivium magnum proceribus suis mille, et coram
   mille vinum bibit.


   Daniel here refers to the history of what happened at the taking of
   Babylon; but meanwhile he leaves those judgments of God to the
   consideration of his readers, which the Prophets had predicted before
   the people had become exiles. He does not use the prophetic style, as
   we shall afterwards see, but is content with simple narrative; while
   the practice of history may be learnt from the following expressions.
   It is our duty now to consider how this history tends towards building
   us up in the faith and fear of God. First of all we notice the time at
   which Belshazzar celebrated this banquet. Seventy years had passed away
   from the time when Daniel had been led into exile with his companions.
   For although Nebuchadnezzar will soon be called the father of
   Belshazzar, yet it is clear enough that Evil-Merodach lived between
   them; for he reigned twenty-three years. Some reckon two kings before
   Belshazzar; for they place Regassar after Labassardach; and these two
   will occupy eight years. Metasthenes has stated it so, and he has many
   followers. But Nebuchadnezzar the Great, who took Daniel captive, and
   was the son of the first king of that name, evidently reigned
   forty-five years. Some transfer two years to the reign of his father;
   at any rate, he held the regal power for forty-five years; and if the
   twenty-three years of Evil-Merodach are added, they will make
   sixty-eight years -- in which Belshazzar had reigned eight years. We
   see, then, how seventy-two years had passed away from the period of
   Daniel being first led captive. Metasthenes reckons thirty years for
   the reign of Evil-Merodach; and then, if we add eight years, this makes
   more than eighty years -- which appears probable enough, although
   Metasthenes seems to be in error in supposing different kings instead
   of only different names. [240] For Herodotus does not call Belshazzar,
   of whom we are now speaking, a king, but calls his father Labynetus,
   and gives him the same name. [241] Metasthenes makes some mistakes in
   names, but I readily embrace his computation of time, when he asserts
   Evil-Merodach to have reigned thirty years. For when we treat of the
   seventy years which Jeremiah had formerly pointed out, we ought not to
   begin with Daniel's exile, no,' yet with the destruction of the city,
   but with the slaughter which occurred between the first victory of king
   Nebuchadnezzar, and the burning and ruin of the temple and city. For
   when the report concerning the death of his father was first spread
   abroad, as we have elsewhere said, he returned to his own country, lest
   any disturbance should occur through his absence. Hence we shall find
   the seventy years during which God wished the people's captivity to
   last, will require a longer period for the reign of Evil-Merodach than
   twenty-three years; although there is not any important difference, for
   soon after Nebuchadnezzar returned, he carried off the king, leaving
   the city untouched. Although the temple was then standing, yet God had
   inflicted the severest punishment upon the people, which was like a
   final slaughter, or at least nearly equal to it. However this was, we
   see that Belshazzar was celebrating this banquet just as the time of
   the deliverance drew nigh.

   Here we must consider the Providence of God, in arranging the times of
   events, so that the impious, when the time of their destruction is
   come, cast themselves headlong of their own accord. This occurred to
   this wicked king. Wonderful indeed was the stupidity which prepared a
   splendid banquet filled with delicacies, while the city was besieged.
   For Cyrus had begun to besiege the city for a long time with a large
   army. The wretched king was already half a captive; and yet, as if in
   spite of God, he provided a rich banquet, and invited a thousand
   guests. Hence we may conjecture the extent of the noise and of the
   expense in that banquet. For if any one wishes to entertain only ten or
   twenty guests, it will occasion him much trouble, if he wishes to treat
   them splendidly. But when it was a royal entertainment, where there
   were a thousand nobles with the king's wife and concubines, and so
   great a multitude assembled together, it became necessary to obtain
   from many quarters what was required for such a festival; and this may
   seem incredible! But Xenophon though he related many fables and
   preserved neither the gravity nor the fidelity of a historian, because
   he desired to celebrate the praises of Cyrus like a rhetorician;
   although he trifles in many things, yet here had no reason or occasion
   for deception. He says a treasure was laid up, so that the Babylonians
   could endure a siege of even ten or more years. And Babylon was
   deservedly compared to a kingdom; for its magnitude was so large as to
   surpass belief. It must really have been very populous, but since they
   drew their provisions from the whole of Asia, it is not surprising that
   the Babylonians had food in store, sufficient to allow them to close
   their gates, and to sustain them for a long period. But in this banquet
   it was most singular that the king, who ought to have been on guard, or
   at least have sent forth his guards to prevent the city from being
   taken, was as intent upon his delicacies as if he had been in perfect
   peace, and exposed to no danger from any outward enemy. He had a
   contest with a strong man, if any man ever was so. Cyrus was endued
   with singular prudence, and in swiftness of action by far excelled all
   others. Since, then, the king was so keenly opposed, it is surprising
   to find him so careless as to celebrate a banquet. Xenophon, indeed,
   states the day to have been a festival. The assertion of those Jews who
   think the Chaldeans had just obtained a victory over the Persians, is
   but trifling. For Xenophon -- who may be trusted whenever he does not
   falsify history in favor of Cyrus, because he is then a very grave
   historian, and entirely worthy of credit; but when he desires to praise
   Cyrus, he has no moderation -- is here historically correct, when he
   says the Babylonians were holding a usual annual festival. He tells us
   also how Babylon was taken, viz., by Gobryas and Gadatas his generals.
   For Belshazzar had castrated one of these to his shame, and had slain
   the son of the other in the lifetime of his father. Since then the
   latter burnt with the desire of avenging his son's death, and the
   former his own disgrace, they conspired against him. Hence Cyrus turned
   the many channels of the Euphrates, and thus Babylon was suddenly
   taken. The city we must remember was twice taken, otherwise there would
   not have been any confidence in prophecy; because when the Prophets
   threaten God's vengeance upon the Babylonians, they say their enemies
   should be most fierce, not seeking gold or silver, but desiring human
   blood; and then they narrate every kind of atrocious deed which is
   customary in war. (Jeremiah 50:42.) But nothing of this kind happened
   when Babylon was taken by Cyrus; but when the Babylonians freed
   themselves from the Persian sway by casting off their yoke, Darius
   recovered the city by the assistance of Zopyrus, who mutilated his
   person, and pretended to have suffered such cruelty from the king as to
   induce him to betray the city. But then we collect how hardly the
   Babylonians were afflicted, when 3000 nobles were crucified! And what
   usually happens when 8000 nobles are put to death, and all suspended on
   a gallows -- nay, even crucified? Thus it easily appears, how severely
   the Babylonians were punished at the time, although they were then
   subject to a foreign power, and treated shamefully by the Persians, and
   reduced to the condition of slaves. For they were forbidden the use of
   arms, and were taught from the first to become the slaves of Cyrus, and
   dare not wear a sword. We ought to touch upon these things shortly to
   assure us of the government of human events by the judgment of God,
   when he casts headlong the reprobate when their punishment is at hand.
   We have an illustrious example of this in King Belshazzar.

   The time of the deliverance predicted by Jeremiah was at hand -- the
   seventy years were finished -- Babylon was besieged. (Jeremiah 25:11.)
   The Jews might now raise up their heads and hope for the best, because
   the arrival of Cyrus approached, contrary to the opinion of them all;
   for he had suddenly rushed down from the mountains of Persia when that
   was a barbarous nation. Since, therefore, the sudden coming of Cyrus
   was like a whirlwind, this change might possibly give some hope to the
   Jews; but after a length of time, so to speak, had elapsed in the siege
   of the city, this might east down their spirits. While king Belshazzar
   was banqueting with his nobles, Cyrus seems able to thrust him out in
   the midst of his merriment and hilarity. Meanwhile the Lord did not sit
   at rest in heaven; for he blinds the mind of the impious king, so that
   he should willingly incur punishments, yet no one drew him on, for he
   incurred it himself. And whence could this arise, unless God had given
   him up to his enemy? It was according to that decree of which Jeremiah
   was the herald. Hence, although Daniel narrates the history, it is our
   duty, as I have said, to treat of things far more important; for God
   who had promised his people deliverance, was now stretching forth his
   hand in secret, and fulfilling the predictions of his Prophets.
   (Jeremiah 25:26.)

   It now follows -- King Belshazzar was drinking wine before a thousand
   Some of the Rabbis say, "he strove with his thousand nobles, and
   contended with them all in drinking to excess;" but this seems grossly
   ridiculous. When he says, he drank wine before a thousand, he alludes
   to the custom of the nation, for the kings of the Chaldeans very rarely
   invited guests to their table; they usually dined alone, as the kings
   of Europe now do; for they think it adds to their dignity to enjoy a
   solitary meal. The pride of the kings of Chaldea was of this kind.
   When, therefore, it is said, [24]Belshazzar drank wine before a
   thousand, something extraordinary is intended, since he was celebrating
   this annum banquet contrary to his ordinary custom, and he deigned to
   treat his nobles with such honor as to receive them as his guests.
   Some, indeed, conjecture that he drank wine ordeals, as he was
   accustomed to become intoxicated when there were no witnesses present;
   but there is no force in this comment: the word before means in the
   presence or society of others. Let us go on:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [240] See the [25]Dissertations at the end of this volume, in which
   these historical points are treated at length.

   [241] Herod., lib. 1, sect. 188. Comp. Cyropoed., lib. 4 and 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:2

   2. Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden
   and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the
   temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his
   wives, and his concubines, might drink therein.

   2. Beltsazar princepit [242] in gustu, vel, sapore, vini, ut afferrent
   vasa auri et argenti, [243] quae asportaverat, vel, extulerat,
   Nebuchadnezer pater ejus ex temple quod est in Jerusalem, ut biberent
   in illis rex, et proceres ejus, uxores et concubine. [244]


   Here king Belshazzar courts his own punishment, because he furiously
   stirred up God's wrath against himself, as if he was dissatisfied with
   its delay while God put off his judgment for so long a period. This is
   according to what I have said. When the destruction of a house is at
   hand, the impious remove the posts and gates, as Solomon says.
   (Proverbs 17:19.) God therefore, when he wishes to execute his
   judgments, impels the reprobrate by a secret instinct to rush forward
   of their own accord, and to hasten their own destruction. Belshazzar
   did this. His carelessness was the sign of his stupidity, and also of
   God's wrath, when in the midst of his own pride and crimes he could
   delight in reveling. Thus his blindness more clearly points out God's
   vengeance, since he was not content with his own intemperance and
   excesses, but must openly declare war against God. He ordered,
   therefore, says he, the gold and silver vessels to be brought to him
   which he had taken away from Nebuchadnezzar These vessels appear to
   have been laid up in the treasury; hence Nebuchadnezzar had never
   abused these vessels in his lifetime; we do not read that Evil-Merodach
   did anything of this kind, and Belshazzar now wishes purposely to
   inflict this insult on God. There is no doubt he brought forth those
   vessels by way of ridicule, for the purpose of triumphing over the true
   God, as we shall afterwards see.

   We have already explained the sense in which the Prophet calls
   Nebuchadnezzar the father of Belshazzar, since it is usual in all
   languages to speak of ancestors as fathers; for Belshazzar was of the
   offspring of Nebuchadnezzar, and being really his grandson, he is
   naturally called his son; and this will occur again. There are some who
   think Evil-Merodach was stricken with that grievous affliction
   mentioned in the last chapter: possibly his name was Nebuchadnezzar,
   but there is no reason for adopting their opinion; [245] it is
   frivolous to fly directly to this conjecture when the name of the
   father occurs. the Prophet says Belshazzar committed this under the
   influence of wine Since tm, tegnem, signifies "to taste," no doubt he
   here speaks of tasting; and since this may be metaphorically
   transferred to the understanding, some explain it to mean being
   impelled by wine, and thus his drunkenness took the place of reason and
   judgment. Nights and love and wine, says Ovid, have no moderation in
   them. [246] This explanation I think too forced; it seems simply to
   mean, when Belshazzar grew warm with wine, he commanded the vessels to
   be brought to him; and this is the more usual view. When, therefore,
   the savor of the wine prevailed, -- that is, when it seized upon the
   king's senses, then he ordered the vessels to be brought It is worth
   while to notice this, to induce us to be cautious concerning
   intemperance in drinking, because nothing is more common than the
   undertaking many things far too rashly when our senses are under the
   influence of wine. Hence we must use wine soberly, that it may
   invigorate not only the body but the mind and the senses, and may never
   weaken, or enervate, or stupify our bodily or mental powers. And this
   is, alas! too common, since the vulgar proverb is well known -- pride
   springs from drunkenness. For this reason the poets supposed Bacchus to
   have horns, since intemperate men are always puffed up, and the most
   wretched fancy themselves kings. What then must happen to monarchs,
   when in their forgetfulness they dream themselves kings of kings, and
   even deities? The Prophet wishes to mark this fault when he says,
   Belshazzar, under the influence of wine, ordered vessels to be brought
   to him It now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [242] Verbally it means said, but here it signifies commanded. --
   Calvin,.

   [243] Made of gold and silver. -- Calvin.

   [244] Some translate his wife, since there was one principal wife, who
   alone was the king's companion, and she received the name of Queen, as
   we shall afterwards see. -- Calvin.

   [245] This is the view of the Duke of Manchester; it is ably supported
   in his learned volume on "The Times of Daniel." As we have had occasion
   to review the general argument elsewhere, we merely allude to it here.
   -- See Dissertations.

   [246] Ars. Amor., Eleg. 6. The French translation is worthy of notice,
   -- "La nuiet, l'amour, le boire sans mesure,
   N' induit a rien sinon a toute ordure." -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:3

   3. Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the
   temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem; and the king, and
   his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.

   3. Tunc attulerunt vasa aurea quae extulerant ex temple domus Dei quae
   erat in Jerusalem: et biberunt in illis rex, et proceres ejus, et uxor,
   [247] et concubinae ipsius.


   The Prophet uses the word "golden," probably, because the most precious
   vessels were brought; silver might also have been added, but the more
   splendid ones are noticed. He does not say that Nebuchadnezzar carried
   them off, but implies it to be the common act of all the Babylonians.
   They obtained the victory under the direction of this king, hence he
   used the spoils; and since they were all engaged in the victory, the
   Prophet speaks of them all. In using the phrase, "the temple," he
   expresses more than before, by saying, not from Jerusalem only but from
   the temple of God's house.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [247] Or, "wives," in the plural number. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:4

   4. They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of
   brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

   4. Biberunt vinum, et laudarunt deos aureos, et argenteos, aereos,
   ferreos, ligneos, et lapideos.


   Here the Prophet shews more distinctly and clearly how the king
   insulted the true and only God, by ordering his vessels to be brought
   to him. For when they had been brought forth, they praised, says he,
   all their gods of gold and silver; meaning in defiance of the true God
   they celebrated the praises of their false deities, and thanked them,
   as we find in Habakkuk. (Habakkuk 1:16.) Although there is no doubt
   they sacrificed heartily the produce of their industry, as the Prophet
   there expresses it, yet they exalted their own gods, and thus
   obliterated the glory of the true God. And this is the reason why the
   Prophet now takes pains to state those vessels to have been brought
   from the temple of God's house For he here strengthens the impiety of
   the king and his nobles for erecting their horns against the God of
   Israel. There is then a great contrast, between God who commanded his
   temple to be built at Jerusalem, and sacrifices to be offered to him
   and false gods. And this was the head and front of Belshazzar's
   offending, because he thus purposely rose up against God, and not only
   tyrannically and miserably oppressed the Jews, but triumphed over their
   God -- the Creator of heaven and earth. This madness accelerated his
   ultimate destruction, and it occurred for the purpose of hastening the
   time of their deliverance. Hence I have represented him to have been
   drawn by God's great instinct to such madness that vengeance might be
   ripened.

   They drank, says he, wine, and praised their gods. The Prophet does not
   ascribe the praise of their gods to drunkenness, but he obliquely shews
   their petulance to have been increased by drink. For if each had been
   sober at home, he would not have thus rashly risen up against God; but
   when impiety exists in the heart, intemperance becomes an additional
   stimulus. The Prophet seems to me to mean this, when he repeats, they
   were drinking; for he had said, the king and his nobles, his wife, and
   concubines, were drinking He now inculcates the same thing in similar
   words, but adds, they drank wine, -- meaning their madness was the more
   inflamed by the excitement of the wine. Then they praised the gods of
   silver, etc. The Prophet here reproachfully mentions gods of gold,
   silver, brass, wood, and stone, since we know God to have nothing in
   common with either gold or silver. His true image cannot be expressed
   in corruptible materials; and this is, the reason why the Prophet calls
   all the gods which the Babylonians worshipped, golden, silver, brazen,
   wooden, and stone. Clearly enough the heathen never were so foolish as
   to suppose the essence of Deity to reside in gold, or silver, or stone;
   they only called them images of their deities; but because in their
   opinion the power and majesty of the deity was included within the
   material substance, the Prophet is right in so completely condemning
   their criminality, because we hear how carefully idolaters invent every
   kind of subtlety. In the present times, the Papacy is a glaring proof
   how men cling to gross superstitions when they desire to excuse their
   errors; hence the Prophet does not here admit those vain pretenses by
   which the Babylonians and other heathens disguise their baseness, but
   he says, their gods were of silver and gold And why so? for although
   they orally confessed that gods reign in heaven, (so great was the
   multitude and crowd of their deities that the supreme God was quite
   shrouded in darkness,) although therefore the Babylonians confessed
   their gods to have dwelt in heaven, yet they fled to statues and
   pictures. Hence the Prophet deservedly chides them for adoring gods of
   gold and silver. As to his saying, then the vessels were brought, it
   shews how the slaves of tyrants obey them in the worst actions, because
   no delay intervened in bringing the vessels from the treasury. Daniel
   therefore signifies how all the king's servants were obedient to his
   nod, and desirous of pleasing a person brutish and drunken; at the same
   time he shews the shortness of that intemperate intoxication; for he
   says, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:5

   5. In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over
   against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king's
   palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.

   5. In ilia hora egressi sunt digiti manus hominis, et scribebant e
   regione lucernae [248] super calcern parietis [249] palatii regis, et
   rex cernebat palmam [250] manus scribentis.


   Here Daniel begins his narration of the change which took place, for at
   that instant the king' acknowledged something sorrowful and disturbing
   to be at hand. Yet, as he did not at once understand what it was, God
   gave him a sign as an omen of calamity, according to the language of
   the profane. In this way God sent him warning when he saw the king and
   his nobles raging with mad licentiousness. There appeared, then, the
   hand of a man, says the Prophet, using this expression from its
   similitude and form. We are sure it was not a man's hand; it had the
   appearance of one, and hence was called so. Scripture often uses this
   method of expression, especially when treating external symbols. This
   is, then, a sacramental form of speech, [251] if I may use the
   expression. God, indeed, wrote the inscription by his own power, but he
   shews King Belshazzar the figure as if a man had written it on the
   wall; hence the fingers of a hand were put forth. This expression
   conduces in no slight degree to the reality of the miracle; for if
   Belshazzar had seen this on the wall from the very first, he might have
   supposed some artifice had placed the hand there; but when the wall was
   previously bare, and then the hand suddenly appeared, we may readily
   understand the hand to have been a sign from heaven, through which God
   wished to shew something' important to the king. The fingers of a hand,
   then, were put forth, and wrote from the midst of the candlestick, or
   lamp. Clearly, then, this was a feast by night, and Babylon was taken
   in the midst of the night. No wonder their banquets were protracted to
   a great length, for intemperance has no bounds. When men are accustomed
   to spend the day in luxury, I confess indeed they do not usually
   continue their banquets till midnight; but when they celebrate any
   splendid and remarkable feast, they do not find the daylight sufficient
   for their festivites and the grosser indulgences of the table.

   Hence the hand appeared from the candlesticks to render it the more
   conspicuous. That hand, says the Prophet, wrote on the surface of the
   palace wall. If any one had announced to the king this appearance of a
   human hand, he might have doubted it; but he says the king was an
   eye-witness, for God wished to terrify him, as we shall afterwards see,
   and hence he set before him this spectacle. The king, then, perceived
   it; perhaps his nobles did not; and we shall afterwards see how the
   terror operated upon the king alone, unless, indeed, some others
   trembled with him. When, therefore, they saw his countenance changed
   and exhibiting proofs of terror, they began to fear, although they were
   all desirous of affording him some consolation. Hence God wished to
   summon this impious king to His tribunal when the hand of a man
   appeared before him in the act of writing. We shall see what it wrote
   in its proper place.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [248] Or, "candlestick;" some explain it, "window." -- Calvin.

   [249] Some consider it the surface, others the roof, which is probable.
   -- Calvin

   [250] Others translate it "finger." -- Calvin.

   [251] This phrase is worthy of notice. The Latin is "sacramentalis
   locutio;" the French, "est aussi sacramentale " See our Ezekiel,
   [26]volume 2, p. 312 and [27]note, where the Sabbath is termed a
   Sacrament.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we are so prone to forgetfulness and to our
   own indulgence in the desires and pleasures of the flesh, -- Grant, I
   say, to each of us to be recalled to the contemplation of thy
   judgments; and may we be anxious to walk as in thy sight. May we be
   afraid of thy just vengeance, be careful not to provoke it by our
   petulance and other vices; but may we submit ourselves to thee, be held
   up, and propped up by thy hands, and proceed in the sacred course of
   thy calling, until at length thou shalt raise us to thy heavenly
   kingdom, which has been acquired for us by the blood of thine
   only-begotten Son. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twenty-Fourth
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:6

   6. Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled
   him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote
   one against another.

   6. Tunc Regis vultus [252] mutatus est: et cogitationes ejus terruerunt
   eum, et ligamina lumborum ejus solvebantur, [253] et poplites ejus
   invicem collisi sunt.


   Here Daniel shews how the king's mind was struck with fear, lest any
   one should think his fright without foundation. But he expresses, by
   many circumstances, how disturbed the king was, and thus the
   sufficiency of the reason would easily appear. It was needful for him
   to be so struck, that all might understand how God was seated on his
   throne, and summoned him as a criminal. We mentioned before how Daniel
   impresses us with the pride of this king, and his careless security is
   a clear proof of it. When the daily siege of the city ought to have
   rendered him anxious, he was celebrating his usual banquets, as if in
   profound peace. Whence he appears to be corrupted by a kind of
   spiritual drunkenness, so as not to feel his own calamities. This,
   then, is the reason why God roused him up and awakened him from his
   lethargy, because no ordinary means were effectual in recalling him to
   soundness of mind. The fear which he experienced might seem a
   convenient preparation for penitence. But we see the same thing in this
   case as we do in that of Esau; for he was not only touched with
   contrition when he saw himself cut off, but he uttered a loud and
   piercing' lamentation when seeking his father's "blessing," and yet he
   was too late. (Genesis 27:24.) A similar occurrence is related here of
   King Belshazzar, but we must remark upon everything in order. Daniel
   says. The king's countenance was changed; then, the joints of his limbs
   were loosened, and he was disturbed, or frightened, in his thoughts;
   and lastly, he adds, his knees smote together The word properly
   signifies, to strike one against another. By these signs the Prophet
   shews how King Belshazzar was frightened by the vision already
   mentioned. Without doubt, as I have just said, God inspired him with
   this terror, for we know even when God has openly ascended to his own
   tribunal, how stupid the reprobate remain, and how immovable! But God
   wished to affect the mind of this impious king, and to render his
   ignorance without excuse.

   Here we may remark, generally, in how many ways God touches men's
   hearts -- not those of the reprobate only, but also of his elect, for
   we see even the best men slow and slothful when God summons them to his
   judgment-seat. It becomes necessary to chastise them with rods,
   otherwise they never approach God of their own accord. He might,
   indeed, move their minds without violence; but he wishes to set before
   us, as in a glass, our slowness and slothfulness, since we do not obey
   his word with natural willingness. Hence he tames his children with
   cords when they will not profit by his word. With regard to the
   reprobate, he often chides their obstinacy, because, before he
   undertakes the office of judge, he kindly entices them; when they do
   not profit by this, he threatens; and when his threats are useless and
   devoid of efficacy, he then calls them to his tribunal. Respecting the
   fate of the King of Babylon, God had suffered Daniel to be silent, for
   his ingratitude and pride had closed the door, so as to prevent Daniel
   from undertaking the office of a teacher as he was prepared to do;
   hence the King of Babylon continued without one. But God suddenly
   appeared as a judge, by the writing of which we have shortly spoken,
   and of which we shall say more in the proper place. Whatever its
   meaning may be: we see King Belshazzar not only admonished by an
   outward sign of his approaching death, but inwardly stirred up to
   acknowledge himself to be dealing with God. For the reprobate often
   enjoy their own pleasures, as I have said, although God shews himself
   to be their judge. But he treats King Belshazzar differently: he
   desires to inspire him with terror, to render him more attentive to the
   perusal of the writing. This time was, as I have said, a preparation
   for repentance; but he failed in the midst of his course, as we see too
   many do who tremble at the voice of God and at the signs of his
   vengeance, as soon as he admonishes them; but these feelings are but
   evanescent; thus proving how little they have learnt of the necessary
   lesson.

   The example of Esau is similar to this, since he despised God's grace
   when he heard himself deprived of the inheritance divinely promised
   him. (Genesis 25:33.) He treated the blessing as a fable, till he found
   it a serious matter; he then began to lament, but all in vain. Such
   also was the fright of King Belshazzar, as we shall soon perceive. Even
   when Daniel explained the writing to him, he was by no means moved by
   it, but adorned Daniel with royal tokens of regard. Yet the object and
   use of this was totally different, for when the nobles were moved, and
   the reality became manifest, God in this way demonstrated his glory:
   and Darius, who took the city, with his son-in-law Cyrus, understood
   how his own valor and perseverance were not the sole cause of his
   victory, and how the satraps, Gobryas and Gadata, would not have
   assisted him so materially unless the whole affair had been under God's
   auspices. Thus God shewed himself as in a glass to be the avenger of
   his people, as he had promised seventy years previously. It now
   follows: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [252] "The form or figure," verbally. -- Calvin.

   [253] "His hip-joints," for the Hebrews and Chaldees use roundabout
   expressions. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:7

   7. The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and
   the soothsayers. And the king spake, and said to the wise men of
   Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me the
   interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain
   of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.

   7. Clamavit rex fortiter, ut introducerentur magi, Chaldaei, et
   astrologi, [254] et loquutus est rex, et dixit sapientibus Babylonis,
   Quisquis legerit scripturam hanc, et interpretationem ejus indieaverit
   mihi, purpura vestietur, et torques ex auro, hoc est, aureus, super
   collum ejus, et tertius in regno dominabitur.


   The Prophet narrates how King Belshazzar sought a remedy for his
   anxiety; hence we gather how his mind was so immediately wounded, and
   how he felt he could not escape God's hand, otherwise he would not have
   called the wise men so suddenly in the midst of the banquet. Again,
   when the Prophet says, He cried out loudly, he was clearly so
   astonished as to forget his being king, for to cry out at table was not
   consistent with his dignity. But God expelled all pride from him, by
   compelling him to burst forth into a cry, like a man completely beside
   himself. We must now consider the remedy to which he resorted: he
   ordered the Chaldeans, and magi, and astrologers to be called We learn
   from this how exceedingly prone men are to vanity, lying, and
   falsehood. Daniel ought to have been first, even among the Chaldeans,
   for that was an answer worthy of remembrance which he had given to the
   grandfather of this king, when he predicted his becoming like the
   beasts of the forest. Since this prophecy was verified by the event,
   his authority ought to have flourished even to a thousand years. He was
   daily in the king's sight, and yet he was neglected, while the king
   sent for all the Chaldeans, and astrologers, and diviners, and magi.
   Truly enough, these men were then in so great repute that they
   deservedly obscured the fame of Daniel, for they were indignant at a
   captive being preferred to native teachers, when they knew their own
   glory amongst all peoples depended upon the persuasion of their being
   the only wise men. As, therefore, they wished to retain their good
   opinion, as being God's counselors, no wonder they despised this
   stranger. But this feeling cannot avail for a moment before God: for
   what can be urged in defense of the king's impiety? His grandfather was
   a memorable instance of God's vengeance, when rejected from the company
   of men, and compelled to dwell among the wildest beasts of the forest.
   This, truly, could not appear a matter of chance. God, then, had first
   admonished him by a dream, and next sent his own Prophet as the
   interpreter of the oracle and the vision. As I have said, the fame of
   this event ought to have been perpetual among the Chaldeans, yet the
   grandson of King Nebuchadnezzar had forgotten his example, insulted the
   God of Israel, profaned the vessels of the temple, and triumphed with
   his idols! When God sets before him the sign of his judgment, he calls
   together the magi and the Chaldeans, and passes by Daniel. And what
   possible excuse can he have for this? We have seen, as I have said, how
   very prone men are to be deluded by Satan's impostures, and the
   well-known proverb becomes true, -- The world loves to be deceived!

   This, also, is worthy of notice, because in the present day, and in
   troublous times, many protect themselves behind the shield of their
   ignorance. But the explanation is at hand -- they are willingly blind;
   they shut their eyes amidst the clearest light; for if God considered
   King Belshazzar without excuse when the Prophet was once presented to
   him, what excuse can the blind of these days allege? Oh! if I could
   determine what God's will is for me, I would submit myself instantly to
   it, because God daily and openly calls to us and invites us, and shews
   us the way; but none answer him, none follow him, or at least how very
   few! Hence we must diligently consider the example of the King of
   Babylon when we see him full of anxiety, and yet not seeking God as he
   ought. And why so? He wanders about in great hesitation; he sees
   himself constrained, and yet he cannot fly from the judgment of God,
   but seeks consolation in magi, Chaldeans, and other impostors; for, as
   we have seen, they had been once or twice proved so, and this ought to
   have been sufficiently celebrated and notorious to all men. We see,
   then, how blind King Belshazzar was, since he closed his eyes to the
   light offered him. So in the present day almost all the world continues
   in blindness; it is not allowed to wander in darkness, but when light
   shines upon it, it closes its eyes, rejects God's grace, and purposely
   desires to cast itself headlong. This conduct is far too common.

   Now the Prophet says, -- The king promised the wise men a present of a
   chain of gold to whoever read the writing; and besides this, raiment of
   purple, and the third rank in the kingdom! This shews him not to have
   been sincerely touched by the fear of God. And this repugnance is
   worthy of observation in the wicked, who dread God's judgments, and yet
   the pride of their hearts is not corrected and subdued, as we saw in
   the case of this king. For his knees smote one against the other, and
   the joints of his loins were loosened: he trembles throughout his
   entire frame, and becomes half dead with fear, because God's terror
   seizes on all his senses. Meanwhile, we see a hidden pride lurking in
   his mind, which breaks forth in the promise, whoever shall interpret
   the writing, shall be the third in rank in the kingdom! God had already
   deprived him of his royal dignity; yet he still wishes to raise others
   on high in defiance of God! What, then, is the meaning of this? We see
   how often the wicked are terrified, and how deeply they cherish a
   hidden contumacy, so that God never subdues them. They shew, indeed,
   many signs of repentance; but if any one carefully weighs all their
   words and deeds, he will find the Prophet's narration concerning King
   Belshazzar completely verified, because they rage against God, and are
   never teachable or obedient, but utterly stupefied. We saw this partly
   in former verse, and shall see it again more clearly at the end of the
   chapter. As to the latter clause of the verse, he shall rule as third
   in the kingdom, it is uncertain whether he promises the third portion
   or the third rank; for many think the queen, of whom mention will soon
   be made, was the wife of King Nebuchadnezzar, and grandmother of King
   Belshazzar. It follows: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [254] We have previously explained these words. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:8-9

   8. Then came in all the king's wise men: but they could not read the
   writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof.

   8. Tunc ingressi sunt omnes sa-pientes regis, et non potuerunt
   scripturam legere, et interpreta-tionem ejus patefacere regi.

   9. Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was
   changed in him, and his lords were astonied.

   9. Tunc rex Beltsazar multum territus fuit, et vultus ejus mutatus fuit
   super eum, in eo: et principes ejus fuerunt obstupefacti. [255]


   Here Daniel relates how deceived the king was in his opinion, in hoping
   for any interpretation of the writing from either the magi or the
   astrologers, the Chaldeans or the soothsayers; for none of them could
   read it. Hence he pays here the punishment of his ingratitude in
   passing over God's Prophet, while he knew he had predicted truth to his
   grandfather just as it had happened, as well as Daniel's general
   excellence in wisdom, Hence the proofs of his calling were sufficiently
   numerous and trustworthy. Since, then, he had so despised God's
   unparalleled benefit, he is destitute of counsel:, and sees himself
   call in vain upon all the Chaldeans and astrologers. For Daniel says,
   There was no one who could read the writing or reveal its
   interpretation to the king Because this seems absurd, many Rabbis have
   hazarded various conjectures. Some think the letters were transposed;
   others guess that they were changed into their counterparts and
   equivalents; and others think the char-actors were changed. But we have
   elsewhere shewn how bold the Jews are in their conjectures, whenever
   they have no certain guide. We do not require their guesses, because,
   very probably, the writing was visible to the king and concealed from
   all the Chaldeans, or else they were so blind that they could see
   nothing; just as God denounced against the Jews a stupor of this kind.
   We see what he pronounces, by Isaiah, (Isaiah 29: 11,) "Your law shall
   be like a. sealed book: If it shall be said to any one, Read it,' he
   shall say, The book is sealed, I cannot:' or the book may be opened and
   ye shall all become blind: even those who seem to be sharper than all
   others, shall say they are ignorant and unlettered men." Whatever God
   threatened against the Jews we know was fulfilled, and is fulfilled to
   this day, since a veil is put before their eyes, as Paul says. (2
   Corinthians 3:14.) Hence they were blind in the midst of the brightest
   light. What wonder then if the same thing happened to the Chaldeans, so
   flint they could not read the writing? There is no necessity to
   conjecture any transposition of letters, or any inversion of their,
   order, or any change of one into another; for the word tql, tekel, went
   first, and afterwards mn', mn' Mena, Mena. These guesses then are
   frivolous; and thus much is certain, God wished the king to be made
   aware of his approaching destruction; next, his soul was moved, not
   with repentance, but only enough to render his sloth without excuse;
   and hence, whether willingly or not, he was compelled to send for some
   remedy, since he knew himself to be dealing with God.

   Now, with regard to the writing itself, God could not be a free agent
   unless he possessed the power of addressing one man at one time, and a
   number of men at another. He wished King Belshazzar to be conscious of
   this writing, while the magi were all as unable to read it as if they
   were blind. And then, with reference to the interpretation, their
   perplexity need not surprise us. For God spoke enigmatically, when he
   said Mene, Mene, and then Tekel, that is weighed, and Peres, divided.
   If the magi could have read these words a hundred times over, they
   could never either conjecture or comprehend their true meaning. The
   prophecy was allegorical, until an interpreter was divinely ordained
   for it. So far as the mere letters are concerned, there is no reason
   why we should be surprised at the eyes of the magi being blinded, since
   God pleased it to be so, and wished to cite the king to his tribunal,
   as we have already said. The Prophet says, The king was frightened, his
   countenance was changed, and the princes also were disturbed The
   publicity of the event ought to have increased the sense of God's
   judgment, for, as we shall afterwards see, King Belshazzar himself was
   slain that very night. Cyrus entered while the Babylonians were
   feasting, and enjoying their luxuries in security. So remarkable an
   example of God's justice might have been instantly buried in that
   drunken revel, had it not been rendered conspicuous to many bystanders.
   Hence Daniel repeats, The king was disturbed, after he saw no prospect
   of either aid or advice from his magi and astrologers. He says also,
   his princes were astonished, because not only the king ought to be
   troubled but the whole Court, and the report ought to flow forth not
   only through the city, but to foreign nations, since there is no doubt
   that Cyrus was afterwards informed of this prophecy; for he would not
   have courted Daniel so much, nor honored him so remarkably, unless this
   occurrence had been made known to him. It afterwards follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [255] Or, anxious. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:10-11

   10. Now the queen, by reason of the words of the king and his lords,
   came into the banquet house; and the queen spake and said, O king, live
   for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be
   changed:

   10. Regina propier verba regis et procerum in domum symposii, [256]
   ingressa est, loquuta est et dixit, Rex, in aeternum vive: ne terreant
   to cogitationes tuae, et vultus tuus ne mutetur.

   11. There is a man in thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy
   gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom,
   like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king
   Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made master of
   the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers;

   11. Est vir in regno tuo, in quo spiritus est deorum sanctorum: et in
   diebus parris tui intelligentia [257] et scientia, et sapientia quasi
   sapientia deorum reperta est in eo: et Rex Nebuchadnezer pater tuus
   magistrum magorum, [258] astrologorum, Chaldaeorum, aruspicum
   constituit ipsum, pater tuus rex, inquam.


   Here Daniel relates the occasion of his being brought before the king,
   as the reader and interpreter of the writing. [28]The queen, he says,
   did this. It is doubtful whether it was the wife of King Belshazzar, or
   his grandmother. She was probably an old woman, as she refers to events
   in the time of King Nebuchadnezzar This conjecture has no sufficient
   foundation, and hence it is better to suspend our judgment than to
   assert anything rashly; unless, as we before saw, his wife was at table
   with him. As far as we can gather the words of the Prophet with
   certainty, we must diligently notice them, and thus convict the king of
   ingratitude, because he did not admit Daniel among the magi, Chaldeans,
   and astrologers. The holy man had no wish to be reckoned in that
   company; he would have deserved to lose God's prophetic spirit had he
   thus mingled with impostors; and he is clearly to be distinguished from
   them. King Nebuchadnezzar had set him over all the magi; he had no wish
   to exercise this honor, unless, as I have just said, he would deprive
   himself of the singular gift of prophecy; for we must always take care
   how far we can go. We know how very prone we are to be enticed by the
   blandishments of the world, especially when ambition blinds us and
   disturbs all our senses. No plague is worse than this, because when any
   one sees a prospect of the acquisition of either profit or honor, he
   does not regard either what he ought to do or what God permits, but is
   hurried on by a blind fury. This would have happened to Daniel, unless
   he had been restrained by a sense of true piety, and hence he
   repudiated the honor offered him by King Nebuchadnezzar. He never
   wished to be reckoned among soothsayers, and astrologers, and impostors
   of this kind, who deluded that nation with prodigies. Here the queen
   enters and mentions Daniel; but this does not render the king without
   excuse; for, as we have already said, Daniel had acquired a name of
   renown among men of all ages, and God wished to signalize him by a
   distinct mark, to fix the minds of all upon him, as if he were an angel
   from heaven. As King Belshazzar was ignorant of the existence of such a
   Prophet in his kingdom, this was the result of his gross and brutish
   indifference. God, therefore, wished King Belshazzar to be reproved by
   a woman, who said, Let not thy thoughts disturb thee! She calms him
   quietly, because she saw how frightened he was; but, meanwhile, she
   shews him the grossness of his error in wandering about in uncertainty,
   when the way was plain before him. God had put his torch in the
   Prophet's hand for the very purpose of lighting the king, unless he
   willfully desired to wander in darkness, as all the wicked do. Hence,
   we may learn from the example of this king, the common fault of our
   nature; for no one runs out of the right way, unless he indulges in his
   own ignorance, and desires all light to be extinct within him. As to
   the language of the queen, The spirit of the holy gods is in Daniel! we
   have elsewhere explained its meaning. It is not surprising that the
   profane use this language, since they cannot discern between the one
   God and angels. Hence they promiscuously call anything divine and
   celestial, a god. Thus also the queen calls angels, holy gods, and
   places the true God among them. But it is our privilege to acknowledge
   the true God as shining forth alone, and the angels as all taking their
   own ranks without any excellence in heaven or earth to obscure the
   glory of the only God. The writing has this tendency -- the exaltation
   of God in the highest degree, and the magnifying of his excellency and
   his majestic supremacy. We here see how needful it is for us to be
   instructed in the essential unity of God, since from the very beginning
   of the world men have always been persuaded of the existence of some
   Supreme Deity; but after they became vain in their imaginations, this
   idea entirely escaped them, and they mingled God and angels in complete
   confusion. Whenever we perceive this, let us feel our need of Scripture
   as a guide and instructor which shines on our path, urging us to think
   of God as inviting us to himself and willingly revealing himself to us.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [256] It must be translated in this way, because the noun is derived
   from sth shetheh, to drink. -- Calvin.

   [257] Verbally, "light," used metaphorically. -- Calvin.

   [258] I do not stop to explain these words. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since thou dost constantly address us by thy
   Prophets, and permittest us not to wander in the darkness of error, --
   Grant us, I say, to be attentive to thy voice, and make us docile and
   tractable towards thee; especially when thou settest before us a Master
   in whom are included all treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Grant us
   further, I pray thee, to be subject to thine only-begotten Son, to hold
   on in the right course of our holy calling, and to be always pressing
   onwards to that goal to which thou callest us, until we are successful
   in all our contests with this world, and at length arrive at that
   blessed rest which thou hast obtained for us through the blood of the
   same thy Son. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twenty-Fifth

   WE began yesterday to explain the passage where Daniel relates how the
   queen advised King Belshazzar to send for the Prophet. We shewed how
   the king was here convicted of ingratitude, in suffering such a Prophet
   of God to be in obscurity so long, because that memorable prophecy,
   already treated, ought to have been well known and in everybody's
   mouth, as conferring a permanent authority on the holy man. Now, when
   Daniel says, the queen entered the banqueting-room; very probably she
   was not the king's wife, but his grandmother. I have expressed my
   intention of not contending the point, since in doubtful cases every
   one ought to enjoy his own unbiased judgment. But it is incongruous to
   say, The king was feasting with his wife and concubines, and then to
   add, "the queen entered the banqueting-room." Hence we suppose her to
   be called Queen, through the honor, rank, and respect which she still
   enjoyed, without any power. The testimony of Herodotus confirms this
   view, for he praises the queen of King Nebuchadnezzar for her singular
   prudence, calling him Labynetus and her Nitocris. [259] It is far more
   probable that this matron was absent from a banquet unsuitable to her
   age and gravity, since she would scarcely be feasting with those who
   were thus devoting themselves to luxury. When she enters the room, she
   reminds the king of Daniel, and she now gives the reason why he
   surpasses all the magi and soothsayers, the diviners and the Chaldees.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [259] Herod., lib. i.e. 185 and 188.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:12

   12. Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding,
   interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving
   of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named
   Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the
   interpretation.

   12. Propterea quod spiritus excellens, et intelligentia, et cognitio,
   interpretatio somniorum, et arca. norton norum, et solutio nodorum
   [260] inventa est in eo, nempe Daniel, cui rex imposuerit nomen
   Beltsazar: et nunc Daniel vocetur, et interpre-tationem patefaciat.


   The queen here assigns the reason why Daniel had obtained the honor of
   being esteemed the prince and master of all the wise men; because she
   said, An excellent spirit was found in him, as he interpreted dreams,
   revealed secrets, and solved difficulties The three gifts in which
   Daniel excelled are here enumerated, and this proves him to have
   surpassed the other magi, since none of them could be compared with
   him. The magi boasted in their ability to interpret dreams, to solve
   all difficulties, and explain enigmas; but this boast of theirs was
   twice shewn to be vanity and folly. The queen therefore deservedly
   claims these three qualities for Daniel, while shewing his superiority
   to all others. Hence she reasons with authority when she says, A name
   was imposed upon him by the king. We have already spoken of this name,
   Belteshazzar; but the queen now refers to this name, to inform the king
   in what great esteem and honor he was held by his grandfather. The name
   of his father is here expressed, since Belshazzar might despise all
   strangers; yet reason would dictate the propriety of deferring to the
   judgment of his grandfather, whom every one knew to be a most
   remarkable character, whom God humbled for a time, as we saw, and as
   Daniel will now allude to it. Let us proceed, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [260] That is, he resolved difficulties by prudence and knowledge, as I
   said previously. I read it all in one context, though verbs and nouns
   are intermingled, for I wish to make it simple, and to avoid ambiguity
   -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:13-16

   13. Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king spake and
   said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the children of
   the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Jewry?

   13. Tunc Daniel adductus est coram rege: loquutus est rex, et dixit
   Danieli, Tu me est [261] the Daniel, qui, ex filiis caprivitatis
   Jehudah, quem abduxit rex pater mens e Jehudah.

   14. I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee,
   and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found in thee.

   14. Et audivi de to, quod spiritus deorum in to, et intelligentia, et
   cognitio, et sapientia excellens, inventa sit in re.

   15. And now the wise men, the astrologers, have been brought in before
   me, that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the
   interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of
   the thing:

   15. Et nunc producti sunt coram me sapientes, arioli, [262] qui
   scripturam hanc legerent, et interpretationem ejus patefacerent mihi:
   et non potuerunt interpretationem sermonis indicate.

   16. And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make interpretations, and
   dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing, and make known to
   me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and
   have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler in
   the kingdom.

   16. Et ego audivi de to, quod possis nodos solvere, et arcana
   explicare: nunc si poteris scripturam legere et interpretationem ejus
   patefacere mihi, purpura vestieris, et torques ex auro super collum
   tuum, et tertius in regno dominaberis.


   Here the king does not acknowledge his own folly, but without any
   modesty he interrogates Daniel, and that, too, as a captive, -- Art
   thou, that Daniel, of the captives of Judah, whom my father led away?
   He seems to speak contemptuously here, to keep Daniel in servile
   obedience; although we may read this sentence as if Belshazzar
   inquired, Are you that Daniel? In truth, I have heard of thee! He had
   heard before, and had said nothing; but now, when extreme necessity
   urges him, he pays the greatest respect to Daniel. I have heard,
   therefore, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, since thou canst
   unravel intricacies and reveal secrets With regard to the spirit of the
   gods, we have already mentioned how King Belshazzar, by the common
   custom of all nations, promiscuously mingled angels with God; because
   those miserable ones could not extol God as they ought, and treat
   angels as entirely under his feet. But this sentence shews men never
   were so brutal as not to ascribe all excellence to God, as we see in
   profane writers; whatever promotes human advantage, and is remarkable
   for superiority and dignity, they treat as benefits derived from the
   gods. Thus the Chaldeans called the gift of intelligence a spirit of
   the gods, being a rare and singular power of penetration; since men
   acknowledge they do not acquire and attain to the prophetic office by
   their own industry, but it is a heavenly gift. Hence men are compelled
   by God to assign to him his due praise; but because the true God was
   unknown to them, they speak implicitly, and, as I have said, they
   called angels gods, since in the darkness of their ignorance they could
   not discern which was the true God. Whatever be the meaning, Belshazzar
   here shews in what estimation he holds Daniel, saying, he depends on
   the reports received from others, and thus displaying his own
   slothfulness. He ought to have known the Prophet by personal
   experience; but from his being content with simple rumor, he proudly
   neglected the teacher offered to him, and neither reflected upon nor
   wished to confess his own disgrace. But thus God. often extracts a
   confession from the impious, by which they condemn themselves, even if
   they wish exceedingly to escape censure.

   The following phrase has the same meaning: -- All the wise men were
   brought before me, and the soothsayers or diviners, to read this
   writing to me, and to reveal its interpretation; and they could not do
   it, said he; for God punished him by shewing how profitless were all
   the Chaldeans and soothsayers, in whom he trusted at the moment of his
   extremity. While he was thus disappointed in his hopes, he acknowledges
   himself to have been deceived; and when he preferred the magi and
   soothsayers, he thought himself fortified by their counsel, as long as
   they were on his side. Meanwhile his rejection of the holy Prophet was
   deservedly intolerable to God. Belshazzar confesses this without
   intending to do so; hence I said his confession was not ingenuous or
   voluntary, but violently extorted by the secret instinct of God. He
   also promises Daniel what he had previously promised the magi, -- Thou
   shalt be clothed in purple if thou canst read this writing, and wear a
   golden chain round thy neck, and thou shalt reign as the third person
   in the kingdom But the end of his reign was now close at hand, and yet
   in security he offers this dignity to Daniel. This shews how rapidly
   the terror which God had occasioned him had vanished away. He is
   agitated by the greatest uneasiness, just like madmen, for they having
   no certainty exult amidst their terror, and wish to leap or fly towards
   heaven itself. Thus also this tyrant though he trembles at God's
   judgment, yet retains a hidden obstinacy in his heart, and imagines his
   kingdom will permanently continue, while he promises wealth and honors
   to others. It now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [261] If we read it interrogatively; or, "Thou art Daniel?" -- Calvin.

   [262] Or, conjurers. I do not dwell on this as I said before. --
   Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:17

   17. Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to
   thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet I will read the writing
   unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.

   17. Tunc respondit Daniel, et dixit coram rege, Dona tua tibi sint,
   [263] et munera tua alteri da: tamen scripturam legam regi, et
   interpretationem ejus patefaciam ei.


   First of all, Daniel here rejects the proffered gifts. We do not read
   of his doing so before; he rather seemed to delight in the honors
   conferred by King Nebuchadnezzar. We may inquire into the reason for
   this difference. It is not probable that the intention, feeling, or
   sentiments of the Prophet were different. What then could be his
   intention in allowing himself to be previously ennobled by
   Nebuchadnezzar, and by now rejecting the offered dignity? Another
   question also arises. At the end of this chapter we shall see how he
   was clothed in purple, and a herald promulgated an edict, by which he
   became third in the kingdom. The Prophet seems either to have forgotten
   himself in receiving the purple which he had so magnanimously rejected,
   or we may ask the reason why he says so, when he did not refuse to be
   adorned in the royal apparel. With respect to the first question, I
   have no doubt of his desire to treat the impious and desperate
   Belshazzar with greater asperity, because in the case of King
   Nebuchadnezzar there still remained some feelings of honor, and hence
   he hoped well of him and treated him more mildly. But with regard to
   King Belshazzar, it was necessary to treat him more harshly, because he
   had now arrived at his last extremity. This, I have no doubt, was the
   cause of the difference, since the Prophet proceeded straight forward
   in his course, but his duty demanded of him to distinguish between
   different persons, and as there was greater pertinacity and obstinacy
   in King Belshazzar, he shews how much less he deferred to him than to
   his grandfather. Besides, the time of his subjection was soon to be
   finished, and with this end in view he had formerly honored the
   Chaldean empire.

   As to the contrast apparent between his reply and his actions, which we
   shall hereafter see, this ought not to seem absurd, if the Prophet had
   from the beginning borne his testimony against the king's gifts, and
   that he utterly re-jeered them. Yet he does not strive very vehemently,
   lest he should be thought to be acting cunningly, for the purpose of
   escaping danger. In each case he wished to display unconquered
   greatness of mind; at the beginning he asserted the king's gifts to be
   valueless to him, for he knew the end of the kingdom to be at hand, and
   afterwards he received the purple with other apparel. If he had
   entirely refused them, it would have been treated as a fault and as a
   sign of timidity, and would have incurred the suspicion of treason. The
   Prophet therefore shews how magnificently he despised all the dignities
   offered him by King Belshazzar, who was already half dead. At the same
   time he shews himself intrepid against all dangers; for the king's
   death was at hand and the city was taken in a few hours -- nay, in the
   very same hour! Daniel therefore did not reject this purple, she wing
   his resolution not to avoid death if necessary. He would have been
   safer in his obscurity, had he dwelt among the citizens at large,
   instead of in the palace; and if he had resided among the captives, he
   might have been free from all danger. As he did not hesitate to receive
   the purple, he displays his perfect freedom from all fear. Meanwhile
   he, doubtless, wished to lay prostrate the king's foolish arrogance, by
   which he was puffed up, when he says, Let thy gifts remain with thee,
   and give thy presents to another! I care not for them. Because he so
   nobly despises the king's liberality, there is no doubt of his desire
   to correct the pride by which he was puffed up, or at least to wound
   and arouse his mind to feel God's judgment, of which Daniel will soon
   become both the herald and the witness. It now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [263] That is, may they remain with thee. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:18-20

   18. O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a
   kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour:

   18. O rex, [264] Deus excelsus imperium, et magnitudinem, et
   praestantiam, et splendorem dedit Nebuchadnezer patri tuo.

   19. And for the majesty that he gave him, all people, nations, and
   languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he would he slew, and
   whom he would he kept alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he
   would he put down.

   19. Et ob magnitudinem quam dederat ei, omnes populi, gentes et linguae
   tremuerunt, et formidarunt a conspectu ejus: quem volebat, occidebat:
   [265] et quem volebat percutere, percutiebat: et quem volebat
   attol-lere, attollebat: et quem volebat dejicere, dejiciebat.

   20. But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride,
   he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from
   him:

   20. Quando autem elevatum fuit cor ejus, et spiritus ejus roboratus est
   [266] ad superbtam, dejectus fuit e solio regni, et gloriam abstulerunt
   ab eo.


   Before Daniel recites the writing, and adds its interpretation, he
   explains to King Belshazzar the origin of this prodigy. He did not
   begin the reading at once, as he might conveniently have done, saying
   Mene, Mene! as we shall see at the end of the chapter, since the king
   could not have pro-fired by his abrupt speech. But here Daniel shews it
   to be by no means surprising, if God put forth his hand and shewed the
   figure of a hand describing the king's destruction, since the king had
   too obstinately provoked his anger. We see then why Daniel begins by
   this narrative, since King Nebuchadnezzar was a most powerful monarch,
   subduing the whole world to himself and causing all men to tremble at
   his word, and was afterwards hurled from the throne of his kingdom.
   Hence it more clearly appears that Belshazzar did not live in
   ignorance, for he had so signal and remarkable an example [hat he ought
   to have conducted himself with moderation. Since then that domestic
   admonition did not profit him, Daniel shews the time to be ripe for the
   denunciation of God's wrath by a formidable and portentous sign. This
   is the sense of the passage. Passing on to the words themselves, he
   first says, To King Nebuchadnezzar God gave an empire, and
   magnificence, and loftiness, and splendor; as if he had said, he was
   magnificently adorned, as the greatest monarch in the world. We have
   stated elsewhere, and Daniel repeats it often, that empires are
   bestowed on men by divine power and not by chance, as Paul announces,
   There is no power but of God. (Romans 13:1.) God wishes his power to be
   specially visible in kingdoms. Although, therefore, he takes care of
   the whole world, and, in the government of the human family even the
   most miserable things are regulated by his hand, yet his singular
   providence shines forth in the empire of the world. But since we have
   often discussed this point at length, and shall have many opportunities
   of recurring to it, it is now sufficient just briefly to notice the
   principle, of the exaltation of earthly kings by the hand of God, and
   not by the chances of fortune.

   When Daniel confirms this doctrine, he adds, On account of the
   magnificence which God conferred upon him, all mortals trembled at the
   sight of him! By these words he shews how God's glory is inscribed on
   kings, although he allows them to reign supreme. This indeed cannot be
   pointed out with the finger, but the fact is sufficiently clear; kings
   are divinely armed with authority, and thus retain under their hand and
   sway a great multitude of subjects. Every one desires the chief power
   over his fellow-creatures. Whence happens it, since ambition is natural
   to all men, that many thousands are subject to one, and suffer
   themselves to be ruled over and endure many oppressions? How could this
   be, unless God entrusted the sword of power to those whom he wishes to
   excel? This reason, then, must be diligently noticed, when the Prophet
   says, All men trembled at the sight of King Nebuchadnezzar, because God
   conferred upon him that majesty, and wished him to excel all the
   monarchs of the world. God has many reasons, and often hidden ones, why
   he raises one man and humbles another; yet this point ought to be
   uncontroverted by us. No kings can possess any authority unless God
   extends his hand to them and props them up. When he wishes to remove
   them from power, they fall of their own accord; not because there is
   any chance in the changes of the world, but because God, as it is said
   in the Book of Job, (Job 12:18,) deprives those of the sword whom he
   had formerly entrusted with it.

   It now follows, Whom he wished to slay he slew, and whom he wished to
   strike he struck Some think the abuse of kingly power is here
   described; but I had rather take it simply, for Nebuchadnezzar being
   able to east down some, and to raise others at his will, since it was
   in his power to give life to some and to slay others. I, therefore, do
   not refer these words to tyrannical lust, as if Nebuchadnezzar had put
   many innocent persons to death, and poured forth human blood without
   any reason; or as if he had despoiled many of their fortunes, and
   enriched others and adorned them with honor and wealth. I do not take
   it so. I think it refers to his arbitrary power over life and death,
   and over the rise of some and the ruin of others. On the whole, Daniel
   seems to me to describe the greatness of that royal power which they
   may freely exercise over their subjects, not through its being lawful,
   but through the tacit consent of all men. Whatsoever pleases the king,
   all are compelled to approve of it, or at least no one dares to murmur
   at it. Since, therefore, the regal license is so great, Daniel here
   shews how King Nebuchadnezzar was not carried away by his own plans, or
   purposes, or good fortune, but was entrusted with supreme power and
   rendered formidable to all men, because God had designed him for his
   own glory. Meanwhile, kings usually despise what they are permitted to
   enjoy, and what God allows them. For powerful as they are, they must
   hereafter render an account to the Supreme King. We are not to gather
   from this, that kings are appointed by God without any law, or any
   self-restraint; but the Prophet, as I have said, speaks of the royal
   power in itself. Since kings, therefore, have power over their subjects
   for life and death, he says, the life of all men was in the hand of
   King Nebuchadnezzar. He now adds, When his heart was exalted, then he
   was cast down (or ejected) from the throne of his kingdom, and they
   deprived him of his majesty He follows up his own narrative, tie wishes
   to shew King Belshazzar how God bears with the insolence of those who
   forget him, when they have obtained the summit of power. Desiring to
   make this known, he says, King Nebuchadnezzar, thy grandfather, was a
   mighty monarch. He did not obtain this mightiness by himself, nor could
   he have retained it, except he had been supported by God's hand. Now
   his change of circumstances was a remarkable proof that the pride of
   those who are ungrateful to God can never be endured unto the end, as
   they never acknowledge their sway to proceed from his benevolence.
   When, therefore, says he, his heart was raised up and his spirit
   strengthened in pride, a sudden change occurred. Hence you and all his
   posterity ought to be taught, lest pride still further deceive you, and
   ye profit not by the example of your father; as we shall afterwards
   relate. Hence this writing has been set before thee, for the purpose of
   making known the destruction of thy life and kingdom.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [264] Verbally, "Thou, O king," as he addresses him. -- Calvin.

   [265] That is, "whom he wished to slay was slain." -- Calvin.

   [266] Or, "he was hardened." -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since our own station in life has been assigned to
   us, that we may be content with our lot, and when thou dost humble us,
   may we willingly be subject to thee, and suffer ourselves to be ruled
   by thee, and not desire any exaltation, which may lead us down to
   destruction. Grant us also, to conduct ourselves so modestly in our
   various callings, that thou mayest always shine forth in. us. May
   nothing else be set before us than to assist our brethren to whom we
   are attached, as in thy sight; and thus glorify thy name among all men,
   through Jesus Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twenty-sixth.

   In the sentence which we began to explain yesterday, the clause must be
   noticed where Daniel says, The heart of King Nebuchadnezzar was
   strengthened by pride, signifying that he was not suddenly elated by
   folly, as vain men often swell with pride without a cause; nor does any
   interior affection of the mind precede; but he wishes to express in
   addition, the length of time during which this pride had been
   conceived; as if he had said, he was not seized by any sudden vanity,
   but his pride was studied, and obstinacy and obduracy were added to it.
   The change of number which afterwards occurs from singular to plural,
   some refer to the angels, as if they deprived him by God's command; but
   I rather think these words are taken indefinitely, implying merely his
   being deprived of his glory, as we have formerly observed similar forms
   of speech. It now follows --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:21

   21. And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was made like
   the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed him with
   grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he
   knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he
   appointeth over it whomsoever he will.

   21. Eta filiis hominum exterminatus fuit: et cor ejus cum bestils
   positum est: et cum onagris habitatio ejus: herba sicut tauros
   ciba-verunt eum: et tore coeli corpus ejus irrigatum fuit, donec
   cognos-ceret quod dominetur Deus excelsus in regno hominum, et quem
   velit imponat in illo.


   First, with respect to the text; verbally, it is "he put," and thus
   some translate, "he placed his own heart among the brutes," which makes
   a tolerable sense; but others rather refer this to God, who placed his
   heart among beasts, and we know how often the noun substantive is
   defective in Hebrew and Chaldee; hence we may translate it verbally,
   Nebuchadnezzar himself placed his own heart, that is, assimilated his
   own senses to the brutes, so as to differ in no respect from them. It
   may also mean, God placed his heart among the brutes, that is,
   infatuated him so, as to render him like them. Others take the word
   svy, shevi, absolutely; but it ought rather to be explained actively.
   Again, some translate the next clause, "Made him taste the grass, like
   a brute;" and others, that the grass supported him. The number is
   changed, but there is no doubt about the sense; for if we read, "The
   herb of the field supported him," the expression will be indefinite,
   similar to many others previously noticed; but if any one prefers using
   the plural number, the sense will be equally suitable; for "the herbs
   of the field gave him nourishment."

   This verse does not need any long explanation, since Daniel only
   repeats what he had formerly written: His grandfather, Nebuchadnezzar,
   although not changed into a wild beast, was driven from the common
   society of men, and his whole body was deformed, whilst he abhorred the
   habits of men and preferred to dwell with the brutes. This was a
   horrible prodigy, especially in so great a monarch; and it was an
   example worthy of being handed down by posterity even to a thousand
   generations, had the monarchy endured so long. But his grandson quickly
   forgot this event, and thus he is deservedly convicted of the basest
   slothfulness. This is the reason why Daniel repeats the history again,
   He was driven, says he, from the children of men; his heart was placed
   among the beasts, meaning he was deprived of reason and judgment. We
   know this to be the principal difference between men and brutes -- men
   understand and reason, but brutes are carried away by their senses.
   God, therefore, set forth a memorable example in despoiling this king
   of his reason and intelligence, His dwelling, says he, was with the
   wild asses; formerly he had dwelt in a palace, conspicuous throughout
   the world at large, from whom all the people of the East sought their
   laws. Since he was habitually worshipped as a god, this was a horrible
   judgment, since he afterwards dwelt among wild beasts, and like a bull
   received his sustenance from the grass of the field, when he had
   previously reveled in every delicacy, and was accustomed to luxurious
   habits, and to the whole wealth of a kingdom; especially, when we know
   how luxuriously the Orientals indulged themselves. Babylon was the
   mother of all indulgences, and when the king's condition was thus
   changed, no one could be ignorant of its cause -- not mere chance or
   accident:, but the rare and singular judgment of God!

   He afterwards adds what he had formerly said, His body was moistened by
   the dews of heaven, until he acknowledged God to reign supreme in the
   kingdom of men Here again the end of the punishment is expressed --
   that Nebuchadnezzar might feel himself to have been created king by
   divine power, and to shew how earthly kings could not stand unless God
   propped them up by his hand and influence. They think themselves placed
   beyond the changes of fortune, and although they verbally boast of
   reigning by the grace of God, yet they despise every deity and transfer
   the glory of the divinity to themselves! We gather from these words
   that this is the folly of all kings. For if Nebuchadnezzar had been
   persuaded of God's appointment of kings, of their dependence upon his
   will, and of their fall or stability according to his decree, he had
   not needed this punishment, as these words clearly imply, tie excluded
   God, then, from the government of the world; but this is common with
   all earthly kings, as I have lately stated. All indeed will profess
   something, but the Holy Spirit does not regard those false
   protestations, as they are called. Hence in the character of King
   Nebuchadnezzar we have set before us, as in a glass, the drunken
   confidence of all kings, in supposing themselves to stand by their own
   power, and to free themselves from the authority of God, as if he were
   not seated as a judge in heaven, Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, ought to be
   humbled, until he acknowledged God's reign upon earth, since the common
   opinion fixed him up in heaven, as if contented with his own ease, and
   careless of the affairs of the human race. At length it is added, and
   whom he wills, he exalts, or sets up. What has been said obscurely is
   better expressed, since Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged, by being severely
   punished and subdued, the reign of God on the earth. For when earthly
   kings see themselves surrounded by guards, powerful in riches, and able
   to collect mighty armies by their nod; when they see they inspire
   universal terror, they think God deprived of his rights, and are unable
   to conceive any change; as it is said in the Psalms of all the proud,
   (Psalm 10:4,) and as Isaiah says to the same purport, Even should a
   blast pass by, or a deluge overwhelm the whole earth, yet evil shall
   not touch us. (Isaiah 28:15.) As if they had said, although God should
   thunder from heaven, yet we shall be safe from all disaster and
   disturbance. Kings persuade themselves of this. Hence they begin to
   acknowledge God as king of the earth, when they feel themselves in his
   hand and at his disposal, to east down those whom he has raised up, and
   to exalt the lowly and abject, as we have already seen. This clause of
   the verse, then, is an explanation of the former sentence. It now
   follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:22

   22. And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart,
   though thou knewest all this;

   22. Et tu filius ejus Beltsazar, non humiliasti cor tuum: qua propter
   [267] totum hoc cognoveras.


   Daniel here shews why he, related what we have hitherto heard
   concerning King Nebuchadnezzar's punishment; for Belshazzar ought to
   have been so affected by that domestic example, as to submit himself to
   God. We may believe, indeed, that his father Evil-Merodach had
   forgotten his punishments, since he would not have conducted himself so
   petulantly against God, nor trampled on true and sincere piety; for God
   spared the wretched tyrant who restrained himself within the bounds of
   moderation. But as to his grandfather Belshazzar, he was altogether
   intolerable; hence God stretched forth his hand. The Prophet now
   teaches this. Thou art his son, says he. This circumstance urges upon
   him with greater force the duty of not seeking an example in foreign
   nations, since he acknowledged himself to have sufficient at home of
   what was both necessary and useful. He enlarges upon his crime in
   another way, by saying, Yet thou didst know this Men are accustomed to
   shield themselves under their ignorance with the view of extenuating
   the guilt of their crimes, but those who sin knowingly and willfully
   are without the slightest excuse. The Prophet therefore convinces the
   king of manifest obstinacy; as if he had said, You have provoked God's
   anger on purpose; since he ought to have been aware of the horrible
   judgment awaiting all the proud, when he had such a remarkable and
   singular proof of it in his grandfather, which he ought to have kept
   constantly before his eyes. It follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [267] Verbally -- but it means, "since." -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:23

   23. But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they
   have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy
   lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou
   hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and
   stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy
   breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified:

   23. Et contra Dominum coeli to extulisti, et vasa domus ejus, [268]
   protulerunt in conspectum tuum: et tu, et proceres tui, uxores tuae,
   [269] et concubinae tuae vinum bibistis in illis: et deos argenti, hoc
   est, argenteos, et aureos, aeneos, ferreos, ligneos, et la-pideos, qui
   non vident, et non audiunt, et non intelligunt, laudasti: et Deum, cui
   est in manu ejus anima tua, [270] et eujus [271] omnia tua, non
   honorasti.


   The Prophet continues his own sentence, and confirms what I have said,
   namely, King Belshazzar was intractable and willfully blind to God's
   judgment. For thou hast raised thyself, says he, against the Lord of
   heaven. If he had raised himself thus insolently against men, his sin
   would be worthy of punishment; but when he had provoked God on purpose,
   this arrogance neither could nor ought to be borne. Again, therefore,
   the Prophet increases the guilt of the king's pride by saying, he
   raised himself against the King of heaven He also expresses the manner
   of his doing so, by commanding the vessels of the temple to be brought
   to sight; he drank from them This profanation was an indecent
   sacrilege, but Belshazzar was not content with that indignity; he used
   these vessels for luxury and foul debauchery, abusing them in the
   company of concubines and abandoned women; and added a yet greater
   reproach against God, in praising his gods of silver and gold, brass
   and iron, wood and stone, which cannot feel. This had not been said
   previously; but since Daniel here sustains the character of a teacher,
   he does not relate the events so shortly as at first. When he said at
   the beginning of this chapter, Belshazzar celebrated that impure
   banquet, he spoke historically; but he now executes, as I have said,
   the office of a teacher. Thou, says he, hast praised the gods made of
   corruptible material, who neither see, nor hear, nor understand; but
   thou hast defrauded the living God of his honor, in whose hand is thy
   life, on which thou dependest, and whence all in which thou boastest
   proceeds. Because thou hast so despised the living God, who had been so
   gracious unto thee, this ingratitude was both base and shameful. We
   see, therefore, how severely the Prophet reproves the impious tyrant of
   sacrilege, and mad rashness, and foul ingratitude towards God. I pass
   over these things lightly, since they have been treated elsewhere. It
   now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [268] That is, of his temple. -- Calvin.

   [269] Or, thy wife. -- Calvin.

   [270] That is, in whose hand is thy life. -- Calvin.

   [271] In whose power are all things. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:24

   24. Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was
   written.

   24. Tunc a conspectu ejus missa est particula manus, [272] et scriptura
   haec notata fuit.


   Some stress must be laid upon the adverb v'dyn, badin, "at that time,"
   because God's wrath, or at least its denunciation, was now ripe.
   Daniel, therefore, shews how very patiently God had borne with King
   Belshazzar in not instantly talking up arms and inflicting punishment;
   but he now begins to come forth as a judge, and to ascend his judgment
   seat; for the haughtiness was now desperate, and the impiety no longer
   tolerable. We observe with what emphasis the word then is used; as if
   he had said, Thou canst not complain of the swiftness of the penalty,
   as if God had exacted it before the time. Thou canst not here complain
   of God's swiftness in punishing thee; for think and consider in how
   many ways, and for how long a time, thou hast provoked his anger. And
   with regard to thy last crime, thou certainly hadst arrived at the
   height of impiety, when that hand appeared to thee. God, therefore, now
   drags thee to punishment in proper time, since he has hitherto borne
   with thee and thy sins. After this forbearance, what remains to prevent
   his destroying thee, because thou hast so proudly insulted him, and art
   utterly hardened, without the slightest hope of amendment.

   He says also, from himself; for Belshazzar need not inquire whence the
   hand proceeded, it came from the presence of God; that is, This hand is
   a witness to the wrath of heaven; do not consider it as a specter which
   will vanish away, but see in this appearance a proof of God's
   displeasure at thy wickedness; and because thou hast arrived at thy
   last extremity, thy punishment is also ready for thee. And this
   writing, says he, has been marked; as if he had said, The eyes of King
   Belshazzar were not deceived, since this was really God's hand, being
   sent from his sight as a certain testimony of his wrath. He afterwards
   adds, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [272] Some translate, "the palm," but they understand a hand separate
   from the body -- that portion of a hand, that is, a hand as if cut off
   from the body, was sent from God's presence, says he. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:25-28

   25. And this is the writing that was written, Mene, Mene, Tekel,
   Upharsin

   25. Et haec est scriptura quae notata est, [273] Mene, Mene, numera-tum
   est, numeratum est, Tekel, appensum est, [274] Upharsin, et dividentes.

   26. This is the interpretation of the thing: Mene; God hath numbered
   thy kingdom, and finished it.

   26. Haec interpretatio est ser-monis: Mene, numeravit Deus regnum tuum
   et complevit. [275]

   27. Tekel; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.

   27. Tekel, appende, vel, appensum est, appensus es in trutina, [276] et
   inventus es deficiens.

   28. Peres; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.

   28. Peres pro upharsin, divisum est regnum tuum, et datum Medis et
   Persis.


   Daniel here explains these four verses which were [29]written upon the
   wall. The king could not read them, either through stupor, or because
   God blunted all his senses, and blinded his eyes, as was formerly said.
   The same thing must be said of the magi and the soothsayers, for they
   could have read, had they not been rendered blind. First of all, Daniel
   recites the four words, Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsn, and then adds their
   interpretation. He repeats the word Mene twice. Some conjecture this to
   apply to the numbering of the years of the king's life, and also to the
   time of his reign; but the guess seems to be without any foundation. I
   think the word is used twice for the sake of confirmation; as if the
   Prophet meant the number to be completed, since men usually allow
   calculations to be liable to error. To impress upon Belshazzar that his
   life and kingdom were at stake, God affirms the number to be complete,
   meaning, not a moment of time can be added to the boundary already
   determined. So also Daniel himself interprets it: God, says he, has
   numbered thy kingdom; implying, God has appointed and prescribed a
   fixed end to thy kingdom; hence it must necessarily come to an end,
   since its period is fulfilled.

   Although God here addresses but one king by the writing set before his
   eyes, we may still gather this general instruction -- God has
   prescribed a certain time for all kingdoms. (Job 14:5.) The Scripture
   bears the same witness concerning the life of each of us. If God has
   prescribed to each of us the length of his life, surely this applies
   more forcibly to public empires, of so much greater importance. Hence
   we may know how not only kings live and die according to God's
   pleasure, but even empires are changed, as we have formerly said. He
   fixes alike their origin and their destiny. Hence we may seek
   consolation, when we see tyrants rushing on so impetuously, and
   indulging their lust and cruelty without moderation. When, therefore,
   they rush on, as if they would mingle heaven and earth, let us remember
   this instruction, Their years are numbered! God knows how long they are
   to rage; He is not deceived; He knows whether it is useful to the
   Church and his elect, for tyrants to prevail for a time. By and bye he
   will surely restrain them, but since he determined the number of their
   days from the beginning, the time of his vengeance is not yet quite at
   hand, while he allows them a little longer to abuse without restraint
   the power and the sway which he had divinely granted them.

   The exposition of the word Tekel, to weigh, now follows: -- Since thou
   hast been weighed in the balance, or scale, and found wanting Here
   Daniel shews God so moderating his judgments, as if he was carrying a
   balance in his hand. The emblem is taken from the custom of mankind;
   for men know the use of the balance for accurate measurement. So also
   God is said to treat all things by weight and measure, since he does
   nothing with confusion, but uses moderation; and, according to ordinary
   language, nothing is more or less than it should be. (Wisdom 11:21.)
   For this reason, Daniel says God weighed Belshazzar in a balance, since
   he did not make haste to inflict punishment, but exacted it with
   justice according to his own uniform rule of government. Since he was
   found deficient, that is, was found light and without weight. As if he
   had said, Thou thinkest thy dignity must be spared, since all men
   revere thee; thou thinkest thyself worthy of honor; thou art deceived
   says he, for God judges otherwise; God does not use a common scale, but
   holds his own, and there art found deficient; that is, thou art found a
   man of no consequence, in any way. From these words there is no doubt
   that the tyrant was greatly exasperated, but as his last end was
   approaching, he ought to hear the voice of the herald. And God, without
   doubt, restrained his fierceness, that he should not rise up against
   Daniel.

   The word phrs, Pheres, is added, for the word Phersin, meaning his
   kingdom was divided among the [30]Medes and Persians. I have no doubt
   that by this word God signified the dispersion of the Monarchy which
   was at hand. When, therefore, he says Upharsin, and they shall divide,
   it signifies the instability of the Monarchy, since he wished to
   destroy or utterly abolish it. But the Prophet alludes very appositely
   to the division made between the Medes and Persians; and thus his
   disgrace was increased by the Babylonians being compelled to serve many
   masters. This is indeed a grave and serious disgrace, when a people has
   obtained a wide and extensive empire, to be afterwards conquered and
   subjected to the yoke of a single master; but when it suffers under two
   masters, then the indignity is greatly increased. So Daniel here shews
   how God's wrath was complicated in the destruction of the monarch of
   Babylon, since it added to the severity of their punishment, to be
   subdued by both Medes and Persians. The city, indeed, was truly taken
   by the valor and industry of Cyrus; but since Cyrus admitted his
   father-in-law to the great honor of allowing him to partake of the
   royal authority, hence the Medes and Persians are said to have divided
   the kingdom, although there was properly no division of the kingdom.
   Cyrus afterwards engaged in other expeditions, as he was led away by
   his insatiable avarice and ambition. But Darius, as we shall afterwards
   see, died at the age of sixty years, dwelt quietly at home, and it is
   very well known that he was a Mede; and if we may believe the majority
   of historians, his sister, the mother of Cyrus, had been banished to
   Persia, in consequence of the oracle concerning the fortune and
   greatness of Cyrus. Since his grandfather had exposed him, he
   afterwards avenged the injury, yet, not so cruelly as to take his
   life,-for he desired him to retain some dignity, and hence appointed
   him a satrap. But his son afterwards reigned over the Medes, with the
   full permission of Cyrus, who next married his daughter; and thus, on
   account of this relationship, and through the influence of this new
   alliance, he wished to have him as a partner in the empire. In this
   sense, then, Daniel narrates the division of the Monarchy to be at
   hand, since [31]the Medes and the Persians should divide it among them.
   It follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [273] Or, engraved. -- Calvin.

   [274] Some translate, number, number, weigh. -- Calvin.

   [275] Or, finished. -- Calvin.

   [276] Or, in a balance. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:29

   29. Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with scarlet,
   and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation
   concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

   29. Tunc jussit Beltsazar, et vestierunt Danielem purpura, et torques
   aureus super collum ejus: [277] et clamabant coram ipso quod
   dominaretur tertius in regno.


   This order of the king may excite surprise, since he had been so
   sharply reproved by the Prophet. He next seemed to have lost all
   spirit, for he had grown pale a hundred times, and would have devoted
   the holy Prophet of God to a thousand deaths! How happens it, then,
   that he ordered him to be adorned with royal apparel, and next to be
   proclaimed by his own herald the third person in the kingdom? Some
   think this was done because the laws of kings were sacred among the
   Babylonians; nay, their very words were held as binding, and whatever
   they proclaimed, they desired it to be esteemed firm and inviolable.
   They suppose King Belshazzar to have acted thus through ambition, that
   he might keep his promises. My opinion is, that he was at first utterly
   astonished, and through listening to the Prophet he became like a stock
   or a stone! I think he did so to consult his own ease and safety;
   otherwise he would have been contemptible to his nobles. To shew
   himself unmoved, he commands Daniel to be clothed in these robes, as if
   his threat had been perfectly harmless. He did not despise what the
   Prophet had said, but he wished to persuade his nobles and all his
   guests of his perfect indifference to God's threats, as if he did not
   utter them for the purpose of executing them, but only of terrifying
   them all. Thus kings, when greatly terrified, are always exceedingly
   careful not to shew any sign of their timidity, since they think their
   authority would become materially weakened. To continue, therefore, his
   reverence among his subjects, he is desirous of appearing exceedingly
   careless and undisturbed; and I do not hesitate to pronounce this to
   have been the tyrant's intention in ordering Daniel to be clad in
   purple and in royal magnificence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [277] Was placed. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, that as thou didst once send forth a proof of thy
   wrath against all the proud, so it may be useful to us in these days.
   May we be admonished by the punishment inflicted on this man, and thus
   learn to conduct ourselves with moderation and humility. May we not
   desire any greatness which can be displeasing to thee; and may we so
   remain in our station of life as to serve thee, and to extol and
   glorify thy sacred name, without being even separated from thee. Grant
   us also so to bear thy yoke in this world, and to suffer ourselves to
   be ruled by thee, that we may at length arrive at that happy rest and
   portion in thy heavenly kingdom, which thou hast prepared and procured
   for us, through the blood of thine only-begotten Son. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecturer Twenty-Seventh.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 5:30-31

   30. In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain.

   30. In ilia nocte occisus fiut Beltsazar rex Chaldaeorum.

   31. And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and
   two years old.

   31. Et Darius Medus accepit reg num, cum natus esset annos sexaginta et
   duos.


   Here Daniel shortly relates how his prophecy was fulfilled that very
   night. As we have before explained it, a customary feast-day had
   occurred which the Babylonians celebrated annually, and on this
   occasion the city was betrayed by two satraps, whom Xenophon calls
   Gobryas and Gadatas. On this passage the Rabbis display both their
   impudence and ignorance; as, according to their usual habit, they
   babble with audacity about what they do not understand. They say the
   king was stabbed, because one of his guards heard the Prophet's voice,
   and wished to execute that heavenly judgment; as if the sentence of God
   depended upon the will of a single heathen! We must pass by these
   puerile trifles and cling to the truth of history; for Belshazzar was
   seized in his own banqueting-room, when he was grossly intoxicated,
   with his nobles and concubines. Meanwhile, we must observe God's
   wonderful kindness towards the Prophet. He was not in the slightest
   danger, as the rest were. He was clad in purple, and scarcely an hour
   had passed when the Medes and Persians entered the city. He could
   scarcely have escaped in the tumult, unless God had covered him with
   the shadow of his hand. We see, then, how God takes care of his own,
   and snatches us from the greatest dangers, as if he were bringing us
   from the tomb. There is no doubt that the holy Prophet was much
   agitated amidst the tumult, for he was not without sensibility. [278]
   But he ought to be thus exercised to cause him to acknowledge God as
   the faithful guardian of his life, and to apply himself more diligently
   to his worship, since he saw nothing preferable to casting all his
   cares upon him!

   Daniel adds, the kingdom was transferred to the king of the Medes, whom
   he calls [32]Darius, but Xenophon terms him Cyaxares. It is clear
   enough that Babylon was taken by the skill and under the auspices of
   Cyrus; since he was a persevering warrior possessed of great authority,
   though he is not mentioned here. But since Xenophon relates that
   Cyaxares, here called Darius, was Cyrus's father-in-law, and thus held
   in the highest honor and estimation, it is not surprising to find
   Daniel bringing that king before us. Cyrus was content with his own
   power and with the praise and fame of his victory, and readily conceded
   this title to his father-in-law, whom he perceived to be now growing
   aged and infirm. It is uncertain whether he was the son of Astyages,
   and thus the uncle of Cyrus. Many historians concur in stating that
   Astyages was the grandfather of Cyrus who married his daughter to
   Cambyses; because the astrologers had informed him how an offspring
   should be born of her who should possess the sovereignty over all Asia!
   Many add the story of his ordering the infant Cyrus to be slain, but
   since these [33]matters are uncertain, I leave them undecided. I rather
   think Darius was the uncle of Cyrus, and also his father-in-law;
   though, if we believe Xenophon, he was unmarried at the capture of
   Babylon; for his uncle, and perhaps his father-in-law, had sent him to
   bring supplies when he was inferior in numbers to the Babylonians and
   Assyrians. However this may be, the Prophet's narrative suits the
   circumstances well enough, for Darius, as king of the Medes, obtained
   the royal authority. Cyrus was, indeed, higher than he in both rank and
   majesty, but he granted him the title of King of Babylon, and under
   this name he reigned over the Chaldeans. It now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [278] The Latin is "stipes:" the French, "une souche de bols;"
   literally, a log or block of wood. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 6
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:1-2

   1. It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty
   princes, which should be over the whole kingdom;

   1. Placuit coram Dario, et praefecit super regnum praesides
   provinciarum centum et viginti, qui essent in toto regno.

   2. And over these three presidents; of whom Daniel was first: that the
   princes might give accounts unto them, and the king should have no
   damage.

   2. Et super illos essent, atque ut essent super eos, satrapae tres,
   quorum Daniel unus esset: et ut praesides provinciarum illis redderent
   rationem: et rex non pateretur damnum.


   As to the translation, some translate the last clause of the second
   verse, "That the king should not have any trouble;" but since nzq,
   nezek, signifies "to suffer loss," I willingly adopt this sense;
   because the king did not escape trouble, through a desire for ease, as
   he might have done, being an old man, but he willingly managed his own
   affairs, and committed the care of them to three men, lest anything
   should be lost through passing through too many hands. For experience
   shews us how confusion is caused by a multitude. If there had been only
   there an hundred and twenty governors of provinces, many inconveniences
   must have happened, and much loss would have occurred; hence the king
   placed [34]three prefects over these hundred and twenty.

   Here again we may perceive how God cared for his Prophet, not so much
   for any private reason or through private respect, as by his aid the
   wretched captives and exiles should be benefited. God wished to stretch
   forth his hand to the Jews by means of Daniel. And we may deservedly
   call him God's hand in sustaining the Jews. The Persians, being
   barbarians, were not naturally more merciful than others; hence God
   interposed his servant Daniel to succor them. We must notice, in the
   context of this history, how Daniel alone was chosen by Darius one of
   these three superior officers. He was the third in rank under king
   Belshazzar, although for a moment, yet it might occasion envy under the
   new king that so great an honor was conferred upon him. Very probably
   Darius was informed of the previous predictions of Daniel; how the hand
   appeared upon the wall, how he interpreted the writing, and became a
   heaven-sent messenger to denounce destruction on king Belshazzar. For
   unless this rumor held reached Darius, Daniel would never have obtained
   so much authority under him. His own army abounded in numbers, and we
   know how every conqueror is surrounded in war by many dependents, all
   of whom wish to share in the spoil. Darius, therefore, would never have
   noticed a stranger and a captive, and admitted him to such great honor
   and power, unless he had understood him to be a known Prophet of God,
   and also a herald in denouncing destruction against the Babylonish
   monarchy. Thus we gather how providential it was for him to be among
   the first satraps, and even third in the kingdom, as this brought him
   more quickly under the notice of Darius. For if Daniel had been cast
   down by king Belshazzar he would have remained at home in concealment;
   but when he appeared clothed in royal apparel, the king inquired who he
   was? He heard the means of his arriving at so high an honor; hence he
   acknowledged him as God's Prophet, and appointed him one of the three
   prefects. Here also God's providence is again set before us, not only
   in preserving his servant in safety, but in providing for the safety of
   the whole Church, lest the Jews should be still more oppressed by the
   change of masters. But a temptation is afterwards inflicted, by which
   the holy Prophet and the whole people were severely tried; for the
   Prophet says:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:3-5

   3. Then this Daniel was preferred above the presidents and princes,
   because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him
   over the whole realm.

   3. Tunc Daniel ipse fuit superior, [279] supra satrapas et praesides
   provinciarum: propterea quod spiritus amplior, vel, proestantior, in
   ipso erat: et rex cogitabat eum erigere super totum regnum.

   4. Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against
   Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor
   fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or
   fault found in him.

   4. Tunc satrap, et praesides provinciarum quaesierunt occasionem
   invenire contra Danielem a parte regni, [280] et omnem occasionem,
   [281] et nullum crimen potuerunt invenire: quia verax [282] ipse: et
   nulla culpa, et nullum crimen, [283] inveniebatur in ipso.

   5. Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against this
   Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.

   5. Tunc viri illi dixerunt, non inveniemus in hoc Daniele ullam
   occasionem, nisi inveniamus in ipso ob legem Dei sui.


   The Prophet now relates, as I have said, the origin of a temptation
   which might naturally cast down the spirits of the elect people as well
   as his own. For although Daniel alone was cast into the lion's-den, as
   we shall afterwards see, yet, unless he had been liberated, the
   condition of the people would have been more grievous and severe. For
   we know the wicked petulantly insult the wretched and the innocent,
   when they see them suffering any adversity. If Daniel had been torn by
   the lions, all men would have risen up in a body against the Jews. God,
   therefore, here exercised the faith and patience of his servant, and
   also proved all the Jews by the same test, since they saw themselves
   liable to the most extreme sufferings in the person of a single
   individual, unless God had speedily afforded the assistance which he
   rendered. Daniel, first of all, says, he excelled all others, since a
   more excellent or superior spirit was in him It does not always happen
   that those who are remarkable for prudence or other endowments obtain
   greater authority and rank. In the palaces of kings we often see men of
   brutal dispositions holding high rank, and we need not go back to
   history for this. In these days kings are often gross and infatuated,
   and more like horses and asses than men! Hence audacity and
   recklessness obtain the highest honors of the palace. When Daniel says
   he excelled, he brings to our notice God's two-fold benefit: first, a
   greater portion of his Spirit was bestowed upon him; and secondly,
   Darius acknowledged this, and raised him to honor when he saw him
   endued with no ordinary industry and wisdom. We now understand the
   Prophet's teaching, here, as first divinely adorned with prudence and
   other endowments; and then, Darius was a competent judge of this, in
   estimating his prudence and other virtues, and holding them in great
   repute. Since, therefore, a noble spirit was in him, hence he overcame
   all others, says he; therefore the king determined to set him above the
   whole kingdom, that is, to place him first among the three satraps.
   Although it was a singular privilege with which God once blessed his
   people and his Prophet, yet we ought to weep over the heartlessness of
   kings in these days, who proudly despise God's gifts in all good men
   who surpass the multitude in usefulness; and at the same time enjoy the
   society of the ignorant like themselves, while they are slaves to
   avarice and rapine, and manifest the greatest cruelty and
   licentiousness. Since, then, we see how very unworthy kings usually are
   of their empire and their power, we must weep over the state of the
   world, because it reflects like a glass the wrath of heaven, and kings
   are thus destitute of counsel. At the last day, King Darius alone will
   be sufficient to condemn them, for he had discretion enough not to
   hesitate to set a captive and a foreigner over all his satraps; for
   this was a royal, nay, a heroic virtue in Darius to prefer this man to
   all his own friends. But now kings think of nothing else than
   preferring their own panders, buffoons, and flatterers; while they
   praise none but men of low character, whom God has branded with
   ignominy. Although they are unworthy of being reckoned among mankind,
   yet they esteem themselves the masters of their sovereigns, and treat
   the kings of these days as their slaves. This happens through their
   mere slothfulness, and their discarding every possible anxiety. Hence
   they are compelled to deliver up their command to others, and retain
   nothing but the title. This, as I said, is a sure proof of the wrath of
   heaven, since the world is at this day unworthy of the government which
   God exercises over it by his hand.

   With respect to the envy felt by the nobles, we see this vice rampant
   in all ages, since the aspirants to any greatness can never bear the
   presence of virtue. For, being guilty of evil themselves, they are
   necessarily bitter against the virtue of others. Nor ought it to seem
   surprising that the Persians who sustained the greatest labors, and
   passed through numerous changes of fortune, should be unable to bear
   with an obscure and unknown person, not only associated with them, but
   appointed as their superior. Their envy, then, seems to have had some
   pretext, either real or imaginary. But it will always be deserving of
   condemnation, when we find men selfishly pursuing their own advantage
   without any regard for the public good. Whoever aspires to power and
   self-advancement, without regarding the welfare of others, must
   necessarily be avaricious and rapacious, cruel and perfidious, as well
   as forgetful of his duties. Since, then, the nobles of the realm envied
   Daniel, they betrayed their malice, for they had no regard for the
   public good, but desired to seize upon all things for their own
   interests. In this example we observe the natural consequence of envy.
   And we should diligently notice this, since nothing is more tempting
   than gliding down from one vice to a worse. The envious man loses all
   sense of justice while attempting every scheme for injuring his
   adversary. These nobles report Daniel to have been preferred to
   themselves unworthily. If they had been content with this abuse, it
   would have been, as I said, a vice and a sign of a perverse nature. But
   they go far beyond this, for they seek for an occasion of crime in
   Daniel. We see, then, how envy excites them to the commission of crime.
   Thus all the envious are perpetually on the watch, while they become
   spies of the fortunes of those whom they envy, to oppress them by every
   possible means. This is one point; but when they find no crime, they
   trample upon justice, without modesty and without humanity, and with
   cruelty and perfidy lay themselves out to crush an adversary. Daniel
   relates this of his rivals. He says, They immediately sought occasion
   against him, and did not find it Then he adds how unjustly and
   perfidiously they sought occasion against him. There is no doubt they
   knew Daniel to be a pious man and approved by God; hence, when they
   plot against his holy Prophet, they purposely wage war with God
   himself, while they are blinded with the perverse passion of envy.
   Whence, then, does it spring? Surely from ambition. Thus we see how
   pestilential a plague ambition is, from which envy springs up, and
   afterwards perfidy and cruelty!

   Besides this, Daniel admonishes us by his own example to study to
   strive after integrity, and thus to deprive the malevolent and the
   wicked of all occasion against us, which they seek. We shall find no
   better defense against the envious and the slanderous than to conduct
   ourselves righteously and innocently. Whatever snares they may lay for
   us, they will never succeed, for our innocence will repel their malice
   like a shield. Meanwhile we see how Daniel escaped utter ruin, since
   they sought a pretext against him in something else, namely, his
   worship of God. Hence let us learn how we ought to esteem piety and an
   earnest desire for it of more value than life itself. Daniel was
   faithful and upright in his administration: he discharged his duty so
   as to close the mouth of his enemies and detractors. Thus, as I have
   said, integrity is the best of all protectors. Again, Daniel was in
   danger because he would not leave off the sincere worship of God and
   its outward profession. Hence we must bravely undergo all dangers
   whenever the worship of God is at stake. This temporary life ought not
   to be more precious to us than that most sacred of all things -- the
   preservation of God's honor unstained. We therefore see how we, by
   these means, are urged to the cultivation of integrity, since we cannot
   be more secure than when fortified by a good conscience, as Peter in
   his first epistle exhorts us to the same purpose, (1 Peter 3:16.) Now,
   whatever we may fear, and whatever events await us, even if we become
   subject to a hundred deaths, we ought never to decline from the pure
   worship of God, since Daniel did not hesitate to submit to death and
   enter the lion's den, because he openly professed the worship of
   Israel's God. As these nobles entered into this barbarous and cruel
   counsel for oppressing Daniel under the pretense of religion, here,
   again, we gather the blindness and rashness of mankind when ambition
   and envy seize upon their minds. For it is a matter of no moment with
   them to come into collision with the Almighty, [284] for they do not
   approach Daniel as a fellow-creature, but they leap into an insane and
   sacrilegious contest when they wish to extinguish the worship of God
   and give way to their own indulgence. Thus, as I have said, we are
   admonished by this example how ambition is to be guarded against and
   avoided, and also the envy which arises from it. The nature of this
   charge -- the worship of God -- afterwards follows: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [279] The word ntsch, netzech, means to surpass; hence he was superior
   or more excellent. -- Calvin.

   [280] That is, in his administration. -- Calvin.

   [281] That is, no occasion. -- Calvin.

   [282] Since he was faithful and thoroughly trusty. -- Calvin.

   [283] He repeats the noun for "crime" twice, schyth, shechitheh. --
   Calvin.

   [284] The French editions of 1562 and 1569, a Geneva, translate the
   idiomatic phrase, susque deque illis est, by ce leur est tout un; "it
   is all one to them." -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:6-7

   6. Then these presidents and princes assembled together to the king,
   and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever.

   6. Tunc satrap et provinciarum praesides illi sociati sunt [285] apud
   regem, [286] et sic locuti sunt ei: Dari rex, in ternum vive.

   7. All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes,
   the counsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to establish
   a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that whosoever shall ask a
   petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of thee, O king, he
   shall be cast into the den of lions.

   7. Consilium ceperunt omnes satrap regni, proceres et praesides
   provinciarum, consiliarii, et duces, ut statuatur statutum regis, [287]
   et sanciatur edictum, ut quisquis petierit petitionem ab ullo deo et
   homine usque ad dies triginta hos, prterquam a te, rex, projiciatur in
   speluncam leonum.


   The nobles of the kingdom purposely endeavored to ruin the holy
   Prophet, either by casting him into the lion's den to perish or else by
   causing him to desist from the outward profession of worshipping God.
   They knew him to be so really in earnest that he would not redeem his
   life by so great an act of impiety, and hence they thought him doomed
   to death. We perceive in them great cunning; but God met them on the
   other hand and aided his servant, as we shall see. Meanwhile their
   malice was the more detestable, since they desired to destroy Daniel by
   this very pretense. Although they did not worship Israel's God, they
   knew the Prophet's mind to be pious and straightforward, and then they
   experienced the power of that God who was unknown to them. They did not
   condemn Daniel, nor blame the religion which he practiced; for, as I
   have said, their hatred of this man urged them to such cruelty that
   they rushed against the Almighty. They could not disguise from
   themselves the duty of worshipping God: they worshipped and adored
   unknown deities, and did not dare to condemn the worship of Israel's
   God. We see how the devil fascinated them when they dared to impute
   this as a crime to the holy Prophet; while we are ignorant of the
   manner in which their opinion was changed.

   Some suppose this was done because Darius could not bear with composure
   the glory of his son-in-law. For since he was an old man, and his
   relative in the flower of his age, he thought himself despised. Others
   think Darius to have been touched by secret emulation, and that he
   allowed his nobles to approach him for the purpose of deceiving the
   miserable and doting old man, and thus to throw dust in his eyes. But
   this conjecture does not seem to me sufficiently valid. Nor need I give
   myself much trouble in this matter, because it might happen that at the
   beginning of a new reign they wished to congratulate the king, and they
   fixed upon something new and unaccustomed, as we see often done by
   flatterers of royalty. Hence the old man might be deceived in this
   matter, since the monarchy was newly established. The king had hitherto
   ruled over none but Medes; now Chaldeans, Assyrians, and many other
   nations were added to his sway. Such an addition might intoxicate him
   with vain-glory, and his nobles might think this a plausible reason for
   offering to him divine honors. This single reason seems to me
   sufficient; I do not inquire further, but embrace what is probable and
   obvious at first sight. I defer the remainder till to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [285] For rgs, reges, properly signifies to "join and associate with."
   -- Calvin.

   [286] That is, they made a conspiracy, and approached the king. --
   Calvin.

   [287] That is, royal, or from the king. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, as thou didst govern thy servant Daniel when
   honors were flowing around on all sides, and he was raised to the
   highest dignity, and preserve him safe in his integrity and innocency
   amidst the universal licentiousness, -- Grant, I pray thee, that we may
   learn to restrain ourselves within that moderation to which thou
   restrictest us. May we be content with our humble station and strive to
   prove ourselves innocent before thee and before those with whom we have
   to deal; so that thy name may be glorified in us, and we may proceed
   under thy shelter against the malice of mankind. Whenever Satan
   besieges us on every side, and the wicked lay snares for us, and we are
   attacked by the fierceness of wild beasts, may we remain safe under thy
   protection, and even if we have to undergo a hundred deaths, may we
   learn to live and die to thee, and may thy name be glorified in us,
   through Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twenty-eighth.

   WE said, yesterday, that the nobles who laid snares against Daniel were
   inspired with great fury when they dared to dictate to the king the
   edict recorded by Daniel. It was an intolerable sacrilege thus to
   deprive all the deities of their honor; yet he subscribed [35]the
   edict, as we shall afterwards see, and thus put to the test the
   obedience of his people whom he had lately reduced under the yoke by
   the help of his son-in-law. There is no doubt of his wish to subdue the
   Chaldees, who up to that time had been masters; and we know how
   ferocity springs from the possession of authority. Since then the
   Chaldees had formerly reigned so far and wide, it was difficult to tame
   them and render them submissive, especially when they found themselves
   the slaves of those who had previously been their rivals. We know how
   many contests there were between them and the Medes; and although they
   were subdued in war, their spirits were not yet in subjection; hence
   Darius desired to prove their obedience, and this reason induced him to
   give his consent. He does not purposely provoke the anger of the gods;
   but through respect for the men, he forgets the deities, and
   substitutes himself in the place of the gods, as if it was in his power
   to attract the authority of heaven to himself! This, as I have said,
   was a grievous sacrilege. If any one could enter into the hearts of
   kings, he would find scarcely one in a hundred who does not despise
   everything divine. Although they confess themselves to enjoy their
   thrones by the grace of God, as we have previously remarked, yet they
   wish to be adored in his stead. We now see how easily flatterers
   persuade kings to do whatever appears likely to extol their
   magnificence. It follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:8-9

   8. Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing, that it be
   not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which
   altereth not.

   8. Nunc, rex, statue edictum, et obsigna scripturam, quae non ad
   mutandum, [288] secundum legem Medorum et Persarum, quae non transit.

   9. Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree.

   9. Itaque ipse rex Darius obsignavit scripturam et edictum.


   Here, as I have said, it is sufficiently apparent how inclined to
   fallacies are the minds of kings when they think they can benefit
   themselves and increase their own dignity. For the king did not dispute
   long with his nobles but subscribed the edict; for he thought it might
   prove useful to himself and his successors: if he found the Chaldeans
   obedient to himself and rather prepared to deny the existence of every
   god than to refuse whatever he commanded! As to the use of the word,
   some, translate 'sr', asra, by "writing," deriving it from "to cut in,"
   as we know that all laws were formerly graven on tablets of brass; but
   I interpret it more simply of their seeking from the king a signature
   of the writing, that is, he was to sign the edict after it was written.
   Which cannot be changed, they say -- meaning, the edict is unchangeable
   and inviolable, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which
   does not pass away -- that is, which does not vanish, as also Christ
   says, Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
   away, or shall never become vain. (Matthew 24:35; Mark 13:31.) As to
   his joining the Medes with the Persians, this arises from what we said
   before, since Cyrus and Darius reigned in common as colleagues. Greater
   dignity was granted to Darius, while the power was in the hands of
   Cyrus; besides, without controversy, his sons were heirs of either
   kingdom and of the Monarchy of the East, unless when they began to make
   war on each other. When they say, the law of the Medes and Persians is
   immutable, this is worthy of praise in laws, and sanctions their
   authority; thus they are strong and obtain their full effect. When laws
   are variable, many are necessarily injured, and no private interest is
   stable unless the law be without variation; besides, when there is a
   liberty of changing laws, license succeeds in place of justice. For
   those who possess the supreme power, if corrupted by gifts, promulgate
   first one edict and then another. Thus justice cannot flourish where
   change in the laws allows of so much license. But, at the same time,
   kings ought prudently to consider lest they promulgate any edict or law
   without grave and mature deliberation; and secondly, kings ought to be
   careful lest they be counteracted by cunning and artful plots, to which
   they are often liable. Hence, constancy is praiseworthy in kings and
   their edicts, if only they are preceded by prudence and equity. But we
   shall immediately see how foolishly kings affect the fame of
   consistency, and how their obstinacy utterly perverts justice. But we
   shall see this directly in its own place. It follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [288] That is, which is immutable. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:10

   10. Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his
   house; and, his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he
   kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks
   before his God, as he did aforetime.

   10. Daniel autem ubi cognovit quod obsignata esset scriptura, venit,
   vel, ingressus est, in domum suam (fenestrae autem apertae erant ei in
   coenaculo suo versus Jerusalem) et temporibus tribus in die, [289]
   inclinabat se super genua sua, [290] et precabatur, et confitebatur
   coram Deo suo, quemadmodum fecerat a pristino illo tempore. [291]


   Daniel now relates how he was clothed in the boldness of the Spirit of
   God [36]to offer his life as a sacrifice to God, because he knew he had
   no hope of pardon left, if his violation of the king's edict had been
   discovered; he knew the king himself to be completely in shackles even
   if he wished to pardon him -- as the event proved. If death had been
   before the Prophet's eyes, he preferred meeting it fearlessly rather
   than ceasing from the duty of piety. We must remark that the internal
   worship of God is not treated here, but only the external profession of
   it. If Daniel had been forbidden to pray, this fortitude with which he
   was endued might seem necessary; but many think he ran great risks
   without sufficient reason, since he increased the chance of death when
   only outward profession was prohibited. But as Daniel here is not the
   herald of his own virtue, but the Spirit speaks through his mouth, we
   must suppose that this magnanimity in the holy Prophet was pleasing to
   God. And his liberation shewed how greatly his piety was approved,
   because he had rather lose his life than change any of his habits
   respecting the worship of God. We know the principal sacrifice which
   God requires, is to call upon his name. For we hereby testify him to be
   the author of all good things; next we shew forth a specimen of our
   faith; then we fly to him, and cast all our cares into his bosom, and
   offer him our prayers. Since, therefore, prayer constitutes the chief
   part of our adoration and worship of God, it was certainly a matter of
   no slight moment when the king forbade any one to pray to God; it was a
   gross and manifest denial of piety.

   And here, again, we collect how blind was the king's pride when he
   could sign so impious and foul an edict! Then how mad were the nobles
   who, to ruin Daniel as far as they possibly could, endeavored to
   abolish all piety, and draw down God from heaven! For what remains,
   when men think they can free themselves from the help of God, and pass
   him over with security? Unless he prop us up by his special aid, we
   know how entirely we should be reduced to nothing. Hence the king
   forbade any one to offer up any prayer during a whole month -- that is,
   as I have said, he exacts from every one a denial of God! But Daniel
   could not obey the edict without committing an atrocious insult against
   God and declining from piety; because, as I have said, God exacts this
   as a principal sacrifice. Hence it is not surprising if Daniel
   cordially opposed the sacrilegious edict. Now, with respect to the
   profession of piety, it was necessary to testify before men his
   perseverance in the worship of God. For if he had altered his habits at
   all, it would have been a partial abjuration; he would not have said
   that he openly despised God to please Darius; but that very difference
   in his conduct would have been a proof of perfidious defection. We know
   that God requires not only faith in the heart and the inward
   affections, but also the witness and confession of our piety.

   Daniel, therefore, was obliged to persevere in the holy practice to
   which he was accustomed, unless he wished to be the very foulest
   apostate! He was in the habit of praying [37]with his windows open:
   hence he continued in his usual course, lest any one should object that
   he gratified his earthly king for a moment by omitting the worship of
   God. I wish this doctrine was now engraven on the hearts of all men as
   it ought to be; but this example of the Prophet is derided by many, not
   perhaps openly and glaringly, but still clearly enough, the Prophet
   seems to them too inconsiderate and simple, since he incurs great
   danger, rashly, and without any necessity. For they so separate faith
   from its outward confession as to suppose it can remain entire even if
   completely buried, and for the sake of avoiding the cross. they depart
   a hundred times from its pure and sincere profession. We must maintain,
   therefore, not only the duty of offering to God the sacrifice of prayer
   in our hearts, but that our open profession is also required, and thus
   the reality of our worship of God may clearly appear.

   I do not say that our hasty thoughts are to be instantly spread abroad,
   rendering us subject to death by the enemies of God and his gospel; but
   I say these things ought to be united and never to be separated,
   namely, faith and its profession. For confession is of two kinds:
   first, the open and ingenuous testimony to our inward feelings; and
   secondly, the necessary maintenance of the worship of God, lest we shew
   any sign of a perverse and perfidious hypocrisy, and thus reject the
   pursuit of piety. With regard to the first kind, it is neither always
   nor everywhere necessary to profess our faith; but the second kind
   ought to be perpetually practiced, for it can never be necessary for us
   to pretend either disaffection or apostasy. For although Daniel did not
   send for the Chaldeans by the sound of a trumpet whenever he wished to
   pray, yet he framed his prayers and his vows in his couch as usual, and
   did not pretend to be forgetful of piety when he saw his faith put to
   the test, and the experiments made whether or not he would persevere in
   his constancy. Hence he distinctly says, he went home, after being made
   acquainted with the signing of the decree. Had he been admitted to the
   council, he would doubtless have spoken out, but the rest of the nobles
   cunningly excluded him, lest he should interfere with them, and they
   thought the remedy would be too late, and utterly in vain as soon as he
   perceived the certainty of his own death. Hence, had he been admitted
   to the king's council, he would there have discharged his duty, and
   heartily interposed; but after the signing of the edict, and the loss
   of all opportunity for advising the king, he retired to his house.

   We must here notice the impossibility of finding an excuse for the
   king's advisers, who purposely escape when they see that unanimity of
   opinion cannot be obtained, and think God will be satisfied in this
   way, if they only maintain perfect silence. But no excuse can be
   admitted for such weakness of mind. And, doubtless, Daniel is unable to
   defend them by his example, since, as we have already said, he was
   excluded by the cunning and malice of the nobles from taking his place
   among them as usual, and thus admonishing the king in time. He now
   says, His windows were open towards Jerusalem The question arises,
   Whether it was necessary for Daniel thus to open his windows? For some
   one may object -- he did this under a mistaken opinion; for if God
   fills heaven end earth, what signified his windows being open towards
   Jerusalem? There is no doubt that the Prophet used this device as a
   stimulus to his fervor in prayer. For when praying for the liberation
   of his people, he directed his eyes towards Jerusalem, and that sight
   became a stimulus to enflame his mind to greater devotion. Hence the
   opening of the Prophet's windows has no reference to God, as if he
   should be listened to more readily by having the open heaven between
   his dwelling and Judea; but he rather considered himself and his
   natural infirmity. Now, if the holy Prophet, so careful in his prayers,
   needed this help, we must see whether or not our sloth in these days
   has need of more stimulants! Let us learn, therefore, when we feel
   ourselves to be too sluggish and cold in prayer, to collect all the
   aids which can arouse our feelings and correct the torpor of which we
   are conscious. This, then, was the Prophet's intention in opening his
   windows towards Jerusalem Besides, he wished by this symbol to shew his
   domestics his perseverance, in the hope and expectation of the promised
   redemption. When, therefore, he prayed to God, he kept Jerusalem in
   sight, not that his eyes could penetrate to so distant a region, but he
   directed his gaze towards Jerusalem to shew himself a stranger among
   the Chaldeans, although he enjoyed great power among them, and was
   adorned with great authority, and excelled in superior dignity. Thus he
   wished all men to perceive how he longed for the promised inheritance,
   although for a time he was in exile. This was his second reason for
   opening his windows.

   He says, He prayed three times a-day. This is worthy of observation,
   because, unless we fix certain hours in the day for prayer, it easily
   slips from our memory. Although, therefore, Daniel was constant in
   pouring forth prayers, yet he enjoined upon himself the customary rite
   of prostrating himself before God three times a-day. When we rise in
   the morning, unless we commence the day by praying to God, we shew a
   brutish stupidity, so also when we retire to rest, and when we take our
   food and at other times, as every one finds most advantageous to
   himself. For here God allows us liberty, but we ought all to feel our
   infirmities, and to apply the proper remedies. Therefore, for this
   reason, Daniel was in the habit of praying thrice. A proof of his
   fervor is also added, when he says, He prostrated himself on his knees;
   not that bending the knee is necessary in prayer, but while we need
   aids to devotion, as we have said, that posture is of importance. First
   of all, it reminds us of our inability to stand before God, unless with
   humility and reverence; then, our minds are better prepared for serious
   entreaty, and this symbol of worship is pleasing to God. Hence Daniel's
   expression is by no means superfluous: He, fell upon his knees whenever
   he wished to pray to God. He now says, he uttered prayers and
   confessions before God, or he praised God, for we must diligently
   notice how many in their prayers mutter to God. For although they
   demand either one thing or another, yet they are carried along by an
   immoderate impulse, and, as I have said, they are violent in their
   requests unless God instantly grants their petitions.

   This is the reason why Daniel joins praises or the giving of thanks
   with prayers; as, also, Paul exhorts us respecting both. Offer up, says
   he, your prayers to God, with thanksgiving, (Philippians 4:6,) as if he
   had said, We cannot rightly offer vows and prayers to God unless when
   we bless his holy name, although he does not immediately grant our
   petitions. In Daniel's case we must remark another circumstance: he had
   been an exile for a long time, and tossed about in many troubles and
   changes; still he celebrates God's praises. Which of us is endued with
   such patience as to praise God, if afflicted with many trials through
   three or four years? Nay, scarcely a day passes without our passions
   growing warm and instigating us to rebel against God! Since Daniel,
   then, could persevere in praising God, when oppressed by so many
   sorrows, anxieties, and troubles -- this was a remarkable proof of
   invincible patience. And, doubtless, he signifies a continuous act, by
   using the demonstrative pronoun dnh, deneh, which refers to his
   ordinary habit -- as he had done before, and from former times By
   noticing the time, he marks, as I have said before, a perseverance,
   since he was not only accustomed to pray once or twice, but by a
   regular constancy he exercised himself in this duty of piety every day.
   It afterwards follows: --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [289] That is, three times every day. -- Calvin.

   [290] The verb and the noun are from the same root; "he bent upon his
   knees or inclined himself." -- Calvin.

   [291] That is, as he was accustomed to do. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:11

   11. Then these men assembled, and found Daniel praying and making
   supplication before his God.

   11. Tunc viri illi sociati sunt, [292] et invenerunt Danielem orantem
   et precantem coram Deo suo.


   Here the nobles of Darius display their fraud when they observe Daniel,
   and unite in a conspiracy against him: for no other object but the
   death of Daniel could have induced them to dictate this edict. Hence
   they agree together, and find Daniel uttering prayers and supplications
   to his God If Daniel had prayed with the slightest secrecy, he would
   not have been a victim to their snares; but he did not refuse the
   prospect of death. He knew the object of the edict, and expected the
   arrival of the nobles. We see, then, how willingly he submitted to
   instant death, and for no other purpose than to retain the pure worship
   of God, together with its outward profession. Go to, now, ye who desire
   to shield your perfidy, pretending that you ought not to incur danger
   rashly, and when the wicked surround you on all sides! You become
   cautious lest you should rashly throw away your lives! For Daniel, in
   their opinion, was to be blamed for too great simplicity and folly,
   since he willingly and knowingly encountered certain danger. But we
   have already said, he could not escape from their snare without
   indirectly revolting from God, for he might have been immediately
   reproached -- Why do you desist from your accustomed habit? Why do you
   close your windows? Why do you not dare to pray to your God? It
   appears, then, you regard the king of more importance than the
   reverence and fear of God. Because God's honor would have been thus
   sullied, Daniel, as we have already seen, spontaneously offered himself
   to death as a sacrifice. We are taught, also, by this example, how
   snares are prepared for the sons of God, however circumspectly they
   act, and however soberly they conduct themselves. But they ought to
   conduct themselves so prudently as neither to be too cunning nor too
   anxious, that is, they should not regard their own security so as in
   the meantime to forget God's requirements, and the preciousness of his
   name, and the necessity of a confession of faith in the proper place
   and time. It now follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [292] Or, "collected," as others translate. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:12

   12. Then they came near, and spake before the king concerning the
   king's decree; Hast thou not signed a decree, that every man that shall
   ask a petition of any God or man within thirty days, save of thee, O
   king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said,
   The thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians,
   which altereth not.

   12. Tunc accesserunt et dixerunt [293] coram rege super edicto regio,
   An non edictum obsignasti, ne quisquam homo peteret ab ullo deo vel
   homine, usque ad triginta dies hos, praeterquam abs te, rex, [294]
   projiceretur in speluncam leonum? Respondit rex et dixit, Firmus est
   sermo secundum legem Medorum et Persarum, quae non transit.


   Now the king's nobles approach the king as conquerors, but they do so
   cunningly; for they do not openly say anything about Daniel, whom they
   knew to be a favorite with the king; but they repeat their previous
   assertion concerning the impossibility of changing the edict, since the
   law of the Medes and Persians is inviolable and cannot be rendered
   void. Again, therefore, as far as they possibly can, they sanction that
   edict, lest the king should afterwards be free, or dare to retract what
   he had once commanded. We must mark the cunning with which they
   indirectly circumvent the king, and entangle him, by preventing the
   change of a single word; They come, therefore, and discourse concerning
   the royal edict. They do not mention the name of Daniel, but dwell upon
   the royal decree, so as to bind the king more firmly. It follows -- The
   king answered, The discourse is true We here see how kings desire
   praise for consistency, but they do not perceive the difference between
   consistency and obstinacy. For kings ought to reflect upon their own
   decrees, to avoid the disgrace of retracting what they have hastily
   promulgated. If anything has escaped them without consideration, both
   prudence and equity require them to correct their errors; but when they
   have trampled upon all regard for justice, they desire every
   inconsiderate command to be strictly obeyed! This is the height of
   folly, and we ought not to sanction a perseverance in such obstinacy,
   as we have already said. But the rest to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [293] And they have said. -- Calvin.

   [294] It is preferable to translate it "that any man should ask from
   any god or man, for thirty days, except of thee, O king." -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast reconciled us to thyself by the
   precious blood of thy Son, that we may not be our own, but devoted to
   thee in perfect obedience, and may consecrate ourselves entirely to
   thee: May we offer our bodies and souls in sacrifice, and be rather
   prepared to suffer a hundred deaths than to decline from thy true and
   sincere worship. Grant us, especially, to exercise ourselves in prayer,
   to fly to thee every moment, and to commit ourselves to thy Fatherly
   care, that thy Spirit may govern us to the end. Do thou defend and
   sustain us, until we are collected into that heavenly kingdom which thy
   only-begotten Son has prepared for us by his blood. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Twenty-ninth.

   WE began yesterday to explain Daniel's narrative of the calumny
   invented against him before King Darius. The nobles of the kingdom, as
   we have said, used cunning in their interview with the king; because if
   they had begun with Daniel, the king might have broken his word. But,
   they dwell upon the royal decree; they shew the imminence of the
   danger, unless the authority of all the king's decrees was upheld. By
   this artifice we see how they obtained their object; for the king
   confirms their assertion respecting the wickedness of rendering
   abortive what had been promulgated in the king's name. For kings are
   pleased with their own greatness, and wish their own pleasure to be
   treated as an oracle. That edict was detestable and impious by which
   Darius forbade entreaties to be offered to any deity; yet he wished it
   to remain in force, lest his majesty should be despised by his
   subjects. Meanwhile, he does not perceive the consequences which must
   ensue. Hence we are taught by this example, that no virtue is so rare
   in kings as moderation, and yet none is more necessary; for the more
   they have in their power, the more it becomes them to be cautious lest
   they indulge their lusts, while they think it lawful to desire whatever
   pleases them. It now follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:13

   13. Then answered they and said before the king, That Daniel, which is
   of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king,
   nor the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three
   times a day.

   13. Tunc loquuti sunt, et dixerunt coram rege: Daniel, qui est ex
   filiis captivitatis Jehudah, non posuit super te, rex, sensum, [295]
   neque ad edictum quod obsignasti: et vicibus tribus in die precatur
   petitionem suam. [296]


   Now, when Daniel's calumniators see that King Darius had no wish to
   defend his cause, they open up more freely what they had previously
   conceded; for, as we have said, if they had openly accused Daniel,
   their accusation could have been instantly and completely refuted; but
   after this sentiment had been expressed to the king, their statement is
   final, since by the laws of the Medes and Persians a king's decree
   ought to be self-acting; hence, after this is accomplished, they then
   come to the person. Daniel, say they, one of the captives of Judah, has
   not obeyed thy will, O king, nor the decree which thou hast signed. By
   saying, "Daniel, one of the Jewish captives," they doubtless intended
   to magnify his crime and to render him odious. For if any Chaldean had
   dared to despise the king's edict, his rashness would not have been
   excused. But now when Daniel, who was lately a slave and a Chaldean
   captive, dares to despise the king's command, who reigned over Chaldea
   by the right of conquest, this seemed less tolerable still. The effect
   is the same as if they had said, "He was lately a captive among thy
   slaves; thou art supreme lord, and his masters to whom he was subject
   are under thy yoke, because thou art their conqueror; he is but a
   captive and a stranger, a mere slave, and yet he rebels against thee!"
   We see then how they desired to poison the king's mind against him by
   this allusion, He is one of the captives! The words are very harmless
   in themselves, but they endeavor to sting their monarch in every way,
   and to stir up his wrath against Daniel. He does not direct his mind to
   thee, O king; that is, he does not reflect upon who you are, and thus
   he despises thy majesty and the edict which thou hast signed This is
   another enlargement: Daniel, therefore, did not direct his mind either
   to thee or to thy edict; and wilt thou bear this? Next, they recite the
   deed itself -- he prays three times a-day This would have been the
   simple narrative, Daniel has not obeyed thy command in praying to his
   own God; but, as I have said, they exaggerate his crime by accusing him
   of pride, contempt, and insolence. We see, therefore, by what artifices
   Daniel was oppressed by these malicious men. It now follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [295] Or, has not added his own sense, or given his mind to thee. --
   Calvin.

   [296] That is, prays according to his custom, or as usual. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:14-15

   14. Then the king, when he heard these words, was sore displeased with
   himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured
   till the going down of the sun to deliver him.

   14. Tunc rex, postquam sermonem audivit, valde tristatus est, [297] in
   se: et ad Danielem apposuit cor, [298] ad ipsum servandum: et usque ad
   occasum solis fuit solicitus ad ipsum eruendum. [299]

   15. Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the king,
   Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree
   nor statute which the king establisheth may be changed.

   15. Tunc conglobati sunt viri illi [300] ad regem, et dixerunt, Scias,
   rex, quod lex Medis et Persis est, ut omne edictum et statutum quod rex
   statuerit, non mutetur.


   In the first place, Daniel recites that the king was disturbed, when he
   perceived the malice of his nobles which had formerly escaped him; for
   their intention and their object had never occurred to him; he
   perceives himself deceived and entrapped, and hence he is disturbed.
   Here again we are taught how cautiously kings ought to avoid depraved
   counsels, since they are besieged on every side by perfidious men,
   whose only object is to gain by their false representations, and to
   oppress their enemies, and those from whom they hope for booty or who
   may favor their evil courses. Because so many snares surround kings,
   they ought to be the more cautious in providing against cunning. They
   are too late in acknowledging themselves to have been overreached, when
   no remedy is left, partly through fear, and partly through wishing to
   consult their own credit; and they prefer offending God to suffering
   any outward disrespect from men. Since, therefore, kings consider their
   own honor so sacred, they persevere in their evil undertakings, even
   when their conscience accuses them; and even if justice itself were to
   appear visibly before them, yet this restraint would not be sufficient
   to withhold them, when ambition urges them in the opposite direction,
   and they are unwilling to lose the slightest portion of their
   reputation among men. The case of Darius supplies us with an example of
   this kind.

   First of all, it is said, He was sorrowful when he heard these words,
   and was anxious till the setting of the sun about the way of snatching
   Daniel from death He wished this to be done, if his own honor were
   sound and safe, and his nobles were satisfied. But on the one side, he
   fears disunion if his nobles should conspire to produce disturbance;
   and on the other side, he is moved by a foolish fear, because he does
   not wish to incur the charge of levity which awaited him, and hence he
   is vanquished and obeys the lusts of the wicked. Although, therefore,
   he labored till the setting of the sun to free Daniel, yet that
   perverse shame prevailed of which I have spoken, and then the fear of
   dissension. For when we do not lean upon God's help, we are always
   compelled to vacillate, although anxious to be honestly affected. Thus
   Pilate wished to liberate Christ, but was terrified by the threats of
   the people, when they denounced against him the displeasure of Caesar.
   (John 19:12.) And no wonder, since faith is alone a certain and fixed
   prop on which we may lean while fearlessly discharging our duty, and
   thus overcome all fears. But when we want confidence, we are, as I have
   said, sure to be changeable. Hence Darius, through fear of a conspiracy
   of his nobles against himself, permitted Daniel to be an innocent
   sufferer from their cruelty. Then that false shame is added which I
   have mentioned, because he was unwilling to appear without
   consideration, by suddenly revoking his own edict, as it was a law with
   the Medes and Persians that whatever proceeded from kings was
   inviolable! Daniel now states this. He says, those men assembled
   together; when they saw the king hesitate and doubt, they became fierce
   and contentious with him. When it is said they meet together, this
   relates to their inspiring him with fear. They say, Know, O king! He
   knew it well enough, and they need not instruct him in any unknown
   matter, but they treat him in a threatening manner. "What? dost thou
   not see how utterly the royal name will be hereafter deprived of its
   authority if he violates thine edict with impunity? Will you thus
   permit yourself to become a laughingstock? Finally, they intimate, that
   he would not be king unless he revenged the insult offered him by
   Daniel in neglecting his commandment. Know, therefore, O king, that the
   Persians and Medes -- he was himself king of the Medes, but it is just
   as if they said, What kind of rumor will be spread through all thy
   subject provinces; for thou knowest how far this prevails among the
   Medes and Persians -- the king must not change his edict. If,
   therefore, thou shouldst set such an example, will not all thy subjects
   instantly rise against thee? and wilt thou not be contemptible to
   them?" We see, then, how the satraps rage against their king, and
   frighten him from any change of counsel. And they also join the edict
   with the statute, which the king had resolved upon, with the view of
   impressing upon him the necessity of not changing a single decree which
   he had often and repeatedly sanctioned. It follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [297] Others translate "disturbed;" others again, "was very much
   displeased" or grieved, for v's, bash, signifies to grieve. -- Calvin.

   [298] There is a change in the letters here; for vl, bel, is put for
   lv, leb; here it means, "he applied his heart." -- Calvin.

   [299] Or, to deliver him; that is, he desired to snatch him away. --
   Calvin.

   [300] That is, conspired together, as if they approached the king in a
   body, to inspire the greater terror; "they assembled themselves
   therefore." -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:16

   16. Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into
   the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom
   thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.

   16. Tunc rex loquutus est, [301] et adduxerunt Danielem, et projecerunt
   eum in foveam leonum. Respondit rex, et dixit Danieli, Deus tuus quem
   tu colis ipsum jugiter, [302] ipse liberabit te. [303]


   The king, as we have said, frightened by the denunciation of the
   nobles, condemns Daniel to death. And hence we gather the reward which
   kings deserve in reference to their pride, when they are compelled to
   submit with servility to their flatterers. How was Darius deceived by
   the cunning of his nobles! For he thought his authority would be
   strengthened, by putting the obedience of all men to this test of
   refusing all prayer to any god or man for a whole month. He thought he
   should become superior to both gods and men, if all his subjects really
   manifested obedience of this kind. We now see how obstinately the
   nobles rise against him, and denounce ultimate revolt, unless he obey
   them. We see that when kings take too much upon themselves, how they
   are exposed to infamy, and become the variest slaves of their own
   servants! This is common enough with earthly princes; those who possess
   their influence and favor applaud them in all things and even adore
   them; they offer every kind of flattery which can propitiate their
   favor; but, meanwhile, what freedom do their idols enjoy? They do not
   allow them any authority, nor any intercourse with the best and most
   faithful friends, while they are watched by their own guards. Lastly,
   if they are compared with the wretches who are confined in the closest
   dungeon, not one who is thrust down into the deepest pit, and watched
   by three or four guards, is not freer than kings themselves! But, as I
   have said, this is God's most just vengeance; since, when they cannot
   contain themselves in the ordinary rank and station of men, but wish to
   penetrate the clouds and become on a level with God, they necessarily
   become a laughingstock. Hence they become slaves of all their
   attendants, and dare not utter anything with freedom, and are without
   friends, and are afraid to summon their subjects to their presence, and
   to intrust either one or another with their wishes. Thus slaves rule
   the kingdoms of the world, because kings assume superiority to mortals.
   King Darius is an instance of this when he sent for Daniel, and
   commanded him to be thrown into the den of lions; his nobles force this
   from him, and he unwillingly obeys them. But we should notice the
   reason. He had lately forgotten his own mortality, he had desired to
   deprive the Almighty of his sway, and as it were to drag him down from
   heaven! For if God remains in heaven, men must pray to him; but Darius
   forbade any one from even daring to utter a prayer; hence as far as he
   could he deprived the Almighty of his power. Now he is compelled to
   obey his own subjects, although they exercise an almost disgraceful
   tyranny over him.

   Daniel now adds -- the king said this to him, Thy God, whom thou
   servest, or worshipest, faithfully, he will deliver thee! This word may
   be read in the optative mood, as we have said. There is no doubt that
   Darius really wished this; but it may mean, Thy God whom thou
   worshipest will deliver thee -- as if he had said, "Already I am not my
   own master, I am here tossed about by the blast of a tempest; my nobles
   compel me to this deed against my will; I, therefore, now resign thee
   and thy life to God, because it is not in my power to deliver thee;" as
   if this excuse lightened his own crime by transferring to God the power
   of preserving Daniel. This reason causes some to praise the piety of
   King Darius; but as I confess his clemency and humanity to be manifest
   in this speech, so it is clear that he had not a grain of piety when he
   thus wished to adorn himself in the spoils of deity! For although the
   superstitious do not seriously fear God, yet they are restrained by
   some dread of him; but he here wished to reduce the whole divinity to
   nothing. What sort of piety was this? The clemency of Darius may
   therefore be praised, but his sacrilegious pride can by no means be
   excused. Then why did he act so humanely towards Daniel? Because he had
   found him a faithful servant, and the regard which rendered him
   merciful arose from this peculiarity. He would not have manifested the
   same disposition towards others. If a hundred or a thousand Jews had
   been dragged before his tribunal, he would carelessly have condemned
   them all because they had disobeyed the edict! Hence he was obstinately
   impious and cruel. He spared Daniel for his own private advantage, and
   thus embraced him with his favor; but in praising his humanity, we do
   not perceive any sign of piety in him. But he says, the God whom thou
   worshipest, he will deliver thee, because, he had formerly known
   Daniel's prophecy concerning the destruction of the Chaldean monarchy;
   hence he is convinced, how Israel's God is conscious of all things, and
   rules everything by his will; yet, in the meantime, he neither worships
   him nor suffers others to do so; for as far as he could he had excluded
   God from his own rights. In thus attributing to God the power of
   delivering him, he does not act cordially; and hence his impiety is the
   more detestable, when he deprives God of his rights while he confesses
   him to be the true and only one endued with supreme power; and though
   he is but dust and ashes, yet he substitutes himself in his place! It
   now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [301] That is, he decreed or commanded. -- Calvin.

   [302] The pronoun is superfluous. -- Calvin.

   [303] Or, if we receive it in the manner of a prayer -- "may he deliver
   thee" -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:17

   17. And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and
   the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his
   lords; that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel.

   17. Ed adductus fuit lapis unus et positus super os spelunc: et
   obsignavit eum rex annulo suo et annulo procerum suorum, ne mutaretur
   placitum in Daniele. [304]


   There is no doubt that God's counsel provided that the nobles should
   seal the stone with their own rings, and thus close the mouth of the
   cave, and render the miracle more illustrious. For when the king
   approached on the morrow, the rings were all entire, and the seals all
   unbroken. Thus the preservation of this servant of God was manifestly
   by the aid of heaven and not by the art of men. Hence we see how boldly
   the king's nobles had compelled him to perform their pleasure. For he
   might seem deprived of all royal power when he delivered up to them a
   subject dear and faithful to himself, and ordered him to be thrown into
   the lions' den. They are not content with this compliance of the king;
   they extort another point from him -- the closing up of the mouth of
   the cave; and then they all seal the stone, lest any one should release
   Daniel. We see, then, when once liberty has been snatched away, all is
   over, especially when any one has become a slave by his own faults, and
   has attached himself to the counsels of the ungodly. For, at first,
   such slavery will not prevail as to induce a man to do everything which
   he is ordered, since he seems to be free; but when he has given himself
   up to such slavery as I have described, he is compelled to transgress
   not once or twice, but constantly and without ceasing. For example, if
   any one swerves from his duty through either the fear of man or
   flattery, or any other depraved affection, he will grant various
   things, not only when asked, but when urgently compelled. But when he
   has once submitted to the loss of freedom, he will be compelled, as I
   have already said, to consent to the most shameful deeds at the nod of
   any one. If any teacher or pastor of the Church should turn from the
   right path through the influence of ambition, the author of his
   declension will come to him again and say, What! do you dare to refuse
   me? Did I not obtain from you, yesterday or the day before, whatever I
   wished? Thus he will be compelled to transgress a second time in favor
   of the person to whom he has joined himself, and will also be forced to
   repeat the transgression continually. Thus princes also, who are not
   free agents through being under the tyranny of others, if they permit
   themselves to be overcome contrary to their conscience, lay aside all
   their authority, and are drawn aside in all directions by the will of
   their subjects. This example, then, is proposed to us in the case of
   King Darius, who after inflicting unjust punishment upon Daniel, adds
   this, He must be enclosed in the cave, and then, the stone must be
   sealed, -- and for what object? -- lest the doom should be changed;
   meaning, he did not dare to attempt anything in Daniel's favor. We see,
   then, how the king submitted to the greatest disgrace, because his
   nobles had no confidence in him; they refused to trust him when he
   ordered Daniel to be thrown into the lions' den, but they exacted a
   guarantee against his liberation, and would not suffer him to attempt
   anything. We thus see how disgracefully they withdrew their confidence
   from their king; next they use their authority against him, lest he
   should dare to remove the stone which had been sealed, unless he would
   incur the charge of falsehood by corrupting the public signatures, and
   of deception by falsifying the public documents. Hence this passage
   admonishes us against prostituting ourselves in slavery to the lust of
   men. Let every one serve his nearest neighbors as far as charity will
   allow and as custom demands. Meanwhile, no one ought to permit himself
   to be turned aside in different directions contrary to his conscience,
   because when he loses his free agency, he will be compelled to endure
   many affronts and to obey the foulest commands. This we see exemplified
   in the case of the panders to the avarice, or ambition, or cruelty of
   princes; for when once they are under the power of such men, they are
   most miserable victims; they cannot avoid the most extreme necessities,
   they become wretched slaves, and call down against themselves, a
   hundred times over, the anger of both God and man. It now follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [304] That is, "concerning Daniel." Those who render it "against" as if
   the king had purposely wished to oppose their violence, pervert the
   whole sense, since it was doubtless done at their instigation, lest the
   king should secretly provide for his liberation. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:18

   18. Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting:
   neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his sleep
   went from him.

   18. Tunc profectus est rex in palatium suum, et pernoctavit in jejunio,
   jejunus, et instrumenta musica [305] non fuerint allata coram ipso,
   [306] et somnus etiam discessit ab eo.


   Here Daniel relates the tardy repentance of the king, because although
   he was in the greatest grief, yet he did not correct his fault. And
   this occurs to many who are not hardened by contempt of God and their
   own depravity; they are drawn aside by others, and are dissatisfied
   with their own vices, while they still indulge in them. Would that the
   examples of this evil were rare in the world! but they occur everywhere
   before our eyes. Darius therefore is here proposed to us as
   intermediate between the ungodly and the wicked -- the righteous and
   the holy. The wicked do not hesitate to stir up the Almighty against
   them, and after they have dismissed all fears and all shame, they revel
   in their own licentiousness. Those who are ruled by the fear of God,
   although they sustain hard contests with the flesh, yet impose a check
   upon themselves, and bridle their perverse affections. Others are
   between the two, as I have said, not yet obstinate in their malice, and
   not quite satisfied with their corruption's, and still they follow them
   as if bound to them by ropes. Such was Darius; for he ought constantly
   to have repelled the calumny of his nobles; but when he saw himself so
   entangled by them, he ought to have opposed them manfully, and to have
   reproved them for so abusing their influence over him; yet he did not
   act thus, but rather bent before their fury. Meanwhile he bewails in
   his palace, and abstains from all food and delicacies. He thus shews
   his displeasure at the evil conduct at which he connived. We see then
   how ineffectual it is for our own conscience to smite us when we sin,
   and to cause us sorrow for our faults; we must go beyond this, so that
   sorrow may lead us on to repentance, as also Paul teaches us. (2
   Corinthians 7:10.) Darius, then, had reduced himself to difficulties;
   while he bewails his fault, he does not attempt to correct it. This
   was, indeed, the beginning of repentance, but nothing more; and when he
   feels any compunction, this stirs him up and allows him neither peace
   nor comfort. This lesson, then, we are to learn from Daniel's narrative
   of King Darius passing the whole of that night in wailing. It follows
   afterwards, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [305] Others translate "banquet" or "supper;" but this does not agree,
   because he first said the king passed the night fasting, therefore a
   different interpretation is more suitable, namely, "musical
   instruments." -- Calvin.

   [306] And thus all joys and delights ceased. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:19-20

   19. Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste
   unto the den of lions.

   19. Tunc rex in aurora, [307] surrexit cum illucesceret, et in
   festinatione, [308] ad speluncam leonum venit.

   20. And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto
   Daniel: and the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the
   living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver
   thee from the lions?

   20. Et cum appropinquasset ad foveam, ad Danielem in voce tristi, aut,
   lugubri, clamavit, loquutus est rex, et dixit Danieli, Daniel serve Dei
   viventis, Deus tuus quem tu colis ipsum jugiter, an potuit ad servandum
   te a leonibus? [309]


   Here the king begins to act with a little more consistency, when he
   approaches the pit. He was formerly struck down by fear as to yield to
   his nobles, and to forget his royal dignity by delivering himself up to
   them as a captive. But now he neither dreads their envy nor the
   perverseness of their discourse. He approaches the lions' den early in
   the morning, says he, -- that is, at dawn, before it was, light, coming
   during the twilight, and in haste. Thus we see him suffering under the
   most bitter grief, which overcomes all his former fears; for he might
   still have suffered from fear, through remembrance of that formidable
   denunciation, -- Thou wilt no longer enjoy thy supreme command, unless
   thou dost vindicate thine edict from contempt! But, as I have said,
   grief overcomes all fear. And yet we are unable to praise either his
   piety or his humanity; because, though he approaches the cave and calls
   out, "Daniel!" with a lamentable voice, still he is not yet angry with
   his nobles till he sees the servant of God perfectly safe. Then his
   spirits revive, as we shall see; but as yet he persists in his
   weakness, and is in a middle place between the perverse despisers and
   the hearty worshippers of God, who follow with an upright intention
   what they know to be just.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [307] That is, "in the morning." -- Calvin.

   [308] That is, "hastily." -- Calvin.

   [309] That is, could he preserve thee? -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty Father, since thou shewest us, by the example of thy
   servant Daniel, how we ought to persevere with consistency in the
   sincere worship of thee, and thus proceed towards true greatness of
   mind, that we may truly devote ourselves to thee. May we not be turned
   aside in any direction through the lust of men, but may we persist in
   our holy calling, and so conquer all dangers, and arrive at length at
   the fruit of victory -- that happy immortality which is laid up for us
   in heaven, through Christ our Lord. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Thirtieth.

   WANT of time compelled me to break off our last Lecture at the point
   where Daniel relates how the king approached the cave Now he reports
   his words, -- O Daniel, servant of the living God! thy God whom thou
   worshipest constantly, has he been able to deliver thee? says he.
   Darius declares the God of Israel to be the living One. But if there is
   a living God, he excludes all those imaginary deities whom men fancy
   for themselves by their own ingenuity. For it is necessary that deity
   should be one, and this principle is acknowledged by even the profane.
   However men may be deluded by their dreams, yet they all confess the
   impossibility of having more gods than one. They distort, indeed, God's
   character, but they cannot deny his unity. When Darius uttered this
   praise of the God of Israel, he confesses all other deities to be mere
   fictions; but he shews how, as I have said, the profane hold the first
   principle, but afterwards allow it to escape entirely from their
   thoughts. This passage does not prove, as some allege, the real
   conversion of King Darius, and his sincere adoption of true piety; for
   he always worshipped his own idols, but thought it sufficient if he
   raised the God of Israel to the highest rank. But, as we know, God
   cannot admit a companion, for he is jealous of his own glory. (Isaiah
   42:8.) It was too cold, then, for Darius simply to acknowledge the God
   whom Daniel worshipped to be superior to all others; because where God
   reigns, all idols must of necessity be reduced to nothing; as also it
   is said in the Psalms, Let God reign, and let the gods of all nations
   fall before him. Darius then proceeded so far as to devote himself to
   the true and only God, but was compelled to pay the greatest respect to
   Israel's God. Meanwhile he always remained sunk in his own
   superstitions to which he had been accustomed.

   He afterwards adds, Thy God, whom thou worshipest continually, could he
   free thee from the lions? He here speaks doubtfully, as unbelievers do,
   who seem to have some ground for hope, but no firm or sure persuasion
   in their own minds. I suppose this invocation to be natural, since a
   certain secret instinct naturally impels men to fly to God; for
   although scarcely one in twenty leans upon God's word, yet all men call
   upon God occasionally. They wish to discover whether God desires to
   assist them and to aid them in their necessities; meanwhile, as I have
   said, there is no firm persuasion in their hearts, which was the state
   of the mind of King Darius. Could God deliver thee? says he; as if
   God's power could possibly be doubted! If he had said, Has God
   delivered thee? this would have been tolerable. For God was not bound
   by any law to be always snatching his people from death, since, we very
   well know, this rests entirely with his good pleasure. When, therefore,
   he permits his people to suffer under the lusts of the impious, his
   power is by no means diminished, since their liberation depends upon
   his mere will and pleasure. His power, therefore, ought by no means to
   be called in question. We observe, that Darius was never truly
   converted, and never distinctly acknowledged the true and only God, but
   was seized with a blind fear, which, whether he would or not, compelled
   him to attribute the supreme honor to Israel's God. And this was not an
   ingenuous confession, but was rather extorted from him. It now follows:
   --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:21-22

   21. Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever.

   21. Tunc Daniel cum rege loquutus est, rex, in eternum vive.

   22. My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that
   they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in
   me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.

   22. Deus meus misit angelum suum, et conclusit os leonum, et non
   nocuerunt mihi: quoniam coram ipso innocentia, [310] inventa est in me:
   atque atiam coram te, rex, pravitatem non commisi.


   Here Daniel answers the king moderately and softly, although he had
   been cast into the cave by his command. He might have deservedly been
   angry and expostulated with him, because he had been so impiously
   deserted by him, for King Darius had found him a faithful servant, and
   had used his services for his own advantage. When he saw himself
   oppressed by unjust calumnies, the king did not take his part so
   heartily as he ought; and at length, being overcome by the threats of
   his nobles, he ordered Daniel to be cast into the pit. Daniel might, as
   I have said, have complained of the king's cruelty and perfidy. He does
   not do this, but is silent concerning this injury, because his
   deliverance would sufficiently magnify the glory of God. The holy
   Prophet desired nothing else, except the king's welfare, which he prays
   for. Although he uses the ordinary phrase, yet he speaks from his
   heart, when he says, O king, live for ever! that is, may God protect
   thy life and bless thee perpetually. Many salute their kings and even
   their friends in this way through mere form; but there is no doubt that
   Daniel heartily wished the king the enjoyment of long life and
   happiness. He afterwards adds,

   My God, says he, sent his angel, and shut the lions' mouths! Thus we
   see that Daniel openly assigns to angels the duty of rendering
   assistance, while the whole power remains in the hands of God himself.
   He says, therefore, that he was freed by the hand and assistance of an
   angel, but shews how the angel was the agent and not the author of his
   safety. God, therefore, says he, sent his angel We have often seen how
   indistinctly the Chaldeans spoke when mentioning the Deity; they called
   their deities holy, but Daniel here ascribes the entire glory to God
   alone. He does not bring forward a multitude of deities according to
   the prevalent opinion among the profane. He puts prominently forward
   the unity of God; and then he adds the presence of angels as assisting
   God's servants, shewing how they perform whatever is enjoined upon
   them. Thus the whole praise of their salvation remains with the one
   God, since angels do not assist whomsoever they please, and are not
   moved by their own will, but solely in obedience to God's commands.

   We must now notice what follows: God had shut the lions' mouths For by
   these words the Prophet shews how lions and the most cruel beasts are
   in the hands of God, and are restrained by his secret curb, so that
   they can neither rage nor commit any injury unless by God's permission.
   We may thus learn that savage beasts are only so far injurious to us as
   God may permit them to humble our pride. Meanwhile, we may perceive
   that no beast is so cruel as to injure us by either his claws or his
   teeth, unless God give him the reins. And this instruction is worthy of
   especial notice, since we tremble at the least danger, even at the
   noise of a falling leaf. As we are necessarily exposed to many dangers
   on all sides, and surrounded by various forms of death, hence we should
   be harassed by wretched anxiety unless this principle supported us; not
   only is our life under God's protection, but nothing can injure us
   while he directs everything by his will and pleasure. And this
   principle ought to be extended to the devils themselves, and to impious
   and wicked men, for we know the devil to be always anxious to destroy
   us, like a roaring lion, for he prowls about seeking whom he may
   devour, as Peter says in his First Ephstle, (1 Peter 5:8.) For we see
   how all the impious plot for our destruction continually, and how madly
   they are inflamed against us. But God, who can close the lion's mouth,
   will also both restrain the devil and all the wicked from hurting any
   one without his permission. Experience also shews us how the devil and
   all the impious are controlled by him, for we should perish every
   moment unless he warded off by his opposing influence the numberless
   evils which ever hang over us. We ought to perceive how the singular
   protection of God preserves us in daily safety amidst the ferocity and
   madness of our foes. Daniel says he suffered no loss of any kind,
   because before God his righteousness was found in him. These words
   signify that his preservation arose from God wishing to vindicate his
   own glory and worship which he had commanded in his law. The Prophet
   does not here boast in his own righteousness, but rather shews how his
   deliverance arose from God's wishing to testify by a certain and clear
   proof his approval of that worship for which Daniel had contended even
   to death. We see, then, how Daniel refers all things to the approval of
   the worship of God. The conclusion is, he was the advocate of a pious
   and holy cause, and prepared to undergo death, not for any foolish
   imagination, nor by any rash impulse, nor any blind zeal, but because
   he was assured of his being a worshipper of the one God. His being the
   defender of the cause of piety and holiness was, as he asserts, the
   reason of his preservation. This is the correct conclusion.

   Hence we readily gather the folly of the Papists who, from this and
   similar passages, endeavor to establish the merit and righteousness of
   good works. Oh! Daniel was preserved because righteousness was found in
   him before God; hence God repays every man according to the merits of
   his works! But we must first consider Daniel's intention in the
   narrative before us; for, as I have said, he does not boast in his own
   merits, but wishes his preservation to be ascribed to the Deity as a
   testimony to his true and pure worship, so as to shame King Darius, and
   to shew all his superstitions to be impious, and especially, to
   admonish him concerning that sacrilegious edict by which he arrogated
   to himself the supreme command, and, as far as he could, abolished the
   very existence of God. With the view, then, of admonishing Darius, the
   Prophet says his cause was just. And to render the solution of the
   difficulty more easy, we must remark the difference between eternal
   salvation and special deliverance's. God frees us from eternal death,
   and adopts us into the hope of eternal life, not because he finds any
   righteousness in us but through his own gratuitous choice, and he
   perfects in us his own work without any respect to our works. With
   reference to our eternal salvation, our righteousness is by no means
   regarded, because whenever God examines us, he only finds materials for
   condemnation. But when we consider particular deliverance's, he may
   then notice our righteousness, not as if it were naturally ours, but he
   stretches forth his hand to those whom he governs by his Spirit and
   urges to obey his call; and if they incur any danger in their efforts
   to obey his will, he delivers them. The meaning then is exactly the
   same as if any one should assert that God favors righteous causes, but
   it has nothing to do with merits. Hence the Papists trifle, like
   children, when they use this passage to elicit from it human merits;
   for Daniel wished to assert nothing but the pure worship of God, as if
   he had said, not only his reason proceeded from God, but there was
   another cause for his deliverance, namely, the wish of the Almighty to
   shew the world experimentally the justice of his cause.

   He adds, And even before thee, O king, I have committed nothing wrong
   It is clear that the Prophet had violated the king's edict. Why, then,
   does he not ingenuously confess this? Nay, why does he contend that he
   has not transgressed against the king? Because he conducted himself
   with fidelity in all his duties, he could free himself from every
   calumny by which he knew himself oppressed, as if he had despised the
   king's sovereignty. But Daniel was not so bound to the king of the
   Persians when he claimed for himself as a god what ought not to be
   offered to him. We know how earthly empires are constituted by God,
   only on the condition that he deprives himself of nothing, but shines
   forth alone, and all magistrates must be set in regular order, and
   every authority in existence must be subject to his glory. Since,
   therefore, Daniel could not obey the king's edict without denying God,
   as we have previously seen, he did not transgress against the king by
   constantly persevering in that exercise of piety to which he had been
   accustomed, and by calling on his God three times a-day. To make this
   the more evident, we must remember that passage of Peter,

   "Fear God, honor the king." (1 Peter 2:17.)

   The two commands are connected together, and cannot be separated from
   one another. The fear of God ought to precede, that kings may obtain
   their authority. For if any one begins his reverence of an earthly
   prince by rejecting that of God, he will act preposterously, since this
   is a complete perversion of the order of nature. Then let God be feared
   in the first place, and earthly princes will obtain their authority, if
   only God shines forth, as I have already said. Daniel, therefore, here
   defends himself with justice, since he had not committed any crime
   against the king; for he was compelled to obey the command of God, and
   he neglected what the king had ordered in opposition to it. For earthly
   princes lay aside all their power when they rise up against God, and
   are unworthy of being reckoned in the number of mankind. We ought
   rather utterly to defy than to obey them whenever they are so restive
   and wish to spoil God of his rights, and, as it were, to seize upon his
   throne and draw him down from heaven. Now, therefore, we understand the
   sense of this passage. It follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   [310] Or, integrity. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:23

   23. Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they
   should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the
   den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in
   his God.

   23. Tunc rex valde exhilaratus in se, vel, super eo, Danielem jussit
   educi ex spelunca: et eductus fuit Daniel ex spelunca: et nulla
   corruptio, vel, laesio, inventa fuit in eo: quia credidit, vel,
   confisus est, Deo suo.


   Daniel confirms what he had formerly narrated concerning the feelings
   of King Darius. As he had departed in anxiety to his palace, had
   abstained from food and drink, and had laid aside all pleasures and
   delights, so also he rejoiced in hearing of the wonderful deliverance
   from death of God's holy servant. He afterwards adds, And by the king's
   command Daniel was drawn out of the cave, and no corruption was found
   in him. This cannot be ascribed to good fortune. Hence God made his
   power conspicuous in providing for Daniel's safety from the grasp of
   the lions. He would have been torn to pieces had not God closed their
   mouths; and this contributes in no slight degree to magnify the
   miracle, since no scratch or touch was found upon his body. As the
   lions then spared him, it arose from God's secret counsel; and he
   marked this more clearly, when his calumniators were thrown into the
   cave, and were immediately torn by the lions, as he will soon add. But
   we must notice the reason which is given: He was preserved, since he
   trusted in his God! It will often happen, that a person may have a good
   cause, and yet succeed badly and unhappily; because he adds to what is
   otherwise worthy of praise, too great a confidence in his own counsels,
   prudence, and industry. Hence it is not surprising if those who
   undertake good causes often fail of success, as we often see among the
   profane. For the history of all ages bears witness, to the perishing of
   those who cherish a just cause; but this arises through their perverse
   confidence, since they never contemplated the service of God, but
   rather considered their own praise and the applause of the world.
   Hence, as ambition seized them, they became pleased with their own
   plans. Thus arose that saying of Brutus, "Virtue is a frivolous thing!"
   because he thought himself unworthily treated in fighting for the
   liberty of Rome, while the gods were adverse instead of propitious. As
   if God ought to have conferred upon him that aid which he had never
   hoped and never sought. For we know the pride of that hero's
   disposition. I bring forward but one example; but if we diligently
   weigh the motives which impel the profane when they fight strenuously
   for good objects, we shall find ambition to be the prevailing motive.
   No wonder then if God deserted them in this particular, since they were
   unworthy of experiencing his help. For this reason Daniel states, that
   he was safely preserved, because he trusted in his God.

   The Apostle refers to this in the eleventh chapter of the Ephstle to
   the Hebrews, (Hebrews 11:33,) where he says some were snatched away or
   preserved from the mouths of lions through faith. Hence he assigns the
   cause of Daniel's escaping in safety, and recalls us to faith. But we
   must here consider the meaning and force of the word "believing." For
   the Prophet does not simply speak of his deliverance as springing from
   believing Israel's God to be the true and only God, the Maker of heaven
   and earth, but from his committing his life to him, from his reposing
   on his grace, from his fixed determination that his end must be happy,
   if he worshipped him. Since, therefore, Daniel was certainly persuaded
   that his life was in God's hand, and that his hope in him was not in
   vain, he boldly incurred danger, and intrepidly suffered for the
   sincere worship of God; hence he says, he believed in God We see then
   that the word "belief" is not taken coldly, as the Papists dream, since
   their notion implies an unfolded or dead and shapeless faith, for they
   think faith nothing else but a confused apprehension of the Deity.
   Whenever men have any conception of God at all, the Papists think this
   to be faith; but the Holy Spirit teaches us far otherwise. For we must
   consider the language of the Apostle, -- We do not properly believe in
   God, unless we determine him to be a rewarder of all who diligently
   seek him. (Hebrews 11:6.) God is not sought by foolish arrogance, as if
   by our merits we could confer an obligation upon him; but he is sought
   by faith, by humility, and by invocation. But when we are persuaded
   that God is the rewarder of all who seek him, and we know how he ought
   to be sought, this is true faith. So Daniel did not doubt that God
   would deliver him, because he did not distrust that teaching of piety
   which he had learnt from a boy, and through reliance on which he had
   always called upon God. This, therefore, was the cause of his
   deliverance. Meanwhile, it is clear that Daniel's trust in God did not
   spring from any previous instruction concerning the result; for he
   rather committed his life to God, since he was prepared for death.
   Therefore Daniel could not acknowledge this before he was cast into the
   cave, and exposed to the lions, being ignorant whether God would
   deliver him, as we previously saw in the case of his companions, "God,
   if he pleases, will deliver us; but if not, we are prepared to worship
   Him, and to disobey thy edict." If Daniel had been taught the issue
   beforehand, his constancy would not have deserved much praise; but
   since he was willing to meet death fearlessly for the worship of God,
   and could deny himself and renounce the world, this is a true and
   serious proof of his faith and constancy. He believed therefore in God,
   not because he hoped for such a miracle, but because he knew his own
   happiness to consist in persisting in the true worship of God. So Paul
   says, Christ is gain to me, both in life and in death. (Philippians
   1:21.) Daniel therefore rested in the help of God, but he closed his
   eyes to the event, and was not remarkably anxious concerning his life,
   but since his mind was erected towards the hope of a better life, even
   if he had to die a hundred times, yet he never would have failed in his
   confidence, because our faith is extended beyond the boundaries of this
   frail and corruptible life, as all the pious know well enough. What I
   have already touched upon afterwards follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:24

   24. And the king commanded, and they brought those men which had
   accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their
   children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and
   brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the
   den.

   24. Et jussit rex, et adduxerunt viros illos qui instruxerant [311]
   accusationem adversus eum, nempe Danielem; et in foveam, speluncam,
   leonum projecti sunt ipsi, liberi ipsorum, et uxores eorum, et nondum
   pervenerant ad fundum, [312] speluncae, quando dominati sunt, [313] in
   eos leones, et omnia ossa eorum fregerunt.


   By this circumstance God's virtue shone forth more clearly in
   preserving Daniel, because those who had accused him were immediately
   destroyed by the lions. For if any one should say that the lions were
   satisfied, or there was any other reason why Daniel was not destroyed,
   why, when he was withdrawn, did such great madness immediately impel
   those beasts to tear and devour, not one man only, but a great
   multitude? Not one of the nobles was preserved; next their wives and
   children were added. Lions scarcely ever proceed to such a pitch of
   savageness, and yet they all perished to a man; then how did Daniel
   escape? We surely see how God by this comparison wished to bear witness
   to his own virtue, lest any one should object that Daniel was left by
   the lions because they were already gorged, and desired no other prey,
   for they would have been content with either three or four men; but
   they devoured men, women, and children. Hence the mouths of the lions
   were clearly restrained by the divine power, since Daniel was safe
   during a whole night, but they perished immediately, as soon as they
   were cast into the cave; because we again see how these beasts were
   impelled by sudden madness, so that they did not wait till their prey
   arrived at the bottom, but devoured them as they fell. We shall leave
   the rest till to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [311] "Had enacted," "had cried out;" qui avoyent dresse ceste calomnie
   -- Calvin's own translation into French.

   [312] Or, pavement. -- Calvin.

   [313] Or, prevailed. -- Calvin
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since we were created and placed in this world by
   thee, and are also nourished by thy bounty, for the very purpose of
   consecrating our life to thee, -- Grant, I pray, that we may be
   prepared to live and die to thee. May we seek only to maintain the pure
   and sincere worship of thyself. May we so acquiesce in thy help as not
   to hesitate about breaking through all difficulties, and to offer
   ourselves to instant death, whenever thou requirest it. May we rely not
   only on thy promise, which remains for ever, but upon the many proofs
   which thou hast granted us of the present vitality of thy mighty power.
   Mayest thou be our deliverer in every sense, whether we live or die;
   and may we be blessed in persevering in our confidence in thy name, and
   thy true confession, until at length we are gathered into thy heavenly
   kingdom, which thou hast prepared for us by the blood of thine
   only-begotten Son. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Lecture Thirty-first.

   AT the end of yesterday's Lecture, the enemies of Daniel who had
   malignantly, enviously, and cruelly slandered him, were cast into the
   lions' den, and were torn to pieces with their wives and children; and
   thus the miracle was more clearly conspicuous, as we have previously
   said. Here, again, we may learn how lions are governed by God's hand,
   and are restrained from shewing their ferocity everywhere and against
   every one, except when God permits them. As it is said in the
   ninety-first Psalm, Thou shalt walk upon the lion and the basilisk, and
   tread upon the lion and the dragon; (Psalm 91:13.) So also, on the
   other hand, God denounces against the unbelievers by the Prophet Amos,
   (Amos 5:19,) The lions shall come to meet them, if they go forth from
   their houses. We see, then, how God restrains the cruelty of lions as
   often as he pleases, and how he excites them to madness when he wishes
   to punish mankind. With regard to their wives and children being also
   cast into the den, we need not dispute with any anxiety, whether or not
   this punishment was just. For it seems to be a sure rule of equity,
   that punishment should not pass on to the innocent, especially when it
   involves their life. In all ages, it has been the custom of
   well-ordered States, for many punishments to be inflicted on children
   as well as their parents, as in a public sale of goods, or any charge
   of violence or treason; in criminal cases also, the infamy of parents
   extends to the children, (but this is far more severe, to slay children
   with their parents,) though they cannot possibly be guilty of the same
   crime. Yet, although this is not one of the customary cases, we must
   not hastily condemn it as unjust. We see how God orders whole families
   to be exterminated from the world as a mark of his hatred; but, as a
   just Judge, he always is moderate in his severity. This example, then,
   cannot be precisely condemned, but we had better leave it in doubt. We
   are aware of the cruel and barbarous manner in which the kings of the
   East exercise their sway, or rather their tyranny, on their subjects.
   Hence there is no reason why any one should fatigue himself with the
   question, since King Darius was so much grieved at his being deceived.
   Hence he not only exacted punishment from these wicked slanderers for
   oppressing Daniel, but because he was himself affected by their
   injustice. He wished rather to avenge himself than Daniel; he was not
   content with retaliation, but condemned their children also to
   destruction. It follows, --
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:25-27

   25. Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages,
   that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.

   25. Tunc Darius rex, scripsit omnibus populis, et gentibus, et linguis
   qui habitabant in tota terra, Pax vestra multiplicetur.

   26. I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble
   and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and
   stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,
   and his dominion shall be even unto the end.

   26. A me positum est decretum in omni dominatione, [314] regni mei, ut
   sint metuentes et paventes, [315] a conspectu Dei Danielis; [316] quia
   ipse est Deus vivus, et permanens in seculum: et regnum ejus non
   corrumpetur, et dominatio ejus [317] usque in finem.

   27. He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in
   heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the
   lions.

   27. Eripiens et liberans, et edens signa et miracula [318] in coelo et
   in terra: qui eripuit Danielem e manu leonum.


   Here Daniel adds the king's edict, which he wished to be promulgated.
   And by this edict he bore witness that he was so moved by the
   deliverance of Daniel, as to attribute the supreme glory to the God of
   Israel. Meanwhile, I do not think this a proof of the king's real
   piety, as some interpreters here extol King Darius without moderation,
   as if he had really repented and embraced the pure worship prescribed
   by the law of Moses. Nothing of this kind can be collected from the
   words of the edict -- and this circumstance shews it -- for his empire
   was never purged from its superstitions. King Darius still allowed his
   subjects to worship idols; and he did not refrain from polluting
   himself with such defilement's; but he wished to place the God of
   Israel on the highest elevation, thus attempting to mingle fire and
   water! We have previously discussed this point. For the profane think
   they discharge their duty to the true God, if they do not openly
   despise him, but assign him some place or other; and, especially, if
   they prefer him to all idols, they think they have satisfied God. But
   this is all futile; for unless they abolish all superstitions, God by
   no means obtains his right, since he allows of no equals. Hence this
   passage by no means proves any true and serious piety in King Darius;
   but it implies simply his being deeply moved by the miracle, and his
   celebrating through all the regions subject to him the name and glory
   of the God of Israel. Finally, as this was a special impulse on King
   Darius, so it did not proceed beyond a particular effect; he
   acknowledged God's power and goodness on all sides; but he seized upon
   that specimen which was placed directly before his eyes. Hence he did
   not continue to acknowledge the God of Israel by devoting himself to
   true and sincere piety; but, as I have said, he wished him to be
   conspicuously superior to other gods, but not to be the only God. But
   God rejects this modified worship; and thus there is no reason for
   praising King Darius. Meanwhile his example will condemn all those who
   profess themselves to be catholic or Christian kings, or defenders of
   the faith, since they not only bury true piety, but, as far as they
   possibly can, weaken the whole worship of God, and would willingly
   extinguish his name from the world, and thus tyrannize over the pious,
   and establish impious superstitions by their own cruelty. Darius will
   be a fit judge for them, and the edict here recited by Daniel will be
   sufficient for the condemnation of them all.

   He now says, The edict was written for all people, nations, and
   tongues, who dwell in the whole earth. We see how Darius wished to make
   known God's power not only to the neighboring people, but studied to
   promulgate it far and wide. He wrote not only for Asia and Chaldea, but
   also for the Medes and Persians. He had never been the ruler of Persia,
   yet since his father-in-law had received him into alliance in the
   empire, his authority extended thither. This is the sense of the
   phrase, the whole earth This does not refer to the whole habitable
   world, but to that monarchy which extended through almost the entire
   East, since the Medes and Persians then held the sway from the sea as
   far as Egypt. When we consider the magnitude of this empire, Daniel may
   well say, the edict was promulgated through the whole earth. Peace be
   multiplied unto you! We know how kings in this way soothe their
   subjects, and use soft persuasions for more easily accomplishing their
   wishes, and thus obtain the implicit obedience of their subjects. And
   it is gratuitous on their part to implore peace on their subjects.
   Meanwhile, as I have already said, they court their favor by these
   enticements, and thus prepare their subjects to submit to the yoke. By
   the term "peace," a state of prosperity is implied; meaning, may you be
   prosperous and happy. He afterwards adds, the decree is placed in their
   sight, that is, they display their command before all their subjects.
   This, then, is the force of the phrase, my edict has been placed; that
   is, if my authority and power prevail with you, you must thus far obey
   me; that all may fear, or, that all may be afraid and tremble before
   the God of Daniel! By fear and terror he means simply reverence, but he
   speaks as the profane are accustomed to do, who abhor God's name. He
   seems desirous of expressing how conspicuous was the power of the God
   of Israel, which ought properly to impress every one, and induce all to
   worship with reverence, and fear, and trembling. And this method of
   speaking is derived from a correct principle; since lawful worship is
   never offered to God but when we are humbled before him. Hence God
   often calls himself terrible, not because he wishes his worshippers to
   approach him with fear, but, as we have said, because the souls of men
   will never be drawn forth to reverence unless they seriously comprehend
   his power, and thus become afraid of his judgment. But if fear alone
   flourishes in men's minds, they cannot form themselves to piety, since
   we must consider that passage of the Psalm,

   "With thee is propitiation that thou mayest be feared."
   (Psalm 130:4.)

   God, therefore, cannot be properly worshipped and feared, unless we are
   persuaded that he may be entreated; nay, are quite sure that he is
   propitious to us. Yet it is necessary for fear and dread to precede the
   humiliation of the pride of the flesh.

   This, then, is the meaning of the phrase, that all should fear or be
   afraid of the God of Daniel The king calls him so, not because Daniel
   had fabricated a God for himself, but because he was his only
   worshipper. We very properly speak of Jupiter as the god of the Greeks,
   since he was deified by their folly, and hence obtained a name and a
   celebrity throughout the rest of the world. Meanwhile, Jupiter, and
   Minerva, and the crowd of false deities received their names from the
   same origin. There is another reason why King Darius calls the God whom
   Daniel worshipped Daniel's God, as he is called the God of Abraham, not
   through deriving any precarious authority from Abraham, but through his
   manifesting himself to Abraham. To explain this more clearly -- Why is
   he called the God of Daniel rather than of the Babylonians? because
   Daniel had learnt from the law of Moses the pure worship of God, and
   the covenant which he had made with Abraham and the holy fathers, and
   the adoption of Israel as his peculiar people. He complied with the
   worship prescribed in the Law, and that worship depended on the
   covenant. Hence this name is not given as if Daniel had been free to
   fashion or imagine any god for himself; but because he had worshipped
   that God who had revealed himself by his word. Lastly, this phrase
   ought to be so understood as to induce all to fear that God who had
   made a covenant with Abraham and his posterity, and had chosen for
   himself a peculiar people. He taught the method of true and lawful
   worship, and unfolded it in his law, so that Daniel worshipped him. We
   now understand the meaning of the clause. Thus we may learn to
   distinguish the true God from all the idols and fictions of men, if we
   desire to worship him acceptably. For many think they worship God when
   they wander through whatever errors they please, and never remain
   attached to one true God. But this is perverse, nay, it is nothing but
   a profanation of true piety to worship God so confusedly. Hence, we
   must contemplate the distinction which I have pointed out, that our
   minds may be always included within the bounds of the word, and not
   wander from the true God, if indeed we desire to retain him and to
   follow the religion which pleases him. We must continue, I say, within
   the limits of the word, and not turn away on either one side or the
   other; since numberless fallacies of the devil will meet us
   immediately, unless the word holds us in strict obedience. As far as
   concerns Darius, he acknowledged the one true God, but as we have
   already said, he did not reject that fictitious and perverse worship in
   which he was brought up; -- such a mixture is intolerable before God!

   He adds, Because he is alive, and remains for ever! This seems to
   reduce all false gods to nothing; but it has been previously said, and
   the circumstances prove it true, that when the profane turn their
   attention to the supreme God, they begin to wander directly. If they
   constantly acknowledged the true God, they would instantly exclude all
   fictitious ones; but they think it sufficient if God obtains the first
   rank; meanwhile they add minor deities, so that he lies hid in a crowd,
   although he enjoys a slight pre-eminence. Such, then, was the reasoning
   and the plan of Darius, because he held nothing clearly or sincerely
   concerning the essence of the one true God; but he thought the supreme
   power resident in the God of Israel, just as other nations worship
   their own deities! We see, then, that he did not depart from the
   superstitions which he had imbibed in his boyhood; and hence, we have
   no reason for praising his piety, unless in this particular case. But,
   meanwhile, God extorted a confession from him, in which he describes
   his nature to us. He calls him "the living God," not only because he
   has life in himself, but out of himself, and is also the origin and
   fountain of life. This epithet ought to be taken actively, for God not
   only lives but has life in himself; and he is also the source of life,
   since there is no life independent of him. He afterwards adds, He
   remains for ever, and thus distinguishes him from all creatures, in
   which there is no firmness nor stability. We know also how everything
   in heaven, as well as heaven itself, is subject to various changes. In
   this, therefore, God differs from everything created, since he is
   unchangeable and invariable. He adds, His kingdom is not corrupted, and
   his dominion remains for ever. Here he clearly expresses what he had
   formerly stated respecting the firmness of God's estate, since he not
   only remains essentially the same, but exercises his power throughout
   the whole world, and governs the world by his own virtue, and sustains
   all things. For if he had only said, "God remains for ever," we are so
   perverse and narrow-minded as to interpret it merely as follows: --
   God, indeed, is not changeable in his own essence, but our minds could
   not comprehend his power as universally diffused. This explanation,
   then, is worthy of notice, since Darius clearly expresses that God's
   kingdom is incorruptible and his dominion everlasting.

   Secondly, he calls God his deliverer. Those who consider this edict as
   an illustrious example of piety, will say Darius spoke evangelically as
   a herald of the mercy of God. But, as we have previously said, Darius
   never generally embraced what Scripture teaches concerning God's
   cherishing his people with clemency, his helping them through his being
   merciful to them, and nourishing them with a father's kindness. King
   Darius knew nothing of this reason. Daniel's deliverance was well
   known; this was a particular proof of God's favor. If Darius had only
   partially perceived God's loving-kindness towards his servants, then he
   would have acknowledged his readiness to preserve and deliver them.
   This would be too frigid unless the cause was added, -- God is a
   deliverer! since he has deigned to choose his servants, and bears
   witness to his being their Father, and listens to their prayers, and
   pardons their transgressions. Unless, therefore, the hope of
   deliverance is founded on God's gratuitous adoption and pity, any
   acknowledgment of him will be but partial and inefficient. Darius,
   then, does not speak here as if truly and purely instructed in the
   mercy of God; but he speaks of him only as the deliverer of his own
   people. He correctly asserts in general, "God is a deliverer," since he
   snatched Daniel from the mouth of lions, that is, from their power and
   fierceness. Darius, I say, reasons correctly, when he derives from one
   example the more extensive doctrine concerning the power of God to
   preserve and snatch away his people whenever he pleases; meanwhile, he
   acknowledges God's visible power in a single act, but he does not
   understand the principal cause and fountain of God's affection to
   Daniel to be, his belonging to the sons of Abraham, and his paternal
   favor in preserving him. Hence this instruction should profit us and
   touch our minds effectually, since God is our deliverer; and, in the
   first place, we must confess ourselves to be admitted to favor on the
   condition of his pardoning us, and not treating us according to our
   deserts, but indulging us as sons through his amazing liberality. This
   then is the true sense.

   He afterwards says, he performs signs and wonders in heaven and earth!
   This ought to be referred to power and dominion, as previously
   mentioned; but Darius always considers the events before his eyes. He
   had seen Daniel dwelling safely with lions, and all the rest destroyed
   by them; these were manifest proofs of God's power; hence he properly
   asserts, he performs signs and wonders. But there is no doubt, that
   Darius was admonished by the other signs which had taken place before
   he possessed the monarchy; he had doubtless heard what had happened to
   King Nebuchadnezzar, and then to King Belshazzar, whom Darius had slain
   when he seized his kingdom. He collects, therefore, more testimonies to
   God's power, for the purpose of illustrating his glory in the
   preservation of Daniel. In short, if Darius had renounced his
   superstitions, the confession of his piety would have been pure, and
   full, and ingenuous; but because he did not forsake the worship of his
   false gods, and continued his attachment to their pollution, his piety
   cannot deserve our praise, and his true and serious conversion cannot
   be collected from his edict. This is the complete sense. It now
   follows:
     __________________________________________________________________

   [314] Or, throughout the whole of the dominions. -- Calvin.

   [315] That is, that they should fear and be afraid. -- Calvin.

   [316] That is, before the God of Daniel. -- Calvin.

   [317] Or, power. -- Calvin.

   [318] "Wonders," as some translate it. -- Calvin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel 6:28

   28. So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign
   of Cyrus the Persian.

   28. Daniel autem ipse prospere egit [319] in regno Darii et in regno
   Cyri Persae.


   The word tslch, tzelech, properly signifies to "pass over," and the
   signification is here metaphorical, in the sense of being prosperous.
   There is no doubt, however, of there being a silent contrast between
   the kingdom of the Persians and the Chaldean monarchy, that is, to
   speak more concisely and clearly, between the twofold condition of
   Daniel. For, as we have said, he was for some time in obscurity under
   Nebuchadnezzar; when this monarchy was about to perish he became
   conspicuous; and throughout the whole period of the reign of the
   Chaldeans he was obscure and contemptible. All indeed had heard of him
   as a remarkable and illustrious Prophet, but he was rejected from the
   palace. At one time he was seated at the king's gate, in great honor
   and respect, and then again he was cast out. During the continuance of
   the Chaldee monarchy, Daniel was not held in any esteem; but under that
   of the Medes and Persians he prospered, and was uniformly treated with
   marked respect, for Cyrus and Darius were not so negligent as instantly
   to forget the wonderful works of God performed by his hand. Hence the
   word "passing through," pleases me, since, as I have said, it is a mark
   of the continual possession of honor; for not only King Darius, but
   also Cyrus exalted him and raised him into the number of his nobles,
   when he heard of his favor. It is clear that he left Babylon and went
   elsewhere. Very probably he was not long among the Medes, for
   [38]Darius or Cyaxares died without any heirs, and then his whole power
   passed to Cyrus alone, who was his nephew, through his sister, and his
   son-in-law being his daughter's husband. No doubt, Daniel here commends
   God's favor and kindness towards himself, because this was not the
   usual solace of exile, to obtain the highest favor among foreign and
   barbarous nations, or attain the largest share of their honor and
   reverence. God, therefore, alleviated his sorrow by this consolation in
   his exile. Hence Daniel here not only regards himself in his private
   capacity, but also the object of his dignity. For God wished his name
   to be spread abroad and celebrated over all those regions through which
   Daniel was known, since no one could behold without remembering the
   power and glory of Israel's God. Daniel, therefore, wished to mark
   this. On the other hand also, no doubt, it was a matter of grief to him
   to be deprived of his country, not like the rest of mankind, but
   because the land of Canaan was the peculiar inheritance of God's
   people. When Daniel was snatched away and led off to a distance, as far
   as Media and Persia, without the slightest hope of return, there is no
   doubt that he suffered continual distress. Nor was the splendor of his
   station among the profane of such importance as to induce him to prefer
   it to that pledge of God's favor and paternal adoption in the land of
   Canaan. He had doubtless inscribed on his heart that passage of
   David's,

   "I had rather be in the court of the Lord, than in the midst of the
   greatest riches of the ungodly: then, I had rather be a despised one in
   the house of God, than to dwell in the tents of the unrighteous."
   (Psalm 84:10.)

   Thus Daniel had been taught. Ezekiel, too, properly includes him among
   the three most holy men who have lived since the beginning of the
   world. (Ezekiel 14:14.) [320] This was of the greatest moment; for when
   he was a youth, or at least but middle aged, he was joined with Job and
   Noah, and was the third in rare and almost incredible sanctity! Since
   this was his character, he was no doubt affected with the greatest
   sorrow when he perceived himself subject to perpetual exile, without
   the slightest hope of return, and of being able to worship God in his
   temple and to offer sacrifice with the rest. But lest he should be
   ungrateful to God, he desires to express his sense of the uncommon
   benevolence with which, though an exile and a stranger, and subject to
   reproach among other captives, he was treated and even honored among
   the Medes and Persians. This, therefore, is the simple meaning of the
   passage. It is quite clear, as I have lately said, that Cyrus, after
   the death of Darius, succeeded to the whole monarchy; and we shall
   afterwards see in its proper place how Daniel dwelt with Cyrus, who
   reigned almost [39]thirty years longer. Thus, a long time intervened
   between his death and that of Darius. This, therefore, did not occur
   without the remarkable counsel of God, since the change in the kingdom
   did not influence the position of Daniel, as it usually does. For new
   empires we know to be like turning the world upside down. But Daniel
   always retained his rank, and thus God's goodness was displayed in him,
   and wherever he went he carried with him this testimony of God's favor.
   [40]I shall not proceed further, as we shall discuss a new prophecy
   to-morrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [319] Or, passed. -- Calvin.

   [320] See [41]Dissertation, Number 25, at the close of this Volume.
     __________________________________________________________________

   PRAYER.

   Grant, Almighty God, since by means of a man entangled in many errors,
   thou wishest to testify to us the extent of thy power, that we may not
   at this day grope about in darkness, while thou offerest us light,
   through the Sun of righteousness, Jesus Christ, thy Son. Meanwhile, may
   we not be ashamed to profit by the words of a heathen, who was not
   instructed in thy law, but who celebrated thy name so magnificently
   when admonished by a single miracle: hence may we learn by his example
   to acknowledge thee, not only the Supreme but the Only God. As thou
   hast bound us to thyself by entering into a covenant with us in the
   blood of thine only-begotten Son, may we ever cleave to thee with true
   faith; may we renounce all the clouds of error, and be always intent
   upon that light to which thou invitest us, and towards which thou
   drawest us; until we arrive at the sight of thy glory and majesty, and
   being conformed to thee, may we at length enjoy in reality that glory
   which we now but partially behold. -- Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   DISSERTATIONS
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 1

   THE THIRD YEAR OF KING JEHOIAKIM.

   DANIEL 1:1

   A Correct idea of the scope and interpretation of these prophecies
   cannot be obtained without a due attention to the chronology of the
   events recorded. Hence, throughout these Dissertations it will be
   necessary to discuss some apparently unimportant points, and to combat
   some seemingly harmless opinions. We are thus compelled to enter into
   details which some may pronounce devoid of interest, but which will
   prove worth the labor bestowed upon them.

   The necessity for comment on this first verse arises from the
   difficulty of reconciling its statement with the twenty-fifth chapter
   of Jeremiah. The relation of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar must be
   harmonized with those of the three last kings of Judah, to enable us to
   reconcile Daniel and Jeremiah. We must first ascertain the historical
   events which concern Jehoiakim, and fix their dates by comparing the
   Books of Kings and Chronicles, and the various allusions to him in
   Ezekiel and other prophets. Next, we must accurately define the events
   of Nebuchadnezzar's reign; and afterwards so compare them as to draw a
   correct inference from the whole, notwithstanding much apparent
   discrepancy. This has been done by some commentators, the results of
   whose labors will here, be placed before the reader. Willet's remark on
   Calvin is worthy of notice: "Calvin thinketh to dissolve this knot by
   the distinction of Nebuchadnezzar the father, and Nebuchadnezzar the
   son; that in one place the one is spoken of, and the other in the
   other, but the question is not concerning the year of Nebuchadnezzar's
   reign, but the year of Jehoiakim's reign wherein Jerusalem should be
   besieged; so that the doubt remaineth still." [321] He also answers
   Calvin's solution, by referring Nebuchadnezzar's second year not to the
   period of his reign, but "rather to the time of Daniel's ministry and
   employment with the king, that in the second year of his service he
   expounded the king's dream." Many learned Jews are of opinion that the
   last year of Jehoiakim's reign is intended, meaning the last of his
   independent sovereignty, since they treat him in former years as simply
   a tributary king to either the Egyptians or Babylonians. Josephus in
   his Antiq., (Book 10:6,) is supposed to favor this theory; for he
   places Nebuchadnezzar's attack in the eighth year of Jehoiakim's reign,
   and does not allude to any previous one. Wintle, however, does not
   consider that the words of Josephus justify this inference, [322] and
   suggests that the difference in the methods used by the Jews and
   Babylonians in computing their years, may tend to obviate the
   inconsistency. Wintle suggests some reasons for dating the commencement
   of the seventy years' captivity from the completion of the siege in the
   fourth year of Jehoiakim, when Daniel and his associates were among the
   first captives. Prideaux supposes this event to have occurred six
   hundred and six years A.C., or the one hundred and forty-second year of
   Nabonassar's era; Vignoles and Blair fix the year following. Wintle
   agrees with the latter date, supposing the captivity not to continue
   during seventy solar years, and fixing their termination about 536 A.C.

   Another commentator, who has paid great attention to chronology,
   deserves special notice, since he advocates a new theory respecting
   Cyrus and Nebuchadnezzar, which is worthy of remark, though it has been
   severely criticized. The Duke Of Manchester has an elaborate chapter on
   this date, from which we shall extract the conclusions at which he has
   arrived. He understands "Daniel to speak of Jehoiakim's independent
   reign, reckoning from the time that he rebelled against
   Nebuchadnezzar." [323] Jehoiakim was taken captive in the seventh of
   Nebuchadnezzar.

   The oldest expositors felt the difficulty of the passage. Rabbi Solomon
   Jarchi asks, "How can this be said?" and then replies as follows: --
   This was the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar and the third of Jehoiakim's
   rebellion against him.

   Hengstenberg has not been forgetful to defend our Prophet from the
   charge of historical inaccuracy, to which this verse has given rise. He
   treats the assumption, that Nebuchadnezzar took Jerusalem before his
   accession to the throne, as inadmissible. "The assertion of his being
   associated by his father in the co-regency at that time is not
   adequately sustained." [324] Ch. B. Michaelis and Bertholdt have made
   various attempts to reconcile the discrepancy. "The assumption," says
   Hengstenberg, "that Nebuchadnezzar undertook his first expedition in
   the eighth year of Jehoiakim, is an hypothesis grounded merely on one
   passage." Still, this passage, far from containing an error, affords a
   striking proof of the writer's historical knowledge. Berosus, as quoted
   by Josephus, (Arch. 10:11, 1,) narrates the victory of Nebuchadnezzar
   at Carchemish, which occurred about the close of Jehoiakim's third
   year. Carchemish was a city on the banks of the Euphrates, taken by
   Pharaoh-Necho about three years previously. Immediately after this
   victory, the conqueror marched against Jerusalem and took it. The
   process by which Hengstenberg arrives at this result, the various
   authors whom he quotes, and the complete refutation which he supplies
   of all the conjectures of his Neologian opponents, will be found amply
   detailed in the valuable work already quoted. Rosenmuller also
   discusses the point, but leans too much to those writers whom
   Hengstenberg refutes.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [321] Willet's "Hexapla in Dan." Edit. 1610, p. 13.

   [322] See his "Daniel." Edit. Tegg, 1836, p. 2.

   [323] "The Times of Daniel," p. 29, chapter iii., where other dates of
   interest are clearly exhibited.

   [324] Dissertations on the Genuineness of Daniel. Edinburgh, 1848, p.
   43.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 2

   NEBUCHADNEZZAR -- ONE KING OR TWO?

   Chapter 1:1

   The difficulty of reconciling the various statements of Scripture with
   themselves and with profane history, has raised the question whether
   there were two Nebuchadnezzar's or only one. The Duke Of Manchester is
   a strenuous advocate for the former hypothesis, and his view of the
   case is worthy of perusal. The first king he supposes to have
   overthrown Necho's army in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, as we have
   already stated. He came from the north into Judea, and took the people
   captive after the overthrow of Assyria. His eleventh year corresponds
   with the fourth of Zedekiah, while he reigned on the whole about
   twenty-nine years. He is to be identified with Cyrus, the father of
   Cambyses, well known in Persian history, so that the second
   Nebuchadnezzar was Cambyses himself. Although the astronomical Canon of
   Ptolemy is a formidable adversary, this writer shews much ingenuity in
   bending it to his purpose. The first king of this name began his reign
   A.C. 511, while Paulus Orosius determines the taking of Babylon "by
   Cyrus" about the time of the expulsion of the kings from Rome (A.C.
   510.) Thus sixty-nine years elapsed between the overthrow of Necho and
   the conquest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar the second; and in the
   eighteenth year of the reign of this latter king the golden image was
   set up.

   Having identified the second king with Cambyses, this writer brings
   forward many testimonies in favor of his being a Persian, and shews
   that the Chaldeans were not Babylonians but Persians. He treats him as
   identical with the Persian Jemsheed, the contemporary of Pythagoras and
   Thales, and the founder of Pasargad and Persepolis, and justifies his
   positions by the authorities of Diocles, Hecataeus, Cedrenus, the
   Maccabees, Abydenus, and Alexander Polyhistor. "The evidence is deduced
   from direct testimony, from geographical position, from similarity in
   language and religion, in manners and customs, in personal character
   and alliances; from Babylonian bricks and cylinders; as also from
   historical synchronism's and identity of actions." [325] The statements
   of Herodotus are fully discussed and compared with the Egyptian
   sculptures, with the view of shewing that the second Nebuchadnezzar was
   the Cambyses of Herodotus, the son-in-law of Astyages and the conqueror
   of Egypt. The story of his madness, after profaning the temple of Apis,
   is said to apply accurately to this second monarch.

   It could not be expected that a theory of this kind could be introduced
   into the world without severe and searching examination. Accordingly,
   Birks, in his preface to "The two later Visions of Daniel," writes as
   follows: "I have examined closely the two difficulties which alone give
   a seeming strength to his Grace's theory, -- the succession of names in
   the Persian history, and the two covenants under Zerubbabel and
   Nehemiah, -- and feel confident I can meet them both with a full and
   complete answer. It seems to me surprising that a paradox of two
   Scripture Nebuchadnezzar's, and a Scripture Cyrus, totally unknown to
   profane history, in the reign of Longimanus, contemporary with Cimon
   and Pericles, can ever be received by any mind accustomed to pay the
   least regard to the laws of evidence. Every fresh inquiry has only
   increased my confidence in the usual chronology derived from the Canon
   of Ptolemy, and its truth, I believe, may be almost entirely
   established even by Scripture evidence alone." Vaux, the learned author
   of "Nineveh and Persepolis," furnishes a clear sketch of
   Nebuchadnezzar's career, by combining the accounts of Herodotus and the
   Scriptures. In the thirty-first year of Josiah's reign, Necho fought
   the battle of Megiddo, in which Josiah was mortally wounded. He then
   took Cadytis, "the holy city" of the Jews, and at length returned to
   Egypt with abundance of spoil. After a lapse of three years he invaded
   the territory of the king of Babylon. The reigning monarch --
   Nabopolassar -- was aged and infirm; he gave the command of his army to
   his son Nebuchadnezzar, who defeated the Egyptians at Carcesium or
   Carchemish, and drove them out of Asia. He marched to Jerusalem, and
   reinstated Jehoiakim as its king, in subjection to himself; he spoiled
   the temple of the chief ornaments and vessels of value, and among the
   prisoners transmitted to Babylon were Daniel and his three friends. He
   next carried on war against the Egyptians, till the news of his
   father's death caused his return. The revolt of Jehoiakim caused a
   second attack upon the city, and the carrying off of many prisoners,
   among whom was Ezekiel, to the banks of the distant Chebar. Zedekiah,
   the brother of Jehoiakim, having been placed on the throne, and having
   made an alliance with Pharaoh Hophra, the Apries of Herodotus, he is
   deposed by the King of Babylon, and carried captive in blindness and
   chains. Thus for the third and last time this conqueror invaded Judea
   and profaned the temple. After a lapse of four years he besieged Tyre;
   for thirteen years it resisted his arms, but was at length razed to the
   ground. He next succeeded in an expedition against Egypt, dethroned
   Apries, and leaving Amasis as his viceroy, returned to his imperial
   city. In the language of Jeremiah, "he arrayed himself with the land of
   Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment." He next occupies himself
   in beautifying the city, and erecting a palace of extraordinary
   magnificence, and in constructing those hanging gardens mentioned by
   Diodoras, Megasthenes, and Arrian. The remainder of his history is
   easily gathered from the Prophet's narrative. "A careful consideration
   of the authorities seems to shew that Clinton is right in his
   supposition that the reign of this prince was about forty-four years in
   duration, and that he was succeeded after a short interval by
   Belshazzar." [326] Willet arrives at the same conclusion as to the
   length of his reign by a different process of reasoning. The following
   dates are extracted from Prideaux, whose caution and accuracy are most
   commendable: --

   A.C.

   586. Tyre besieged.

   570. The death of Apries, coincident with the dream of the tree,
   (Daniel 4,) after his last return from Egypt.

   569. Daniel 4:30. Driven out into the fields.

   563. Restored after seven years.

   562. Death, after about forty-four years' reign.

   Another series of dates has been displayed by the author of "The Times
   of Daniel," founded on a different chronological basis; we can only
   extract a few of them from pages 282, et seq.: --

   B.C.

   510. Babylon taken by Cyrus, and kings expelled from Rome.

   507. Commencement of Jehoiakim's independent reign. Daniel 1:1

   500. Nebuchadnezzar II. appointed; his dream. Daniel 2.

   494. Golden Image set up. Daniel 3.

   483. Nebuchadnezzar 1. died.

   441. Nebuchadnezzar 2. died.

   Dr. Wells has the following chronological arrangement of the chief
   events of Nebuchadnezzar's reign: --

   A.C.

   607. He is this year taken by his father "as partner" in the kingdom,
   falling in with the latter part of the third year of Jehoiakim, (Daniel
   1:1.)

   606. Jehoiakim carried to Babylon with Daniel and others.

   The first of the seventy years' captivity.

   605. His father died. Nabopolassar in Ptolemy's Canon, the son's name
   being Nabocolassor. The Canon allows him forty-three years from this
   period.

   603. Daniel interprets his dream. Daniel 2

   588. He re-takes Jerusalem and Zedekiah.

   569. Returned to Babylon, is afflicted with insanity. Daniel 4.

   562. He dies "a few days" after being restored to reason.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [325] Times of Daniel, p. 141.

   [326] Nineveh and Persep., p. 71, second edition.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 3.

   THE ANCESTORS AND SUCCESSORS OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR.

   Daniel 1:1

   To understand aright the history of these times, we must take a cursory
   glance at the period both preceding and following that of the great
   Chaldean chieftain. His ancestors were largely concerned in the
   overthrow of the Assyrian empire. The origin of this monarchy is
   involved in great obscurity, and we are at this moment in a transition
   state with respect to our knowledge of its history. The deciphering of
   those inscriptions which have lately been brought home is rapidly
   proceeding, and will lead to a more complete knowledge of the events of
   this obscure epoch. Early in the Book of Genesis we read of Nimrod, the
   grandson of Ham, as the founder of an extensive monarchy in the land of
   Shinar. Out of this land he went forth into Ashur, or perhaps it is
   Ashur who went forth and built Nineveh and other cities. The records of
   succeeding ages are too few to enable us to follow the stream of
   history: we have nothing to guide us but myths, and legends, and
   traditionary sovereigns, whose names are but the fictions of
   imagination. It must never be forgotten that many centuries elapsed
   between Noah and Solomon, and that the most ancient profane history is
   comparatively modern. The late discoveries in Egypt, and the high state
   of civilization attained by these "swarthy barbarians," have led the
   learned to the conclusion that we have hitherto lost many centuries
   between the flood and Abraham; and since the long list of Egyptian
   dynasties, as given by Manetho, has been proved accurate, it may fairly
   be supposed that the Assyrian sculptures will rather add to the credit
   of Ctesias than detract from it. At all events, Nineveh was "no mean
   city" when Athens was a marsh, and Sardis a rock. Whether Ninus is a
   fabulous creation or not, monarchs as mighty as the eagle-headed
   worshipper of Nisroch his god, swayed the scepter for ages over a
   flourishing and highly civilized people. Herodotus gives us a hint of
   the antiquity and pre-eminence of Assyria when he says, "The Medes were
   the first who began to revolt from the Assyrians, who had possessed the
   supreme command over Upper Asia for five hundred and twenty years."
   Whether we adopt the view of Bishop Lowth or not, that Ninus lived in
   the time of the Judges, [327] we may correctly assume that some
   successful conqueror enlarged and beautified Babylon, five hundred
   years before the Chaldean era of Nabonassar, 747 A.C. Whatever the
   source of this wealth, whether derived from the spoils of conquered
   nations, according to Montesquieu, or from intercourse with India
   through Egypt, according to Bruce, [328] the lately discovered remains
   imply a very high style of art at a very remote period in the history
   of Assyria. The "Pul" of 2 Kings 15:19, was by no means the founder of
   the monarchy, as Sir Isaac Newton and others have supposed; he was but
   one amidst those "servants of Bar," whose names are now legible on the
   Nimroud obelisk in the British Museum. The next king mentioned in
   Scriptures is Tiglath-Pileser, whose name we have lately connected with
   Pul and Ashur; and after him follow Shalmaneser, Sennacherib, and
   Esarhaddon, the three kings who are thought to have built the palace at
   Khorsabad, founded Mespila, and constructed the lions in the south-west
   palace of Nimroud. As the Medes revolted first, so the Chaldeans
   rebelled afterwards, according to the usual law of separation from the
   parent stock, when the tribe or race grows strong enough to establish
   its independence. The first prince who is known to have lived after
   this revolt is Nabonassar, the founder of the era called by his name.
   In process of time, other kings arose and passed away, till in the
   thirty-first year of Manasseh, Esarhaddon died, after reigning thirteen
   years over Assyria and Babylon united. He was succeeded by his son
   Laosduchius, the Nabuchodonosor of the Book of Judith, whose successor
   commenced his reign in the fifty-first year of Manasseh, being the
   hundred and first of the above mentioned era. From this effeminate king
   his Chaldean general Nabopolassar wrested Babylon, and reigned over his
   native country twenty-one years. This revolt is said to have taken
   place in the eighteenth year of King Josiah, when the powers of Media
   uniting with the power of Babylonia, took and destroyed the great city
   of Nineveh, and reduced the people under the sway of the rising
   monarchy. His son Nebuchadnezzar is said to have married the daughter
   of Astyages, the king of the Medes, and thus brings down the history to
   the times of our Prophet.

   Among the ancient cities of the world, Nineveh is conspicuous for its
   grandeur. The phrase of Jonah, "that great city," is amply confirmed by
   the historian, Diodorus Siculus, (lib. 2 section. 23.) who uses
   precisely the same expression, recording its circumference as four
   hundred and eighty stadia, with high and broad walls. The inference
   from the statement of the Book of Jonah is, that it was populous,
   civilized, and extensive. The language of both Jonah and Nahum imply
   exactly what the buried sculptures have exhibited to us, a state of
   society highly organized, with various ranks, from the sovereign to the
   soldier and the workman, yet effeminated by luxury and self-indulgence.
   The expressions of Scripture give us exalted ideas of its size and
   splendor, while they assign its wickedness as a reason for the complete
   destruction by which it was annihilated. Prophet after prophet
   recognizes its surpassing opulence, its commercial greatness, and its
   deep criminality. The voice of Zephaniah is soon followed by the sword
   of Arbaces, and Sennacherib and Sardanapalus are eclipsed by the rising
   greatness of Nabopolassar and Cyaxares. Its temples and its palaces had
   become so encrusted in the soil during eight centuries of men, that
   Strabo knows it only as a waste, and Tacitus treats it as a Castellum;
   and in the thirteenth century of our era, Abulfaragius confirms the
   prophecy of Nahum and the narrative of Tacitus, by recording nothing
   but the existence of a small fortification on the eastern bank of the
   Tigris. [329]

   The dates assigned to these events vary considerably; the following may
   be trusted as the result of careful comparison. In the year A.C. 650,
   Nebuchodonosor is found on the throne of Assyria, "a date," says Vaux,
   "which is determined by the coincidence with the forty-eighth year of
   Manasseh, and by the fact that his seventeenth year was the last of
   Phraortes, king of Media, A.C. 634. The Book of Judith informs us of an
   important engagement at Ragau between this Assyrian king and Arphaxad
   the king of the Medes. This victory at Ragau, or Rhages, occurred A.C.
   634, just "fifty-seven years after the loss of Sennacherib's army."
   [330] After returning from Ecbatana, the capital of Media, the
   conqueror celebrated a banquet at Nineveh which lasted one hundred and
   twenty days. Cyaxares, the son of Phraortes, at length avenged his
   father's death at Rhages, and by the aid of Nabopolassar, threw off the
   yoke of Assyria, attacked and took Nineveh about 606 A.C., and thus, by
   fixing the seat of empire at Babylon, blotted out the name of Nineveh
   from the page of the world's history.

   This renowned general is usually held to be the father of
   Nebuchadnezzar, on the authority of Berosus, as quoted by Josephus, and
   of the Astronomical Canon of Ptolemy. But the author of "The Times of
   Daniel" endeavors to identify him with either Sardanapalus or
   Esarhaddon; the arguments by which this supposition is supported will
   be found in detail in the work itself, while the original passages in
   Josephus and Eusebius are found at length in the notes to Grotius on
   "The truth of the Christian religion." [331] He died A.C. 695.

   His Successors. -- According to the Canon of Ptolemy, Evil-Merodach
   succeeded Nebuchadnezzar, reigned two years, and was slain by his
   brother-in-law Neri-Glissar, who reigned four years; his son,
   Laborosoarchod, reigned nine months, though quite a child, and was
   slain by Nabonadius, supposed to be Belshazzar, a grandson of
   Nebuchadnezzar, who reigned seventeen years. Evil-Merodach is mentioned
   in 2 Kings 25:27, and Jeremiah 52:31, but not by Daniel, and this gives
   some countenance to the supposition, that Belshazzar was the son and
   not the grandson of Nebuchadnezzar. It is not easy to assign with
   certainty the correct dates to each of these kings, the reckoning of
   Josephus is here followed, which he derives from Berosus. The testimony
   of profane antiquity to the truth and historical accuracy of Daniel may
   be found in a convenient form in Kitto's Bibli. Cyclop., Art.
   Nebuchadnezzar, page 406. The authorities are quoted at length, and the
   whole subject is ably elucidated. The limited space necessarily allowed
   for illustrating these Lectures, must be our apology for merely
   indicating where valuable information is to be obtained.

   In the New Monthly Magazine for August and September 1845, there are
   two articles very full of illustration of our subject, by W. F.
   Ainsworth, entitled, The Rivers and Cities of Babylonia.

   Dissertation 4

   THE CHALDEANS.

   Chapter 1:5

   To determine the question which was raised in our last Dissertation, we
   must investigate the origin of the Chaldeans, as it was the tribe
   whence Nebuchadnezzar sprung. "The question," says Heeren, "what the
   Chaldeans really were, and whether they ever properly existed as a
   nation, is one of the most difficult which history presents." [332]
   They are first mentioned in Genesis (Genesis 11:28,) as Casdim,
   (Lecture 5;) they were situated north of Judea, and are identical with
   the people who should, according to Jeremiah, destroy the temple from
   the north. (Jeremiah 1:13, 14, etc.) They are not mentioned by name
   again in the books of Scripture till many centuries afterwards they had
   become a mighty nation. The word Chasdim in the Hebrew and Chasdaim in
   the Chaldee dialects, is clearly the same as the Greek Chaldaioi; and
   Gesenius supposing the root to have been originally card, refers them
   to the race inhabiting the mountains called by Xenophon Carduchi.
   Forster, indeed, has argued at considerable length in favor of their
   Arabian origin, and supposes them the well known Beni Khaled, a horde
   of Bedouin Arabs. [333] From this opinion we entirely dissent. The view
   of Gesenius in his Lectures at Halle in 1839, quoted in "The Times of
   Daniel," appears preferable, -- "The Chaldeans had their original seat
   on the east of the Tigris, south of Armenia, which we now call
   Koordistan; and, like the Koords in our day, they were warlike
   mountaineers, without agriculture, shepherds and robbers, and also
   mercenaries in the Assyrian army; so Xenophon found them." [334] Vaux
   quotes Dicaearchus, a Greek historian of the time of Alexander the
   Great, as alluding to a certain Chaldean, a king of Assyria, who is
   supposed to have built Babylon; and in later times, Chaldea implied the
   whole of Mesopotamia around Babylon, which had also the name of Shiner.
   [335]

   Their religion and their language are also of importance. The former
   consisted in the worship of the heavenly bodies. They are supposed to
   have brought with them to Babylon a knowledge of astronomy superior to
   any then known, since they reduced their observations on the sun, moon,
   five planets, signs of the zodiac, and the rising and setting of the
   sun, to a regular system; and the Greeks are said by Herodotus to have
   derived from them the division of the day into twelve equal parts.
   [336] The lunar year was in common use, but the solar year, with its
   division of months similar to the Egyptian, was employed for
   astronomical purposes. The learned class gradually acquired the
   reputation and position of "priests," and thus became astrologers and
   soothsayers, and "wise men" in their day and generation. Michaelis and
   Sehlozer consider their origin to be Sclavonic, and, consequently,
   distinct from the Babylonians, who were descendants of Shem.

   Their Language. -- The original language of this people is a point of
   great interest to the biblical critic. If the people were of old
   northern mountaineers, they spoke a language connected with the
   Indo-Persic and Indo-Germanic stem rather than the Semitic. In treating
   this question, we should always allow for the length of time which
   elapsed between the original outbreak of those hordes from their native
   hills; and their conquest of Babylon under Nebuchadnezzar. Gesenius, in
   his Lectures on Biblical Archaeology, reminds us of their being first
   tributary to the Assyrians, of their subsequent occupation of the
   plains of Mesopotamia for some centuries previously to their becoming
   the conquerors of Asia under successful leaders. [337]

   From the fourth verse of chapter 2 (Daniel 2:4) we learn that they
   spoke the Aramaic dialect, which the Alexandrine Version, as well as
   Theodotion's, denominates the Syriac. From the Cyropaedia (Book 7:24)
   we ascertain that the Syriac was the ordinary language of Babylon.
   Strabo also informs us that the same language was used throughout all
   the regions on the banks of the Euphrates. [338] Diodorus Siculus calls
   the Chaldeans the most ancient inhabitants of Babylonia, and assigns to
   their astrologers a similar position to that of the Egyptian priests.
   Their devotion to philosophy and their practice of astronomy gained
   them great credit with the powerful, which they turned to account by
   professing to predict the future and to interpret the visions of the
   imaginative and the distressed. [339] The testimony of Cicero is
   precisely similar. [340] Hengstenberg has tested the historical
   truthfulness of the author of this book, by comparing his account of
   the Chaldean priest-caste with those of profane history. According to
   chapter. 2:48, the president of this caste was also a prince of the
   province of Babylon. Thus, according to Diodorus Siculus, Belesys was
   the chief president of the priests, "whom the Babylonians call
   Chaldeans," [341] and governor of Babylon. In Jeremiah, (Jeremiah
   39:3-13,) the president of the priests belonged to the highest class in
   the kingdom, and is called rvmg, rab-mag, a word of Persian origin, and
   clearly applicable to the office as described by Daniel. The views of
   Hengstenberg are usually so correct, that the student may generally
   adopt them at once as his own.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [327] See his Notes on Isaiah, chapter 23, p. 132; and Herod. Clio.
   Edit. Gronov., p. 40.

   [328] Travels, Book 2 chapter 1. See Prideaux's authorities, and his
   arrangement of the Assyrian kings, which differs slightly from that
   here adopted.

   [329] Strabo, lib. 16, p. 737. Tacit. An., lib. 12, section. 13. Hist.
   Dyn., p. 604.

   [330] Nineveh and Persepolis, p. 37.

   [331] Bk. 3 section. 16, and Euseb. Praepar., lib. 9 c. 40 and 41, also
   Strabo, lib. 15 p. 687.

   [332] Volume 2, chapter 1., Babylon, p. 147, Eng. Trans.

   [333] Geog. of Arabia, volume 1 p. 54, and volume 2 p. 210.

   [334] Anab. 4, Sections 3, 5, 6, 7, 8. See also Strabo, lib. 10, and
   Freret Rcch. Hist. sur les anc. Peuple de l'Asie, volume 3, and other
   authorities quoted by the Duke of Manchester, pp. 104, 105.

   [335] See Dicaearch. ap. Stephan. de Urb. voce Caldai'o", and other
   authorities quoted by Vaux, p. 41, etc., also Cicero de Divin.

   [336] Herod. 2, Section 109.

   [337] See Eichhorn's Report. volume viii., and Winer's Chaldee Gr.,
   Introd., also Adelung's Mithridat, th. 1 p. 314. ff.

   [338] Lib. 2 t. 1 p. 225, ed. Sieb., also lib. 16.

   [339] Lib. 2 chapter. 20.

   [340] De Divinat., lib. 1 cap. 1, also Pliny's N. H., lib. 6 chapter.
   26.

   [341] Lib. 2, Section 24, ap Heng., p. 275, Edit. Ed., 1848.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 5

   I. ASHPENAZ, A CHIEF OF THE EUNUCHS.

   Daniel 1:7

   This proper name is interpreted by Saadias to mean "the man of a
   sorrowful countenance;" but Rosenmuller assigns the meaning of the
   Syriac and Arabic corresponding words as more probable, viz., "helping"
   and "alert." The Alexandrine Greek substitutes Abiezer for Aspenaz,
   being a Hebrew patronymic, signifying "father of help." "The chief of
   the eunuchs" seems the correct definition of his office.srys , saris,
   is equivalent to the Greek eunouchos, and the office is similar to that
   at present exercised at the courts of Turkey and Persia as the kislar
   agha, "high-chamberlain of the palace." So much confidence was
   necessarily reposed in these domestic officers, that many affairs of
   the utmost importance and delicacy were intrusted to their care. Thus
   the children of the royal and noble families of Judea were committed to
   the care of Aspenaz. The word sphr, sepher, "book," in which he was to
   instruct them, must be extended to all the literature of the Chaldees.
   Oecolampadius treats it as including rhetoric, eloquence, and all those
   elevating pursuits which cultivate the mind and refine the manners. He
   then proceeds to treat the narrative as an allegory; the "prince of
   Babel, or, of the world," represents Satan; Daniel and his companions,
   the elect members of Christ. The family of David is supposed to imply
   this spiritual household of God, and the word phrtmym, pharth-mim,
   nobles, is pressed into this service by a preference for the rendering
   of Saadias, "perfect fruit." The eunuch is said to typify those
   spiritual flatterers who entice the children of God by flatteries and
   allurements to sin, and by substituting worldly sophistry for true
   wisdom, draw souls from Christ. Although such reflections are very
   profitable, yet Calvin has shewn his matured judgment by excluding all
   fanciful allegory from his comments. Oecolampadius supposes the king to
   be liberal and benevolent in ordering the captives to be fed from his
   table, and prudent in proposing this indulgence as a reward for their
   diligence in study. Here also the king's character is allegorized; he
   becomes a model of Satan enticing God's elect, and offering them to
   partake of his own dainties, that he may win them more blandly to
   himself.

   In commenting, too, on the change of names, Oecolampadius gives the
   usual meaning to the Hebrew words, but observes, how the name of God
   was omitted from them all, and the worthiness attributed to the
   creature. This, he thinks, to have been the eunuch's intention, while
   he points to the change as an instance of the contrast between human
   and divine wisdom. The conduct of Daniel may be illustrated by the
   practice of the early Christians, against whom it was objected by
   Caecilius, that they abhorred meats offered to idols when commanded to
   partake of them. [342] Willet has discussed the questions -- "Whether
   Daniel and the rest learned the curious arts of the Chaldeans?" and,
   "Whether it be lawful to use the arts and inventions of the heathen?"
   by collecting various opinions and summing them up with practical
   wisdom. [343]

   II.THE NAMES OF THE THREE CHILDREN.

   IT is the well-known custom of the East to change the names of persons
   on their admission to public office or to families of distinction. The
   change here recorded most probably arose from a desire to draw these
   young Jews away from all the associations of home, and to naturalize
   them as much as possible among their new associates. Hananiah is
   supposed to come from chnn, chanan, to be gracious, and yh, yah,
   Jehovah, meaning "favored of God." Mishael from ys, ish, he is, and 'l,
   el, God, meaning "the powerful one of God." Azariah from zr, gnezer,
   help, and yh, yah, Jehovah: "the help of Jehovah." A variety of
   conjectures have been hazarded concerning the Chaldee equivalents.
   Shadrach is probably from sd', sheda, to inspire, and rk, rak, king,
   being a Babylonian name for the sun; others connect it with an evil
   deity. Meshach retains a portion of its Hebrew form, and substitutes
   sk, shak, for 'l, el, that is, the female deity Schaca, which answers
   to the Venus of the Greeks. vd-ngv, gnebed-nego, is the Chaldaic phrase
   for "servant of Nebo," one of their deities, or perhaps, servant of
   burning fire. The deity Nebo furnished names to many chiefs and
   sovereigns among the Assyrians and Chaldees, and modern researches and
   discoveries have enabled us to trace similar derivations with great
   accuracy. Compounds of Pul were used in a similar way: thus
   Tiglath-Pileser is Tiglath Pul-Asser; and Nabo-Pul-Asser is interpreted
   as Nabo, son of Pul, lord of Assyria.

   The name of Daniel was also changed. The word is derived from dvn, dun,
   to judge, and 'l, el, God, meaning "a divine judge;" while his new name
   relates to the idol Bel, meaning "keeper of the treasures of Bel."

   III. THE PULSE.

   Daniel 1:12

   Calvin's view of this verse is rather peculiar, and especially his
   comment on Deuteronomy 8:3; on Daniel 1:14. The word "pulse," hzrym,
   hazerognim, signifies the same as the Latin legumen, and may perhaps be
   extended to the cerealia as well. Vegetable diet generally is intended.
   The food provided from the royal table was probably too stimulating,
   and the habitual temperance of Daniel and his companions is here
   pointed out as conducing remarkably to their bodily health and
   appearance. Thus, while conscience refused to be "polluted," obedience
   to the laws of our physical nature produces a corresponding physical
   benefit. Wintle very appositely quotes Virgil, Georg. 1:73, 74, to
   illustrate the kind of food intended.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [342] Apud Minuc. Fel., lib. 8 Arnob.

   [343] Quaest. 38, 39, p. 28. Edit. Cam., 1610.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 6

   CORESH -- WAS HE CYRUS THE GREAT?

   Daniel 1:21

   The last verse of this chapter is connected with an interesting
   inquiry, viz., Was the Coresh here mentioned Cyrus The Great, or any
   other Cyrus? The noble author of "The Times of Daniel" has thrown much
   "life" into the subject by his elaborate defense of a theory which we
   now proceed to state and discuss. Cyrus the Great he thinks identical
   with Nebuchadnezzar the First, and Cambyses with his son Nebuchadnezzar
   the Second; the exploits of the hero of Herodotus and Xenophon are
   attributed to the former, while Coresh becomes but a minor character,
   contemporary with Darius the Mede, after whom he is said to reign, and
   before Darius the son of Ahasuerus. This view also brings the story of
   Esther within the period of the captivity of Babylon. It has always
   been a subject of great difficulty with commentators on Daniel, to
   reconcile the scriptural narrative with those of both Herodotus and
   Xenophon. The majority finding this impossible, have decided in favor
   of one or the other of these historians; and the best modern writers
   usually prefer Herodotus. Lowth, in his Notes on Isaiah, says, "the
   Cyrus of Herodotus was a very different character from that of the
   Cyrus of the Scriptures and Xenophon;" and Archbishop Secker has taken
   great pains to compare all the profane historians with Scripture, and
   shews that the weight of the argument lies against the truth of the
   Cyropaedia. Whether Cyrus was the grandson of Astyages or not, many
   believe with Ctesias that he overcame him in battle, and founded the
   Persian empire upon the ruins of the Median dynasty. It is scarcely
   possible that it should be left for this nineteenth century to discover
   the identity between a first Nebuchadnezzar and this conqueror of the
   East; and while the clearing up of every historical discrepancy is
   impossible, yet it is desirable to reconcile the occurrences which are
   related by both Herodotus and Xenophon. The son of Cambyses the
   Persian, and of Mandane the daughter of Astyages king of the Medes, is
   said to have conquered Craesus king of Lydia, enlarged the Persian
   empire, subdued Babylon and the remnant of the Assyrian power, and
   placed his uncle Cyaxares over the united territories of Media and
   Babylon. After the death of this relative, he reigned over Asia, from
   India to Ethiopia, a territory consisting of 127 provinces. The manner
   of his death is uncertain, all the historians differ in their accounts,
   but the place of his burial is allowed to be Pasargadae, as Pliny has
   recorded in his Natural History. This tomb was visited by Alexander the
   Great, and has lately been noticed and described by European travelers.
   The plains of Murghab are watered by a river which bears the name of
   Kur, and is thought to be identical with the Greek Cyrus. A structure
   in a ruinous state has been found there, apparently of the same date as
   the remains at Persepolis, bearing cuneiform inscriptions which are now
   legible. The legend upon one of the pilasters has been interpreted, "I
   am Cyrus the Achaemenian;" and no doubt is entertained by the learned
   that this monument once contained the remains of the founder of the
   Persian monarchy. A single block of marble was discovered by Sir R. K.
   Porter, on which he discovered a beautiful sculpture in bas-relief,
   consisting of the figure of a man, from whose shoulders issue four
   large wings, rising above the head and extending to the feet. [344] The
   whole value of such an inscription to the reader of Daniel is the
   legend above the figure, in the arrow-headed character, determining the
   spot as the tomb of Cyrus the Great. It shews, at the least, that he
   cannot be identified with Nebuchadnezzar.

   The manner in which the author of "The Times of Daniel" has commented
   on the prophecies relating to the overthrow of Babylon, is worthy of
   notice here. Isaiah 45:14, is referred by Dr. Keith to Cyrus, and
   objection is made to the supposed fulfillment in the person of Cyrus,
   Keith is said to apply to Cyrus the primary historical fulfillment of
   all the prophecies relating to the overthrow of Babylon, and the
   justness of this inference is doubted. Isaiah 13-14:27, is one of the
   passages where the asserted allusion to Cyrus is questioned, since it
   relates to a period in which the power of Assyria was in existence. The
   Assyrian is supposed to be Sennacherib, to whose predecessor both
   Babylon and Media were subject. "The Chaldeans, mentioned in Isaiah
   13:19, I have already explained to have been a colony of astronomers,
   planted in Babylon by the Assyrian kings to carry on their astronomical
   observations, in which science they excelled." Again, Isaiah 21:2, "Go
   up, O Elam; besiege, O Media," is applied by Dr. Keith to Cyrus, to
   which the noble author objects, as well as to the supposition "that the
   overthrow of Belshazzar during his drunken revelry was predicted in
   Scripture, and that the minute fulfillment by Cyrus is recorded by
   Xenophon." "The feast of Belshazzar," it is added, "does not appear to
   correspond with the festival described by Xenophon, which was
   apparently periodical, and which, not a portion of the nobles, but all
   the Babylonians, observed by drunkenness and revelry during the whole
   night." "It also agrees with the mode in which Zopyrus got possession
   of Babylon." Calvin seems to give it this turn, "A treacherous one
   shall find treachery," etc. Further comments are then made upon Isaiah
   44 and 45, and on Jeremiah 50 and 51, evading the force of their
   application to Cyrus, and combating with some degree of success the
   assertions of Keith; for the noble author, who is earnest in pulling
   down, is ingenious in building up. "From this short examination, it
   appears that the prophecy of Jeremiah (Jeremiah 50 and 51) corresponds
   with the capture of Babylon by Darius the Mede of Scripture, and by
   Darius Hystaspes, according to Herodotus." Some writers have supposed
   Cyrus to be identical with this Darius the Mede; and Archbishop Secker
   acknowledges some ground for such a conjecture. "The first year of
   Darius the Mede is by the LXX. translated the first year of Cyrus,"
   [345] and the Canon of Ptolemy favors the identity. "Now all agree, as
   far as I have seen," says Wintle, "that the year of the expiration of
   the captivity, or the year that Cyrus issued his decree in favor of the
   Jews, was the year 212 of the era of Nabonassar, or 536 A.C.; and there
   is no doubt but Darius the Mede, whoever he was, reigned, according to
   Daniel, from the capture of Babylon, till this same first year of
   Cyrus, or till the commencement of the reign alloted by Scripture to
   Cyrus the Persian." "The Canon certainly allots nine years' reign to
   Cyrus over Babylon, of which space the two former years are usually
   allowed to coincide with the reign of Cyaxares or Darius the Mede, by
   the advocates of Xenophon." (Prelim. Dissertation.) Herodotus,
   Xenophon, and Ctesias all agree in the original superiority of the
   Medes, till the victories of Cyrus turned the scale, and gave rise to
   the Persian dynasty. At the fall of Babylon, and during the life of
   Darius, the Medes are mentioned by Daniel as superior, but at the
   accession of Cyrus this order is reversed, and Ezra, Nehemiah, and
   Esther, all assign the foremost place to the Persians.

   The life of Daniel, Rosenmuller reminds us, was prolonged beyond the
   first year of king krvs, Coresh, for the tenth chapter informs us of
   his vision in the third year of that monarch's reign. He explains the
   apparent contradiction, by saying that it was enough for Daniel to
   live, or to the liberation of the Jews in the first year of the reign
   of Coresh; that was the crowning event of his prolonged existence. The
   conjectures of Bertholdt and Aben-Ezra are mentioned, only to be
   disposed of by a few words of censure. An ingenious conjecture of a
   French critic is found in the Encycl. Theol., Liv. 27. The objection of
   Bleek, Ewald, Winer, and De Wette, are ably treated at length by
   Hengstenberg, and really meet with more serious attention than they
   deserve. It is a useless waste of precious time to enter minutely into
   every "phantasy" of the restless neology of Germany, while the
   chronology of Daniel's life will form the subject of a subsequent
   Dissertation. As some Neologians dwell much on the historian Ctesias,
   and lest the unlearned reader should be misled by their confident
   assertions, we may here state that we have only an epitome of his work
   preserved by the patriarch Photius. Bahr states that he lived about 400
   B.C., in the reign of Darius Nothus, being a Greek physician who
   remained seventeen years at the Persian court. Diodorus informs us that
   he obtained his information from the royal archives, but there are so
   many anachronisms and errors of various kinds, that his statements
   cannot be safely followed as if historically correct. Ctesias, for
   instance, denies all relationship between Cyrus and Astyages. According
   to him, he defeated Astyages, invested his daughter Amytis with the
   honors of a queen, and afterwards married her. F. W. Newman, indeed,
   prefers this narrative to that of both Herodotus and Xenophon, and
   thereby renders their testimony to the scriptural record uncertain and
   valueless. He also treats "the few facts" in regard to the Persian
   wars, "which the epitomator has extracted as differing from Herodotus,"
   as carrying with them "high probability." The closing scene of his
   career, as depicted in the narrative of Ctesias, is pronounced "beyond
   comparison more credible" than that of Herodotus. This great conqueror
   died the third day after his wound in a battle with "the Derbices," and
   was buried in that monument at Pasargadae, which the Macedonians broke
   open two centuries afterwards, (Strabo, lib. 15 Section 3; Arrian, lib.
   vi. Section 29,) and which has lately been explored and described by
   Morier and Sir R. K. Porter. [346]

   Notwithstanding the hypothesis which has lately found favor with the
   modern writers whose worlds we have quoted, we feel that the views of
   the older critics are preferable; and, on the whole, Calvin's
   exposition can only be improved upon in minor details. The authorities
   enumerated by Archbishop Secker, as given by Wintle in his preface,
   page 18 and following, are worthy of attentive perusal; and we must
   refer again to Hengstenberg's able replies to a variety of objections
   which we are unable to notice. See Daniel 1:6 and following, Edit. Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [344] An engraving of this statue is given in Vaux's Nineveh and
   Persepolis, p. 322.

   [345] Wintle's Transl., prelim. Dissertation.,

   [346] See Kitto's Bibl. Cyc., art Cyr., and Vaux's Nineveh, p. 316.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 7.

   THE KING'S DREAM.

   Daniel 2:1

   Its Date. -- The assertion of the first verse has created some
   difficulty, in consequence of its not allowing time enough for the
   Jewish youth to become a man. Jerome attempts to solve it by supposing
   the point of departure to be not his reign over Judea, but of his
   dominion over other nations, as the Assyrians and Egyptians. He seems
   justified in this view by the words of Josephus, (Antiq., lib. 10
   chapter 10. Section 3,) who distinctly refers the dream to the second
   year "after the laying waste of Egypt." Rosenmuller objects to this
   explanation, and to that of C. B. Michaelis, and adopts that of
   Saadias, who supposes the dream to have happened in the second year,
   but not to be interpreted till the conclusion of the third.

   Its Origin. -- Nothing is more difficult to reduce to philosophic laws
   than the theory of dreams and their interpretation. The researches of
   physical science have thrown more light on the subject than all the
   guesses of ancient or modern divines. Jerome, for instance, thought
   that in this case, "the shadow of the dream remained," a sort of breath
   (aura) and trace remaining in the mind of the king. It is of no use
   whatever to seek for much light on these subjects in the works of the
   ancients, whether Fathers or Reformers; they are constantly displaying
   their ignorance whenever they treat of subjects within the domain of
   psychological science. The physician has now become a far safer guide
   than the divine. Although Nebuchadnezzar's dream was supernatural in
   its origin, yet it seems like ordinary ones in its departing from the
   sleeper while he is completely unconscious of its subject.

   Physical researches have proved the truth of Calvin's assertion on
   verse third, that "Scientia est generalis et perpetua." Explanations
   have happily passed away from the theologian and the metaphysician to
   the physician and the chemist. The brain is now admitted to be the
   organ through which the mind acts during both the activity and the
   repose of the body, and dreams are now known to depend upon physical
   causes acting through the nerves upon the brain. The late researches of
   the celebrated chemist Baron Reichenbach seem to have led us one step
   nearer to the true explanation of these singular phenomena; the
   discovery of odyle, a new imponderable agent, like caloric and
   electricity, has enabled the modern philosopher to trace some of the
   laws of natural and artificial sleep. The existence of odyle in
   magnets, crystals, and the animal frame, and its intimate connection
   with lucidity, and impressions conveyed to the sensorium during
   magnetic sleep, seems now to be received by the best psychologists;
   their experiments will, doubtless, lead to our ascertaining the laws
   which regulate dreaming; and if the results said to be obtained by Mr.
   Lewis, Major Buckley, and Dr. William Gregory of Edinburgh, are
   ultimately admitted as facts by the scientific world, a new method of
   explaining the operations of the mind in sleep will be completely
   established. -- See the "Letters" published by the Professor of
   Chemistry in the University of Edinburgh, 1 volume 12mo. 1851.

   This contrast between the ancient and modern methods of explanation is
   strikingly exemplified by Calvin's reference to the Daimones on page
   119, which requires some elucidation to render it intelligible to the
   general reader.

   The philosophers of Greece held various theories concerning them, among
   which that recorded by Plato in the Phaedrus is the most singular. He
   commences by asserting the immortality of the soul, and its essential
   existence from all eternity. The explanation of this idea, as it really
   is, he treats as divine, but its similitude as human and readily
   comprehended. The simile is remarkable. The deities have all a chariot
   and horses, which are perfect, but ours have two horses, each of
   contrary dispositions. A whole armament of these winged spirits are led
   on under the concave of heaven, Jupiter himself leading the armament of
   gods and daimones. In attempting to ascend, the perfect horses of the
   deities succeed in reaching the convex surface, which no poet ever has
   described or will describe worthily; but some charioteers fail in their
   efforts, because one of their horses is depraved, and ever tends
   downwards towards the earth. In consequence of this depravity, the
   utmost confusion occurs -- the daimones loose their wings and fall to
   earth, and become human souls. But the various ranks which arise from
   them deserve especial notice. Those who have beheld most of the glories
   beyond the heavenly concave become philosophers, and the next to them
   kings and warriors. Seven other classes of men spring up in the
   following order: -- politicians, physicians, prophets, poets, farmers,
   sophists, and tyrants. After ten thousand years, the soul may recover
   its wings, and be judged -- some in heaven and others in courts of
   justice under the earth, while some pass into beasts and then return
   again to bodies of men. This notion of the origin of the soul from the
   daimones is a very singular one, and helps us to understand the double
   sense of the word, like that of angels among us, both good and bad.
   Though it is not difficult to perceive its connection with dreaming, as
   the medium of intercourse between the souls of men and the disembodied
   spirits, yet such conjectures throw no light whatever upon the king's
   dream before us.

   The passages alluded to by Calvin from Cicero are found in the First
   and Second Books De Divinatione. They consist of extracts from Ennius,
   and relate the fabled dreams of Priam, Tarquinius Superbus, and the
   mother of Phalaris, as well as that remarkable one which the magi are
   said to have interpreted for Cyrus. In the Second Book, Cicero argues
   wisely and strenuously against the divine origin of dreams. To pay the
   slightest attention to them he deems the mark of a weak, superstitious,
   and driveling mind. He inveighs strongly against the pretense to
   interpret them, which had become a complete traffic, and displayed the
   imposture which always flourishes wherever there are dupes to feed it.
   He combats the views of Aristotle, which Calvin quotes, and supplies
   much material for discussion though but little illustration of our
   subject. The passages above referred to will be found quoted and
   explained in Colquhoun's History of Magic, volume 1, while some useful
   observations on sleep and dreams occur in page 60 and following.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 8.

   THE IMAGE AND ITS INTERPRETATION.

   Daniel 2:38

   "Thou art this head of gold." A question has arisen whether this
   expression relates to Nebuchadnezzar personally, or to his empire and
   dynasty continued to his grandson. The principle is an important one,
   although history has already removed all difficulty as to the facts. C.
   B. Michaelis, Willet, Wells, and others, consider the monarch as the
   representative of his empire, not only during his life but until its
   overthrow. In the quaint language of Willet, "In this short sentence,
   thou art the head of gold, there are as many figures as words." Thou,
   that is, thy kingdom; art, meaning signifiest or representest; head,
   means "the antiquity and priority of that kingdom, and the knowledge
   and wisdom of that nation;" gold, "betokeneth their riches, prosperity,
   and flourishing estate." Compare also Isaiah 14:4, and Jeremiah 51:7,
   where the epithet golden alludes to the majesty and wealth of the city.
   Wintle interprets the golden head as representing the duration of the
   empire of Babylon from Ninus to Belshazzar, a period of 700 years; but
   this is objectionable, since the father of Nebuchadnezzar was of a
   different race from the early sovereigns of Babylon, and the vision
   becomes far more emphatic, by being limited to Nebuchadnezzar and his
   immediate successors. Oecolampadius limits the period to his own times,
   and gives an ingenious reason for the head being of gold. He quotes the
   authorities for the extensive dominion of this king, viz.,

   Berosus known to us through Josephus, and Megasthenes through Eusebius,
   as well as Orosius, who extend his sway over Syria, Armenia, Phoenicia,
   Arabia, Lybia, and even Spain; but this commentator is not satisfied
   with this allusion. He explains it of the justness of his
   administration. His earlier years were more righteous than his later,
   and though many faults may be detected in him, yet he was less open to
   the charge of injustice than the Persians and Greeks who succeeded him.

   Daniel 2:39 The Second Kingdom is the Medo-Persian, denoted according
   to Josephus by the two arms. Wintle very appositely quotes Claudian --

   Medus ademit
   Assyrio, Medoque tulit moderamina Perses [347]

   The Vulgate here introduces the adjective "silver," adopting it from
   Daniel 2:32, not as a translation, but, according to Rosenmuller, as a
   modus interpretamenti.

   The Third Kingdom is that of the Greeks, but the Fourth is variously
   interpreted. It relates to either the successors of Alexander or to the
   Romans. The majority of the older commentators agreed with Calvin in
   thinking it to mean the Roman empire, viz., Oecolampadius, Bullinger,
   Melancthon and Osiander, while Grotius and Rosenmuller, and Cosmas, the
   Indian traveler whom we have previously referred to as known to us
   through Montfaucon, advocate its reference to the Seleucidae and
   Lagidae. Poole's Synopsis will furnish the reader with long lists of
   varying opinions, each fortified by its own reasons, and Willet has
   carefully collected and arranged the arguments on both sides. The
   divines of Germany have added their conjectures to those which have
   preceded them. Kuinoel in his theological commentaries has preserved
   the view of Velthusen [348] and others; while the absurdities which
   some of them propose may be understood from the opinion of Harenberg,
   who thinks the stone which destroyed the image to be the sons and
   grandsons of Nebuchadnezzar, and Doederlein in his notes to Grotius,
   and Scharfenberg in his "Observations on Daniel," approve the foolish
   conjecture.

   A third view, very different from those which preceded it, has been
   ably stated and laboriously defended. Dr. Todd of Dublin, in his
   valuable "Lectures on Antichrist," considers the fourth empire as yet
   to come. The kingdoms of Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, and Cyrus, are said to
   be signified by the golden head, that of Alexander by the silver breast
   and arms, the Roman by the brass, while the iron prefigures the cruel
   and resistless sway of Antichrist, which shall not be overthrown till
   the second advent of Messiah. We shall have future opportunities for
   discussing this theory more at length; it has necessarily enlisted him
   in the ranks of the Futurists, whom Birks has confuted at length in his
   "First Elements of Sacred Prophecy." We refer the student to these two
   worlds, each excellent of its kind, while we defer the discussion of
   this most interesting question till we treat the chapters contained in
   our second volume.

   In descending to details, the arms of the image have been treated as
   symbols of the Medo-Persian empire; Theodoret considering the right arm
   to represent one, and the left the other. Various reasons have been
   given for the implied inferiority. Willet adopts one the direct
   contrary of Calvin's. While one author treats the inferiority as moral,
   in consequence of a general corruption of manners, Willet thinks the
   "government more tolerable and equal toward the people of God." Some
   have thought the silver to refer to remarkable wealth, and others to
   superior wisdom and eloquence. The belly and thighs being of brass, are
   thought to prefigure the intemperance, and yet the firmness of the
   Grecian powers. Alexander's personal debauchery and extravagance is
   said to be hinted at. The brass is said to imply his warlike
   disposition and his invincible spirit. The iron is thought to be
   peculiarly characteristic of the conquests of Rome; the mingling with
   clay signifies "the division and dissension of the kingdom," says
   Willet; while others refer it to the marriages between the Roman
   generals and the barbarians, or generally to the intermingling of the
   conquerors of the world with the tribes whom they subdued. The two legs
   are said to be the two great divisions of the Roman empire after the
   time of Constantine, though those who treat them as belonging to the
   successors of Alexander, think they mean Egypt and Syria. The mingling
   with the seed of men (Daniel 2:43) is interpreted of the admission of
   the subject allies to the freedom of the state (donati civitate), and
   also of the fusion between the barbarians and the Romans, in the late
   periods of the declining empire. Whether the toes represent individual
   kings or distinct kingdoms, has been discussed by Birks in his
   "Elements of Prophecy."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [347] II. Consul., Lib. de Stil., 163, 164.

   [348] Animad. in Daniel 2:27-45. Helmstad., 1783, preserved by Kuinoel,
   volume 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 9.

   THE STONE CUT WITHOUT HANDS.

   Daniel 2:45

   The Stone "Cut Out Of The Mountain" is generally interpreted of the
   kingdom of Messiah, some writers applying it to his first Advent, and
   others to his second. If the fourth kingdom be the Roman, then the
   stone was cut "without hands," either at the birth of Christ, or, as
   Calvin when answering Abarbanel prefers, at the first spread of the
   Gospel. The reason why a "stone" here symbolizes "the kingdom of the
   heavens," is because Christ is spoken of in Scripture as a chief
   corner-stone. The passages in the Psalms, Isaiah, and Matthew, and
   others, are too familiar to the reader to require quotation. The
   mountain is supposed to be, either the Virgin Mary, or the Jewish
   people; without hands, may allude to our Savior's marvelous birth, or
   to his spiritual independence of all human agency. The ancient fathers,
   as well as the modern reformers, agree in this allusion to Christ. See
   Justin Martyr Dial. cum Tryph., section 32; Irenaeus adv. Haer., verse
   21; Tertullian, De Resur., page 61; Apolog., page 869; Cyprian adv.
   Jud., lib. 2. section 17; Augustine in Psalm 98.

   The question of the greatest interest is, whether this prophecy has
   been fulfilled at the first Advent, or is yet to be accomplished at the
   second. Willet has taken Calvin to task for his "insufficient" answers
   to the "Rabbine Barbanel," but as they vary only on minor points, it is
   not necessary to quote the corrections of his thoughtful monitor.

   The theory of Joseph Mede, the great advocate of the year-day system,
   may be noticed here. He supposes the stone cut out at the first Advent,
   but not to smite the image till the second. This involves the existence
   of the Roman empire, throughout the whole Christian dispensation -- an
   admission that Calvin would not make, and should not be hastily
   allowed. Dr. Todd correctly remarks, "it assumes the Roman empire to be
   still in existence," and it further assumes that the prophecies
   revealed to Daniel advance beyond the first Advent of Messiah. Calvin
   and the older commentators treat them as terminating with the
   establishment of the Gospel dispensation. Tertullian, indeed, applies
   this passage to the second Advent, but Maldonatus considers that
   expositor as "insanus," who thinks the Roman empire to be still
   existing. Yet both Bellarmine, and Birks argue for its present
   continuance, and each founds upon it his own views of Scripture
   prophecy.

   As we shall have other opportunities for discussing these questions in
   our second volume, we simply state that Calvin and our chief Reformers
   considered all Daniel's prophecies summed up and satisfied by the first
   Advent of Christ. As they did not adopt the year-day system, they
   treated these predictions as pointing the Jews to the coming of their
   Messiah, and as depicting the various kingdoms and sovereigns which
   should arise, and affect by their progress and dissensions the Holy
   Land. It never once occurred to them that the Book of Daniel relates in
   any way to the details of the history of modern Europe, and of either
   the Court or the Church of Rome.

   Another view hinted at, but disapproved by Bishop Newton, is that the
   third empire relates solely to Alexander, the fourth to his successors
   in Syria and Egypt, and the stone cut without hands to the Roman
   dominion. But with this popular writer as well as with Joseph Mede --
   the received view of the iron portion of the image is "little less than
   an article of faith." [349] The stone he reminds us was quite different
   from the image, so the kingdom of Christ was utterly distinct from the
   principalities of this world. He asserts that its smiting power was
   displayed at the first Advent, and is continued throughout the
   subsequent history of the world. But as Bishop Newton is an advocate of
   the historical system of interpreting days for years, which Calvin did
   not uphold, it is unnecessary to quote him further. The reader will,
   however, derive benefit from consulting the authorities which he has
   brought forward in rich abundance. [350] As he is a valuable and a
   popular expounder of prophecy, it is necessary to make this passing
   allusion to so valuable an author; while the reader of these Lectures
   must be cautioned against adopting any views of prophecy which are
   inconsistent with the great principle upon which the Almighty deals
   with us, in our new covenant through Christ our Lord.

   Oecolampadius in his comment upon Daniel 2:44, treats the kingdom of
   Christ as spiritual and eternal; like other earnest writers, he
   considers the troubles of his own days as peculiarly the marks of
   Antichrist. The blasphemy of the Mahometans, and the arrogance of the
   "Cata-baptists," seem to him intolerable. He is especially vehement
   against those who urge the necessity of a second baptism, and deny the
   value of outward ordinances, as the ministry and the sacraments; and
   argues for the permanence of external ceremonies till the second Advent
   of Christ.

   He considers verse forty-five to relate to the second coming of Christ
   and the resurrection of mankind to judgment, but does not condemn the
   opinion of Jerome and other "fathers," who refer it to the incarnation
   of our Lord. The mountain, says he, is Zion, and the people the Jews,
   and by his crucifixion, Christ is said to grow into a mountain and fill
   the earth. He quotes Hippolytus as sanctioning its reference to the
   second Advent; and objects to the views of Irenaeus, Tertullian, and
   Lactantius, who as Chiliasts turned this passage to their purpose. The
   gross ideas of some Jews and Christians, respecting a thousand years of
   carnal enjoyment upon earth, are wisely reprobated, and some very
   profitable remarks are made upon the spiritual reign of Christ in the
   hearts and souls of his people. Oecolampadius is on this occasion
   remarkably practical and searching in his comment; he is not so
   critical and literal as Calvin, but he develops more of the deep
   feelings of the mature Christian than any other Reformer does on the
   Old Testament.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [349] Mede's Works, Book 4, Ep. 6 p. 736.

   [350] See Dissertation XIII. Edit. Lond. 1832.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 10.

   THE COLOSSUS AT DURA.

   Daniel 3:1

   Many points of interest are connected with the narrative of this
   chapter.

   1. The time of its erection. This is unknown; various conjectures have
   been offered, but not the slightest historical foundation proved for
   any of them. Theodoret and Chrysostom fix upon the eighteenth year of
   the king's reign.

   2. The object of its erection. It was probably intended to entrap the
   Jews and all conscientious worshippers of Jehovah. Calvin's view is
   adopted by the best writers.

   3. In whose honor was it erected? Willet agrees with Calvin in thinking
   it was consecrated to some deity, as Bel, the chief object of his
   worship.

   4. The place of its erection was the plain called by Ptolemy, Deira,
   between Chaltopis and Cissia, in the region of Susan. [351] The editor
   of the Chisian Codex derives it from the Persian word dooran, meaning
   an enclosure, thus strengthening the view of Jerome, that it was
   erected in an enclosure within the city.

   A singular feature in the earliest commentators is the mystical
   application of such subjects. Chrysostom, for instance, takes it to
   denote covetousness; [352] and Jerome, (in loc.,) false doctrine and
   heresy; and Irenaeus, the pomp and pride of the world, under the
   mastery of Satan. [353]

   The disproportion of its form has occasioned some difference among
   expositors. Bertholdt, as usual, is full of faultfinding. "How was it
   possible for it to stand of itself?" But there is no proof that the
   statue had throughout a human form. Columns with a human head on the
   top were often erected by the Asiatics in honor of their deities.
   Mnter in his Religion of the Babylonians, treats it as similar to the
   Amyclaean Apollo, a simple column, to which a head and feet were added.
   Gesenius, too, has observed that the ruins of the tower of Belus are
   imposing only from their colossal size, and not from their proportions;
   the Babylonians preferred everything huge, irregular, and grotesque.
   Idol-pillars were commonly erected by the Assyrians in honor of their
   deities. If, however, we strictly limit the word tslm, tzelem, to a
   human figure complete in all its parts, we may still vindicate the
   truth of Daniel by allowing for a pedestal which would be necessary.
   The proportion of six to one is correct: for a human figure; hence with
   a pedestal, ten to one by no means violates the principles of art. Of
   the difficulty of raising it we are no judges. The able remarks of
   Heeren are exactly suited to the occasion, -- "The circle of our
   experience is too limited for us to assign at once the scale of what is
   possible in other lands, in a different clime, and under other
   circumstances. Do not the Egyptian pyramids, the Chinese wall, and the
   rock temple at Elephanta, stand, as it were, in mockery of our
   criticism, which presumes to define the limits of the united power of
   whole nations?" [354]

   The material of the Colossus is worthy of notice. It is scarcely
   possible that it could be all of gold. Some, have thought it to have
   been hollow like the Colossus of Rhodes, which exceeded it in height by
   ten cubits. (Pliny His. Nat., 34 Section 18.) Chrysostom thought it
   made of wood, and only covered with gold plating, and certainly we have
   authority for such a view from Exodus 39:38, where an altar made of
   acacia wood, and covered with gold, is termed golden; and that in
   Exodus 39:39, merely covered with brass, is termed brazen. The immense
   treasures heaped together at Babylon favor the possibility of
   sufficient gold being at hand to cover so large a statue; while the
   weight of the golden statue of Bel, with its steps and seat, as
   recorded both by Herodotus and Diodorus, is far from sufficient to
   allow of their being massive gold throughout. Thus profane history
   becomes exceedingly valuable in enabling us to interpret correctly the
   language of the Old Testament. Many minds are inclined at once to
   discredit the erection of any such colossus all of gold; the mechanical
   and artistic difficulties are far too great; but when we find such
   historians giving us accounts of similar erections made of plated wood,
   or consisting of a mere hollow case, plated over, the whole of the
   difficulties vanish, everything is reduced at once within the bounds of
   credibility, the historical accuracy of Daniel is vindicated, the
   captious insinuations of disbelievers are repelled, and the mind of the
   earnest inquirer is at rest on the firm rock which patient
   investigation has provided for it.

   Hengstenberg's attention is occupied throughout this chapter with
   noticing the objections of his Neologian predecessors. De Wette,
   Bertholdt, and Bleek, have each attempted to discredit the historical
   veracity of Daniel. The period of the erection of the image -- if ever
   erected at all -- was that of Antiochus Ephphanes, say they, and his
   character is the supposed original of the fabulous Nebuchadnezzar, and
   the writer "merely invented these tales in order to inspire the Jews
   with fortitude under the religious persecutions of Antiochus." [355]
   Bertholdt also considers the address of the three Jews to the king as
   an instance of "revolting insolence and levity;" while Theodoret is
   quoted as "being amazed at the courage of these youths, their wisdom,
   their piety," in language exactly in the spirit of Calvin himself.
   [356] The preparation of the furnace has created some difficulty,
   especially when Chardin relates that a whole month has been taken up
   with feeding two ovens with fire, for the purpose of destroying
   criminals; but this objection is removed by the natural supposition
   that the king anticipated refusal, and had prepared beforehand to
   execute summary vengeance on all who disobeyed. "What result is gained
   by the miracle?" ask the disbelievers. "How disproportionate was the
   colossus," he exclaims, "no such statue ever existed, no such miracle
   was ever performed." But history puts to flight a whole host of
   conjectures, for Herodotus mentions a statue in the temple of Belus,
   and Diodorus Siculus confirms his account. [357] Hengstenberg has
   collected a long list of authorities in proof of the erection of such
   statues by the ancient monarchs of the East, and we refer to his
   valuable labors for a reply to objections, which are happily unknown to
   the majority of our readers.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [351] Ptol., Geog., lib. 6. cap. 3.

   [352] Hom., 18, in Ep. 2. ad Cor.

   [353] Adv. Haer., lib. 5.

   [354] See Selden de Diis Syr., c. 3 p. 49; Jablonski, Panth. AEg., p.
   80; Gesenius in Encyc., Art. Babylon, th. 7 p. 24; Munter, p. 59; and
   Heeren, Ideen, l. 2, p. 170, ap. Heng.

   [355] Reply to Objections, p. 70.

   [356] Opp., volume 2, p. 1110, ap. Heng., p. 73; Voy. en Perse, 4, p.
   276.

   [357] Lib. 1, section 183, and lib. 2, section 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 11.

   THE NAMES OF THE MAGISTRATES.

   Daniel 3:2

   Calvin has very judiciously declined to enter into the signification of
   each of these officers, as there is great difficulty in ascertaining
   the exact duties to be assigned to each. The best method of determining
   this point is to follow up the meaning of the corresponding words in
   the cognate languages of the East, and to bear in mind the officers of
   state at present in use. We will here state a few results of our
   researches, referring the reader for fuller information to Castell's
   valuable Lexicon, and Rosenmuller's and Wintle's comments, and
   punctuating the words after the best foreign scholars.

   'chsdrphny', achas-dar-penaja, is derived from the Persian by both
   Castell and Rosenmuller; its meaning is majestatis janitores. Wintle
   translates correctly satraps.

   sgny' signaja, is also Persian; Rosenmuller renders it supremus
   prfectus, and Wintle, "senators," implying a viceroy of the first
   rank.

   phchvt', pach-vatha, is clearly equivalent to the Oriental "pasha."

   'drgzdy', adar-gaz-raja, the Septuagint translates by "consuls," and
   Theodotion and Jerome by "leaders," and Wintle by "judges."

   gdvry', gedab-raja, is commonly rendered "treasurers."

   dtvry', dethab-raja, signifies the superior officers of the law.

   tphty', tiph-taya, is clearly connected with the Turkish word mufti,
   who is the chief religious officer of the Mohamedan faith.

   sltny, sil-tonei, a general expression for "governors" Joseph
   Jacchiades has explained it fully in his Chaldee paraphrase.

   Poole's Synopsis may also be consulted with advantage. Oecolampadius
   departs here from his usual custom, by entering into the criticism of
   these words, and quoting Rabbi Saadias, the Septuagint, and the Chaldee
   paraphrasts.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 12.

   THE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.

   Daniel 3:5

   It is not possible to define, as Calvin reminds us, what these
   instruments were. Researches have been made into the etymology of the
   Chaldee words, and a comparison instituted between the properties
   implied and those of modern use and construction. Travelers in the East
   have compared the music of the present day with that recorded in this
   verse. A similarity, too, has been pointed out between the instruments
   of the Syrians and Greeks. As no practical advantage can arise from
   quoting the conjectures of various writers, we simply refer to Wintle
   and Rosenmuller in loc., where some interesting information is given in
   extenso. Poole's Synopsis also supplies much verbal criticism.
   Oecolampadius passes by altogether any explanation of these
   instruments, but makes some very appropriate practical comments. True
   religious worship, he justly observes, does not need this variety of
   external incentive; a pure conscience with trust in God and obedience
   to his laws is the best music in his eyes, while he applauds Plato's
   description of the best music which a soul can offer to its Creator.
   Antichrist, he asserts, delights in such outward and sensual
   gratification's, while the advanced Christian worships in spirit,
   calmly, quietly, and inwardly. True religion is thus the antagonist of
   all outward and idolatrous service; it is not prompted by fear nor
   promoted by a tyrant's command, but requiring no visible parade of
   instrumental minstrelsy, it worships with a cheerful heart and a free
   and buoyant spirit, inspired by the hope of everlasting life through
   the promises of God in Christ. This sentiment, although 300 years old,
   is worthy of the Reformer who uttered and maintained it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 13.

   THE SON OF GOD.

   Daniel 3:25

   This translation of the Chaldee words lvr 'lhyn, leber-alehin, in our
   version is liable to mistake. Wintle has more correctly rendered them
   "a son of a god." It was far more likely that the heathen king would
   express his astonishment in this way than allude to what he could not
   comprehend, the appearance of the Logos in human form. Calvin correctly
   states it to be "one of the angels." Angels are called in Scripture,
   says Wells, sons of God, as in Job 1:6, and Job 38:7. "Some angelic
   appearance" is the correct comment of Wintle. Jerome takes it as a type
   of Christ descending into Hades, and Munter asserts it to be our Lord
   himself. Wells neither affirms nor denies this view, which has been
   held by a number of commentators who consider that the Logos appeared
   in human form on several occasions during patriarchal and
   Ante-Messianic times. Justin Martyr makes the same assertion when
   describing the pre-existence of the Logos to his philosophic
   persecutors. Willet leans to this view, after summing up a variety of
   opinions from able writers. Some of his reflections on the general
   narrative are edifying; but his discussion on the nature of angels is
   fancifully unprofitable, and his ignorance of natural science is
   singularly displayed in his treatment of the ordinary and extraordinary
   action of fire. Rosenmuller translates, "like a son of the gods," that
   is an angel, and the writers quoted by Poole come to the same
   conclusion; but Oecolampadius, thinks the appearance to be that of
   Immanuel himself, and refers to other instances of his being visible to
   Abraham, Jacob, and Moses. He fortifies his view by quotations from
   Chrysostom, Apollinarius, and other ecclesiastical authorities.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 14.

   A WATCHER.

   Daniel 4:13

   This is the correct rendering of the word yr, gnir, but it has been
   conjectured that its meaning is the same as tsyr, tzir, being the
   Chaldee word for "a messenger." Jerome ingeniously conjectures it to be
   the same as the Greek word Iris, the messenger of heaven. In Job 36:30,
   the Hebrew is 'yr, air, where Origen reads Irin according to Archbishop
   Seeker. Willet replies to the question "why the angels are called
   watchmen," and quotes Calvin's reason with approbation. Rosenmuller
   approves of Jerome's conjecture, and adduces Hom. Odys., lib. 18:5, in
   confirmation of it. He takes "the watcher and holy one" as a
   hendia-dys, reminding us that in Job 15:15, angels are called "holy
   ones" by the figure autonomasia. The Scholia of the Alexandrine Codex
   interpret the word eir, as equivalent to angel, and Isidorus Pelusiota,
   according to Rosenmuller, (Ep. 177, lib. 2,) considers the word to
   refer to the chief of angels. The Syrians in their hymns join watchers
   with angels as rejoicing over converted sinners, according to the
   learned editors of the Chisian Codex, page 127, edit. Rom. See also
   Critica Sacra, volume 7, edit. Frcof. The view of Oecolampadius is
   similar to those already expressed, but he takes the word "watcher" in
   the sense of an exciter or herald of divine punishment. R. Saadias
   supposes a terrible destroyer to be intended.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 15.

   THE MADNESS OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR.

   Daniel 4:25

   THE narrative of this chapter has met with much disbelief among the
   skeptical school of theology. The want of corresponding profane history
   is a subject of complaint. Origen found himself deserted by all ancient
   historians, and Jerome searched them in vain for any confirmation of
   the sacred text. We must remember, however, that the historians whom we
   reckon ancient, are very modern with reference to these early times.
   Megasthenes, for instance, wrote rather earlier than Berosus, about 280
   A.C., at the court of Seleucus Nicator, king of Babylon, and we have
   only portions of their writings second hand. Diocles, the author of a
   Persian history, and Abydenus, of an Assyrian and Median, obtained
   their materials from Chaldee traditions, many ages after the events
   recorded. The Chaldee chroniclers, Hengstenberg assures us, were,
   notorious for their national vanity and boasting, [358] and were not
   likely to record anything derogatory to their earliest hero. But even
   Bertholdt is compelled to confess that Abydenus has preserved a legend
   similar to the narrative of this chapter. "On ascending the roof of his
   palace, he became inspired by some god, and delivered himself as
   follows: -- Babylonians! I Nebuchadnezzar foretell you a calamity that
   is to happen, which neither my ancestor Bel nor queen Beltis can
   persuade the Fates to avert. There shall come a Persian mule, (one
   having parents of different countries,) having your own gods in
   alliance with him, and shall impose servitude upon you, with the head
   of a Mede, the boast of the Assyrians." [359] Now madness and
   inspiration were usually connected by the ancients; the time and place
   too, correspond with Daniel's narrative; the extasis occurred after the
   completion of his conquests, and the phrase, "by some god," refers to a
   foreign deity, whom we know to be the Jehovah of the Hebrews. The
   narrative of the frenzy which rendered him unfit for government, is
   allowed to be credible by the chief skeptics of the continent.
   Michaelis allows "that this calamity more frequently attacks great and
   extraordinary minds than ordinary men." Our physicians can now explain
   the reason through their improved knowledge of the brain and its
   functions. Pathological and psychological science is here more useful
   than all the conjectures of disbelieving theologians. In the early days
   of the Church, the greatest difficulty was found in taking this
   narrative literally: hence expositors treated it as an allegory. The
   king was held to represent Satan falling from heaven, and the whole
   account of his dwelling with the beasts of the field was taken
   figuratively, and rejected historically. Jerome, however, while he
   records this view at great length, adheres to the literal account.
   [360]

   The disbelief of the narrative above referred to may have arisen from
   an erroneous interpretation of the sacred text. For some writers have
   affirmed a complete metamorphosis of the man into the beast; a
   conclusion by no means warranted by the language of the passage.
   Tertullian has correctly explained the clause, "his hair became like
   eagle's feathers," by capilli incuria horrorem aquilinum prferente,
   since it was a natural consequence of his wild mode of life, and a
   usual mark of the sensualizing effect of prolonged insanity. And with
   reference to the time of this affliction, Hengstenberg quotes Calvin
   with approbation, for agreeing with the idea of an indefinite period
   implied by the word "seven." Calvin, however, inclines too much towards
   the theory of the indefinite use of definite numbers. There seems no
   good reason why the number "seven" should not be taken strictly and
   literally, nor why the word "times" dnvn, gni-danin, should not mean
   years. Even Hengstenberg gives way too much to the plausible conceits
   of his wily antagonists. Rosenmuller correctly limits the expression to
   seven years, a period by no means unnatural for the continuance of a
   highly excited state of the brain, producing mania, accompanied by all
   the symptoms mentioned in this chapter. Oecolampadius views it as a
   case of mental disease, and quotes many similar narratives from
   Aben-Ezra, Pausanias, and Augustine, bringing forward the fables of the
   heathen poets, as illustrating the passage. For the opinion of
   Tertullian, and various Jewish and continental writers, Kitto's Bibl.
   Cyclop. may be consulted, especially as the view there set forth by Dr.
   Wright is sound, judicious, and practical.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [358] P. 86. See also as there quoted, Niebuhr His. Gew., p. 189.
   Schlosser, Geshichte, etc., p. 172; and Volney, Recherches, etc., p.
   150.

   [359] Euseb. Praep. Evan., l. 9. Section 41, p. 456, Edit Colon., and
   Chron. Armen., p. 59.

   [360] See Rosenmuller's extract from his Commentary on this chapter,
   Dan., p. 171, where the original Greek of Abydenus is also given at
   length.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 16.

   THE EDICT OF PRAISE.

   Daniel 4:37

   This monarch probably lived but a single year after his recovery; and
   some writers have thought that his restoration produced a conversion to
   the worship of the one true God. But Hengstenberg agrees with our
   author: "Compare Calvin on the passages," says he, "who strikingly
   proves from them the incorrectness of the opinion of very many
   expositors as to the radical and entire conversion of Nebuchadnezzar."
   Calvin is clearly right, for it was customary with the Persians to
   blend the doctrines of Zoroaster with the Babylonian astrology. [361]
   The scriptural language of the king has been treated as an argument
   against the authenticity of the decree. Eichhorn and Bertholdt object
   to his speaking like an orthodox Jew in the phraseology of the Old
   Testament. But the affinity of certain phrases with other passages of
   Scripture, is no argument against its authenticity. The monarch had
   held much intercourse with Daniel; he had doubtless heard his method of
   expressing reverence and respect for the one true God, and he would
   repeat such expressions the more exactly in proportion to his want of
   personal experience of their meaning. In the case of the edict of
   Cyrus, brief as it is, several references are found to the prophecies
   of Isaiah. [362] As to the change of person from the third to the
   first, Hengstenberg approves of Calvin's suggestion. Oecolampadius
   considers the king really converted, and through knowing the angel to
   be the Christ, he supposes him not only a convert, but an apostle. This
   is far too favorable a view of his character; but it is instructive to
   ascertain the decisions of various eminent Reformers, and to observe
   which of them stands the scrutinizing test of an appeal to posterity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [361] Schlosser, p. 279, ap. Heng.

   [362] Kleinert, p. 142, and V. Colln. ap. Heng., p. 96.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 17.

   BELSHAZZAR AND THE FEAST.

   Daniel 5:1, 2.

   This monarch is here said to be the son of Nebuchadnezzar. The Duke of
   Manchester takes this literally, while the usual opinion is that he was
   his grandson. "No king," says he, "in Berosus, Megasthenes, or
   Polyhistor, corresponds with him. The Scripture says that
   Nebuchadnezzar was his father, which most people say means grandfather,
   and it is not to be denied, that by son, grandson may be intended; but
   in this case it is contrary to all the evidence we have on the subject.
   The author of the Scholastical History reports that Belshazzar was son
   of the daughter of Darius. Nebuchadnezzar the Second did, as I
   conceive, marry the daughter of Darius, which would make Belshazzar his
   son. But admitting that Belshazzar was paternal grandson of
   Nebuchadnezzar, none of the successors of Nebuchadnezzar could have
   been in that relation to him." The Persian writer Merkhond is the next
   quoted, by whose help the duke identifies Ka'oos with Nebuchadnezzar
   the First, Afrasiab with Astyages, and Siyawesh, the son of Ka'oos,
   with Belshazzar. It is then conjectured that this king never reigned
   except during his father's lifetime: if he was "the king" during his
   father's madness, the omission of his name by profane historians is
   thus accounted for. An Oxford MS. is quoted to shew "that
   Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar were reigning at Babylon when Darius and
   Coresch were reigning over Persia. [363]

   This hypothesis interferes so much with the ordinary deductions from
   ancient historians, that we must not pass it over without special
   notice.

   The received hypothesis has been so clearly stated by Wells, that
   reference to it is all that is needed. [364] Jeremiah (Jeremiah 27:6)
   had predicted that Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom was to be prolonged through
   the life of his son and his son's son. Ptolemy's Astronomical Canon is
   the best known authority for the history of Nebuchadnezzar's
   successors, as we have detailed them in a former Dissertation, and they
   are also found in a readable form in Stackhouse's History of the Bible.
   [365] The last of these kings is Nabonadius, and he is supposed to be
   the same as the Nabonnedus of Berosus, the Labynetus of Herodotus, and
   the Belshazzar of Daniel. [366] During his reign, says Berosus, the
   walls of the city near the river were strengthened by brick-work and
   bitumen; and in its seventeenth year Cyrus advanced against Babylon,
   the king met him with a large army, but was defeated, and then enclosed
   himself within Borsippa. Cyrus then took Babylon, and having determined
   to pull down its outer fortifications, he returned to Borsippa and
   besieged it. Nabonnedus then gave himself up, and Cyrus permitted him
   to close his life peaceably in Carmania, where he remained till his
   death. The narrative of Herodotus is slightly at variance with this.
   Cyrus made war against Labynetus, the son of Nitocris, a very spirited
   and powerful queen, and succeeded to the kingdom of Assyria "from his
   fathers." [367] Having turned the stream of the river Euphrates, he
   entered the city through its bed, and when the center was captured,
   those who dwelt at the extremities were ignorant of their disaster, for
   they "were celebrating a festival that day with dancing and all manner
   of rejoicing, till they received certain information of the general
   fate. And thus Babylon was the first time taken." Herodotus also
   records its second capture through the treachery of Zopyrus, in the
   reign of Darius Hystaspes, (lib. 3 section. 159;) and with this second
   capture the noble duke supposes the scriptural narrative to be
   co-incident.

   The Cyropaedia of Xenophon affords its testimony to a similar event,
   and as its historic value has been altogether denied, we cannot
   certainly pronounce the event the same. Vitringa has vindicated its
   historical truth, and Gesenius and Bertholdt have admitted it.
   Hengstenberg quotes lib. 7 section. 5, combines it with Herod., lib. 1
   section. 191, and remarks, "This testimony of Xenophon, too, is so much
   the more in our favor, as it confirms the particular circumstance that
   the nobles were at the feast assembled at the table of the king." [368]
   He adds, "The precise agreement of Daniel with Herodotus and Xenophon
   is acknowledged by Munter, 50 100 page 67, to be astonishing, and even
   Gesenius, Z. Jes. 1, page 655, cannot help calling it very
   astonishing." For a fuller discussion of all details, we refer at
   length to his conclusive work, merely giving our vote in his favor, and
   against the ingenious hypothesis which it has become necessary to state
   and explain.

   The Great Feast. -- The original word for feast is "bread," and this
   being united with "wine," becomes the usual mode of describing an
   eastern feast, where the people are all great eaters of bread. "To eat
   bread," and to "set on bread," is the scriptural method of indicating a
   feast. The number of the guests may not have amounted to a thousand, as
   this is an eastern expression for a large and surprising number, yet it
   is not incredible, since Harmer has informed us that "a quadrangular
   court, within the first or outer gate of the palace, was made use of
   for this purpose." [369] Willet reminds us of this eastern way of
   multiplying numbers by alluding to the 10,000 guests said to be present
   at Alexander's feast, and each of whom received a golden cup. Ptolemy,
   the father of Cleopatra, made a similar banquet for Pompey. It is
   supposed to have been an annual solemnity in honor of some deity, and
   the art of "tasting of the wine" (verse 2) alludes to the custom of
   tasting the libation previous to the sacrifice. Wintle very appositely
   quotes Virgil, AEn. lib. i. 741, --

   "Primaque libato summo tenus attigit ore."

   This view is rendered highly probable by the Chaldean custom recorded
   by Athenaeus, [370] of sacrificing to small images, of various metals,
   in human shape, an idolatry described in Baruch, Daniel 6: 3. Willet
   quotes Junius as stating that this feast occurred on the 16th day of
   the month Loon, when it approached in character the Saturnalia and
   Bacchanalia of the Greeks. "Tasting the wine" is rendered by the
   Vulgate and the Alexandrine version as if its sense were "drunken," and
   thus the general idea of licentious revelry is carried out.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [363] "The Times of Daniel," pp. 256-258.

   [364] Annotat., chapter 5, p. 46.

   [365] p. 984, edit. fol., volume 2, 1744.

   [366] Berosus ap. Joseph. and ap. Grotius de Veritat, lib. 3, Note;
   Hengstenberg's remarks on this passage in Berosus are valuable, p. 264.

   [367] Lib. 1., section. 188.

   [368] P. 261; see also Vitringa Comment., Z. Jes. 1 417; and Heeren, 1
   2, p. 157, ap. Heng.

   [369] As quoted by Wintle, p. 79, volume 1, p. 191.

   [370] Deipnosophist, chapter. 13:2.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 18.

   THE QUEEN.

   Daniel 5:10

   Calvin doubts whether this was the wife or grandmother of Belshazzar.
   But there is another possible solution. Prideaux supposes she was the
   mother of the king, following the narrative of Herodotus, though
   Grotius and Josephus represent her as the widow of Nebuchadnezzar. The
   author of "The Times of Daniel" differs from the received view of the
   times of Nitocris; she reigned, he concludes, "in the generation before
   Nebuchadnezzar's father." Her name is not found in the Astronomical
   Canon, and consequently either Herodotus or the Canon must be mistaken.
   Nitocris, says Herodotus, lived five generations after Semiramis, but
   then, according to Bryant, eight different periods have been assigned
   for his reign, between A.C. 2177 and 713. Notwithstanding the celebrity
   which Herodotus has conferred upon his name, it is impossible now to
   ascertain whether she was the queen-mother alluded to in the text, but
   it is equally injudicious to pronounce positively that she was not.
   Hengstenberg has discussed this question with his usual sagacity.
   Heeren makes her the contemporary of Nebuchadnezzar, and probably his
   wife; but Hengstenberg inclines to the view of her being the
   queen-mother. "We may then justly compare what Herodotus says of
   Nitocris with that which occurs here of the queen, and it only need be
   quoted to shew a perfect agreement." [371] Rosenmuller agrees with
   Jerome in thinking her the widow of Nebuchadnezzar, and Oecolampadius
   adopts the same view, when commenting with great spirit and animation
   on this point.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [371] See Prideaux, 1, p. 227; Eichhorn, 1, p. 79; Jahn Archaeol., 2.
   1., p. 217.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 19.

   THE HAND-WRITING ON THE WALL.

   Daniel 5:25

   We are constantly reminded of the necessity of a knowledge of words, if
   we would interpret aright the Word of God. That record which is
   emphatically "The Word," is composed in detail of many words, and it is
   literally impossible so to understand Holy Scripture as to expound it
   fully, without a knowledge and use of single expressions. This remark
   is peculiarly applicable in the present instance. Calvin takes each
   word separately in the perfect tense, while in the Arabic, the past
   participle is used, viz., mensuratum, appensum, divisum.

   mn', mene, is the participle pihel of the verb mn', mana, numeravit,
   meaning to set bounds to the continuance of anything.

   tql, tekel, is the Chaldee word for the Hebrew sql, shekel, to weigh --
   the shekel being a standard weight of silver money. The reference is to
   the Almighty weighing in the balances of Justice the conduct of the
   king.

   vphrsyph, upharsin -- et dividentes; Calvin thus literally, and
   Rosenmuller explains that the active participle plural is taken
   impersonally, and is thus equal to the part. pass. sing. The ending n,
   n, it must be recollected, is the Chaldee equivalent for the Hebrew m

   The allusion to the balance in relation to a kingdom is common among
   ancient classical writers. Homer, Iliad, lib. 22 and Virgil, AEn., lib.
   12, contain instances; as well as the Paradise Lost, Book 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 20.

   THE MEDES AND PERSIANS.

   Daniel 5:28

   IT is highly interesting to the student of prophecy to trace the origin
   and progress of these empires which have gained repute in the history
   of our race. This interest is increased when we discover that the
   narratives of profane writers illustrate the sacred text. And as great
   efforts have been made to impugn the authenticity of this Book, we must
   again refer to some of the arguments which induce the best divines to
   rely on its historical accuracy.

   The history of Media and its people frequently impinges upon the
   eccentric orbit of the Jewish tribes. It has been supposed that the
   name of the country was derived from kdy, chadi, the third son of
   Japhet, but this conjecture is rendered futile, when we remember that
   the first establishment of the kingdom dates only 150 years before
   Cyrus. It must never be forgotten, when treating of these early times,
   how very modern all writers are who lived after the times of Solomon.
   To us they appear ancient, and their authority for the truth of an
   event conclusive; but those historians of Asia, upon whom we are
   compelled to rely, lived many ages after the occurrences which they
   record. It seems now to be admitted, that we have lost many centuries
   between the flood and Abraham; hence the attempt to assign the origin
   of any empire to the immediate descendants of Noah is highly deceptive.
   We can only take the best testimony which we have, but with it we must
   correct the uncertainty of even the most positive assertions. The
   Medes, if we may trust Herodotus, were an offset from the Assyrians.
   They broke off from their sway, after the Assyrians had held the empire
   of Upper Asia for five hundred and twenty years. The interesting story
   of Deioces, and the foundation of Ecbatana is recorded, the account of
   that city corresponding precisely with that handed down to us in the
   Book of Judith. [372] In process of time the neighboring tribes were
   subdued and united, till Phraortes, having reduced the Persians under
   his dominion, led the united nations against the Assyrians. Cyaxares
   his son succeeded him, and both extended and consolidated the Median
   sway. Astyages, the grandfather of Cyrus, was his son and successor;
   and during the whole period of these monarchs' reigns province after
   province was added to the growing empire. The constant testimony of
   history from Herodotus to Ctesias asserts the acquisition of Media by
   Cyrus to have been a forcible seizure. Here our chief object is to
   impress upon the reader the scantiness of our early materials, and the
   distance of time at which some of the historians who record them lived
   after the events. Ctesias, for instance, was a young physician at the
   Court of Artaxerxes, the brother of Cyrus the younger. Although he
   wrote twenty-three books of Persian history, we have but a few
   fragments collected by the diligence of Photion. Our attention is
   therefore turned with the greatest earnestness towards the deciphering
   of the monuments which abound on the banks of the rivers of Babylonia,
   and throughout the whole land of Shinar. These have become the best
   evidence in favor of the trustworthiness of Daniel, and against the
   ingenious and inconsistent guesses of neology.

   M. M. J. Baillie Fraser and W. Francis Ainsworth have treated the
   geological and geographical portion of the subject with great success;
   the former in his work on "Mesopotamia and Assyria," and the latter in
   "Geological Researches." See also the two papers on "The rivers and
   cities of Babylonia" by the latter writer, in the New Monthly Magazine,
   August and September, 1845. The Duke of Manchester has collected much
   information from ancient historians, but has not availed himself of the
   antiquarian researches, which describe and identify the mounds and
   ruins at present in existence. Vaux's "Nineveh and Persepolis" also
   affords much material illustrative of this portion of Daniel.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [372] Chapter 1:1, and following.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 21.

   DARIUS THE MEDE.

   Daniel 5:31

   THE received views respecting this celebrated monarch have lately been
   impugned by the noble author of "The Times of Daniel." He gives five
   reasons for believing him to be Darius Hystaspes instead of the
   Cyaxares of Xenophon, the uncle and father-in-law of Cyrus. This
   assertion will therefore require some notice in detail, and compel us
   to repeat some statements with which the student of ancient history is
   familiar.

   The views of the author already alluded to are, thus expressed, --
   "Three kings," it is said, "of the name of Darius occur in Scripture;
   must we not presume that the first Darius there corresponds with Darius
   the first in profane history? that the second in each equally agree;
   and that the third Darius, with whom the list terminates in Scripture,
   is the third Darius with whom the line of Persian kings closes?" There
   are strong marks in corroboration of the Median of this verse being
   Hystaspes; some of these are as follows: -- First, each is said to have
   taken Babylon. Both levied taxes, so that the second verse of chapter.
   6 is said to be parallel to Herodotus, Book 3, and Strabo, [373] Book
   15. This levying taxes leads to a similar assertion respecting
   Ahasuerus in Esther, Esther 10:1, who reigned "from India even to
   Ethiopia." (Esther 1:1.) "Now, Ahash-verosh, (meaning Ahasuerus,) who
   succeeded Darius the Median, reigned over India," and, according to
   Herodotus, Darius Hystaspes conquered India; hence this Mede was Darius
   Hystaspes. Pliny's testimony is brought forward to shew that Susa was
   built by this Darius; [374] Ahasuerus resided at Shushan, which is
   identical with Susa, hence the conclusion is the same. Other reasons
   are given, and other collateral assertions made. Authorities are quoted
   by which it is laid down that Ahasuerus was Xerxes, the history of
   Esther occurred during the captivity, the son of Ahasuerus was Darius
   Nothus, the third Darius was Codomanus. "To complete the evidence, I
   will contrast the identification which I propose with that which is now
   most generally approved of." [375]

   CANON OF PTOLEMY

                         SCRIPTURE AS I PROPOSE

   Darius the First

                         Darius the Median.

   Xerxes

                         Ahashverosh.

   Artaxerxes the First.

                         Artaxerxes the First, (Coresch.)

   Darius the Second.

                         Darius the Second.

   Artaxerxes the Second.

                         Son of Ahashverosh.

   Ochus

                         Artaxerxes the Second.

   Arostes.


   Darius the Third.

                         Darius the Third, (fourth from Coresch, Daniel 11.)


   It is also suggested that Jeremiah 50 and Jeremiah 51 of Jeremiah apply
   to this Darius and not to Cyrus, as Dr. Keith asserts. Jeremiah 51:11
   and 28, are said to apply to Zopyrus, and the language of the chapter
   is on the whole more suitable to the capture of Babylon by this Darius,
   according to Herodotus, Book 3, than to that by Cyrus.

   The commonly received view is stated shortly by Rosenmuller, -- that
   this Mede was the Cyaxares II. of Xenophon, [376] the son of Astyages,
   the uncle and father-in-law of Cyrus. AEschylus, in his tragedy of the
   Persae, [377] introduces Darius the son of Hystaspes, recounting his
   origin from Darius the Mede. Josephus, in the tenth Book of his
   Antiquities, says he was the son of Astyages; and Theodoret, in his
   Commentary, identifies him with Cyaxares. Jerome states that, in
   conjunction with his uncle Cyrus, he subverted the Chaldean empire.

   "If Xenophon's account of Cyrus be in general admitted," [378] says
   Wintle, "we cannot be at a loss to determine who was Darius the Mede;
   and if even the defeat of Astyages be received according to Herodotus,
   and it be placed in the tenth year of Cyrus's reign over Persia Proper,
   yet there seems no necessity to conclude but that the kingdom of Media
   might still, with the consent of Cyrus, be continued to Cyaxares, his
   mother's brother, who might retain it till his death, after the
   conquest of Babylon, which Herodotus attributes to Cyrus, after he had
   reduced the neighboring powers." He next proceeds to obviate one or two
   chronological difficulties often considered as weighty objections to
   Xenophon's account. "The name of Darius is omitted in the Canon,
   although he is allowed to have reigned more than one year, if he
   reigned at all. How shall we then reconcile his history with the Canon?
   and where or in what part must this reign be placed? The same answer
   will serve for both inquiries. The Canon certainly allots nine years to
   Cyrus over Babylon, of which space the two former years are usually
   allowed to coincide with the reign of Cyaxares or Darius the Mede by
   the advocates of Xenophon." A MS. of Archbishop Secker is then quoted,
   in which he gives reasons why Berosus might have overlooked this reign
   as short-lived and nominal. Prideaux and Usher, and the Ancient
   Universal History, are referred to for additional information. [379]
   With reference to the period before us, it is concluded, from the close
   of this Daniel 5, "that Darius the Mede did not begin his reign till
   after the capture of Babylon; and this event I am inclined to place in
   the next year after the 17th of Nabonadius, in the 210th year of the
   Chaldean era, or 538 years before Christ, which was the first of
   Cyrus's nine years. Whether the defeat of Nabonadius and the taking of
   the city happened near the same time, I need not determine; but it
   seems clear from Daniel, (Daniel 5:31,) as well as from Xenophon, that
   the king was slain on the same night that the city was taken; and this,
   I apprehend, must have happened about the real year of the captivity
   67, supposing the fourth of Jehoiakim to agree with the year 605 before
   Christ, according to Blair."

   Here again the researches of Hengstenberg afford us valuable aid in
   discussing and reconciling the various statements of historians. The
   silence of Herodotus and Ctesias concerning a Median king of Babylon is
   noticed, and even concealment on the part of the Persians is shewn to
   be highly probable.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [373] Section 89. Jahn points out what he considers a mistake of
   Strabo's, Arch. Bib., chapter 2, sect. 233.

   [374] Lib. 6 chapter. 27

   [375] P. 90.

   [376] Cyrop., lib. i. chaps. 4, 5, and lib. iii. chapter 3, sect. 20.

   [377] Line 762.

   [378] Preliminary Dissertation, p.24.

   [379] Con., part 1 Books 2, 3; Annals, pp. 80, 81; History of the Medes
   and Persians, volume v.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 22.

   CAPTURE OF BABYLON.

   Daniel 5:31

   IF the period of the city's capture could be accurately determined,
   many difficulties would be cleared up. Calvin supposes it to have
   occurred in the last and eighth year of Belshazzar's reign, but the
   majority of commentators place it in the seventeenth or eighteenth
   year. Willet makes his third year his last, as also Bullinger and
   Oecolampadius, and this is done by following the short Hebrew
   Chronicle, which places it at the fifty-second year of the desolation
   of Jerusalem, and the seventieth of the kingdom of Babylon. The
   Oriental Chronicle, according to the author of "The Times of Daniel,"
   assigns twenty years, and the Alexandrian Chronicle only four to this
   monarch; and such being the conflicting testimony of the most ancient
   and authentic documents, it naturally happens that modern writers
   select their own dates and their own systems according, first, to their
   own acquaintance with the subject; and next, to their own judgment of
   the best selection of authorities which can be made. The only class of
   divines who appear disingenuous in such selections are those Germans
   who attempt to impugn the historical accuracy of this Prophet, by
   tacitly assuming that there is no real, and positive, and consistent
   knowledge to be obtained from profane writers, and then by asserting
   that a pseudo-Daniel has displayed either ignorance, carelessness, or
   deception. They appeal to the historians of Greece, as if they were
   contemporary with the events which they record, and prefer throwing
   doubt upon the sacred narrative, to sifting the evidence upon which
   they believe the profane.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 23.

   THE THREE PRESIDENTS.

   Daniel 6:2

   This division of the kingdom into 120 provinces is exactly in
   accordance with the assertion of Xenophon, who says that Cyrus
   appointed satraps over the conquered nations. Usher, in his Annals,
   thinks that Darius followed the suggestion of Cyrus, who instituted
   this method of government. This verse is reconciled with the first of
   Esther, by remembering that after the conquest of Egypt by Cambyses,
   and of Thrace and India by Darius Hystaspes, seven provinces were added
   to the number. Junius, according to Willet, states, that after spending
   a year in settling the affairs of Babylon, he resigned all power to
   Darius. He approves of Calvin's phrase, "regnare in commune," implying
   the joint reign of both kings. Josephus is in error in multiplying the
   number by three. The reason for the appointment of these presidents may
   be understood variously. The Latin interpreter, says Willet,
   translatesnzq , nezek, by molestiam, meaning "trouble," Darius is
   represented as sixty-two years of age, and naturally fatigued by the
   wear and tear of an active life. Daniel is elevated to an office
   equivalent to that of the Turkish grand Vizier, and the crime imputed
   to him seems similar to that of Rome -- "crimen laesae majestatis," a
   kind of high treason. The word lh, gnillah, (Daniel 6:4,) is translated
   by Wintle very appropriately "action" in the forensic sense, equivalent
   to the Greek aijtiva. These presidents and princes came in concourse
   and tumultuously before the king. The Vulgate "surripuerunt," came by
   stealth, is disapproved by Wintle.

   Daniel 6:7. The Decree by which Daniel was entrapped has occasioned the
   special cavil of Bertholdt and his adherents. They have treated it as
   an erroneous fiction, but have been appositely refuted by Hengstenberg.
   Oriental kings, he reminds us, were often treated as objects of
   exclusive worship. Heeren has stated "that the kings of the Medes and
   Persians were regarded and worshipped as representations and
   incarnations of Ormuzd." [380] In the sacred books of the Zend
   religion, "Iran, the Medo-Bactrian kingdom under Gustasp, is to him the
   image of the kingdom of Ormuzd; the king himself the image of Ormuzd;
   Turan, the northern nomad land, where Afrasiat rules, is the image of
   the kingdom of darkness, under the rule of Ahriman." The king was the
   visible manifestation of Ormuzd, like him, commanding, with unlimited
   power, the seven princes of the empire; next in rank to him were the
   representatives of the seven Amshaspands, who stood round the throne of
   Ormuzd. Similar testimony respecting the worship paid to the monarchs
   of the East, is given by Plutarch, Xenophon, Socrates, and Arrian.
   Curtius distinctly asserts, that the Persians worshipped their kings
   among their gods, so that the credibility of Daniel is fully vindicated
   by the records of profane antiquity. On the royal tombs at Persepolis,
   there are various sculptures representing the Persian kings as gods,
   and in De Sacy's Persian inscriptions, they are termed the offspring of
   gods.

   Daniel 6:10 Daniel's Conduct And Prayer, as here recorded, have been
   questioned by some German critics, on the ground of practices and
   usages as yet unknown in Upper Asia. The custom of praying towards
   Jerusalem, it is said, did not arise among the Jews living abroad, till
   after the rebuilding of the temple. But it must not be forgotten that
   it prevailed among the Jews from early times. David prayed towards the
   sanctuary, and raised his hands towards it. The Dedication prayer of
   Solomon contains a distinct injunction to the same effect. The very
   place, says Stolberg, where the temple had stood and was again to
   stand, was holy to Daniel. [381] The hours, at which the Prophet
   offered up his prayer are said to belong to the fine-spun religiousness
   of the later Jews. But this assertion is made in forgetfulness of the
   ancient custom of all nations to have fixed and invariable periods for
   the worship of their deities. Willet approves of Calvin's comments on
   this passage, and Oecolampadius considers it a thanksgiving for the
   encouraging beginning, happy success, and prosperous end of our
   undertakings. Willet also discusses the propriety of Daniel's exposing
   himself thus openly to the malice of his enemies, after he knew of the
   king's decree. He agrees on the whole with the practical comment of
   Calvin, and adduces it as an example of perseverance in the line of
   duty, in full confidence of the protecting power of God, and in
   defiance of all the malice of the most inveterate foes.

   Daniel 6:10. The Open Windows Towards Jerusalem. -- Various writers
   have supposed this action of the Prophet's to be the result of
   ostentation. Calvin has treated this point ably, and Wetstein, in his
   Notes on Acts 1:13, has explained the nature of "the upper chamber" in
   the Jewish houses, and their use either as oratories or for other
   solemn or festive purposes. Shaw, in his Travels, alludes to their
   structure and use. The light was usually admitted into these upper
   rooms through large windows, and the Jews naturally turned towards
   Jerusalem in prayer, with earnest longing for speedy deliverance. The
   "three times a-day" has been used by Bellarmine [382] as an argument
   for the canonical hours of the Romish Church, and Pintus goes further
   to insist on seven, according to Psalm 119. But all these arguments
   which enforce Christian duties by Jewish practices are erroneous.
   Calvin's principle is judiciously stated, but it is founded on
   enlightened and Christian common sense, and not in a blind adherence to
   Jewish traditions. Similar principles should guide us as to praying
   towards the east. Oecolampadius refers to the supposed Apostolic
   tradition of worshipping towards the east, but he reprobates it as
   superstitious. Nos patriam nostram in clis habemus, et a Deo originem.
   Irenaeus [383] ascribes this superstition as a heresy to the Ebionites.
   Daniel's open profession of his faith in God has been censured as too
   bold and in judged for our imitation, but it has also been ably
   vindicated as an example of perseverance in religious duty when our
   conscience justifies us in maintaining God's truth before men. Willet
   approves of Calvin's distinction "of Confession, that it is of two
   sorts, cum palam testamur, quod est in animo, et ne aliquod perversoe
   simulationis signum demus."

   While this sheet is passing through the press, a very illustrative
   work, confirming the historical accuracy of Daniel, has been published,
   entitled "Nineveh And Its Palaces: the Discoveries of Botta and Layard
   applied to the elucidation of Holy Writ; by Joseph Bonomi, F.R.S.L." It
   contains the latest and best interpretations of the cuneiform
   inscriptions, and is worthy of attentive perusal.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [380] Heeren. Ideen. Augs., 3te, 2 50 p. 474, and Heng., p. 103, et
   seq.

   [381] Religionsg., 4, p. 48, ap. Heng., p. 116; also Vitringa de Syn.,
   p. 179. Eisenmenger, 1, p. 584, eod. auct.

   [382] Lib. 1, De bon oper. in partic., c. 12.

   [383] Adv. Haeres., lib. 1, cap. 26.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Dissertation 24

   THE KING'S DECEASE.

   Daniel 6:28

   Could we ascertain accurately when death closed "the reign of Darius,"
   most of the controversies concerning the history of these times and
   personages would be set at rest. We have first to determine who Darius
   was? and secondly, to discover whether a portion of his reign is
   contemporaneous with that of Cyrus? With respect to the first point, it
   ought to be fully understood that there is no actual correspondence
   between this monarch and any well-attested ruler mentioned in profane
   history. The balance of probabilities is in favor of his being
   Cyaxares, but we have already stated how Xenophon, Ctesias, and
   Herodotus differ on the point; and we are careful to repeat this,
   because the futility of the Neologian arguments might otherwise entrap
   the unwary. For instance, Dr. Wells has the following Note: -- "It is
   to be observed that in Ptolemy's Canon the two years of Darius the
   Mede's reign are reckoned to Cyrus, who accordingly has therein nine
   years assigned for his reign; whereas Xenophon assigns but seven years
   to it, reckoning the first year the same as Ezra doth, viz., from the
   death of Darius and Cambyses." Wintle again states, "there is no doubt
   but Darius the Mede, whoever he was, reigned, according to Daniel, from
   the capture of Babylon till this same first year of Cyrus, or till the
   commencement of the reign allotted by Scripture to Cyrus the Persian."
   (Preface, where reference is made to a Memoir by M. Freret, containing
   many just and accurate dates assigned to the life and transactions of
   Cyrus.) The reader cannot fail to perceive that this sentence leaves
   the two important questions in as much doubt as ever. Dr. Eadie, of the
   American Presbyterian Church, states, too, positively, "The kingdom of
   Babylon was given by Cyrus to Darius the Mede, or Cyaxares II., as a
   reward for his services; and after his death, at the end of two years,
   this kingdom returned to Cyrus, and hence Cyrus is spoken of as if he
   were the successor of Darius at Babylon. Daniel 6:28." -- (Art.,
   Daniel, in his Bibl. Cycl.) Willet informs us that Tertullian and Cyril
   of Jerusalem took Darius for Darius Hystaspes, and the noble Duke, to
   whom we have already referred, agrees in this opinion, and argues very
   elaborately in its favor.

   The German Neologians have not been slow to construct a charge of
   inaccuracy against Daniel, in consequence of these historic
   difficulties. Bertholdt, Bleek, and De Wette, treat it as an error to
   call Cyaxares II by the name of Darius, and suppose it a confusion with
   the son of Hystaspes. But before the commentator on Scripture ventures
   to use the phrase, "historic inaccuracy," he must first clearly
   ascertain what historic accuracy really is. An unlearned reader might
   suppose from their reasonings that all the profane historians agreed in
   their accounts, and that the only element of confusion was that
   introduced by the narrative of Scripture. But the truth is far
   otherwise. No two authors agree in their statements throughout. Ancient
   history is, in fact, simply an ideal deduction from a variety of
   conflicting traditions. Of Cyaxares II., for instance, neither
   Herodotus nor Justin say anything. Neither of them mention any son of
   Astyages. Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and Polyaenus, agree with them in
   asserting that the Median empire closed with Astyages, and the Persian
   began at once with Cyrus; and yet there is evidence to shew that Darius
   the Mede was a real person. "Still farther," says Hengstenberg, "the
   author agrees in another special fact with profane history. Xenophon
   relates [384] that soon after the taking of Babylon, the conquered
   lands were divided into provinces, and governors set over them. All
   this is stated in our book, too." Are we, indeed, to infer, from a mere
   difference of names, that the author is chargeable with confounding
   them? The Cambyses of profane writers is called in the book of Ezra,
   Achaschverosh (Ahasuerus). Pseudo-smerdis bears in profane writers two
   different names -- in Ctesias, Spendates; in Justin, Oropastes; and in
   Ezra he appears under a third name, Artachshasta (Artaxerxes). "Now,
   why is this appearance in all other cases unanimously explained on the
   ground that the names of kings were not nomina propria, but surnames,
   whilst, on the contrary, in this single instance, this explanation is
   not once proposed as possible? And yet in this very case this
   explanation is quite natural, since it is generally allowed that the
   name Darius in particular is an appellation. That it was a mere title
   appears from this, that several different kings bear it." Herbelot says
   the name Dara is Persian, and appellative, signifying "sovereign."
   [385]

   When we descend to the historians of the Christian era, we find in the
   Armenian Chronicle of Eusebius a confirmation of the narrative under
   review. In a short appendix to a fragment of Abydenus, found also in
   the Praeparatio Evangelica, Darius is distinctly mentioned as king; so
   that if it be impossible to be certain as to the identity of this king
   with Cyaxares, yet it must be remembered that profane history,
   independently of Scripture, is at variance with itself, and that no new
   clement of discord is introduced by our Prophet. Let the objector first
   settle what the events connected with the overthrow of Babylon from
   uninspired authorities really were, and we shall then be prepared to
   shew that the writer of this book was free from inaccuracies, and that
   all the obscurity hovering over the subject arises from our very
   imperfect knowledge of the occurrences of this period. And the more
   fully the assertions of the Neologists are investigated, the more
   baseless will their charges against this Prophet of Jehovah appear.

   THE PROLONGATION OF DANIEL'S LIFE.

   Daniel 6:28

   THE prolongation of our Prophet's life till the era specified in this
   verse, is worthy of our notice, that we may, if possible, accurately
   ascertain his age at leading periods of his history. We cannot
   ascertain precisely the year of his entrance into public life. He was
   born shortly before King Josiah's death, probably about 620 B.C.; and
   thus he had many opportunities of cultivating that early piety for
   which he was conspicuous. He was about fourteen years old when taken
   captive to Babylon. Three years afterwards, the king of Israel threw
   off the Babylonian yoke, and thus he and his companions became hostages
   and forerunners of the capture of the whole nation. From Jahn's
   Biblical Antiquities, we learn how skilled he was in various sciences
   after three years' training, (pages 99, 100;) and the high opinion
   which was entertained of his integrity, wisdom, and piety, is confirmed
   by this remarkable honor paid to him by the Prophet Ezekiel. He is
   connected, while alive, with Noah and Job. (See Ezekiel 14:14, and
   Calvin's comment on the passage in our Edition, volume 2.)

   The dream and its interpretation in Daniel 2 occurred during Daniel's
   youth, and resulted in his promotion with his three friends to the
   highest offices of the kingdom. We now lose sight of him for thirty
   years, and it is impossible to determine whether he sat at the king's
   gate during the whole of this period. The erection of the image on the
   plains of Dura, and the subsequent punishment of his three companions,
   seem inconsistent with his residence at that time at Babylon as an
   adviser of his sovereign. The three "children," as they are termed in
   Daniel 1:17, were now about fifty years of age; and it has become
   necessary to remark this, because some have spoken of them as still
   children when thus miraculously delivered from destruction. We too
   often take for granted impressions of this kind, which we have
   imperceptibly imbibed in our earliest days; and besides this, the works
   of the great masters in painting have fostered the error. These
   splendid productions of European art are often glaringly untrue, yet
   while based upon fabulous anachronisms, they too often adhere to the
   imagination, and influence our thoughts in days of more mature
   advancement. At the period of the dream in Daniel 4 Daniel was about
   fifty years of age; and thus we have another gap of about fifteen
   years. Belshazzar had now ascended his grandfather's throne. The mystic
   characters on the wall soon reveal a fearful reality. Darius the Mede
   still esteems the upright counselor, and he had become a venerable
   "ancient of days" before he is thrust into the lion's den. During the
   first year of King Darius, he learned, from the Book of Jeremiah, the
   approaching period of Judah's deliverance. During the third year of
   Cyrus, he is favored with a vision on the banks of the Tigris.
   (Jeremiah 10:1-4.) We cannot ascertain how long he lived after this
   period, but he was at least eighty years of age when he died. Various
   assertions and traditions exist among the Jews respecting both the time
   and place of his decease, and these have passed current, through the
   unsuspecting simplicity of some of our older expounders, who record as
   certain the hazardous statements of the authorities on which they rely.
   Dr. Wells, after comparing various dates, concludes, "that Daniel was
   about eighty-nine or ninety years old in the third year of Cyrus;" he
   pays no regard to the conjectures of some, who make him to have lived
   one hundred and thirty-eight, or one hundred and fifty years, and adds
   the possibility of his reaching one hundred years.

   Our object in view in impressing this chronology is to disabuse the
   public mind of the Romish ideas connected with what they term, "The
   song of the three children." Their usual method of treating these three
   martyrs for truth and holiness is utterly erroneous, and like every
   other error of theirs, injurious and pernicious in proportion as it
   deviates from the Written And Infallible Word Of The Living God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [384] Cyropaedia, lib. 8, chapter 6, etc.; Berth., 2 p. 848, ff.;
   Rosen. Alterthumsk, 1. 50, p. 369; Jahn. Arch., 2. 50, p. 244.

   [385] See Hengstenberg's Authorities on p. 41, where Gesenius and Winer
   are quoted as well as Heeren Ideen, 1:1, p. 163; and Volney Rech.
   Nouv., t. 1, p. 144. Edit. Paris, 1814.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Concluding Remarks.

   Having brought our Dissertations on the Historical portion of this
   sacred book to a close, we have still another duty to discharge in
   editing these Commentaries. We have already defended our Reformer from
   the charges of the German Neologist, and from the censures of the
   fanciful expounders of prophecy; We have now merely to offer a few
   comments on the Practical Inferences which Calvin so ably draws from
   the inspired narrative. While perusing this volume, the reader must
   often have felt the difference between the state of the world in the
   days of Nebuchadnezzar and his own. Those were emphatically days of
   visions, and marvels, and visibly divine interpositions. We, on the
   contrary, pass on along the even tenor of the walk of life, without
   expecting to behold a hand-writing on the wall, or to experience the
   all-devouring heat of a "burning fiery furnace." We see no vision in
   the night season foretelling the wonders of an unknown future, and
   expect neither magician nor prophet to expound with the authority of
   heaven the images of our sleeping hours. Yet, with our Reformer, we see
   the world agitated in all quarters with unexpected revolutions.
   Oppression, and intrigue, and tyranny, prevail among the rulers of
   Europe and of Christendom, and there seems no human means adequate to
   the task of stemming the tide of recklessness and infidelity as it
   overflows the nations. If these comments on scriptural prophecy are to
   be useful in our day and generation, they need some connecting links of
   interpretation which may apply the general principles enunciated to the
   practical problem to be worked out. Otherwise, we either make no
   intelligent use of such a history as this volume contains, or else we
   apply it wrong. The latter error is a very common one; and as many are
   liable to its commission, we trust these Concluding Remarks will be
   found suitable and instructive. It may appear to many readers that
   Calvin in his Practical Exhortations overlooks this difference between
   a miraculous dispensation and the ordinary condition of God's people
   under the New Covenant. If he be somewhat open to this charge, it is
   readily accounted for by the times in which he lived. Calvin, like
   Daniel, was an exile from his fatherland. The house of Valois and their
   tyrant kings were to him the exact counterparts of the Babylonian
   monarchs. They were absolute sovereigns, and most ferocious persecutors
   of the people of the Lord. The Medici, the Guises, and the Lorraines of
   his day were to him the very antitypes of the nobles who fawned upon
   Nebuchadnezzar, and of the presidents who inveigled Darius. In his
   Dedicatory Ephstle prefixed to this volume, the pious in France are
   represented as in a position exactly similar to that of the Jews during
   their captivity. The parallel being in each case so striking and so
   different to what we see and experience in these days, we need not be
   surprised at Calvin's expectation of special interpositions, and at our
   own backwardness to appreciate the full suitability of his comments.
   Now there is clearly a sense in which such "special deliverance's" are
   real, and a sense in which they are not. And as this is a point of some
   importance involving the idea of the Almighty which our Reformer has
   presented to us in the preceding pages, we shall comment at some length
   on a few passages of importance.

   For instance, on Daniel 2:21, and following, we have a full reply to
   unbelieving objections to God's providential government of the world.
   The profane are said to consider all things acted upon by a "blind
   impulse," and "others affirm the human race to be a kind of sport to
   God, since men are tossed about like balls." The chief cavils of the
   Reformation Period were those which proceeded from complete skepticism.
   Philosophers having thrown off the superstitions of Popery naturally
   doubted and disputed all things. The reasoners of Calvin's days were
   something like those intelligent Hindoos who are now worshippers of
   neither Brahma nor Christ. They are in a transition state, and having
   unlearned so much, they scarcely know where to lay the foundation-stone
   of trustworthy belief. Throughout these Lectures, our author is
   constantly answering the arguments of those contemporaries who felt the
   hollowness of Rome, and had not yet tried the firmness of Geneva. Still
   to us his replies may not be convincing. This remark applies to the
   following passage. "If the sun always rose and set at the same period,
   or at least certain symmetrical changes took place yearly, without any
   casual change; if the days of winter were not short, and those of
   summer not long, we might then discover the same order of nature, and
   in this way God would be rejected from his dominion." Here we must
   remember that in Calvin's days most men were ignorant of those general
   laws and all-pervading principles by which the Author of nature governs
   and sustains the universe. In his day, there was scarcely any choice
   between the system which represented the Almighty removed in a kind of
   Ephcurean repose far away from the works of his hand, and a system
   which supposed him to interfere arbitrarily and suddenly in favor of
   one party, and to rim discomfiture of another. Since this period, the
   researches of modern science have discovered for us the numerous, the
   simple, and seemingly self-acting principles, according to which the
   days of winter are short, and those of summer long. We can contemplate
   humbly "the same order of nature" from year to year with undeviating
   regularity, and yet never be tempted "to reject God from his dominion."
   Yea, the marvel is this, the more we are trained to view the
   comprehensive theories of physical astronomy, and chemistry, and
   magnetism, the more are we led to adore and to magnify the Great and
   the All-powerful Original. Such studies do not lead us to "erect nature
   into a deity," and to reject the Creator from his own dominion. They
   rather lead us to detect the fallacy in the expression "nature does
   this or that;" they prove to us that there is no such existence as
   "nature," but that the word is but an expression for a complex and
   comprehensive idea of external objects, in the minds of men. The
   Almighty is seen by the true naturalist, in all his works, not as
   interposing visibly and surprisingly at one time, and leaving all
   things to themselves at another; but rather as impressing on every
   created particle of matter its own condition of obedience to certain
   laws which we call either mechanical or chemical, vital or organic. And
   it is the merciful arrangement of providence that a persevering study
   of God's works prepares the mind for an intelligent perusal of his
   word. The habit of looking for such general principles as gravitation,
   attraction, organization, and development, of applying these theories
   to practice by the process of mathematical reasoning, or anatomical
   dexterity, and of arriving at results indisputably true, -- this habit
   of mind is an excellent preparative for the equally discursive pursuit
   of revealed theology. Thus we readily detect the fallacy of ascribing
   the events of life to either fortune, or chance, or nature. Calvin had
   to contend with them as if they were realities; we may profit by
   Locke's chapter on complex ideas, and treat them as expressions
   comprehending many separate existence's, so related to each other that
   we form "a collective idea" of the whole.

   By continuing this process of thought we are enabled to explain,
   although not to defend certain phrases of Calvin's respecting the
   prerogatives of God. On Daniel 5:11, men are said to "mingle God and
   angels in complete confusion," and on Daniel 5:21, God is said to be
   "excluded from the government of the world," The moment our attention
   is turned to the point, we perceive that the ideas only of God and
   angels can be mingled, and in imagination only can men exclude the
   Almighty from his sway over the wills of mankind. Such phrases, we must
   remember, are the remnants of that realism which lingered in the minds
   of many of the Reformers, and still clings to the writings of some of
   their successors. Such expressions as we meet with on Daniel 6:10,
   "Draw down God from heaven," and on Daniel 6:16, "to deprive the
   Almighty of his sway," are better avoided. The same thought may be
   expressed in language more adapted to our enlarged views of the glory
   of our Creator. The Hebrew Prophets, it has been said, "dramatized the
   particulars of their mission," and their symbolical portraits of the
   Almighty were afterwards received as exact and literal descriptions of
   his character. The Jewish people, even in the time of Daniel, were but
   in the infancy of moral and intellectual growth; and to them the
   well-known proverb most aptly applies, "Omne ignotum, pro magnifico."
   Everything marvelous was attributed at once to the direct agency of a
   deity, disturbing rather than controlling the occurrences of life. Thus
   the world, and its surprising tumults, successes, struggles, and
   reverses, appeared but a scene of fortuitous and capricious chance. But
   the more we advance from infancy to manhood, the more we gain power to
   methodize these moral phenomena under some fixed and intelligible
   arrangement.

   It is possible to present from the word of God another reply to the
   Ephcurean suppositions of Calvin's day, on principles in advance of
   those which he adopts. While he represents kings as actually contending
   with the Almighty, and really attempting to hurl him from his throne in
   heaven, we must remember that such language can only be suggestive. The
   foundation of all true reverence for Deity is the idea of an infinite
   and invisible Being, of whose wisdom and might the material universe is
   the product, and of whose moral nature the conscience of man is the
   image. When asked for rigid proof of this assertion, we are constrained
   to refer it to that faith which is peculiarly his gift. The double
   postulate of that essential existence which is spiritual, and of
   something in ourselves, which is his image, is the necessary rock upon
   which we must be placed before we can understand our origin and our
   destiny -- our position in the universe -- our moral relation to that
   system of providence into which we find ourselves born. And this series
   of providential occurrences is in many respects exactly the opposite to
   that described in these six chapters of Daniel. Miraculous and
   supernatural agency is here variously employed to counteract what are
   known to us as the ordinary laws of nature. The simple will of the
   Almighty annihilates the effect of fire in the furnace, and the
   ferocity of lions in their den. A sweeping act of his power converts
   one despot into the appearance of a beast of prey, and affrights
   another by the ominous appearance of a hand writing vengeance on a
   wall. We cannot expect such special revelations, judgments, or
   deliverance's. Our study of the character of Deity is contained in the
   revealed record of such wonders, and in the present and past history of
   man and of the physical world. Moral and natural philosophy, under the
   guidance of revealed religion, is for us the exponent of the idea of
   Deity. The omnipresence of mind in outward nature is now all but
   visible to every student. Vast as the universe is, we know it to be
   pervaded by a moral purpose, and this presents that view of Deity which
   provides for adoration, and love, and reverence, without limit, and
   satisfies the longings for worship which are implanted deeply in the
   human soul. Thus we clothe the idea of an infinite spirit with the
   attributes of a human conscience; we are not satisfied with "a dynamic
   center of the universe," we desire to feel our souls overflow with that
   mingled wonder and love which constitutes the highest and noblest
   worship of him who is Good. The history of nations and of families
   impresses upon us the idea of a personal providential Divinity, having
   fellow-feeling with the wants and distresses, the joys and the sorrows
   of mankind. Now, we also believe that there are general, harmonious,
   ever-acting laws of his providential government as well as of his
   physical. And the study of ordinary sciences disciplines the mind, and
   qualifies it to perceive, and arrange, and reason upon analogous laws
   in the moral and religious government of our immortal spirits. A firm
   persuasion that there is no disorder or disturbance in God's moral sway
   -- that he is not influenced by caprice, or swayed by favoritism, or
   turned aside by passionate entreaty, is necessary as the key-stone to
   the arch of Christian wisdom. Those very confusions of which our
   Reformer writes so vigorously in his Dedicatory Ephstle, ascribing them
   to the "red and sanguinary cohorts and horned beasts," were all in
   accordance with those uniformity's of action which we now designate
   general laws. So far from considering it possible for God to "sit at
   ease in heaven and desert and betray his own cause," our firm reliance
   on the permanence of those principles which underlie and encompass all
   others, is thereby tested and increased. The phenomena of political
   government, of religious persecution, and of social outbursts of fury
   and fanaticism, obey laws as orderly and as undeviating as those which
   regulate the motion of a planet or the passage of electricity along the
   wire. Through and by means of this "setting up and pulling down of
   kings," the Almighty speaks a language addressed alike to our reason,
   our conscience, and our faith. But the great guarantee of our spiritual
   improvement is the fundamental belief that there is harmony, and
   classification, and inflexible regularity throughout the whole moral
   government of God. The very possibility of accident, or favoritism, or
   isolated marvel, must be banished from our thoughts. We know, by long
   course of proof and experience, that they do not exist in the physical
   world, and we cannot allow them a single foot-print within the domain
   of our moral and spiritual nature. Nothing here can be an anomaly,
   nothing an exception. In the uncultivated mind, there is an avidity for
   the marvelous, and a morbid eagerness for a cheap and easy solution of
   the solemn mysteries concerning God and the soul; but our educated
   religious life is like "a star hovering on the horizon's verge between
   night and morning." Thus, by faith we stand at the parting of the two
   roads, imagined by Plate's great Parmenides, between the seeming and
   the true. As this star shines brighter over our path, mere external
   ceremonies and notional expressions become more and more objects of
   distrust; and the ideas of God and of the soul, of sin and of
   conscience, of heaven and of glory, become more and more vivid and real
   to us. And if any are afraid that the pursuit of either scientific, or
   moral, or religious truth, according to the principles here laid down,
   will injure true religion or saving faith, the single antidote to this
   fear is found in the exhortation, "Have faith in God." (Mark 11:22.)
   Throughout these Lectures our Reformer ever clings to this scriptural
   principle, and even illustrates his subject ably, practically, and
   improvingly; while he all along labors under the difficult task of
   rendering a narrative interspersed with miracle available for the
   improvement of modern Christians who live under a totally different
   dispensation.

   As another illustration of this difficulty, we may turn to Daniel
   6:25-27, where our commentator asserts of the profane, that they so
   unite minor deities with the true that "he lies hid in a crowd,
   although he enjoys a slight pre-eminence." Such simple and racy
   language is easily intelligible, but scarcely dignified enough. It
   justifies the assertion that in the infancy of great truths, language
   is an index of our ignorance rather than of our knowledge. Truly enough
   all men "wander confusedly" when they attempt to render palpable to
   others their contemplations of a Deity. This idea is the most vague and
   comprehensive of all -- a universal solvent of all problems in the
   early stage of our religious existence. The Egyptians and the Greeks
   saw a god everywhere -- in hill, in brook, in bird and beast. They
   manifested no lack of faith in the existence of beings far superior to
   themselves; and when the priest set up the ugly idol in its gorgeous
   temple, he never imagined he was creating a god for either himself or
   the people. He only attempted, after his fashion, to give fixity and
   embodiment to the ideas of Deity which were floating about indefinitely
   in the minds of the multitude. But the interval was wide indeed between
   these metaphorical symbols and the simple abstract idea of one
   self-acting Being ruling the conscience and swaying the future
   destinies of all men. When the tree of knowledge was separated from the
   tree of life, a dark and forlorn interval succeeded, during which
   mankind underwent long struggles of disquietude in "feeling after" the
   Almighty One. And we have been permitted to find him. To believe in his
   permanent presence and providence, to cling to him with the trust of a
   child to a parent, to follow after him, with no voice but his word
   acting on conscience and cheering while it guides, to trust him even
   amid the darkest prospects, -- this it is to have faith in God. And
   this trust is not the mere result of reason, or understanding, or
   sentiment, or speculation. It is woven into our deepest instincts and
   our noblest aspirations. It unites them all. It is completed in love.
   What the profane call Nature, all who sympathize in Darius's
   proclamation concerning Daniel's God, feel to be a legislation of love.
   A parent whose government is unerring and complete is ever setting
   before us the unalterable Law as an exhibition of unchanging love. The
   very severity and uncompromising character of this idea of Deity proves
   the crowning beneficence of his kingship over the powers of this world.
   Inflexible justice and unerring certainty become the highest proofs of
   all-pervading benevolence. Herein lies the perfection of constancy and
   truth. The conscience is thus felt to be the vicegerent of this
   Divinity within. Forms of thought and expression must change, and since
   Calvin's time, in the course of three centuries, they have passed
   through many changes; and man's religious condition must always be
   modified by the extension of his knowledge, his experience, and his
   educated capacities. Many habitual modes of thought current in the days
   of Oecolampadius and Willet have been set aside; the disturbance of
   feeling which this occasioned has subsided, and our comprehension of
   God's moral sway over the affairs of men has been enlarged and purified
   by the change. His hand-writing is now legible to us on ten thousand
   walls where of old it was a blank. The wonder which has been removed
   from special facts has been transferred to general laws; and if "the
   dream and its interpretation" are not now sent as proofs of his
   providence, there has sprung up instead equally striking indications of
   it in every dewdrop and in every flower.

   The Practical Improvement which is so appositely made of every
   occurrence throughout this historical portion of the Lectures,
   constitutes a large share of their value. They always plead fervently
   for justice; always and everywhere they place justice first. They shew
   us that the absolute will of the most unbending tyranny must ultimately
   yield to the Divine omnipotence of justice, and that all defenses which
   human power may raise against human rights are utterly vain. He who
   would be god-like must first be just, and whatever else may be avoided,
   there is no escape from an avenging judge and a self-torturing
   conscience. These Lectures encourage us to harbor no distrust that
   permanent evil will arise to us from doing manfully our duty; they
   banish all fear that religion should suffer from the withdrawing of any
   supports which are proved to be unsound. They stir us up to do the work
   assigned to us while yet it is day with affectionate fidelity and all
   earnestness of zeal, and are specially instructive in an age like ours,
   more remarkable for the variety of its creeds than the intensity of its
   faith. Certainly the ancient spirit of righteousness, which flourished
   so vigorously under the crushing despotism of the House of Valois, is
   not strong within us. That spirit may be characterized as moral courage
   and religious earnestness combined with love to Christ and readiness to
   peril life for his name. And while it has almost died out in these
   days, the practical exhortations of these Lectures may, by God's
   blessing, aid in its revival.

   Connected with the practical exposition of our Prophet, we find a
   passage in Daniel 5 which demands our notice. In commenting on Daniel
   5:5, and explaining that the hand which wrote upon the wall was not
   real, but only a figure, it is said, "Scripture often uses this form of
   speech, and especially when treating external symbols." "Est ergo haec
   etiam sacramentalis loquutio, ut ita loquar." It would surprise us to
   find the word "sacramental" introduced here, if we were unacquainted
   with the modes of thought and expression in which Calvin was brought
   up. But when we remember the very strong hold which the phraseology of
   the schoolmen had upon the minds of all who were early imbued with it,
   we enter at once into the fullness of its meaning. We have already
   stated in our Dissertations On Ezekiel, that the theology of Europe
   was, during the middle ages, entirely moulded according to the teaching
   of either the Realists or the Nominalists. It was so then, and it is so
   now. These two classes of mental cultivation still govern the
   theological studies of mankind, and will probably do so till the end of
   our Christian dispensation. The theology of Rome is the growth of the
   scholastic philosophy built up by the Realists; the teaching of the
   Reformers springs entirely from that of the Nominalists. All leanings
   to Rome have in them the essence of Realism, made manifest by some
   Romanizing tendencies; and all Ultra-Protestantism verges towards a
   series of negatives based upon Nominalism. We have already alluded to
   the first nominalist, to whom Luther and Melancthon own their deep
   obligations. "The real originator of the Protestant principle," says
   the author of The Vindication of Protestant Principles, "the first man
   who truly emancipated himself from the trammels of Popish
   ecclesiolatry, the first, in fact, who referred everything to
   Scripture, and asserted the right of private judgment in its
   interpretation, was our own countryman, William of Ockham, in Surrey."
   He died at Munich in the year 1347, just 170 years before Luther
   fastened his ninety-five propositions to the church doors at
   Wittenberg. Leopold Ranke also asserts that the celebrated nominalist,
   Gabriel Biel, was chiefly an epitomizer of this favorite writer of
   Melancthon's. (See Vindic. Prot. Prin.) The Zurich Letters (Ep. 23,
   Park. Soc.) inform us of the language of Bishop Jewel when writing to
   Peter Martyr, 5th November 1559, -- "We have deserted the ranks of
   Scotus and Aquinas for those of the Occamists and Nominalists," 1842.
   This sentence condenses under a short formula the very essence of the
   controversies which now agitate Christendom at large. We cannot dwell
   here on the proofs of this important statement; we can only remind the
   reader of these Lectures that he will find some lingering traces of the
   realism which once pervaded the theology of Europe, and in which Calvin
   was brought up. We all know how exceedingly difficult it is utterly to
   efface the earliest impressions made upon an earnest and deeply
   speculative mind. Whenever, for instance, some of the expressions with
   respect to the Almighty seem alien to our present modes of thinking, we
   are now able to trace them to their source, and to set them aside as
   remnants of a system which our Reformer energetically and vigorously
   opposed. He is always leading us to cultivate the idea of a moral mind
   pervading all that we know and read of now, and can know hereafter.
   This germinant truth shines like light within our souls; the images and
   visions, the trials and triumphs of Daniel and his companions, are no
   longer insulated atoms in chaos -- a mighty maze, and all without a
   plan -- but portions of one organic whole, in which we are personally
   bound up for both time and eternity. And the more we surrender
   ourselves to this trust in our Parent Spirit, the more shall we find
   our ignorance of the plans of Providence removed, and the cloud of
   mystery hanging over the prevalence of evil brightened and dispersed.
   Thus the discovery of the laws by which the universe is governed by no
   means excludes the Supreme Cause from our contemplation; on the
   contrary, he becomes more manifest to us by his pervading and perpetual
   presence.

   Throughout these Lectures we are ever taught that we can see God only
   by being pure in heart. The preparation for spiritual insight into holy
   mysteries is purity of conscience and singleness of eye. But even these
   able comments do not clear up everything. Our lot on earth must be to
   walk more by faith than by sight. This is the chief exercise of the
   soul, which is essential to its vitality and growth. We must have at
   times our mountains of vision as well as our valleys of the shadow of
   death. Never let us doubt the essential permanence of justice, and
   righteousness, and truthfulness. By this we shall be borne up through
   regions of cloud into realms of light. Thus will our spirituality be
   strengthened and refined: thus we shall be permitted to obtain larger
   perceptions of God's character and maturer judgments of his purposes.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The translation of Daniel 1-6 is located [42]here.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [43]8:16   [44]11:28   [45]25:33   [46]27:24   [47]37:9   [48]37:36
   [49]39:1   [50]40:2   [51]40:7   [52]41:40   [53]42:15

   Exodus

   [54]9:27   [55]10:16   [56]16:4   [57]16:31   [58]19:18   [59]39:38
   [60]39:39

   Leviticus

   [61]20:6   [62]26:36

   Numbers

   [63]6:2   [64]11:8   [65]12:6   [66]12:6

   Deuteronomy

   [67]8:3   [68]8:3   [69]18:10

   1 Kings

   [70]21:29   [71]21:29

   2 Kings

   [72]6:15   [73]15:19   [74]19:37   [75]24:2   [76]24:3   [77]25:27

   Esther

   [78]1:1   [79]1:20   [80]10:1

   Job

   [81]1:6   [82]6:6   [83]12:18   [84]12:18   [85]14:5   [86]15:15
   [87]18:5   [88]36:30   [89]38:7

   Psalms

   [90]2:9   [91]2:12   [92]10:4   [93]18:27   [94]22   [95]22:15
   [96]30:6   [97]34:7   [98]38:7   [99]40:3   [100]51:6   [101]62:9
   [102]68:20   [103]75:6   [104]75:7   [105]75:7   [106]80:1
   [107]84:10   [108]89:6   [109]91:11   [110]91:13   [111]98
   [112]99:1   [113]102:18   [114]103:20   [115]106:46   [116]113:6
   [117]113:7   [118]115:3   [119]118:22   [120]119   [121]127:1
   [122]129:1-4   [123]130:4   [124]132:14   [125]145:18

   Proverbs

   [126]8:15   [127]17:19

   Isaiah

   [128]8:7   [129]8:14   [130]9:13   [131]11:1   [132]13:1-14:27
   [133]13:18   [134]13:19   [135]14:4   [136]20:1   [137]21:2
   [138]28:11   [139]28:15   [140]29   [141]29:11   [142]37:16
   [143]37:38   [144]40:9   [145]42:8   [146]42:10   [147]44
   [148]45:14   [149]54:11   [150]60:12   [151]63:5

   Jeremiah

   [152]1:10   [153]1:13   [154]1:14   [155]9:1   [156]10:1-4
   [157]24:2   [158]24:8   [159]25:11   [160]25:12   [161]25:26
   [162]27:6   [163]29:7   [164]29:10   [165]39:3-13   [166]48:11
   [167]50   [168]50   [169]50   [170]50:42   [171]51   [172]51:7
   [173]51:11   [174]52:31

   Ezekiel

   [175]14:14   [176]14:14   [177]14:14   [178]14:20   [179]17:19
   [180]23:14   [181]23:15   [182]28:3

   Daniel

   [183]1   [184]1:1   [185]1:1   [186]1:1   [187]1:1-2   [188]1:3
   [189]1:4   [190]1:5   [191]1:6   [192]1:6-7   [193]1:7   [194]1:8
   [195]1:9   [196]1:10   [197]1:11-13   [198]1:12   [199]1:14
   [200]1:14-15   [201]1:16   [202]1:17   [203]1:17   [204]1:17
   [205]1:18-20   [206]1:21   [207]1:21   [208]2   [209]2   [210]2
   [211]2:1   [212]2:1   [213]2:2   [214]2:3-4   [215]2:4   [216]2:5
   [217]2:6   [218]2:7   [219]2:7-9   [220]2:8   [221]2:10   [222]2:11
   [223]2:12   [224]2:13-15   [225]2:14   [226]2:16   [227]2:17-18
   [228]2:19   [229]2:20   [230]2:21   [231]2:21   [232]2:22   [233]2:23
   [234]2:24   [235]2:25   [236]2:26   [237]2:26   [238]2:27
   [239]2:27-45   [240]2:29   [241]2:30   [242]2:31-35   [243]2:32
   [244]2:36-38   [245]2:38   [246]2:39   [247]2:39   [248]2:40-43
   [249]2:43   [250]2:44   [251]2:44-45   [252]2:45   [253]2:46
   [254]2:47   [255]2:48   [256]2:49   [257]3   [258]3:1   [259]3:1
   [260]3:2   [261]3:2   [262]3:3   [263]3:4-5   [264]3:5   [265]3:6-7
   [266]3:8-12   [267]3:13-15   [268]3:16-18   [269]3:19-20
   [270]3:21-23   [271]3:23-24   [272]3:24-25   [273]3:25   [274]3:26
   [275]3:27   [276]3:28   [277]3:29   [278]3:30   [279]4   [280]4
   [281]4   [282]4:1-3   [283]4:4-6   [284]4:7   [285]4:8-9
   [286]4:10-12   [287]4:13   [288]4:13-16   [289]4:17   [290]4:18
   [291]4:19   [292]4:20-22   [293]4:23-24   [294]4:25   [295]4:25
   [296]4:26   [297]4:27   [298]4:28-32   [299]4:30   [300]4:33
   [301]4:34   [302]4:35   [303]4:36   [304]4:37   [305]4:37   [306]5
   [307]5   [308]5:1   [309]5:1   [310]5:2   [311]5:2   [312]5:3
   [313]5:4   [314]5:5   [315]5:5   [316]5:6   [317]5:7   [318]5:8-9
   [319]5:10   [320]5:10-11   [321]5:11   [322]5:12   [323]5:13-16
   [324]5:17   [325]5:18-20   [326]5:21   [327]5:21   [328]5:22
   [329]5:23   [330]5:24   [331]5:25   [332]5:25-28   [333]5:28
   [334]5:29   [335]5:30-31   [336]5:31   [337]5:31   [338]5:31   [339]6
   [340]6:1-2   [341]6:2   [342]6:3-5   [343]6:4   [344]6:6-7   [345]6:7
   [346]6:8-9   [347]6:10   [348]6:10   [349]6:10   [350]6:10
   [351]6:11   [352]6:12   [353]6:13   [354]6:14-15   [355]6:16
   [356]6:16   [357]6:17   [358]6:18   [359]6:19-20   [360]6:21-22
   [361]6:23   [362]6:24   [363]6:25-27   [364]6:25-27   [365]6:28
   [366]6:28   [367]6:28   [368]6:28   [369]7   [370]7:8   [371]8:8
   [372]11   [373]11:2-6   [374]11:3   [375]11:4   [376]11:34
   [377]11:36   [378]11:36   [379]20   [380]48:3-5

   Amos

   [381]5:19

   Micah

   [382]5:2

   Habakkuk

   [383]1:16

   Haggai

   [384]2:7

   Zechariah

   [385]9:15

   Matthew

   [386]5:11   [387]10   [388]10:32   [389]24:35

   Mark

   [390]8:38   [391]11:22   [392]13:31

   Luke

   [393]1:52   [394]12   [395]21:19   [396]23:31

   John

   [397]4:24   [398]18:36   [399]19:12

   Acts

   [400]1:13   [401]10:26

   Romans

   [402]2:5   [403]8:10   [404]13:1   [405]13:1   [406]13:5   [407]14:23
   [408]16:27

   1 Corinthians

   [409]2:4   [410]2:14   [411]2:16   [412]7:31   [413]7:34

   2 Corinthians

   [414]2:7   [415]2:17   [416]3:14   [417]5:4   [418]7:10

   Galatians

   [419]5:25

   Ephesians

   [420]2   [421]6   [422]23   [423]166   [424]177

   Philippians

   [425]1:21   [426]4:6   [427]4:12

   Colossians

   [428]1:5

   1 Thessalonians

   [429]5:23

   1 Timothy

   [430]6:16

   Titus

   [431]2:12   [432]2:13

   Hebrews

   [433]11:6   [434]11:26   [435]11:33

   James

   [436]1:6   [437]4:6

   1 Peter

   [438]1:5   [439]2:17   [440]3:16   [441]5:5   [442]5:8

   2 Peter

   [443]1:20   [444]1:21

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [445]11:21

   1 Maccabees

   [446]1:59
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Daniel

   [447]1   [448]1:1   [449]1:3   [450]1:4   [451]1:5   [452]1:6
   [453]1:8   [454]1:9   [455]1:10   [456]1:11   [457]1:15   [458]1:16
   [459]1:17   [460]1:18   [461]1:21   [462]2   [463]2:1   [464]2:2
   [465]2:3   [466]2:5   [467]2:6   [468]2:7   [469]2:8   [470]2:9
   [471]2:10   [472]2:11   [473]2:12   [474]2:13   [475]2:14   [476]2:15
   [477]2:16   [478]2:17   [479]2:19   [480]2:20   [481]2:21   [482]2:22
   [483]2:23   [484]2:24   [485]2:25   [486]2:26   [487]2:27   [488]2:28
   [489]2:29   [490]2:30   [491]2:31   [492]2:33   [493]2:34   [494]2:38
   [495]2:39   [496]2:40   [497]2:44   [498]2:46   [499]2:47   [500]2:48
   [501]2:49   [502]3   [503]3:1   [504]3:2   [505]3:3   [506]3:4
   [507]3:6   [508]3:7   [509]3:8   [510]3:13   [511]3:16   [512]3:17
   [513]3:18   [514]3:19   [515]3:21   [516]3:24   [517]3:26   [518]3:27
   [519]3:28   [520]3:29   [521]3:30   [522]4   [523]4:1   [524]4:3
   [525]4:4   [526]4:7   [527]4:8   [528]4:9   [529]4:10   [530]4:12
   [531]4:13   [532]4:14   [533]4:16   [534]4:17   [535]4:18   [536]4:19
   [537]4:20   [538]4:23   [539]4:25   [540]4:26   [541]4:27   [542]4:28
   [543]4:30   [544]4:31   [545]4:32   [546]4:33   [547]4:34   [548]4:35
   [549]4:36   [550]4:37   [551]5   [552]5:1   [553]5:2   [554]5:3
   [555]5:4   [556]5:5   [557]5:6   [558]5:7   [559]5:8   [560]5:9
   [561]5:10   [562]5:12   [563]5:13   [564]5:15   [565]5:17   [566]5:18
   [567]5:21   [568]5:22   [569]5:23   [570]5:24   [571]5:25   [572]5:27
   [573]5:28   [574]5:29   [575]5:30   [576]5:31   [577]6   [578]6:1
   [579]6:3   [580]6:4   [581]6:5   [582]6:6   [583]6:7   [584]6:8
   [585]6:10   [586]6:11   [587]6:12   [588]6:13   [589]6:14   [590]6:16
   [591]6:17   [592]6:18   [593]6:19   [594]6:20   [595]6:21   [596]6:22
   [597]6:23   [598]6:24   [599]6:25   [600]6:27   [601]6:28
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * Chaldaioi: [602]1
     * daimonia: [603]1
     * theopempta: [604]1
     * theia: [605]1
     * mantike: [606]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * ': [607]1 [608]2 [609]3
     * 'drgzdy': [610]1
     * 'chsdrphny': [611]1
     * 'yr: [612]1
     * 'kl: [613]1
     * 'l: [614]1 [615]2 [616]3
     * 'ns: [617]1
     * 'sr': [618]1
     * 'rk: [619]1
     * 'sphym: [620]1
     * v'dyn: [621]1
     * v's: [622]1
     * vl: [623]1
     * vrm: [624]1
     * gdvry': [625]1
     * d: [626]1
     * dvr: [627]1 [628]2
     * dvn: [629]1
     * dyny-'mt: [630]1
     * dnh: [631]1
     * dtvry': [632]1
     * h: [633]1 [634]2
     * hdm: [635]1
     * hdmyn: [636]1
     * hzrym: [637]1
     * hyh: [638]1
     * hyl: [639]1 [640]2
     * hrtmym: [641]1
     * v: [642]1
     * vphrsyph: [643]1
     * z: [644]1
     * zmn': [645]1
     * zph: [646]1
     * chnn: [647]1
     * tvch: [648]1
     * tm: [649]1 [650]2
     * yh: [651]1 [652]2
     * yn: [653]1
     * ys: [654]1
     * kdy: [655]1
     * kvv: [656]1
     * kch: [657]1
     * klh: [658]1 [659]2
     * krvs: [660]1
     * ksdym: [661]1
     * l: [662]1
     * lv: [663]1
     * lvr 'lhyn: [664]1
     * lk: [665]1
     * m: [666]1 [667]2
     * mhlk: [668]1
     * mch': [669]1
     * mksphym: [670]1
     * mlh: [671]1
     * mlk: [672]1
     * mlky: [673]1
     * mlth: [674]1
     * mn': [675]1 [676]2 [677]3 [678]4
     * mnh: [679]1
     * mnchh: [680]1
     * n: [681]1 [682]2
     * nzq: [683]1
     * nzq : [684]1
     * nsh: [685]1
     * ntsch: [686]1
     * sgny': [687]1
     * sphr: [688]1 [689]2
     * srys : [690]1
     * srysym: [691]1
     * : [692]1
     * vd-ngv: [693]1
     * dnvn: [694]1
     * zr: [695]1
     * t': [696]1
     * yr: [697]1
     * lh: [698]1
     * nph: [699]1
     * ph': [700]1
     * phchvt': [701]1
     * phrvq: [702]1
     * phrs: [703]1
     * phrtmym: [704]1 [705]2
     * phtgm': [706]1
     * ts: [707]1
     * tsyr: [708]1
     * tslch: [709]1
     * tslch : [710]1
     * tslm: [711]1 [712]2
     * qsvt: [713]1
     * rv tvchym: [714]1
     * rvmg: [715]1
     * rgs: [716]1
     * rk: [717]1
     * s: [718]1
     * svyv: [719]1
     * sgy': [720]1
     * sd': [721]1
     * svy: [722]1
     * schyth: [723]1
     * sk: [724]1
     * slh: [725]1 [726]2
     * slvh: [727]1
     * sltny: [728]1
     * sphr: [729]1
     * sql: [730]1
     * sth: [731]1
     * t: [732]1
     * tphty': [733]1
     * tql: [734]1 [735]2
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Hexapla in Dan: [736]1
     * La nuiet, l'amour, le boire sans mesure, N' induit a rien sinon a
       toute ordure: [737]1
     * Medus ademit Assyrio, Medoque tulit moderamina Perses: [738]1
     * Primaque libato summo tenus attigit ore: [739]1
     * Procemiunm in Dan: [740]1
     * Prodromus Danielicus: [741]1
     * addit: [742]1
     * ante biennium Joanne Crispino: [743]1
     * auget: [744]1
     * bene positum: [745]1
     * consilium: [746]1
     * consuetudo: [747]1
     * et numerum Divorum altaribus addit: [748]1
     * sacramentalis locutio: [749]1
     * stipes: [750]1
     * susque deque illis est: [751]1
     * tam brutus homo: [752]1
     * tyranni: [753]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of German Words and Phrases

     * Die Authentie das Daniel: [754]1
     * Die heilige, Eingebund der heiligen, Schrift: [755]1
     * Neue critische undersuchungen uber das Buch Daniel: [756]1
     * Theologische Studien: [757]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * et dividentes: [758]1
     * Atuthentic des Daniel: [759]1
     * Du grand Escuyer: [760]1
     * Hist. sur les anc. Peuple de l'Asie: [761]1
     * a Geneva: [762]1
     * ce leur est tout un: [763]1
     * comme dit le proverb, un mal qui est bien en repos: [764]1
     * est aussi sacramentale: [765]1
     * qui avoyent dresse ceste calomnie: [766]1
     * si stupide et brutal: [767]1
     * une souche de bols: [768]1
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. http://www.ccel.org/
   2. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol22.htm|vol22.preface.p29
   3. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss1
   4. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss2
   5. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss3
   6. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss4
   7. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss5
   8. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss6
   9. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.appendix6
  10. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss7
  11. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss8
  12. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss9
  13. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss10
  14. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss10
  15. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss11
  16. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss12
  17. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss12
  18. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss13
  19. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.appendix13
  20. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss14
  21. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.appendix14
  22. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss15
  23. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss16
  24. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss17
  25. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.appendix2
  26. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol23.htm|vol23.p312
  27. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol23.htm|vol23.p312.note
  28. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss18
  29. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss19
  30. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss20
  31. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss20
  32. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss21
  33. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss22
  34. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss23
  35. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss23.Decree
  36. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss23.conduct
  37. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss23.window
  38. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss24
  39. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.Diss24.increase
  40. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.conclusions
  41. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol24.htm|vol24.appendix25
  42. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol25.htm|vol25.translation.da.c1.v1
  43. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=16#ix.xx-p8.1
  44. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=28#xiii.iii-p19.1
  45. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=33#xi.viii-p10.1
  46. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=24#xi.viii-p8.1
  47. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=9#viii.ii-p12.1
  48. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=36#vii.ii-p9.2
  49. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=1#viii.xiv-p15.6
  50. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=40&scrV=2#vii.ii-p9.3
  51. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=40&scrV=7#vii.ii-p9.3
  52. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=41&scrV=40#viii.xlvii-p7.2
  53. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=42&scrV=15#viii.xlv-p3.2
  54. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=9&scrV=27#viii.xlv-p2.1
  55. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=10&scrV=16#viii.xlv-p2.2
  56. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=4#vii.xiv-p12.2
  57. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=31#viii.xiv-p15.1
  58. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=18#iv-p12.2
  59. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=39&scrV=38#xiii.ix-p15.1
  60. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=39&scrV=39#xiii.ix-p15.2
  61. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=20&scrV=6#viii.vi-p10.1
  62. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=36#iv-p18.1
  63. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vii.xiii-p16.1
  64. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=8#viii.xiv-p15.2
  65. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=6#viii.xvi-p12.1
  66. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=6#vii.xviii-p6.2
  67. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vii.xiv-p10.1
  68. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=3#xiii.iv-p13.2
  69. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=10#vii.xviii-p6.1
  70. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=29#x.ix-p24.1
  71. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=29#x.xxiv-p20.1
  72. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=15#ix.xvii-p10.1
  73. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=15&scrV=19#xiii.iii-p6.1
  74. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=37#ii-p51.1
  75. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=2#vii.i-p13.1
  76. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=3#vii.i-p13.1
  77. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=25&scrV=27#xiii.iii-p13.1
  78. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xiii.xx-p6.2
  79. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=1&scrV=20#x.xii-p9.2
  80. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=10&scrV=1#xiii.xx-p6.1
  81. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xiii.xii-p5.3
  82. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=6&scrV=6#viii.xiv-p15.3
  83. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=12&scrV=18#xi.xvii-p14.1
  84. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=12&scrV=18#x.xxiv-p27.1
  85. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=5#xi.xxiv-p17.1
  86. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=15#xiii.xiii-p5.6
  87. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=18&scrV=5#ix.xvi-p14.1
  88. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=36&scrV=30#xiii.xiii-p5.4
  89. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=38&scrV=7#xiii.xii-p5.4
  90. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=9#viii.xxxiv-p28.2
  91. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=12#viii.xlii-p19.2
  92. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=4#xi.xx-p8.1
  93. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=27#x.xxiv-p21.2
  94. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=0#vii.v-p10.3
  95. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=15#vii.v-p10.4
  96. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=6#x.iii-p11.2
  97. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=7#ix.xvii-p10.3
  98. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=7#x.iii-p12.1
  99. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=3#viii.xx-p8.1
 100. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=6#x.xxix-p12.1
 101. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=9#viii.xxiii-p8.1
 102. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=20#ix.xiv-p3.1
 103. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=6#viii.xxi-p10.1
 104. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=7#viii.xxi-p10.1
 105. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=7#x.xii-p10.1
 106. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=1#vii.i-p16.2
 107. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=10#xii.xxvi-p8.1
 108. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=6#ix.xvii-p10.5
 109. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#ix.xvii-p10.2
 110. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=13#xii.xxiv-p2.1
 111. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=98&scrV=0#xiii.viii-p4.2
 112. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=99&scrV=1#vii.i-p16.3
 113. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=18#viii.xlii-p18.3
 114. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=20#x.ix-p20.1
 115. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=46#vii.xi-p7.1
 116. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=6#x.xii-p10.2
 117. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=7#x.xxix-p13.1
 118. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#x.xxix-p9.1
 119. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=22#viii.xxxix-p23.1
 120. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#xiii.xxii-p10.1
 121. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=1#x.xxiv-p21.1
 122. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=129&scrV=1#iv-p26.1
 123. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=4#xii.xxv-p17.2
 124. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#vii.i-p16.1
 125. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=18#viii.xvii-p6.2
 126. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=15#viii.xxxiv-p28.1
 127. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=17&scrV=19#xi.ii-p9.1
 128. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=7#viii.xxxviii-p7.2
 129. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=14#viii.xxxix-p23.2
 130. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=13#x.xxviii-p2.1
 131. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=1#viii.xxxix-p23.4
 132. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=1#xiii.v-p7.2
 133. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=18#viii.xxxviii-p7.1
 134. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=19#xiii.v-p7.3
 135. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=4#xiii.vii-p4.2
 136. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=20&scrV=1#ii-p51.3
 137. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=21&scrV=2#xiii.v-p7.4
 138. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=11#viii.ii-p13.1
 139. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=15#xi.xx-p8.2
 140. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=0#xi.x-p9.1
 141. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=11#viii.ii-p13.2
 142. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=16#vii.i-p16.4
 143. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=38#ii-p51.2
 144. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=9#vii.v-p10.2
 145. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#xii.xix-p3.1
 146. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=10#viii.xx-p8.2
 147. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=0#xiii.v-p7.5
 148. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=14#xiii.v-p7.1
 149. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=11#iv-p25.1
 150. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=12#viii.xlii-p18.1
 151. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=5#viii.xlii-p19.3
 152. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=10#x.xvi-p9.1
 153. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xiii.iii-p19.2
 154. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xiii.iii-p19.2
 155. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=1#x.xv-p13.1
 156. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=1#xiii.xxiii-p13.4
 157. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=24&scrV=2#vii.i-p12.3
 158. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=24&scrV=8#vii.i-p12.3
 159. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=11#xi.i-p10.1
 160. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=12#iv-p22.1
 161. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=26#xi.i-p10.2
 162. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=6#xiii.xvi-p8.1
 163. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=7#x.xiv-p6.1
 164. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=10#iv-p22.2
 165. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=39&scrV=3#xiii.iii-p31.1
 166. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=48&scrV=11#viii.xiv-p15.4
 167. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=50&scrV=0#xiii.v-p7.6
 168. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=50&scrV=0#xiii.v-p7.7
 169. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=50&scrV=0#xiii.xx-p28.1
 170. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=50&scrV=42#xi.i-p9.1
 171. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=0#xiii.xx-p28.2
 172. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=7#xiii.vii-p4.3
 173. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=11#xiii.xx-p28.3
 174. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=52&scrV=31#xiii.iii-p13.2
 175. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vii.i-p12.4
 176. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=14#xii.xxvi-p9.1
 177. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=14#xiii.xxiii-p12.2
 178. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=20#ii-p18.1
 179. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=17&scrV=19#viii.xxxix-p23.5
 180. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=23&scrV=14#ii-p51.4
 181. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=23&scrV=15#ii-p51.4
 182. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=28&scrV=3#ii-p18.2
 183. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=0#xiv-p1.1
 184. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xiii.ii-p19.1
 185. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xiii.ii-p26.1
 186. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xiii.iii-p3.1
 187. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.i-p1.1
 188. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.ii-p1.1
 189. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.v-p1.1
 190. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.vi-p1.1
 191. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xiii.v-p11.1
 192. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vii.vii-p1.1
 193. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=7#xiii.iv-p3.1
 194. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.viii-p1.1
 195. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.xi-p1.1
 196. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.xii-p1.1
 197. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.xiii-p1.1
 198. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xiii.iv-p12.1
 199. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xiii.iv-p13.3
 200. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.xiv-p1.1
 201. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.xv-p1.1
 202. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii.xviii-p1.1
 203. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=17#viii.xxiii-p9.1
 204. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=17#xiii.xxiii-p13.2
 205. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.xix-p1.1
 206. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.xx-p1.1
 207. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xiii.v-p4.1
 208. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xiii.ii-p20.1
 209. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xiii.ii-p30.1
 210. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xiii.xxiii-p13.1
 211. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=1#viii.i-p1.1
 212. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xiii.vi-p3.1
 213. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=2#viii.ii-p1.1
 214. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=3#viii.v-p1.1
 215. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=4#xiii.iii-p27.1
 216. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=5#viii.vi-p1.1
 217. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=6#viii.vii-p1.1
 218. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=7#viii.vi-p11.7
 219. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=7#viii.viii-p1.1
 220. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=8#viii.vi-p9.2
 221. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=10#viii.xi-p1.1
 222. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=11#viii.xii-p1.1
 223. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=12#viii.xiii-p1.1
 224. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=13#viii.xiv-p1.1
 225. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=14#viii.vi-p11.8
 226. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=16#viii.xv-p1.1
 227. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=17#viii.xvi-p1.1
 228. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=19#viii.xvii-p1.1
 229. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=20#viii.xx-p1.1
 230. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=21#viii.xxi-p1.1
 231. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=21#xiii.xxiv-p3.1
 232. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=22#viii.xxii-p1.1
 233. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=23#viii.xxiii-p1.1
 234. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=24#viii.xxvi-p1.1
 235. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=25#viii.xxvii-p1.1
 236. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=26#viii.vi-p11.11
 237. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=26#viii.xxviii-p1.1
 238. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=27#viii.xxix-p1.1
 239. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=27#xiii.vii-p11.1
 240. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=29#viii.xxx-p1.1
 241. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=30#viii.xxxi-p1.1
 242. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=31#viii.xxxiv-p1.1
 243. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=32#xiii.vii-p9.1
 244. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=36#viii.xxxvii-p1.1
 245. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=38#xiii.vii-p3.1
 246. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=39#viii.xxxviii-p1.1
 247. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=39#xiii.vii-p6.1
 248. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=40#viii.xxxix-p1.1
 249. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=43#xiii.vii-p13.1
 250. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=44#xiii.viii-p11.1
 251. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=44#viii.xlii-p1.1
 252. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=45#xiii.viii-p3.1
 253. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=46#viii.xliii-p1.1
 254. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=47#viii.xlvi-p1.1
 255. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=48#viii.xlvii-p1.1
 256. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=49#viii.xlviii-p1.1
 257. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=0#xiii.ii-p21.1
 258. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=1#ix.i-p1.1
 259. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=1#xiii.ix-p3.1
 260. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=2#ix.iv-p1.1
 261. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xiii.x-p3.1
 262. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=3#ix.v-p1.1
 263. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=4#ix.vi-p1.1
 264. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=5#xiii.xi-p3.1
 265. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=6#ix.vii-p1.1
 266. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=8#ix.x-p1.1
 267. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=13#ix.xi-p1.1
 268. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ix.xii-p1.1
 269. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=19#ix.xv-p1.1
 270. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=21#ix.xvi-p1.1
 271. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=23#ii-p108.1
 272. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=24#ix.xvii-p1.1
 273. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=25#xiii.xii-p4.1
 274. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=26#ix.xx-p1.1
 275. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=27#ix.xxi-p1.1
 276. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=28#ix.xxii-p1.1
 277. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=29#ix.xxiii-p1.1
 278. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=30#ix.xxiv-p1.1
 279. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xiii.ii-p12.1
 280. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xiii.ii-p32.1
 281. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xiii.xxiii-p13.3
 282. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=1#x.i-p1.1
 283. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=4#x.iii-p1.1
 284. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=7#x.iv-p1.1
 285. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=8#x.v-p1.1
 286. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=10#x.viii-p1.1
 287. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=13#xiii.xiii-p4.1
 288. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=13#x.ix-p1.1
 289. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=17#x.xii-p1.1
 290. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=18#x.xiii-p1.1
 291. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=19#x.xiv-p1.1
 292. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=20#x.xv-p1.1
 293. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=23#x.xvi-p1.1
 294. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=25#x.xix-p1.1
 295. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=25#xiii.xiv-p3.1
 296. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=26#x.xx-p1.1
 297. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=27#x.xxi-p1.1
 298. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=28#x.xxiv-p1.1
 299. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=30#xiii.ii-p13.1
 300. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=33#x.xxv-p1.1
 301. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=34#x.xxvi-p1.1
 302. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=35#x.xxix-p1.1
 303. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=36#x.xxx-p1.1
 304. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=37#x.xxxi-p1.1
 305. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=37#xiii.xv-p3.1
 306. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xiii.xx-p34.1
 307. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xiii.xxiv-p8.1
 308. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xi.i-p1.1
 309. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xiii.xvi-p3.1
 310. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xi.ii-p1.1
 311. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xiii.xvi-p3.1
 312. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xi.iii-p1.1
 313. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xi.iv-p1.1
 314. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xi.v-p1.1
 315. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xiii.xxiv-p8.2
 316. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xi.viii-p1.1
 317. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xi.ix-p1.1
 318. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xi.x-p1.1
 319. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xiii.xvii-p3.1
 320. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xi.xi-p1.1
 321. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=11#xiii.xxiv-p4.1
 322. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xi.xiv-p1.1
 323. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=13#xi.xv-p1.1
 324. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=17#xi.xvi-p1.1
 325. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=18#xi.xvii-p1.1
 326. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=21#xi.xx-p1.1
 327. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=21#xiii.xxiv-p4.2
 328. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=22#xi.xxi-p1.1
 329. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=23#xi.xxii-p1.1
 330. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=24#xi.xxiii-p1.1
 331. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=25#xiii.xviii-p3.1
 332. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=25#xi.xxiv-p1.1
 333. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=28#xiii.xix-p3.1
 334. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=29#xi.xxv-p1.1
 335. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=30#xi.xxviii-p1.1
 336. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=31#xiii.xx-p3.1
 337. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=31#xiii.xx-p34.2
 338. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=31#xiii.xxi-p3.1
 339. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xiii.xvi-p18.1
 340. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xii.i-p1.1
 341. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=2#xiii.xxii-p3.1
 342. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xii.ii-p1.1
 343. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xiii.xxii-p4.4
 344. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=6#xii.iii-p1.1
 345. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=7#xiii.xxii-p5.2
 346. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=8#xii.vi-p1.1
 347. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=10#xii.vii-p1.1
 348. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=10#xiii.xxii-p7.2
 349. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=10#xiii.xxii-p9.2
 350. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=10#xiii.xxiv-p4.3
 351. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xii.viii-p1.1
 352. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=12#xii.ix-p1.1
 353. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=13#xii.xii-p1.1
 354. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=14#xii.xiii-p1.1
 355. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xii.xiv-p1.1
 356. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xiii.xxiv-p4.4
 357. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=17#xii.xv-p1.1
 358. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=18#xii.xvi-p1.1
 359. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=19#xii.xvii-p1.1
 360. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=21#xii.xx-p1.1
 361. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=23#xii.xxi-p1.1
 362. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=24#xii.xxii-p1.1
 363. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=25#xii.xxv-p1.1
 364. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=25#xiii.xxiv-p6.1
 365. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=28#xii.xxvi-p1.1
 366. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=28#xiii.xxiii-p3.1
 367. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=28#xiii.xxiii-p4.2
 368. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=28#xiii.xxiii-p11.1
 369. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii-p106.1
 370. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=8#ii-p109.1
 371. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=8&scrV=8#ii-p65.1
 372. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=0#xiii.xx-p26.1
 373. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=2#ii-p26.1
 374. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=3#ii-p65.2
 375. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=4#ii-p65.2
 376. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=34#iv-p22.3
 377. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=36#ii-p106.2
 378. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=36#ii-p109.2
 379. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=20&scrV=0#ii-p23.1
 380. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=48&scrV=3#viii.xlvi-p8.1
 381. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=19#xii.xxiv-p2.2
 382. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#viii.xlii-p20.1
 383. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=16#xi.iv-p6.1
 384. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv-p12.1
 385. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=15#viii.xxxix-p23.3
 386. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=11#ix.xv-p11.1
 387. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vi.i-p6.1
 388. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=32#ix.xv-p11.2
 389. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=35#xii.vi-p9.2
 390. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=38#ix.xv-p11.3
 391. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=22#xiii.xxiv-p5.1
 392. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=31#xii.vi-p9.3
 393. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=52#x.xii-p10.3
 394. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi.i-p6.2
 395. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=19#iv-p20.1
 396. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=31#vii.i-p15.2
 397. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#ix.vii-p20.1
 398. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=36#viii.xlii-p13.1
 399. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=12#xii.xiii-p13.1
 400. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xiii.xxii-p9.3
 401. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=26#viii.xlv-p3.1
 402. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=5#x.xxiv-p20.2
 403. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=10#viii.xlii-p18.2
 404. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#x.xii-p10.4
 405. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#xi.xvii-p13.1
 406. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=5#x.xiv-p7.1
 407. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=23#ix.xxii-p10.1
 408. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=27#viii.xxi-p8.1
 409. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=4#viii.xxix-p9.1
 410. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#ix.vii-p10.1
 411. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv-p26.2
 412. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=31#viii.xxxiv-p26.1
 413. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=34#ix.vii-p20.2
 414. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#viii.vii-p7.1
 415. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=17#viii.xlvii-p7.1
 416. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=14#xi.x-p9.2
 417. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=4#ix.xiv-p4.1
 418. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#xii.xvi-p8.1
 419. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=25#ix.xxii-p9.2
 420. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=0#xiii.ix-p11.1
 421. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xiii.viii-p9.1
 422. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=23&scrV=0#xiii.xxiv-p8.3
 423. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=166&scrV=0#x.ii-p7.1
 424. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=177&scrV=0#xiii.xiii-p5.7
 425. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xii.xxi-p7.3
 426. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xii.vii-p15.1
 427. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii.xiv-p12.1
 428. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv-p27.1
 429. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#ix.vii-p20.3
 430. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#viii.xxii-p9.1
 431. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv-p27.2
 432. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv-p27.2
 433. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#xii.xxi-p7.2
 434. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=26#vii.xiv-p10.2
 435. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=33#xii.xxi-p7.1
 436. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=6#viii.xvii-p6.1
 437. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#x.xxiv-p21.3
 438. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#viii.xlii-p19.1
 439. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xii.xx-p15.1
 440. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xii.ii-p19.1
 441. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#x.xxiv-p21.4
 442. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xii.xx-p12.1
 443. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#ii-p130.1
 444. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#ii-p130.1
 445. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=11&scrV=21#xi.xxiv-p19.1
 446. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=1Macc&scrCh=1&scrV=59#viii.xxxix-p20.1
 447. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p0.1
 448. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.i-p9.1
 449. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.ii-p8.1
 450. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.v-p8.1
 451. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.vi-p8.1
 452. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vii.vii-p8.1
 453. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.viii-p7.1
 454. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.xi-p6.1
 455. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.xii-p9.1
 456. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.xiii-p13.1
 457. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii.xiv-p9.1
 458. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.xv-p6.1
 459. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii.xviii-p5.1
 460. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.xix-p11.1
 461. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.xx-p5.1
 462. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#viii-p0.1
 463. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=1#viii.i-p6.1
 464. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=2#viii.ii-p7.1
 465. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=3#viii.v-p8.1
 466. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=5#viii.vi-p8.1
 467. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=6#viii.vii-p6.1
 468. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=7#viii.viii-p16.1
 469. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=8#viii.viii-p18.1
 470. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=9#viii.viii-p20.1
 471. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=10#viii.xi-p6.1
 472. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=11#viii.xii-p7.1
 473. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=12#viii.xiii-p5.1
 474. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=13#viii.xiv-p11.1
 475. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=14#viii.xiv-p13.1
 476. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=15#viii.xiv-p16.1
 477. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=16#viii.xv-p6.1
 478. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=17#viii.xvi-p11.1
 479. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=19#viii.xvii-p5.1
 480. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=20#viii.xx-p7.1
 481. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=21#viii.xxi-p7.1
 482. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=22#viii.xxii-p7.1
 483. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=23#viii.xxiii-p7.1
 484. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=24#viii.xxvi-p6.1
 485. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=25#viii.xxvii-p5.1
 486. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=26#viii.xxviii-p6.1
 487. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=27#viii.xxix-p8.1
 488. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=28#viii.xxix-p11.1
 489. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=29#viii.xxx-p5.1
 490. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=30#viii.xxxi-p7.1
 491. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=31#viii.xxxiv-p19.1
 492. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=33#viii.xxxiv-p25.1
 493. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=34#viii.xxxiv-p27.1
 494. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=38#viii.xxxvii-p13.1
 495. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=39#viii.xxxviii-p6.1
 496. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=40#viii.xxxix-p16.1
 497. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=44#viii.xlii-p9.1
 498. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=46#viii.xliii-p6.1
 499. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=47#viii.xlvi-p5.1
 500. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=48#viii.xlvii-p6.1
 501. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=49#viii.xlviii-p6.1
 502. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=0#ix-p0.1
 503. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=1#ix.i-p6.1
 504. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=2#ix.iv-p5.1
 505. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=3#ix.vii-p9.1
 506. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=4#ix.vii-p17.1
 507. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=6#ix.vii-p19.1
 508. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=7#ix.vii-p21.1
 509. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=8#ix.x-p17.1
 510. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=13#ix.xi-p14.1
 511. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ix.xii-p11.1
 512. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=17#ix.xii-p16.1
 513. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=18#ix.xiv-p2.1
 514. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=19#ix.xv-p9.1
 515. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=21#ix.xvi-p13.1
 516. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=24#ix.xvii-p9.1
 517. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=26#ix.xx-p5.1
 518. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=27#ix.xxi-p7.1
 519. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=28#ix.xxii-p7.1
 520. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=29#ix.xxiii-p8.1
 521. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=30#ix.xxiv-p6.1
 522. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=0#x-p0.1
 523. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=1#x.ii-p2.1
 524. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=3#x.ii-p10.1
 525. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=4#x.iii-p10.1
 526. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=7#x.iv-p5.1
 527. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=8#x.v-p8.1
 528. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=9#x.vii-p2.1
 529. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=10#x.ix-p13.1
 530. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=12#x.ix-p16.1
 531. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=13#x.ix-p19.1
 532. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=14#x.ix-p21.1
 533. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=16#x.ix-p23.1
 534. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=17#x.xii-p8.1
 535. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=18#x.xiii-p6.1
 536. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=19#x.xiv-p5.1
 537. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=20#x.xv-p12.1
 538. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=23#x.xvi-p8.1
 539. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=25#x.xix-p5.1
 540. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=26#x.xx-p6.1
 541. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=27#x.xxi-p9.1
 542. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=28#x.xxiv-p17.1
 543. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=30#x.xxiv-p19.1
 544. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=31#x.xxiv-p22.1
 545. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=32#x.xxiv-p24.1
 546. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=33#x.xxv-p5.1
 547. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=34#x.xxvi-p8.1
 548. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=35#x.xxix-p7.1
 549. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=36#x.xxx-p8.1
 550. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=37#x.xxxi-p6.1
 551. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=0#xi-p0.1
 552. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xi.i-p5.1
 553. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xi.ii-p8.1
 554. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=3#xi.iii-p6.1
 555. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xi.iv-p5.1
 556. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=5#xi.v-p8.1
 557. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=6#xi.viii-p7.1
 558. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xi.ix-p6.1
 559. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=8#xi.x-p8.1
 560. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=9#xi.x-p10.1
 561. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xi.xi-p10.1
 562. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xi.xiv-p6.1
 563. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=13#xi.xv-p13.1
 564. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=15#xi.xv-p15.1
 565. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=17#xi.xvi-p6.1
 566. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=18#xi.xvii-p12.1
 567. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=21#xi.xx-p5.1
 568. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=22#xi.xxi-p6.1
 569. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=23#xi.xxii-p9.1
 570. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=24#xi.xxiii-p6.1
 571. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=25#xi.xxiv-p15.1
 572. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=27#xi.xxiv-p18.1
 573. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=28#xi.xxiv-p20.1
 574. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=29#xi.xxv-p6.1
 575. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=30#xi.xxviii-p7.1
 576. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=31#xi.xxviii-p10.1
 577. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xii-p0.1
 578. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=1#xii.i-p7.1
 579. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=3#xii.ii-p14.1
 580. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xii.ii-p16.1
 581. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=5#xii.ii-p18.1
 582. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=6#xii.iii-p10.1
 583. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=7#xii.v-p2.1
 584. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=8#xii.vi-p8.1
 585. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=10#xii.vii-p8.1
 586. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=11#xii.viii-p6.1
 587. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=12#xii.ix-p7.1
 588. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=13#xii.xii-p7.1
 589. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=14#xii.xiii-p11.1
 590. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=16#xii.xiv-p8.1
 591. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=17#xii.xv-p6.1
 592. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=18#xii.xvi-p7.1
 593. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=19#xii.xvii-p10.1
 594. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=20#xii.xix-p2.1
 595. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=21#xii.xx-p8.1
 596. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=22#xii.xx-p10.1
 597. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=23#xii.xxi-p5.1
 598. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=24#xii.xxii-p8.1
 599. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=25#xii.xxv-p14.1
 600. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=27#xii.xxv-p21.1
 601. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=28#xii.xxvi-p6.1
 602. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iii-p19.3
 603. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.ii-p9.3
 604. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.ii-p9.1
 605. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.ii-p9.2
 606. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.ii-p8.1
 607. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.15
 608. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.vii-p4.2
 609. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxix-p8.4
 610. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.x-p8.1
 611. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.x-p5.1
 612. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xiii-p5.5
 613. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.x-p5.1
 614. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.5
 615. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.11
 616. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p10.2
 617. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.vii-p4.1
 618. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.vi-p9.1
 619. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxi-p10.4
 620. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.iv-p2.2
 621. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.xxiii-p7.1
 622. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.xiii-p4.1
 623. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.xiii-p5.1
 624. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.xxix-p12.1
 625. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.x-p9.1
 626. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.10
 627. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.vi-p4.1
 628. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.4
 629. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p10.1
 630. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxxi-p8.2
 631. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.vii-p15.2
 632. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.x-p10.1
 633. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.14
 634. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxix-p8.3
 635. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.1
 636. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p5.1
 637. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p13.4
 638. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.xx-p6.2
 639. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.vi-p4.1
 640. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.xv-p7.1
 641. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.iv-p2.1
 642. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxi-p5.1
 643. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xviii-p7.1
 644. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.9
 645. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxx-p4.1
 646. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.xii-p5.1
 647. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.2
 648. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.xiv-p15.5
 649. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.xiv-p14.2
 650. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.ii-p11.1
 651. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.3
 652. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.7
 653. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.2
 654. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.4
 655. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xix-p5.1
 656. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.xii-p7.1
 657. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.v-p10.1
 658. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxix-p8.1
 659. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxix-p8.2
 660. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.v-p9.1
 661. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.iv-p2.4
 662. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.xii-p5.1
 663. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.xiii-p5.2
 664. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xii-p5.2
 665. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.xxxvii-p7.1
 666. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.16
 667. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xviii-p7.4
 668. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxiv-p18.1
 669. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxix-p4.1
 670. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.iv-p2.3
 671. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.3
 672. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxi-p10.2
 673. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxi-p10.1
 674. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p9.1
 675. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.x-p9.4
 676. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.x-p9.5
 677. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xviii-p5.1
 678. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xviii-p5.2
 679. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.xii-p4.1
 680. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.xlv-p2.3
 681. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.17
 682. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xviii-p7.3
 683. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.i-p8.1
 684. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xxii-p4.2
 685. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.vii-p4.3
 686. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.ii-p4.1
 687. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.x-p6.1
 688. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.v-p11.1
 689. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p4.3
 690. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p4.2
 691. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.ii-p9.1
 692. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.13
 693. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.12
 694. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xiv-p8.1
 695. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.6
 696. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.xiv-p14.1
 697. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xiii-p5.2
 698. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xxii-p4.3
 699. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.ix-p6.1
 700. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.ix-p6.2
 701. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.x-p7.1
 702. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxi-p10.3
 703. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.xxiv-p21.1
 704. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.ii-p10.1
 705. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p4.4
 706. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xii-p9.1
 707. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.12
 708. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xiii-p5.3
 709. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.xxvi-p7.1
 710. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.xxiv-p4.1
 711. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.xv-p4.1
 712. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.ix-p13.1
 713. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxxi-p8.1
 714. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.xiv-p15.7
 715. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iii-p31.2
 716. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.iii-p4.1
 717. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.9
 718. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.5
 719. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.xvi-p14.2
 720. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.viii-p8.1
 721. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.8
 722. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.xx-p6.1
 723. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.ii-p10.1
 724. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iv-p9.10
 725. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.xxiii-p6.1
 726. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.iii-p11.1
 727. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.iii-p11.3
 728. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.x-p12.1
 729. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#x.xxi-p4.1
 730. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xviii-p6.2
 731. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.xi-p4.1
 732. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#viii.vi-p11.6
 733. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.x-p11.1
 734. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.x-p9.3
 735. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xviii-p6.1
 736. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.i-p6.1
 737. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.ii-p13.1
 738. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.vii-p7.1
 739. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xvi-p16.1
 740. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ii-p35.1
 741. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ii-p120.1
 742. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.vii-p13.2
 743. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#iii-p4.1
 744. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.vii-p13.3
 745. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#iv-p19.1
 746. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.xvii-p5.1
 747. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.xvii-p5.2
 748. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ix.vii-p13.1
 749. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.v-p10.1
 750. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.xxviii-p9.1
 751. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.ii-p20.2
 752. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.i-p12.1
 753. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.ii-p11.1
 754. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ii-p16.1
 755. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ii-p31.1
 756. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ii-p20.1
 757. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ii-p124.2
 758. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.xviii-p7.2
 759. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#ii-p124.1
 760. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.xiii-p15.1
 761. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xiii.iii-p21.1
 762. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.ii-p20.1
 763. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.ii-p20.3
 764. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#iv-p19.2
 765. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.v-p10.2
 766. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xii.xxii-p4.1
 767. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#vii.i-p12.2
 768. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom24/cache/calcom24.html3#xi.xxviii-p9.2
