     __________________________________________________________________

         Title: Commentary on Isaiah - Volume 4
    Creator(s): Calvin, John (1509-1564)
                (Alternative)
                (Translator)
        Rights: Public Domain
    LC Call no: BS491
   LC Subjects:

                The Bible

                Works about the Bible
     __________________________________________________________________

   COMMENTARY

   ON THE

   BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH


   BY JOHN CALVIN



   TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL LATIN, AND COLLATED WITH
   THE LATEST FRENCH VERSION

   BY THE REV. WILLIAM PRINGLE



   VOLUME FOURTH



   CHRISTIAN CLASSICS ETHEREAL LIBRARY
   GRAND RAPIDS, MI

   [1]http://www.ccel.org
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 49.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 49:1-26

   1. Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The LORD
   hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made
   mention of my name.

   1. Audite me, Insulae, et attendite populi e longinquo. Iehova ex utero
   vocavit me, e ventre matris meae habuit in memoria nomen meum.

   2. And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his
   hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath
   he hid me;

   2. Et posuit os meum quasi gladium acutum; in umbra manus suae protexit
   me, et posuit me in sagittam tersam, in pharetra sua abscondit me.

   3. And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be
   glorified.

   3. Et dixit mihi, Servus meus es, Israel, in to gloriabor.

   4. Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for
   nought, and in vain; yet surely my judgment is with the LORD, and my
   work with my God.

   4. Ego autem dixi, Frustra laboravi; inaniter et vane fortitudinem meam
   consumpsi. At judicium meum coram Iehova, et opus meum coram Deo meo.

   5. And now, saith the LORD that formed me from the womb to be his
   servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered,
   yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the LORD, and my God shall be my
   strength.

   5. Et nunc dicit Iehova, qui formavit me ab utero in servum sibi, ut
   reducam ad se Iacob. Atque ut Israel non colligatur, tamen gloriosus
   ero in oculis Iehovae, et Deus meus erit fortitudo mea.

   6. And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant
   to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of
   Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou
   mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.

   6. Et ait, Leve est ut tu mihi sis servus ad suscitandas tribus Iacob,
   et desolationes Israel ut restituas. Itaque constitui to in lucem
   Gentium, ut sis salus mea ad extremum terrae.

   7. Thus saith the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to
   him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant
   of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship,
   because of the LORD that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and
   he shall choose thee.

   7. Sic dicit Iehova redemptor Israel, Sanctus ejus, ad contemptibilem
   anima, ad gentem abominabilem, ad servum dominantium. Reges videbunt,
   et consurgent Principes, et adorabunt propter Iehovam, quia fidelis est
   Sanctus Israel, et qui elegit to.

   8. Thus saith the LORD, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in
   a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and
   give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to
   cause to inherit the desolate heritages;

   8. Sic dicit Iehova: In tempore placiti exaudivi to, in die salutis
   auxiliatus sum tibi; et servabo to, et dabo to in foedus populi, ut
   suscites terram, ut haereditate obtineas haereditates desolatas.

   9. That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in
   darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their
   pastures shall be in all high places.

   9. Ut dicas vinctis, Exite; iis qui sunt in tenebris, Ostendite vos.
   Super vias pascentur, in omnibus verticibus pascua eorum.

   10. They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun
   smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the
   springs of water shall he guide them.

   10. Non esurient, neque sitient; non percutiet eos aestus et sol; quia
   miserator eorum diriget eos, et super scaturigines aquarum ducet eos.

   11. And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be
   exalted.

   11. Et ponam omnes montes meos in viare, et semitae meae elevabuntur.

   12. Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north
   and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim.

   12. Ecee, isti e longinquo venient; et ecee, isti ab Aquilone, et a
   mari; et isti e terra Sinis, (vel, Sinim.)

   13. Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into
   singing, O mountains: for the LORD hath comforted his people, and will
   have mercy upon his afflicted.

   13. Laudate, coeli; et exulta, terra; et erumpite, montes, in laudera;
   quia consolatus est Iehova populum suum, et pauperum suorum
   miserebitur.

   14. But Zion said, The LORD hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath
   forgotten me.

   14. Atqui dixit Sion, Dereliquit me Iehova, et Dominus meus oblitus est
   mei.

   15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
   compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not
   forget thee.

   15. An obliviscetur mulier foetus sui, ut non misereatur filii uteri
   sui? Etiam si istae oblitae fuerint, ego tamen non obliviscar tui.

   16. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of, my hands; thy walls
   are continually before me.

   16. Ecce, super palmas sculpsi to; muri tui coram me sunt semper.

   17. Thy children shall make haste; thy destroyers and they that made
   thee waste shall go forth of thee.

   17. Festinant structores tui; destructores tui et vastatores tui procul
   abs to discedent.

   18. Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather
   themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the LORD, thou
   shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind
   them on thee, as a bride doeth.

   18. Leva per circuitum oculos tuos, et vide. Omnes congregati sunt.
   venerunt tibi. Vivo ego, dicit Iehova, quod omnibus quasi ornamento
   vestieris, et circumligaberis illis tanquam sponsa.

   19. For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy
   destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants,
   and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

   19. Quoniam desolationes tuis, et vastitates tuae, et terra tua
   deserta, nunc tamen angusta erit ob multitudinem habitantium; et procul
   abscedent consumptores tui.

   20. The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other,
   shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me: give
   place to me that I may dwell.

   20. Adhuc dicent in auribus tuis filii orbitatis tuae: Angustus mihi
   locus est; secede alio mihi, ut habitem.

   21. Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these,
   seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and
   removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left
   alone; these, where had they been?

   21. Et dices in corde tuo: Quis genuit mihi istos? Nam ego orba (vel,
   sterilis) et solitaria demigrans, et exul. Quis ergo istos educavit?
   Ecce, ego relicta eram sola; isti unde sunt?

   22. Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the
   Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring
   thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their
   shoulders.

   22. Sic dicit Dominus Iehova: Ecce levabo ad Gentes manum meam, et ad
   populos extollam vexillum meum; et adducent filios tuos in sinu, et
   filiae tuae super humeram ferentur.


   23. And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy
   nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the
   earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am
   the LORD: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

   23. Et erunt reges nutritii tui, et reginae eorum nutrices tuae; prono
   in terram vultu adorabunt to, et pulverem pedum tuorum lingent. Et
   scies quod ego sum Iehova, quia non pudefient qui me expectant.

   24. Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive
   delivered?

   24. An anferetur forti praeda? An captivitas justi (vel, justa)
   liberabitur?

   25. But thus saith the LORD, Even the captives of the mighty shall be
   taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I will
   contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy
   children.

   25. Atqui sic dicit Iehova, Etiam captivitas fortis auferetur, et
   praeda tyranni liberabitur; quia cum eo qui contendit tecum ego
   contendam, et filios tuos ego servabo.

   26. And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and
   they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all
   flesh shall know that I the LORD am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the
   mighty One of Jacob.

   26. Et pascam spoliatores tuos carnibus tuis, et quasi musto sanguine
   suo inebriabuntur; et sciet omnis caro quod ego sum Iehova servator
   tuus, et redemptor tuus fortis Iacob.


   1. Hear me, O islands! After having treated of the future deliverance
   of the people, he comes down to Christ, under whose guidance the people
   were brought out of Babylon, as they had formerly been brought out of
   Egypt. The former prophecy must have been confirmed by this doctrine;
   because they would scarcely have hoped that the Lord would deliver
   them, if they had not placed Christ before their eyes, by whom alone
   desponding souls can be comforted and strengthened; for from him they
   ought not only to expect eternal salvation, but ought equally to expect
   temporal deliverance. Besides, it is customary with the prophets, when
   they discourse concerning the restoration of the Church, to bring
   Christ into view, not only because he would be the minister of the
   Church, but because on him was founded the adoption of the people. The
   Jews also, or, at least, such of them as have any soundness of
   understanding, admit that this passage cannot be understood as relating
   to any other person than Christ. But still the train of thought which
   we have pointed out has not been perceived by every interpreter; for
   the Prophet does not, by a sudden transition, mention Christ, but
   interweaves this with the former subject, because in no other manner
   could the people entertain the hope of deliverance, since on him
   depended their reconciliation with God. And in order that the style
   might be more energetic, he introduces Christ as speaking, and
   addresses not only the Jews but nations that were beyond the sea, and
   foreign nations who were at a great distance from Judea, to whom, as we
   have formerly remarked, [1] he gives the name of "Islands."

   Jehovah hath called me from the womb. A question arises, What is the
   nature of this calling? For, seeing that we were

   "chosen in Christ before the creation of the world,"
   (Ephesians 1:4,)

   it follows that election goes before this calling; for it is the
   commencement and foundation of our election. Accordingly, it might be
   thought that Isaiah says far less than the occasion demands, when he
   says that he was "called from the womb;" for he had been called long
   before. But the answer is easy; for the subject here treated of is not
   eternal election, by which we are adopted to be his sons, but only the
   appointment or consecration by which Christ is set apart to that
   office, that no man may think that he intruded into it without being
   duly authorized. "For no man," as the Apostle says,

   "taketh this honor upon himself, but he who is called by God, as Aaron
   was. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made a high priest, but
   he who spake to him, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee."
   (Hebrews 5:4, 5.)

   Moreover, the Prophet does not describe the commencement of the period,
   as if it were only from the womb that God began to call him; but it is
   as if he had said, "Before I came out of the womb, God had determined
   that I should hold this office." In like manner Paul also says that he
   was "set apart from the womb," (Galatians 1:15,) though he had been
   "elected before the creation of the world." (Ephesians 1:4.) To
   Jeremiah also it is said, "Before thou camest out of the womb, I knew
   thee." (Jeremiah 1:5.) In short, the meaning is, that Christ was
   clothed with our flesh by the appointment of the Father, in order that
   he might fulfill the office of Redeemer, to which he had been
   appointed.

   From my mother's belly he hath had my name in remembrance. This has the
   same import as the former clause; for by "the remembrance of the name"
   is meant familiar acquaintance. He therefore distinguishes himself from
   the ordinary rank of men, because he was elected to an uncommon and
   remarkable office.

   2. And he hath placed my mouth as a sharp sword, he employs a twofold
   comparison, that of "a sword" and of "a quiver," in order to denote the
   power and energy of the doctrine; and he shews why he was called, and
   why he was honored by a name so excellent and illustrious, namely, that
   he may teach; for this is what he means by the word "mouth." Christ
   hath therefore been appointed by the Father, not to rule, after the
   manner of princes, by the force of arms, and by surrounding himself
   with other external defences, to make himself an object of terror to
   his people; but his whole authority consists in doctrine, in the
   preaching of which he wishes to be sought and acknowledged; for nowhere
   else will he be found. He asserts the power of his "mouth," that is, of
   the doctrine which proceeds from his mouth, by comparing it to "a
   sword;" for

   "the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
   sword, and piercing even to the dividing of the soul and the spirit,
   and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
   intentions of the heart." (Hebrews 4:12.)

   And hath made me as a polished arrow. He now compares his mouth to "an
   arrow," because it strikes not only close at hand, but likewise at a
   distance, and reaches even those who appear to be far off.

   In his quiver hath he hid me. After having spoken of the efficacy of
   doctrine, Isaiah adds, that God, by his power, protects Christ and his
   doctrine, so that nothing can stop his course. And this was very
   necessary to be added; for, as soon as the mouth of Christ is opened,
   that is, as soon as his Gospel is preached, adversaries rise up on all
   sides, and innumerable enemies league together in order to crush it; so
   that the efficacy which he ascribes to doctrine would not be
   sufficient, if there were not added his protection, in order to drive
   away adversaries.

   Besides, the present question is not about the person of Christ, but
   about the whole body of the Church. We must indeed begin with the Head,
   but we must next come down to the members; and to all the ministers of
   the Word must be applied what is here affirmed concerning Christ; for
   to them is given such efficacy of the Word, that they may not idly beat
   the air with their voices, but may reach the hearts and touch them to
   the quick. The Lord also causes the voice of the Gospel to resound not;
   only in one place, but far and wide throughout the whole world. In
   short, because he faithfully keeps them under his protection, though
   they are exposed to many attacks, and are assaulted on every side by
   Satan and the world, yet they do not swerve from their course. We ought
   to have abundant knowledge of this from experience; for they would all
   to a man have been long ago ruined by the conspiracies and snares of
   adversaries, if the Lord had not defended them by his protection. And
   indeed, amidst so many dangers, it is almost miraculous that a single
   preacher of the Gospel is permitted to remain. The reason of this is,
   that the Lord guards them by his shadow, and "hides them as arrows in
   his quiver," that they may not be laid open to the assaults of enemies
   and be destroyed.

   3. Thou art my servant, O Israel. It is of great importance to connect
   this verse with the preceding, because this shews that the Prophet now
   speaks not only of a single man, but of the whole nation; which has not
   been duly considered by commentators. This passage must not be limited
   to the person of Christ, and ought not to be referred to Israel alone;
   but on the present occasion we should attend to the customary language
   of Scripture. When the whole body of the Church is spoken of, Christ is
   brought forward conspicuously so as to include all the children of God.
   We hear what Paul says:

   "The promises were given to Abraham and to his seed. He saith not, And
   to seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ."
   (Galatians 3:16.)

   He does not include the whole multitude of children who were descended
   from Abraham himself according to the flesh, seeing that all were not
   partakers of the blessing. Ishmael was rejected, Esau was a reprobate,
   and many others were cut off. When the people were rescued from
   Babylon, but a small renmant came out; for the greater part rejected
   God's astonishing kindness. Where then was "the seed?" In Christ, who
   is the Head, and contains in himself the rest of the members; for in
   him is joined and bound by an indisoluble bond all the seed.

   In like manner, under the name Israel, by which he means Christ, Isaiah
   includes the whole body of the people, as members under the Head. Nor
   ought this to be thought strange; for Paul also, when he speaks of the
   union, employs the metaphor of the human body, and then adds: "So also
   is Christ." (1 Corinthians 12:12.) In that passage the name of Christ
   is given to Israel, that is, to the whole body of believers, who are
   joined to Christ, as members to the Head. In a word, the Lord honors by
   this name the Church, which is the spouse of Christ, just as the wife
   is honored by bearing the name and title of her husband. He calls
   "Israel his servant," that is, he calls the Church his handmaid,
   because she is "the pillar and foundation of truth," (1 Timothy 3:15;)
   for he hath committed his word to the care of the Church, that by her
   ministrations it may be published throughout the whole world.

   In thee I will be glorified. At length, in the conclusion of the verse
   he shews what is the design of these ministrations, and for what
   purpose, they who preach the Gospel are called by God; namely, that
   they may zealously display his glory, and may likewise promote it among
   others, which Christ also teaches us in the Gospel,

   "Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee." (John 17:1.)

   This is a very high honor conferred on poor, feeble men, when the Lord
   appoints them, though corrupt and depraved, to promote his glory; and
   therefore we ought to be the more encouraged to render to him our
   service and obedience. Yet God intends to express something more, that,
   notwithstanding the efforts of Satan and all wicked men, the power of
   God will be victorious, so that Christ shall triumph gloriously, and
   the majesty of God shall shine forth in his Gospel.

   4. And I said, In vain have I toiled. The Prophet here brings forward a
   grievous complaint in the name of the Church, yet in such a manner
   that, as we have formerly remarked, we must begin with the Head. Christ
   therefore complains along with his members, that it appears as if his
   labor were thrown away; for, having formerly pronounced a high and
   striking commendation on the power and efficacy of the word which
   proceedeth out of his mouth, while yet it scarcely does any good, and
   the glory which God demands from the ministration of it does not shine
   forth, he therefore introduces the Church as complaining that she
   spends her labor fruitlessly, because men do not repent at the
   preaching of heavenly doctrine.

   It was highly necessary that the Prophet should add this; first, that
   we may know that the fruit which he mentioned is not always visible to
   the eyes of men; for otherwise we might call in question the truth of
   the word, and might entertain doubts if that which is so obstinately
   rejected by many was the word of God. Secondly, it was necessary, that
   we may advance with unshaken firmness, and may commit our labor to the
   Lord, who will not permit it to be ultimately unproductive. The Prophet
   therefore intended to guard against a dangerous temptation, that we may
   not, on account of the obstinacy of men, lose courage in the middle of
   our course. And indeed Christ begins with the complaint, for the
   purpose of affirming that nothing shall hinder him from executing his
   office. The meaning of the words might be more clearly brought out in
   the following manner: "Though my labor be unprofitable, and though I
   have almost exhausted my strength without doing any good, yet it is
   enough that God approves of my obedience." Such is also the import of
   what he adds, --

   But my judgement is before Jehovah. Although we do not clearly see the
   fruit of our labors, yet we are enjoined to be content on this ground,
   that we serve God, to whom our obedience is acceptable. Christ exhorts
   and encourages godly teachers to strive earnestly till they rise
   victorious over this temptation, and, laying aside the malice of the
   world, to advance cheerfully in the discharge of duty, and not to allow
   their hearts to languish through weariness. If therefore the Lord be
   pleased to make trial of our faith and patience to such an extent that
   it shall seem as if we wearied ourselves to no purpose, yet we ought to
   rely on this testimony of our conscience And if we do not enjoy this
   consolation, at least we are not moved by pure affection, and do not
   serve God, but the world and our own ambition. In such temptations,
   therefore, we should have recourse to this sentiment.

   Yet it ought to be observed, that here Christ and the Church accuse the
   whole world of ingratitude; for the Church complains to God in such a
   manner as to remonstrate with the world, because no good effect is
   produced on it by the doctrine of the Gospel, which in itself is
   efficacious and powerful. Yet the whole blame rests on the obstinacy
   and ingratitude of men, who reject the grace of God offered to them,
   and of their own accord choose to perish. Let those persons now go and
   accuse Christ, who say that the Gospel yields little fruit, and who
   defame the doctrine of the word by wicked slanders, and who throw
   ridicule on our labors as vain and unprofitable, and who allege that,
   on the contrary, they excite men to sedition, and lead them to sin with
   less control. Let them consider, I say, with whom they have to do, and
   what advantage they gain by their impudence, since men alone ought to
   bear the blame, who, as far as lies in their power, render the
   preaching of the Word unprofitable.

   Godly ministers, who bitterly lament that men perish so miserably by
   their own fault, and who sometimes devour and waste themselves through
   grief, when they experience so great perversity, ought to encourage
   their hearts by this consolation, and not to be alarmed so as to throw
   away the shield and spear, though sometimes they imagine that it would
   be better for them to do so. Let them consider that they share with
   Christ in this cause; for Christ does not speak of himself alone, as we
   formerly mentioned, but undertakes the cause of all who faithfully
   serve him, and, as their advocate, brings forward an accusation in the
   name of all. Let them therefore rely on his protection, and allow him
   to defend their cause. Let them appeal, as Paul does, to the day of the
   Lord, (1 Corinthians 4:4,) and let them not heed the calumnies,
   reproaches, or slanders of their enemies; for their judgment is with
   the Lord, and although they be a hundred times slandered by the world,
   yet a faithful God will approve and vindicate the service which they
   render to him.

   On the other hand, let wicked men, and despisers of the word, and
   hypocrites, tremble; for when Christ accuses, there will be no room for
   defense; and when he condenms, there will be none that can acquit. We
   must therefore beware lest the fruit which ought to proceed from the
   Gospel should be lost through our fault; for the Lord manifests his
   glory in order that we may become disciples of Christ, and may bring
   forth much fruit.

   5. And now saith Jehovah. By this verse he confirms the former
   statement, and yields more abundant consolation, by repeating that
   calling; and the testimony of conscience, which ought to be regarded by
   us as a fortress; for there is nothing that gives us greater distress
   and anxiety, than to entertain doubts by whose authority, or by whose
   direction everything is undertaken by us. For this reason Isaiah
   reminds us of the certainty of our calling.

   Who formed me from the womb to be his servant. In the first place,
   godly teachers, along with Christ who is their Prince, say that they
   have been "formed" by a divine hand; because God always enriches and
   adorns with necessary gifts those whom he calls to the office of
   teaching, who derive from the one fountain of the Spirit all the gifts
   in which they excel. Thus "the Father hath sealed" (John 6:27) his
   Only-begotten Son, and next prepares others, according to their degree,
   to be fit for discharging their office. At the same time, he points out
   the end of the calling; for to this end have Apostles and teachers of
   the Church been appointed, to gather the Lord's scattered flock, that
   under Christ we may all be united in the same body. (Ephesians 4:11,
   13.) In the world there is miserable dispersion, but in Christ there is
   anakephalaiosis "a gathering together" of all, (Ephesians 1:10,) as the
   Apostle speaks; for there can be no other bond of union. As to the word
   "create," or "form," it is to no purpose that some men speculate about
   it as relating to Christ's human existence, which was created; for it
   is clearer than noon-day, that the "forming" must be viewed as relating
   to office.

   And though Israel be not gathered. The Jews read these words as a
   question: "Shall I not bring back Jacob? and shall Israel not be
   gathered?" and supply the particle h (ha). But that reading is
   excessively unnatural, and the Jews do not consider what was the
   Prophet's meaning, but, so far as lies in their power, corrupt the
   text, in order to conceal the disgrace of their nation. Some explain
   it, "Shall not be lost," or, "Shall not perish;" for the verb 'sph
   (asaph) sometimes denotes what we commonly call (trousser) to truss.
   Those things which are intended to be preserved are "gathered," and
   likewise those things which are intended to be consumed; and
   accordingly, when we mean that any person has been removed out of the
   world, we frequently use the vulgar phrase, "he is trussed," [2] or,
   "he is despatched."

   Yet I shall be glorious. To suppose the meaning to be, "I have been
   sent, that Israel may not perish," would not be unsuitable; but I
   choose rather to follow a different interpretation, namely, "Though
   Israel be not gathered, yet I shall be glorious;" for it is probable
   that opposite things are contrasted with each other in this passage. If
   ministers have been set apart, for the salvation of men, it is glorious
   to them when many are brought to salvation; and when the contrary
   happens, it tends to their shame and disgrace. Paul calls those whom he
   had gained to Christ "his glory and crown." (Philippians 4:1; 1
   Thessalonians 2:19.) On the other hand, when men perish, we receive
   from it nothing but shame and disgrace; for God appears to curse our
   labors, and not to deign to bestow on us the high honor of advancing
   his kingdom by our agency. But the Prophet declares that those who have
   served Christ shall nevertheless be glorious; for he speaks both of the
   head and of the members, as we have formerly remarked. Although
   therefore Israel refuse to be "gathered," yet the ministry of Christ
   shall retain its glory unimpaired; for it will be ascribed to the
   baseness and wickedness of men, that they have not been "gathered."

   In like manner, although the preachers of the Gospel be "the savor of
   death unto death" to the reprobate, yet Paul declares that they have a
   sweet and delightful odor before God, who determines that wicked men
   shall thus be rendered the more inexcusable. God is indeed doubly
   glorified if success corresponds to their wishes; but when the
   ministers of the word have left nothing undone, though they have good
   reason to lament that their labor is unprofitable, still they must not
   repent of having pleased God, whose approbation is here contrasted with
   the perverse judgments of the whole world. As if the Prophet had said,
   "Though men vehemently slander and load them with many reproaches, yet
   this ought to be calmly and patiently endured by them; because God
   judges differently, and bestows a crown of honor on their patience,
   which wicked men insolently slander.

   And my God shall be my strength. When he says that it is enough that
   "God is their strength," the meaning corresponds to what goes before,
   that they ought not to be terrified by the multitude or power of their
   enemies, seeing that they are persuaded that their "strength" lies in
   God.

   6. And he said, It is a small matter. Isaiah proceeds still farther,
   and shews that the labor of Christ, and of the whole Church, will be
   glorious not only before God, but likewise before men. Although at
   first it appears to be vain and useless, yet the Lord will cause some
   fruit to spring from it contrary to the expectations of men. Already it
   was enough that our labor should be approved by God; but when he adds
   that it will not be unprofitable even in the eyes of men, this ought
   still more abundantly to comfort, and more vehemently to excite us.
   Hence it follows, that we ought to have good hopes of success, but that
   we ought to leave it to the disposal of God himself, that the blessing
   which he promises may be made manifest at the proper time, to whatever
   extent, and in whatever manner he shall think proper.

   Therefore I have appointed thee to be a light of the Gentiles. He now
   adds, that this labor will be efficacious, not only among the people of
   Israel, but likewise among the Gentiles; and so it actually happened.
   Moreover, when the preaching of the Gospel produced hardly any good
   effect on the Jews, and when Christ was obstinately rejected by them,
   the Gentiles were substituted in their room. And thus Christ was

   "appointed to be a light of the Gentiles, and his salvation was
   manifested to the very ends of the earth." (Acts 13:47.)

   Now this consolation was highly necessary, both for prophets and for
   apostles, who experienced more and more the obstinacy of the Jews. They
   might doubt the truth of these promises, since they did not perceive
   them to yield any fruit; but when they understood that Christ was sent
   to the Gentiles also, it was not so difficult to animate their hearts
   to persevere. This was incredible, and even monstrous; but this is the
   manner in which the Lord commonly works, contrary to the expectation of
   all. Paul says that this was "a mystery bidden from ages," and that the
   angels themselves did not understand it until it was actually revealed
   in the Church of God. (Ephesians 3:5.) Although therefore the Jews
   alone appeared to have discernment, they are now placed on a level with
   the Gentiles, and with God "there is no distinction between the Jews
   and the Greeks." (Romans 10:12.)

   The Jews read this verse as a question, "Is it a small thing?" As if he
   had said, that it is enough, and that nothing more or greater ought to
   be desired. But they maliciously corrupt the natural meaning of the
   Prophet, and imagine that they will one day be lords of the Gentiles,
   and will have wide and extensive dominion. The true meaning of the
   Prophet is, "This work in itself indeed is magnificent and glorious, to
   raise up and restore the tribes of Israel, which had fallen very low;
   for he will add the Gentiles to the Jews, that they may be united as
   one people, and may be acknowledged to belong to Christ." Nor does this
   passage relate to the rejection of the ancient people, but to the
   increase of the Church, that the Gentiles may be associated with the
   Jews. It is true, indeed, that when the Jews revolted from the
   covenant, the Gentiles entered, as it were, into that place which they
   had left vacant; and thus their revolt was the reason why those who had
   formerly been aliens were admitted to be sons. But in this, as well as
   in other passages, Isaiah foretells that the Church will be greatly
   extended, when the Gentiles shall be received and united to the Jews in
   the unity of faith.

   A light of the Gentiles. Although by the word "light" is meant
   happiness, or joy, yet the Prophet, I have no doubt, directly refers to
   the doctrine of the Gospel, which enlightens souls, and draws them out
   of darkness, He shews that this "light," which Christ shall bring, will
   give salvation. In the same manner as Christ is called "the way, the
   truth, and the life," (John 14:6) because through the knowledge of the
   truth we obtain life, so in this passage he is called the "light" and
   salvation of the Gentiles, because he enlightens our minds by the
   doctrine of the Gospel, in order that he may lead us to salvation. Two
   things, therefore, ought to be remarked; first, that our eyes are
   opened by the doctrine of Christ; and secondly, that we who had
   perished are restored to life, or rather life is restored to us.

   7. Thus saith Jehovah. Isaiah pursues the same subject, that the
   people, when they were afflicted by that terrible calamity, might
   cherish the hope of a better condition; and, in order to confirm it the
   more, he calls God, who promised these things, the Redeemer and the
   Holy One of Israel It will be objected that these statements are
   contradictory, that is, that God is called the "redeemer" of that
   people which he permitted to be oppressed; for where is this
   redemption, and where is this sanctification, if the people could reply
   that they were miserable and ruined? I reply, the record of ancient
   history is here exhibited as the ground of confidence and hope; for
   when the Jews were on the point of despair, the Prophet comes forward
   and reminds them that God, who had formerly redeemed their fathers, is
   still as powerful as ever; and therefore, although for a time, in order
   to exercise the faith of the godly, he concealed their salvation,
   believers are commanded to stand firm, because in his hand their
   redemption is certain. Yet it was proper that they should form
   conceptions of that which lay far beyond human senses. This is a
   remarkable passage, from which we learn how firmly we ought to believe
   God when he speaks, though he does not immediately perform what he has
   promised, but permits us to languish, and to be afflicted for a long
   time.

   To the contemptible in the soul. vzh (bezo) is rendered by some
   commentators "contempt," and by others "contemptible," which I prefer.
   [3] It heightens the wretchedness of that nation, that "in the soul,"
   that is, in their own estimation, they are "contemptible." Many are
   despised by others, though they either deserve honor on account of
   their good qualities, or do not cease to swell with pride, and to tread
   down the arrogance of others by still greater arrogance. But of this
   people the Prophet says, that they despise themselves as much as others
   despise them. He therefore describes deep disgrace and a very unhappy
   condition, and, at the same time, prostration of mind, that they may
   know that God's time for rendering assistance will be fully come, when
   they shall be altogether humbled.

   To the abhorred nation. [4] I see no reason why the plural "Nations,"
   is here employed by some interpreters; seeing that the singular gvy,
   (goi,) "nation," is used by the Prophet, and it is certain that the
   discourse is specially directed to the posterity of Abraham.

   To the servant of rulers. This is added, as if he had said that they
   are oppressed by strong tyrants; for he gives the appellation mslym
   (moshelim) to those whose strength and power are so great that it is
   not easy to escape out of their hands.

   When he says that kings shall see, he speaks in lofty terms of the
   deliverance of his nation; but yet he permits them to be put to the
   test in the fumace, that he may make trial of their faith and patience;
   for otherwise there would be no trial of their faith, if he immediately
   performed what he promised, as we have already said. The word princes
   contains a repetition which is customary among the Hebrews. We would
   express it thus: "Kings and princes shall see; they shall rise up: and
   adore." By the word adore, he explains what he had said, "They shall
   rise up;" for we "rise up" for the purpose of shewing respect. The
   general meaning is, that the most exalted princes of the world shall be
   aroused to perceive that the restoration of the nation is an
   illustrious work of God, and worthy of reverence.

   For faithful is the Holy One of Israel. This is the reason of the great
   admiration and honor which the princes shall render to God. It is
   because they shall perceive the "faithfulness" and constancy of the
   Lord in his promises. Now, the Lord wishes to be acknowledged to be
   true, not by a bare and naked imagination, but by actual experience,
   that is, by preserving the people whom he has adopted. Let us therefore
   learn from it, that we ougtlt not to judge of the promises of God from
   our condition, but from his truth; so that, when we shall see nothing
   before us but destruction and death, we may remember this sentiment, by
   which the Lord calls to himself the contemptible and abominable.

   Hence also it ought to be observed, how splendid and astonishing a work
   of God is the deliverance of the Church, which compels kings, though
   proud, and deeming hardly anything so valuable as to be worthy of their
   notice, to behold, admire, and be amazed, and even in spite of
   themselves to reverence the Lord. This strange and extraordinary work,
   therefore, is highly commended to us. How great and how excellent it
   is, we may learn from ourselves; for to say nothing about ancient
   histories, in what manner have we been redeemed from the wretched
   tyranny of Antichrist? Truly we shall consider it to be "a dream," as
   the Psalmist says, (Psalm 126:1,) if we ponder it carefully for a short
   time; so strange and incredible is the work which God hath performed in
   us who have possessed the name of Christ.

   And who hath chosen thee. He now repeats what he had formerly glanced
   at, that this nation has been set apart to God. But in election we
   perceive the beginning of sanctification; for it was in consequence of
   God having deigned to elect them out of his mere good pleasure, that
   this nation became his peculiar inheritance. Isaiah therefore points
   out the secret will of God, from which sanctification proceeds; that
   Israel might not think that he had been selected on account of his own
   merits. As if he had said, "The Lord, who hath chosen thee, gives
   actual proof of his election, and shows it by the effect." In the same
   manner, therefore, as the truth of God ought to be acknowledged in our
   salvation, so salvation ought to be ascribed exclusively to his
   election, which is of free grace. Yet they who wish to become partakers
   of so great a benefit, must be a part of Israel, that is, of the
   Church, out of which there can be neither salvation nor truth.

   8. In a time of good pleasure. From this verse we again learn more
   clearly what we explained at the beginning of this chapter, that the
   Prophet, while he addresses the whole body of the Church, begins with
   Christ, who is the head. I have said that this ought to be carefully
   observed; for commentators have not attended to it, and yet there is no
   other way in which this chapter can be consistently expounded. This is
   clearly shewn by Paul, who applies this statement to the whole Church.
   (2 Corinthians 6:2.) And yet, what the Prophet adds, I will give thee
   to be a covenant, is applicable to no other than Christ.

   How shall we reconcile these statements? By considering that Christ is
   not so much his own as ours; for he neither came, nor died, nor rose
   again for himself. He was sent for the salvation of the Church, and
   seeks nothing as his own; for he has no want of anything. Accordingly,
   God makes promises to the whole body of the Church. Christ, who
   occupies the place of Mediator, receives these promises, and does not
   plead on behalf of himself as an individual, but of the whole Church,
   for whose salvation he was sent. On this account he does not address
   Christ separately, but so far as he is joined and continually united to
   his body. It is an inconceivable honor which our heavenly Father
   bestows upon us, when he listens to his Son on our account, and when he
   even directs the discourse to the Son, while the matter relates to our
   salvation. Hence we see how close is the connection between us and
   Christ. He stands in our room, and has nothing separate from us; and
   the Father listens to our cause.

   By the word "good pleasure," the Prophet lays a bridle on believers, so
   to speak, that they may not be too eager in their desires, but may wait
   patiently till the time appointed by God has arrived; and in this sense
   Paul gives to the coming of Christ the appellation of "the time of
   fullness." (Galatians 4:4.) He means, therefore, that they depend on
   God's disposal, and ought therefore to endure his wrath with meekness
   and composure. But although the intention of the Prophet is to exhort
   the godly to patience, that they may learn to place their feelings in
   subordination to God, yet at the same time he shows that our salvation
   proceeds from God's undeserved kindness. rtsvn (ratzon) which the
   Greeks translate eudokia, that is, the good-will of God is the
   foundation of our salvation; and salvation is the effect of that grace.
   We are saved, because we please God, not through our worthiness or
   merits, but by his free grace. Secondly, he shows, at the same time,
   that our salvation is certain, when we have a clear proof of the grace
   of the Lord. All doubt ought to be removed, when the Lord testified of
   his "good pleasure." This passage tends to the commendation of the
   word, beyond which we ought not to inquire about salvation; as Paul
   declares that the good pleasure of God is clearly manifested in the
   preaching of the Gospel, and that thus is fulfilled what is contained
   in this passage about "the day of salvation." (2 Corinthians 6:2.)

   Thirdly, the Prophet intended to remind us, that God gives us an
   undoubted pledge of his favor when he sends the Gospel to us; because
   it is evident that he has compassion upon us, when he gently invites us
   to himself, that we may not look around in every direction to seek this
   light, which ought to be expected only from God's gracious pleasure, or
   be tortured by doubt, from which God frees us. But let us remember that
   all this depends on God's free purpose. When therefore the question is
   put, why the Lord enlightened us at this time rather than at an earlier
   period, the reason which ought to be assigned is this: because thus it
   pleased God, thus it seemed good in his sight. Such is the conclusion
   to which Paul comes in the passage which we quoted,

   "Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of
   salvation." (2 Corinthians 6:2.)

   This passage may greatly aid us in ascertaining Isaiah's meaning, that
   we may learn to connect our salvation with God's good pleasure; a proof
   of which is given to us in the preaching of the Gospel. It ought also
   to be observed, that these predictions should not be limited to a
   certain age, since they belong to the whole Church in all ages. For if
   we begin with the deliverance from Babylon, we must go on to the
   redemption of Christ, of which it might be regarded as the commencement
   and the forerunner; and since there are still found among us many
   remnants of slavery, we must proceed forward to the last day, when
   everything shall be restored.

   I have appointed thee to be a covenant. This makes it still more
   evident, that all that had formerly been said was promised to Christ,
   not for the sake of his personal advantage, but on our behalf; for he
   has been appointed to be the mediator of the covenant, because the Jews
   by their sins had revolted from God, who had made an everlasting
   covenant with them. The renewal of that covenant, therefore, which had
   been broken or dissolved, is ascribed to Christ. Yet we must likewise
   keep in view the saying of Paul, that

   "Christ is our peace, to reconcile both them that are far off, and them
   that are near." (Ephesians 2:14, 17.)

   But, Isaiah had directly in view that lamentable ruin, the remedy for
   which could be expected from Christ alone. Besides, it is proper to
   apply this grace to ourselves, because, as compared to the Jews, before
   the Gospel was preached, we were enemies and aliens from God, and could
   not in any other way be reconciled to him. Christ was therefore "given
   to be a covenant of the people," because there was no other way to God
   but by him. At that time the Jews were a people; but in consequence of
   the partition-wall having been broken down, all of us, both Jews and
   Gentiles, have been united in one body.

   That thou mayest raise up the earth, which at that time was waste and
   desolate; for the return of the people was, as we have elsewhere seen,
   a kind of new creation. Such is also the design of the words of the
   Prophet, that we may know that there is nothing in the world but ruin
   and desolation. Christ is sent in order to restore what was fallen down
   and decayed. If we had not been in a fallen condition, there would have
   been no reason why Christ should be sent to us. We ought therefore to
   weigh well our condition; for we are aliens from God, destitute of
   life, and shut out from all hope of salvation. But by Christ we are
   fully restored and reconciled to our Heavenly Father. Isaiah likewise
   adds the benefits which we obtain through Christ, after having been
   reconciled to God.

   9. That thou mayest say to them that are bound. These words describe
   the change which took place at the coming of Christ. And yet the
   Prophet unquestionably intends to administer consolation to the Jews in
   their extremity, that they may not think it incredible that they shall
   be restored to a better condition, because they see that they are
   almost devoted to destruction. Still, he shows in general what is the
   nature of Christ's office, and explains what is meant by restoring
   desolate heritages; for, before the coming of Christ, we are "bound"
   under a miserable yoke, and plunged in darkness. By these metaphors is
   meant, that so long as we are without Christ, we are overwhelmed by a
   load of all evils; for by darkness he excludes everything that relates
   to the kingdom of Christ, faith, righteousness, truth, innocence, and
   everything of that nature. We are therefore in "darkness," till Christ
   say, Shew yourselves We are "bound," till he say, Come forth.

   The word l'mr, (lemor,) "that thou mayest say," is highly emphatic; for
   it shews that the preaching of the Gospel is the means by which we are
   delivered. If therefore we desire liberty, if we desire the light of
   the kingdom of God, let us listen to Christ when he speaks; otherwise
   we shall be oppressed by the unceasing tyranny of Satan. Where then is
   the liberty of our will? Whosoever claims for himself light, or reason,
   or understanding, can have no share in this deliverance of Christ; for
   liberty is not promised to any but those who acknowledge that they are
   captives, and light and salvation are not promised to any but those who
   acknowledge that they are plunged in darkness.

   On the ways they shall feed. When he promises that pastures shall be
   accessible to the children of God, and shall be on the tops of the
   mountains, by these metaphors he declares that all who shall be under
   the protection of Christ shall dwell safely; for he is a careful and
   attentive Shepherd, who supplies his flock with everything that is
   necessary, so that they are in want of nothing that is requisite for
   the highest happiness. (John 10:11.) This instruction was highly
   necessary at the time when the Jews were about to perform a joumey
   through dry and barren countries, in their return to a land which lay
   waste and desolate. The Prophet therefore says that God has abundant
   resources for supplying their wants, though earthly means should fail;
   and accordingly, in accordance with the ordinary custom of Scripture,
   he compares believers to sheep, in order that, being aware of their
   weakness, they may shrink themselves entirely to the care of the
   Shepherd.

   Yet it is probable that indirectly he warns believers not to desire
   excessive luxury, because they will never have so great a superfluity
   as not to be attended by many difficulties; and likewise not to become
   effeminate, because they will be beset by dangers; for we know that
   "the ways" are exposed to the attacks of enemies and robbers, and that
   the tops of mountains are for the most part barren. The Church is
   governed by Christ in such a manner as not to be free from the attacks
   and insults of men, and is fed in such a manner as frequently to
   inhabit barren and frightful regions. But though enemies are at hand,
   God protects us from their violence and oppression. If we are thirsty
   or hungry, he is abundantly able to supply everything that is necessary
   for food and maintenance; and amidst perils and difficulties of this
   nature we perceive his care and anxiety more dearly than if we were
   placed beyond the reach of all danger.

   10. They shall not hunger or thirst. He confirms what was said in the
   former verse, that there is food in the hand of God, so that the Jews
   shall not be in want of provisions for their joumey. Nor can it be
   doubted that he calls to their remembrance, that when their fathers
   were threatened with death in the wilderness through a scarcity of
   bread and of every kind of food, God gave them daily, for forty years,
   manna from heaven. (Exodus 16:35.) In like manner, when he immediately
   afterwards speaks of a shadow against the heat of the sun, he alludes
   to the history related by Moses about "the pillar of a cloud," by which
   God protected his people from being scorched by the buming rays of the
   sun. (Exodus 13:21.) We have said that it is customary with the
   prophets to mention the departure of the people out of Egypt, whenever
   they intend to demonstrate the kindness of God, either publicly towards
   all, or privately towards any individual.

   By the fountains of waters. He likewise alludes to those waters which
   flowed from the rock, (Exodus 17:6,) when the people had well-nigh
   perished from thirst; for those occurrences did not take place at the
   deliverance from Babylon, but, by mentioning former benefits, the
   Prophet magnifies the power of God in securing the safety of the
   Church.

   11. And I will place all my mountains. Here he directly and expressly
   treats of the return of the people; for in vain would he have promised
   so great happiness to the Church, if the people were not to be restored
   to their former liberty. The meaning is, that he will remove every
   obstacle and hinderance that might prevent the return of the people;
   and that he will render the "mountains" passable, which appeared to be
   impassable; and, in short, that he will level both the mountains and
   the valleys, that their return to Judea may be facilitated. Thus, when
   the Church is about to be completely restored, no obstructions, however
   great and formidable, can hinder God from being finally victorious.
   Besides, when he calls them "my mountains," he not only means that he
   has an absolute right to command them to afford a passage to his
   people, but declares that he will be the leader of the expedition, as
   if he would march along with the Jews, and accompany them in the
   joumey. In like manner, it is said in another passage, that he passed
   through Egypt and "rode on the high places of it" at the departure of
   his people. (Deuteronomy 32:13.) But here he describes the
   extraordinary love of God towards the Church, when he says that he
   travels along with her, and undertakes to supply all her wants, as if
   he were consulting his own interests when he assisted his people.

   12. Behold, those from afar shall come. The opinion entertained by
   some, that the four quarters of the earth are here denoted, does not
   rest on very solid grounds; yet I do not reject it, because it not only
   is probable, but agrees with many other passages. Undoubtedly, he first
   says that they shall come from distant parts of the world, and next
   adds certain subdivisions or parts in order to explain this general
   statement.

   And those from the land of Sinis. Instead of "Sinis," some read
   "Sinis;" and indeed the Hebrew copies differ. [5] Jerome thinks (and
   this is the commonly received opinion) that a southern region is so
   denominated from Mount Sinai, which lay toward the south. Others think
   that "Syene" is meant, because it lies under the tropic of Cancer. [6]
   But this diversity has nothing to do with the meaning of the Prophet,
   which of itself is clear and easy to be understood; for the Prophet
   unquestionably means those who had been scattered and dispersed in
   various places, whether they are collected from the north or from the
   sea. While Isaiah promises a return from Babylon, he at the same time
   extends this prediction to the time of Christ, as may be easily learned
   from what goes before; for we must keep in remembrance what we formerly
   said, that the second birth of the Church is here described. Not only
   does he promise that the Jews shall return to Jerusalem to build the
   temple, but likewise that they who had formerly been aliens from the
   Church, shall be collected from every corner of the world.

   13. Praise, O heavens; and rejoice, O earth. Though he exhorts and
   encourages all the godly to thanksgiving, yet he likewise aims at
   confirming the promise which might have been regarded as doubtful; for
   afflictions trouble our consciences, and cause them to waver in such a
   manner that it is not so easy to rest firmly on the promises of God. In
   short, men either remain in suspense, or tremble, or utterly fall and
   even faint. So long as they are oppressed by fear or anxiety, or grief,
   they scarcely accept of any consolation; and therefore they need to be
   confirmed in various ways. This is the reason why Isaiah describes the
   advantages of this deliverance in such lofty terms, in order that
   believers, though they beheld nothing around them but death and ruin,
   might sustain their heart by the hope of a better condition.
   Accordingly, he places the subject almost before their eye, that they
   may be fully convinced that they shall have the most abundant cause of
   rejoicing; though at that time they saw nothing but grief and sorrow.

   Let us therefore remember, that whenever the Lord promises anything, we
   ought to add thanksgiving, that we may more powerfully affect our
   hearts; and next, that we ought to raise our minds to the power of God,
   who exercises a wide and extensive dominion over all the creatures; for
   as soon as he lifts his hand, "heaven and earth" are moved. If the
   tokens of his wonderful power are to be seen everywhere, he intends
   that there shall be an eminent and remarkable example of it in the
   salvation of the Church.

   And he wilt have compassion on his poor. By this metaphor the Prophet
   shews that no obedience which is rendered to God by heaven and earth is
   more acceptable to him than to join together and lend their mutual aid
   to his Church. Moreover, that believers may not faint under the weight
   of distresses, before promising to them consolation from God, he
   exhorts them calmly to bear distresses; for by the word poor he means
   that the Church, in this world, is liable to many calamities. In order,
   therefore, that we may partake of the compassion of God, let us learn,
   under the cross and amidst many annoyances, to strive after it with
   sighs and tears.

   14. But Zion said, Jehovah hath forsaken me. In order to magnify his
   grace the more, God complains that the hearts of the Jews were so
   narrow and close, that the road was almost shut against him, if he had
   not overcome their wicked thoughts by his great goodness. Yet at the
   same time he endeavors to correct this fault, that the deliverance
   which is offered, and, as it were, set before them, may be received by
   them with open hearts, and that, as he is willing to assist them, so
   they, on the other hand, may be prepared to cherish favorable hopes.
   Now, to us also this doctrine belongs; because almost all of us, when
   God delays his assistance, are fearfully distressed and tormented; for
   we think that he has forsaken and rejected us. Thus despair quickly
   creeps in, which must be opposed, that we may not be deprived of the
   grace of God. And indeed amidst these doubts our unbelief is manifested
   and exposed, by our not relying on the promises of God, so as to bear
   patiently either the chastisements by which God urges us to repentance,
   or the trials of faith by which he trains us to patience, or any
   afflictions by which he humbles us. Justly therefore does God
   remonstrate with the Jews for rejecting by wicked distrust the
   salvation offered to them, and not permitting themselves to receive
   assistance. Nor does he limit this accusation to a small number, but
   includes nearly the whole Church, in order to shew that he will be kind
   and bountiful toward the Jews beyond the measure of their faith, and
   that he even strives with them, that by his salvation he may break
   through all the hinderances by which they opposed him. Let each of us
   therefore beware of indulging or flattering ourselves in this matter;
   for the Lord contends with the whole Church, for uttering speeches of
   this kind, which proceed from the fountain of distrust.

   15. Shall a woman forget her child! In order to correct that distrust,
   he adds to the remonstrance an exhortation full of the sweetest
   consolation. By an appropriate comparison, he shews how strong is his
   anxiety about his people, comparing himself to a mother, whose love
   toward her offspring is so strong and ardent, as to leave far behind it
   a father's love. Thus he did not satisfy himself with proposing the
   example of a father, (which on other occasions he very frequently
   employs,) but in order to express his very strong affection, he chose
   to liken himself to a mother, and calls them not merely "children," but
   the fruit of the womb, towards which there is usually a warmer
   affection. What amazing affection does a mother feel toward her
   offspring, which she cherishes in her bosom, suckles on her breast, and
   watches over with tender care, so that she passes sleepless nights,
   wears herself out by continued anxiety, and forgets herself! And this
   carefulness is manifested, not only among men, but even among savage
   beasts, which, though they are by nature cruel, yet in this respect are
   gentle.

   Even if they shall forget. Since it does sometimes happen that mothers
   degenerate into such monsters as to exceed in cruelty the wild beasts
   and forget "the fruit of their womb," the Lord next declares that, even
   though this should happen, still he will never forget his people. The
   affection which he bears toward us is far stronger and warmer than the
   love of all mothers. We ought also to bear in mind the saying of
   Christ,

   "If ye, being evil, know how to give good things to your children, how
   much more your heavenly Father?" (Matthew 7:11.)

   Men, though by nature depraved and addicted to self-love, are anxious
   about their children. What shall God do, who is goodness itself? Will
   it be possible for him to lay aside a father's love? Certainly not.
   Although therefore it should happen that mothers (which is a monstrous
   thing) should forsake their own offspring, yet God, whose love toward
   his people is constant and unremitting, will never forsake them. In a
   word, the Prophet here describes to us the inconceivable carefulness
   with which God unceasingly watches over our salvation, that we may be
   fully convinced that he will never forsake us, though we may be
   afflicted with great and numerous calamities.

   16. Behold, on the palms of my hands. By another cormparison he
   describes that inconceivable carefulness which the Lord exercises
   toward us. It is a common proverb, that "we have it on our fingers'
   ends," when we have anything fully and deeply fixed on our memory. And
   Moses when he recommends constant meditation on the Law, says, "Thou
   shalt bind them for a sign on thy hand;" that is, that they should
   always have the commandments of God placed before their eyes.
   (Deuteronomy 6:8.) He now makes use of the same comparison; as if he
   had said, "I cannot look at my hands without beholding thee in them; I
   carry thee engraved on my heart, so that no forgetfulness can efface
   thee; in a word, I cannot forget thee without forgetting myself." True,
   indeed, God has neither hands nor bodily shape; but Scripture
   accommodates itself to our weak capacity so as to express the strength
   of God's love toward us.

   Thy walls are continually before me. As the Church is frequently called
   the "habitation" or "city of God," (and hence also the metaphor of
   "building" (Psalm 102:16; Jeremiah 24:6; Matthew 16:18) is frequently
   employed in Scripture,) so he makes use of the figurative term "walls,"
   by which he denotes the peace and prosperity of the Church; as if he
   had said that he would take care that Jerusalem should thrive and
   flourish. Yet it ought to be observed that the term "walls" denotes
   proper order of policy and discipline, of which God declares that he
   will be the ceaseless and unwearied guardian. Let us remember that this
   prophecy was accomplished during that frightful desolation, when the
   "walls" of Jerusalem, which were a lively image of the Church, had been
   cast down, the temple overthrown, and government overtumed, and, in a
   word, when everything had been destroyed and nearly razed to the
   foundation; for immediately afterwards he promises that they shall all
   be restored.

   17. Thy builders hasten. He affirms what had been briefly stated in the
   former verse; for it might have been thought that there was no ground
   for what he had now asserted about the unceasing care which God takes
   of his Church and of her walls, which he permits to be razed to their
   foundations, and therefore he adds the explanation, that it will indeed
   be thrown down, but will afterwards be built anew. Builders. From this
   word we may learn what is the true method of restoring the Church,
   namely, if the Lord send "builders, [7] to rear it, and next if he
   drive far away the destroyers who demolish it. Though God could, by
   himself, and without the aid of men, rebuild the Church, yet he deigns
   to employ their hands; and although he alone, by the secret influence
   of his Spirit, completes this whole building, yet he blesses their
   labor, that it may not be useless. From him, therefore, we ought to ask
   and look for builders; for it belongs to him to render them
   "sufficient," as Paul also informs us, (2 Corinthians 3:5,) and to
   assign to each his department.

   We ought also to pray not only that he may "send forth laborers into
   his harvest," (Matthew 9:38,) but that he may recruit their strength
   and efficaciously direct them, so that they may not labor in vain; for,
   when the doctrine of the Gospel is preached with any advantage, it
   arises from his extraordinary goodness. But even this would not be
   enough, if he did not "drive destroyers far away;" for Satan, by
   innumerable arts, invades and assails the Church, and is in no want of
   servants and attendants, who direct their whole energy to destroy, or
   spoil, or hinder the Lord's building. We ought, therefore, constantly
   to entreat that he would ward off their attacks; and if the result be
   not entirely according to our expectations, let us blame our own sins
   and ingratitude; for the Lord was ready to bestow those blessings
   abundantly upon us.

   18. Lift up thine eyes round about. He arouses the Church to survey
   this magnificent work, as if it were actually before her eyes, and to
   behold the multitudes of men who shall flock into it from every
   quarter. Now, as this assemblage must have encouraged godly hearts
   during the dispersion, so they who were eye-witnesses must have been
   excited to gratitude. This shews clearly that this prediction was
   useful at both periods, not only while the event was still concealed by
   hope, but when it had been actually accomplished. Though he speaks to
   the whole Church at large, yet this discourse relates also to
   individuals, that all with one accord, and each person separately, may
   embrace these promises.

   When he bids them "lift up their eyes," he means that the reason why we
   are so much cast down is, that we do not examine the Lord's work with
   due attention, but have a vail placed, as it were, before our eyes, to
   hinder us from seeing what lies at our feet. In consequence of this, we
   do not cherish any confidence, but in adversity are almost overwhelmed
   by despair. And if these things are said to the whole Church, let every
   man consider in his own heart how far he is chargeable with this vice,
   and let him forthwith arouse and awaken himself to behold the works of
   the Lord, that he may rely with all his heart on his promises.

   All are gathered together. When he says that the elect of the Church
   are "gathered together," he means that, in order to their becoming one
   body under Christ, and, as it were, "one fold under one shepherd,"
   (John 10:16,) they must be, if we may so express it, "gathered" into
   one bosom. Christ reckons and treats as his followers none but those
   who are joined in one body by unity of faith. Whoever then shall choose
   to be regarded as belonging to the number of the children of God, let
   him be a son of the Church; for all who are separated from it will be
   aliens from God.

   Thou shalt be clothed as with an ornament. The Prophet shews what is
   the true ornament of the Church, namely, to have a great number of
   children, who are brought to her by faith and guided by the Spirit of
   God. This is true splendor; this is the glory of the Church, which must
   be filthy and ugly, ragged and dishevelled, if she have not these
   ornaments. Hence we see how well the Papists understand what is the
   true manner in which the Church ought to be adorned; for their whole
   attention is given to painted tables, to statues, to fine buildings, to
   gold, precious stones, and costly garments; that is, they give their
   whole attention to puppets, like children. But the true dignity of the
   Church is internal, so far as it consists of the gifts of the Holy
   Spirit, and of progressive faith and piety. Hence it follows, that she
   is richly provided with her ornaments, when the people, joined together
   by faith, are gathered into her bosom, to worship God in a proper
   manner.

   I live, saith Jehovah. [8] In order that this promise may be more
   certain, the Lord employs an oath, which is intended to warn us against
   distrust, and that, when we shall consider that her end is near, we may
   be certain that she shall be fully restored. And if this doctrine was
   ever necessary, it is especially necessary at the present time; for,
   wherever we tum our eyes, we meet with nothing but frightful
   desolation.

   What then must we do, but, relying on this oath of God, struggle
   against despair, and not be terrified by our being inconsiderable in
   number, which makes us despised by the world, and not doubt that there
   are many of the elect, now wandering and scattered, whom God will at
   length assemble into his Church? And therefore we ought to encourage
   our hearts, and to lift up our eyes by faith, that we may extend our
   hope not only to a single age, but to the most distant period.

   19. For thy desolate places, he confirms by other words what we have
   already seen, that the change which he promised is in the hand of God,
   that the Church, which was for a long time waste and desolate, may
   speedily have many inhabitants; so that the place may be too narrow to
   contain them all. He employs the metaphor of a ruinous city, whose
   walls and houses are rebuilt, to which the citizens return in such vast
   numbers that its circumference must be enlarged, because its former
   extent cannot contain them all. Thus he means not only the return of
   the people from Babylon, but the restoration which was effected through
   Christ; that is, when the Church was spread far and wide, not only
   throughout Judea, but throughout the whole world.

   And thy destroyers shall remove far away. He adds that a garrison will
   be provided, if any enemies shall molest her; yea, that she shall be
   secure against their attacks and molestation, because God will "drive
   them far away." Not that the Church shall ever enjoy perfect peace, and
   be secured against all the attacks of enemies; but yet God, bearing
   with the weakness of his people, defended them from wicked men, and
   restrained or warded off their attacks, so that at least the kingdom of
   Satan might not grow out of the ruins of the Church.

   20. Shall again say in thine ears. Isaiah continues the same subject,
   and, under a different metaphor, promises the restoration of the
   Church. He compares her to a widowed or rather a barren mother, in
   order to describe her wretched and distressful condition; for she was
   overwhelmed by so many distresses, that the remembrance of the nation
   appeared to have wholly perished. Mingled with the Babylonians, who
   held her captive, she had almost passed into another body. We need not
   wonder, therefore, if he compares her to a barren mother; for she
   brought forth no more children. Formerly the Jews had enjoyed high
   prosperity; but the kingdom was ruined, and all their strength was
   decayed, and, in short, their name was almost extinguished, when they
   were led into captivity. He therefore promises that the Church shall be
   purified from her filthiness, and that she who is now solitary shall
   regain that condition which she formerly held. And this is included in
   the word Again, that they may not doubt that it is in the power of God
   to restore what he formerly gave, though it was withdrawn for a time.

   The children of thy bereavement. [9] By "the children of bereavement"
   some suppose that orphan children are meant; but I cannot agree with
   this, for "bereavement" and "barrenness" refer rather to the person of
   the Church, and accordingly it is for the sake of amplification that he
   describes them to be those who, contrary to expectation, had been given
   to her who was bereaved and barren.

   Make room for me; that is, "withdraw for my benefit." Not that it is
   proper for the godly to shut out their brethren or drive them from
   their place; but the Prophet has borrowed from familiar language a mode
   of expression fitted to declare that no inconvenience shall hinder many
   from desiring to be admitted and to have room made for them. Now, this
   happened, when the Lord collected innumerable persons out of the whole
   world; for suddenly, and contrary to the expectation of men, the
   Church, which had formerly been empty, was filled; its boundaries were
   enlarged and extended far and wide.

   21. And thou shalt say in thy heart. By these words he declares that
   the restoration of the Church, of which he now speaks, will be
   wonderful; and therefore he represents her as wondering and amazed on
   account of having been restored in a strange and unexpected manner. And
   truly a description of this sort is not superfluous; for, as a new
   offspring grows up among men every day, by which the human race is
   propagated, so the children of God and of the Church are born, who,
   "not from flesh and blood," (John 1:13,) but by the secret power of
   God, are formed again to be new creatures. By nature we have no share
   in the kingdom of God; [10] and therefore, if any man contemplate this
   new and uncommon work, and in what manner the Church is increased and
   maintained, he will be constrained to wonder.

   Who hath begotten me these? He shews that this astonishment will not be
   pretended, like expressions of this kind which frequently proceed from
   flatterers, but that it will come from "the heart;" for there will be
   good ground for wondering, that the Lord has preserved the Church
   amidst so great dangers, and has multiplied it by a new and unexpected
   offspring. Who would have thought that, at the time when the Jews were
   held in the greatest contempt, and were overwhelmed by every kind of
   reproaches and distresses, there would be any of the Gentiles who of
   their own accord desired to be associated with them? It was also in the
   highest degree improbable that the dispositions of men should be so
   suddenly changed as to adopt a religion which they had detested.
   Besides, the partition-wall which had been erected between them
   hindered all foreigners and uncircumcised persons from entering.

   For I was bereaved (or barren) and solitary. She now explains what was
   the chief ground of that astonishment; namely, that formerly she
   brought forth no children, and was altogether destitute. Doctrine,
   which is the seed of spiritual life, by which the children of the
   Church are begotten, (1 Peter 1:23,) had ceased; even the worship
   enjoined by the Law had been broken off; and, in short, everything that
   usually contributes to upholding the order of government had been taken
   away. Now, the Church is called bereaved or barren, not because God
   hath forsaken her, but because his presence is not always visible. We
   ourselves saw an image of that barrenness, when the Lord, in order to
   punish the ingratitude of men, took away his doctrine, and allowed them
   to wander in darkness. The Church might truly be said to be "bereaved"
   and "barren," when none of her children were seen. Hence we ought to
   conclude how foolish the Papists are, who wish that Christ would always
   govern his Church so that it may never be "bereaved" or "barren;"
   seeing that the Lord, thougit he does not forsake the Church, yet very
   frequently, on account of the ingratitude of men, withdraws the tokens
   of his presence.

   Who then hath brought up those? It is no easy matter for those who are
   led into captivity, and who often change their place and habitation, to
   "bring up" children; and when the law and the doctrine of piety no
   longer resounded in the temple, spiritual nourishment had almost
   entirely failed. But the Lord, who has no need of human aid, begets his
   children in an extraordinary manner, and by the astonishing power of
   his Spirit, and "brings them up" wherever he thinks proper; and in the
   fulfillment of this prediction, the Lord supplied them with nurses
   contrary to the expectation of all, so that it is not without reason
   that the Church wonders how they were reared. When we read this
   prophecy we are reminded that we ought not to be distressed beyond
   measure, if at any time we see the Church resemble a "bereaved" woman,
   and that we ought not to doubt that he can suddenly, or in a moment,
   raise up and restore her, though we perceive no means by which she can
   be restored.

   22. Thus saith the Lord Jehovah. Isaiah confirms what he had said a
   little before, that the Lord would cause his Church, though for a very
   long time she had been "barren" and "bereaved," to have an exceedingly
   numerous offspring, and to be constrained to wonder at her own
   fruitfulness; and he does so, in order to remove all doubt which might
   have found its way into their hearts.

   I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles. He declares that he will give
   children to the Church, not only from among the Jews, as formerly, but
   likewise from among "the Gentiles." And yet he indirectly asserts that
   this generation shall be spiritual through the grace of adoption; for
   the metaphor of a banner was intended to lead believers to expect a new
   kind of generation, and different from that which is seen in the
   ordinary course of nature. The Lord must therefore set up a sign, and
   display his secret power through the Gospel, [11] that, out of nations
   who differed so widely from each other both in customs and in language,
   he might bring children to the Church, who should be united in the same
   faith, as brethren meet in their mother's bosom.

   Those who think that, by the figurative terms Hand and Banner, nothing
   more than the preaching of the Gospel is meant, and who set aside the
   power of the Spirit, are mistaken; for both ought to be united, and the
   efficacy of the Spirit ought not to be separated from the preaching of
   the Gospel, as Paul clearly shews. (2 Corinthians 3:6.) To this "hand"
   of God, therefore, to this "banner" we must betake ourselves, when we
   see that the Church is oppressed by the tyranny of wicked men. Though
   every effort be made to overthrow and destroy it, the "hand" of God is
   higher, and in vain do men oppose him. He will at length subdue and
   crush their obstinacy, that the Church may obtain some repose in spite
   of all their exertions.

   When he promises that the sons of the Church shall be brought in her
   arms and on her shoulders, the language is metaphorical, and means that
   God will find no difficulty, when he shall wish to gather the Church
   out of her dispersion; for all the Gentiles will assist him. Although
   this refers, in the first instance, to the Jews who had been banished
   and scattered, yet it undoubtedly ought to be extended to all the elect
   of God, who have become partakers of the same grace.

   23. And kings shall be thy nursing fathers. After having spoken of the
   obedience of the Gentiles, he shews that this relates not to the common
   people only, but to "kings" also. He compares "kings" to hired men who
   bring up the children of others, and "queens" to "nurses," who give out
   their labor for hire. Why so? Because "kings" and "queens" shall supply
   everything that is necessary for nourishing the offspring of the
   Church. Having formerly driven out Christ from their dominions, they
   shall henceforth acknowledge him to be the supreme King: and shall
   render to him all honor, obedience, and worship. This took place when
   the Lord revealed himself to the whole world by the Gospel; for mighty
   kings and princes not only submitted to the yoke of Christ, but
   likewise contributed their riches to raise up and maintain the Church
   of Christ, so as to be her guardians and defenders.

   Hence it ought to be observed that something remarkable is here
   demanded from princes, besides an ordinary profession of faith; for the
   Lord has bestowed on them authority and power to defend the Church and
   to promote the glory of God. This is indeed the duty of all; but kings,
   in proportion as their power is greater, ought to devote themselves to
   it more earnestly, and to labor in it more diligently. And this is the
   reason why David expressly addresses and exhorts them to "be wise, and
   serve the Lord, and kiss his Son." (Psalm 2:10-12.)

   This shews how mad are the dreams of those who assert that kings cannot
   be Christians without laying aside that office; for those things were
   accomplished under Christ, when kings, who had been converted to God by
   the preaching of the Gospel, obtained this highest pinnacle of rank,
   which surpasses dominion and principality of every sort, to be
   "nursing-fathers" and guardians of the Church. The Papists have no
   other idea of kings being "nursing-fathers" of the Church than that
   they have left to their priests and monks very large revenues, rich
   possessions and prebends, on which they might fatten, like hogs in a
   sty. But that "nursing" aims at an object quite different from filling
   up those insatiable gulls. Nothing is said here about enriching the
   houses of those who, under false pretences, hold themselves out to be
   ministers of the Church, (which was nothing else than to corrupt the
   Church of God and to destroy it by deadly poison,) but about removing
   superstitions and putting an end to all wicked idolatry, about
   advancing the kingdom of Christ and maintaining purity of doctrine,
   about purging scandals and cleansing from the filth that corrupts piety
   and impairs the lustre of the Divine majesty.

   Undoubtedly, while kings bestow careful attention on these things, they
   at the same time supply the pastors and ministers of the Word with all
   that is necessary for food and maintenance, provide for the poor and
   guard the Church against the disgrace of pauperism; erect schools, and
   appoint salaries for the teachers and board for the students; build
   poor-houses and hospitals, and make every other arrangement that
   belongs to the protection and defense of the Church. But those
   unnecessary and extravagant expenses for Anniversaries and Masses, for
   golden vessels and costly robes, which swell the pride and insolence of
   papists, serve only to uphold pomp and ambition, and corrupt the pure
   and simple "nursing" of the Church, and even choke and extinguish the
   seed of God, by which alone the Church lives. When we see that matters
   are now very different, and that "kings" are not the "nursing-fathers,"
   but the executioners of the Church; when, in consequence of taking away
   the doctrine of piety and banishing its true ministers, idle bellies,
   insatiable whirlpools, and messengers of Satan, are fattened, (for such
   are the persons to whom the princes cheerfully distribute their wealth,
   that is, the moisture and blood which they have sucked out of the
   people;) when even princes otherwise godly have less strength and
   firmness for defending the Word and upholding the Church; let us
   acknowledge that this is the reward due to our sins, and let us confess
   that we do not deserve to have good "nursing-fathers." But yet, after
   this frightfully ruinous condition, we ought to hope for a restoration
   of the Church, and such a conversion of kings that they shall shew
   themselves to be "nursing-fathers" and protectors of believers, and
   shall bravely defend the doctrine of the Word.

   And shall lick the dust of thy feet. This passage is also tortured by
   the Papists in order to uphold the tyranny of their idol, as if kings
   and princes had no other way of proving themselves to be sincere and
   lawful worshippers of God than by adoring that masked prince of the
   Church instead of God. Thus they consider the obedience of piety to
   consist in kissing the Pope's feet with deep reverence. What they ought
   to think of such barbarous and idolatrous worship, let them learn,
   first, from Peter, whose seat they boast of occupying, who would not
   permit such honor to be rendered to him by the centurion. (Acts 10:6.)
   Let them, next, learn from Paul, who tore his garments, and rejected
   such worship with the utmost abhorrence. (Acts 14:14.) What could be
   more absurd than to imagine that the Son of God appointed, instead of a
   minister of the Gospel, an object of abhorrence, some king dazzling in
   Persian luxury and splendor? But let us remember that the Church, so
   long as she is a pilgrim in this world, is subjected to the cross, that
   she may be humble and may be conformed to her Head; that if her foes
   make any cessation of their hostility, still her highest ornament and
   lustre is modesty. Hence it follows, that she has laid aside her own
   attire, when she is clothed with irreligious pride.

   Here the Prophet means nothing else than the adoration by which princes
   bow down before God, and the obedience which they render to his Word in
   the Church. What we have already said must be carefully observed, that,
   when we speak of rendering honor to the Church, she must never be
   separated from the Head; for this honor and worship belongs to Christ,
   and, when it is bestowed on the Church, it still continues to belong
   undivided to him alone. By the obedience of piety kings do not profess
   submission, so as to bear the yoke of men, but to yield to the doctrine
   of Christ. Whosoever therefore rejects the ministry of the Church, and
   refuses to bear the yoke which God wishes to lay with his own hand on
   all his people, can neither have any fellowship with Christ nor be a
   child of God.

   For they shall not be ashamed. I consider 'sr (asher) to be a
   conjunction signifying For; [12] and the clause to which it belongs is
   closely connected with what goes before, and has been improperly
   disjoined from it by some commentators. By this argument he proves that
   it is highly proper for princes to submit cheerfully to the government
   of God, and not hesitate to humble themselves before the Church;
   because God will not suffer those who hope in him to "be ashamed." As
   if he had said, "This is a pleasant and delightful submission."

   I am Jehovah. He connects his own truth with our salvation; as if he
   had said, that he does not wish men to acknowledge him to be true or to
   be God, unless he actually fulfill what he has promised. And hence we
   obtain inestimable advantage; for, as it is impossible that God should
   not continue to be the same, so the stability of our salvation, which
   the Prophet infers from God's own stability, must remain unshaken.

   24. Shall the prey be taken from the mighty? Having solved, in the
   former verse, an objection which might occur to the mind of believers,
   he now confirms that solution still more; for it might have been
   thought incredible that the Jews should be rescued out of the hands of
   so powerful an enemy, by whom they had been taken in fair battle and
   reduced to slavery, He therefore adds this question as uttered by the
   whole of the common people, among whom it probably flew universally
   from mouth to mouth; and he immediately replies, as we shall sec.

   Shall the captivity of the righteous (or, the righteous captivity) be
   delivered? And we ought, first, to observe this metaphor, that the
   Church is called "the prey of the mighty" and "the captivity of the
   righteous," that is, lawful captivity. He is said to be the "righteous"
   possessor who is the lawful possessor; just as the prey, when the war
   has been righteous, passes into the hands of a righteous possessor.
   [13] Such was the condition of the ancient people, after having been
   driven into captivity; for, along with their native country, they had
   lost their liberty, and were entirely in the power, and at the
   disposal, of the conqueror. And yet we ought carefully to observe this
   metaphor, that the Church is oppressed by the tyranny of princes, and
   exposed to the jaws of wolves, and nevertheless is supposed to be their
   "just" prey. This is, indeed, shamefully wicked; but thus were our
   fathers treated, and we are not more virtuous or more excellent than
   our fathers.

   25. The prey of the tyrant shall be delivered. However they may boast
   of having a right to govern, and glory in an empty title, the Lord
   declares that they are most wicked robbers, when he threatens that he
   will be an avenger and will snatch their prey from them. God does not
   overturn just dominion; and hence it follows that the dominion which
   they usurped over the people of God is mere robbery and wicked tyranny.
   Neither their arms, nor their forces, nor their warlike preparations,
   shall hinder the Lord from taking out of their hands an unjust
   possession.

   Nor does this promise relate only to outward enemies and tyrants, but
   also to the tyranny of Satan, from which we are rescued by the
   wonderful power of God. True indeed, he possesses vast power, but God
   is far more powerful, takes away his arms and demolishes his
   fortresses, that he may set us at liberty. (Matthew 12:29; Luke 11:22.)
   If therefore we have had experience of the power of God in this
   respect, so much the stronger reason have we for trusting that he will
   undoubtedly be our deliverer, whenever our enemies shall lay us under
   their feet and oppress us with cruel bondage.

   I will contend with him that contendeth with thee. When he threatens
   that He will "contend" on our account, first, he reminds us to consider
   his power, that we may not regard the matter by human reason or by the
   power of men. We ought not therefore to look at what we can do or what
   resources we possess, but it is our duty to commit the whole matter to
   the disposal of God alone, who is graciously pleased to protect and
   defend us. Secondly, he affirms that he will be a powerful advocate, to
   reply to the slanders of enemies. We said, a little before, that wicked
   men not only are hurried along by violence and cruelty against the
   Church, but load her with false and calumnious charges, as if they had
   a right to treat her with cruelty; and therefore this consolation is
   highly necessary, that God will be the defender of our innocence, to
   scatter by his defense all the idle pretences which strengthen the
   audacity and fierceness of wicked men. Accordingly he again repeats, --

   I will save thy children. We derive great consolation from knowing that
   we are united with him by so close a bond that he sets himself in
   opposition to all who contend with us, "blesses those who bless us,
   and, on the other hand, curses those who curse us," and, in short,
   declares that he is the enemy of our enemies. (Genesis 12:3.) Hence
   also it ought to be observed, that, when we are restored to liberty and
   life, when we are not oppressed by enemies, and, in short, when we are
   saved, it is not a work of man; that no one may ascribe to his own
   industry what God commands us to expect as an extraordinary blessing
   from himself alone.

   26. And I will feed thy oppressors with their own flesh. First, he
   declares what is the nature of that end which awaits the enemies of the
   Church, and threatens that they shall not only be inflamed with mutual
   hatred, but shall likewise slay each other by mutual slaughter. And
   indeed it is God who drives them headlong, and rouses them to rage, so
   that they tum against themselves that strength which they formerly
   exerted against the Church, fight with each other, as the Midianites
   did, and bring destruction on themselves. (Judges 7:22.) The meaning
   amounts to this, that there will be no need of outward aid or of any
   preparations, when God shall determine to overtum and destroy the
   reprobate; because, having been struck by him with giddiness, they
   shall wear themselves out in mutual conflict by the insatiable rage
   with which they shall attack each other.

   And all flesh shall know. He repeats that statement which we have
   formerly seen, namely, that he will be acknowledged by all to be the
   God of Israel and the true and only God, when he shall have delivered
   his people from destruction; for he intended it to be a demonstration
   of his Divinity, that he openly manifested himself to be the Redeemer
   and Savior of his people.

   The Mighty One of Jacob. Some read the word Jacob in the vocative case:
   "O mighty Jacob;" but I read it in the genitive case, "of Jacob." The
   Lord testifies that he is the Savior, Redeemer, and Mighty One of
   Israel, that they may rely with their whole heart on his defense and
   protection.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Commentary on Isaiah, [2]Vol. 3, p. 244.

   [2] The idiomatic use of "trousser," bears a strong resemblance to the
   idioms of the Italian and English languages. Thus, "trousser baggage,"
   -- "far fagotto," -- "to pack up one's baggage." Again, "trousser un
   homme," -- "spacciare per le poste all' altro mondo," -- "to despatch
   him post haste into the other world." -- Ed.

   [3] vzh (bezo) has been variously explained as an infinitive, a passive
   participle, and an adjective in the construct state, which last is
   adopted by Gessenius and most later writers." -- Alexander.

   [4] "Whom the nation abhorreth, who abhorreth the nation, who excites
   the abhorrence of the nation, the nation which excites abhorrence,' --
   all these are passable translations of the Hebrew words, among which
   interpreters choose according to their different views respecting the
   whole passage. In any case it is descriptive of deep debasement and
   general contempt, to be exchanged hereafter for an opposite condition."
   -- Alexander.

   [5] The resemblance of s Samech to m final Mem partly accounts for the
   difference of the readings. -- Ed

   [6] "Various interpretations have been given of this name, both in
   ancient and modern times. The Targum and Vulgate understand it of some
   land in the far south; the Septuagint supposes it to be Persia; Jerome,
   Jarchi, and Grotius, misled by similarity of sound, refer it to the
   wilderness of Sin and Mount Sinai. Others refer it to Egypt, as if that
   country were so named, either from Sin, or Syene. Others, with higher
   probability, understand Sinim' to be China." -- Eadie's Cyclopcedia.
   "From the north -- Tartary; west, Europe; Sinim, the Chinese, in whose
   country a multitude of Jews he hid, if we may believe the curious
   account of them, published by the Jesuit Brotier, in his supplement to
   Tacit. Hist. 1. v." -- Stock.

   [7] "Maistres charpentiers et massons." "Master carpenters and masons."

   [8] chy-'ny (chai ani) I the Living One,' is here, as in many other
   passages, the form of an oath, employed both by God and by men; and the
   meaning of it is: as truly as I live, so certainly will I perform this
   or that, and this or that event shall happen.' The particle ky (ki)
   here denotes the object of the oath, and is equivalent to hoti in Greek
   after the verbs eipon lego etc.." -- Rosenmuller.

   [9] vnym shyyth skvlh mhm (banim shedayithah shekula methem,) the
   children of whom thou wast bereft.'" -- Jarchi.
   "A city deprived of its inhabitants is compared to a mother bereft of
   her children." -- Rosenmuller.

   [10] "Nous n'avons aucune part au royaume de Dieu."

   [11] "Par la predication de l'Evangile." "By the preaching of the
   Gospel."

   [12] 'sr l' yvsv qry (asher to yeboshu kovai), of whom they that wait
   for me shall not be ashamed,' that is, whom Jehovah, they that wait
   for, they that trust in, shall not be ashamed.' When the Hebrews
   introduce any person speaking, the provisional affix, which comes after
   'sr (asher) and relates to that person, is commonly expressed by them
   in none but the first, that is, in the person of the speaker. For
   example, I am Joseph, 'sr mkrtm 'vty mtsrymh (asher mekartem othi
   mitzraimah,) whom ye sold into Egypt.'" -- Rosenmuller.

   [13] "Quand la guerre est juste, celuy qui prend la prove est juste
   possesseur d'icelle." "When the war is righteous, he who takes the prey
   is the righteous possessor of it."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 50.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 50:1-11

   1. Thus saith the LORD, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement,
   whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have
   sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for
   your transgressions is your mother put away.

   1. Sic dicit Iehova, Ubi libellus iste repudii matris vestrae, quam
   repudiavi? ant quis creditor cui vendidi vos? Ecce propter iniquitates
   vestras estis venditi, et propter transgressiones vestras repudiata est
   mater vestra.

   2. Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there
   none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or
   have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea; I
   make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because there is no
   water, and dieth for thirst.

   2. Cur veni, et nemo (occurrit?) vocavi, et nemo respondit? An
   abbreviando abbreviavit se manus mea, ut non redimat? Annon in me
   virtus ad liberandum? Ecce increpatione mea exsicco mare; pono flumina
   in desertum, ut putrescant pisces eorum prae defectu aquae, et
   moriantur siti.

   3. I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their
   covering.

   3. Induo coelos caligine, et quasi saccure pono operimentum eorum.

   4. The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should
   know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth
   morning by morning; he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.

   4. Dominus Iehova aperuit mihi linguam eruditorum, ut sciam lasso
   verbum in tempore. Excitabit mane, mane excitabit mihi aurem, ut
   audiam, sicut docti.

   5. The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither
   tumed away back.

   5. Dominus Iehova aperuit mihi aurem, et ego non fui rebellis;
   retrorsum non reversus sum.

   6. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked
   off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

   6. Corpus meum exposui percutientibus, et genas meas vellentibus;
   faciem meam non abscondi ab ignominia et sputo.

   7. For the Lord GOD will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded:
   therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not
   be ashamed.

   7. Nam Dominus Iehova auxiliabitur mihi; propterea non sum pudefactus;
   ideo posui faciem meam quasi silicem, et scio quod non confundar.

   8. He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us
   stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.

   8. Prope est qui me justificat, quis contendet mecum? Stemus simul:
   quis adversarius causae meae? Accedat ad me.

   9. Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; who is he that shall condemn me?
   lo, they all shalt wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up.

   9. Ecce, Dominns Iehova auxiliabitur mihi, quis est qui me condemnet?
   Ecce omnes quasi vestimeritran veterascent; tinea comedet eos.

   10. Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that obeyeth the voice of
   his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust
   in the name of the LORD, and stay upon his God.

   10. Quis in vobis est timens Iehovam? Audiat vocem servi ejus. Qui
   ambulavit in tenebris, et qui caruit luce, confidat in nomine Iehovae,
   et innitatur Deo suo.

   11. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about
   with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye
   have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in
   sorrow.

   11. Ecce vos omnes succenditis ignem, et circundati estis scintillis.
   Ite in lumine ignis vestri, et in scintillis quas succendistis. E manu
   mea fuit hoc vobis; in dolore jacebitis.


   1. Where is that bill of divorcement? There are various interpretations
   of this passage, but very few of the commentators have understood the
   Prophet's meaning. In order to have a general understanding of it, we
   must observe that union by which the Lord everywhere testifies that his
   people are bound to him; that is, that he occupies the place of a
   husband, and that we occupy the place of a wife. It is a spiritual
   marriage, which has been consecrated by his eternal doctrine and sealed
   by the blood of Christ. In the same manner, therefore, as he takes us
   under his protection as a early beloved wife, on condition that we
   preserve our fidelity to him by chastity; so when we have been false to
   him, he rejects us; and then he is said to issue a lawful divorce
   against us, as when a husband banished from his house an adulterous
   wife.

   Thus, when the Jews were oppressed by calamities so many and so great,
   that it was easy to conclude that God had rejected and divorced them,
   the cause of the divorce came to be the subject of inquiry. Now, as men
   are usually eloquent in apologizing for themselves, and endeavor to
   throw back the blame on God, the Jews also complained at that time
   about their condition, as if the Lord had done wrong in divorcing them;
   because they were far from thinking that the promises had been made
   void, and the covenant annulled, by their crimes. They even laid the
   blame on their ancestors, as if they were punished for the sins of
   others. Hence those taunts and complaints which Ezekiel relates.

   "Our fathers ate a sour grape, and our teeth are set on edge." (Ezekiel
   18:2.)

   Speeches of this kind being universally current among them, the Lord
   demands that they shall produce the "bill of divorcement," by means of
   which they may prove that they are free from blame and have been
   rejected without cause.

   Now, a "bill of divorcement" was granted to wives who were unjustly
   divorced; for by it the husband was constrained to testify that his
   wife had lived chastely and honorably, so that it was evident that
   there was no other ground for the divorce than that she did not please
   the husband. Thus the woman was at liberty to go away, and the blame
   rested solely on the husband, to whose sullenness and bad temper was
   ascribed the cause of the divorce. (Deuteronomy 24:1.) This law of
   divorcement, as Ezekiel shews, (Matthew 19:8,) was given by Moses on
   account of the hard-heartedness of that nation. By a highly appropriate
   metaphor, therefore, the Lord shews that he is not the author of the
   divorce, but that the people went away by their own fault, and followed
   their lusts, so that they had utterly broken the bond of marriage. This
   is the reason why he asks where is "that bill" of which they boasted;
   for there is emphasis in the demonstrative pronoun, zh (zeh), that, by
   which he intended to expose their idle excuses; as if he had said, that
   they throw off the accusation, and lay blame on God, as if they had
   been provided with a defense, whereas they had violated the bond of
   marriage, and could produce nothing to make the divorce lawful.

   Or who is the creditor to whom I sold you? By another metaphor he
   demonstrates the same thing. When a man was overwhelmed by debt, so
   that he could not satisfy his creditors, he was compelled to give his
   children in payment. The Lord therefore asks, "Has he been constrained
   to do this? Has he sold them, or given them in payment to another
   creditor? Is he like spendthrifts or bad managers, who allow themselves
   to be overwhelmed by debt?" As if he had said, "You cannot bring this
   reproach against me; and therefore it is evident that, on account of
   your transgressions, you have been sold and reduced to slavery."

   Lo, for your iniquities ye have been sold. Thus the Lord defends his
   majesty from all slanders, and refutes them by this second clause, in
   which he declares that it is by their own fault that the Jews have been
   divorced and "sold." The same mode of expression is employed by Paul,
   when he says that we are "sold under sin," (Romans 7:14,) but in a
   different sense; in the same manner as the Hebrew writers are wont to
   speak of abandoned men, whose wickedness is desperate. But here the
   Prophet intended merely to charge the Jews with guilt, because, by
   their own transgressions, they had brought upon themselves all the
   evils that they endured.

   If it be asked, "Did the Lord divorce his heritage? Did he make void
   the covenant?" Certainly not; but the Lord is said to "divorce," as he
   is elsewhere said to profane, his heritage, (Psalm 89:39; Ezekiel
   24:21,) because no other conclusion can be drawn from present
   appearances; for, when he did not bestow upon them his wonted favor, it
   was a kind of divorce or rejection. In a word, we ought to attend to
   these two contrasts, that the wife is divorced, either by the husband's
   fault, or because she is unchaste and adulterous; and likewise that
   children are sold, either for their father's poverty or by their own
   fault. And thus the course of argument in this passage will be
   manifest.

   2. Why did I come? This might be a reason assigned, that the people
   have not only brought upon themselves all immense mass of evils by
   provoking God's anger, but have likewise, by their obstinacy, cut off
   the hope of obtaining pardon and salvation. But I think that God
   proceeds still further. After having explained that he had good reason
   for divorcing the people, because they had of their own accord given
   themselves up to bondage, when they might have been free, he adds that
   still it is not he who prevents them from being immediately set at
   liberty. As he shewed, in the former verse, that the whole blame rests
   with the Jews, so now he declares that it arises from their own fault
   that they grow old and rot in their distresses; for the Lord was ready
   to assist them, if they had not rejected his grace and kindness. In a
   word, he shows that both the beginning and the progress of the evil
   arise from the fault of the people, in order that he may free God from
   all blame, and may shew that the Jews act wickedly in accusing him as
   the author of evil, or in complaining that he will not assist them.

   First, then, the Lord says that he "came;" and why, but that he might
   stretch out his hand to the Jews? Whence it follows that they are
   justly deprived; for they would not receive his grace. Now, the Lord is
   said to "come," when he gives any token of his presence. He approaches
   by the preaching of the Word, and he approaches also by various
   benefits which he bestows on us, and by the tokens which he employs for
   manifesting his fatherly kindness toward us.

   "Was there ever any people," as Moses says, "that saw so many signs,
   and heard the voice of God speaking, like this people?" (Deuteronomy
   4:33.)

   Constant invitation having been of no advantage to them, when he held
   out the hope of pardon and exhorted them to repentance, it is with good
   reason that he speaks of it as a monstrous thing, and asks why there
   was no man to meet him. They are therefore held to be convicted of
   ingratitude, because, while they ought to have sought God, they did not
   even choose to meet him when he came; for it is an instance of extreme
   ingratitude to refuse to accept the grace of God which is freely
   offered.

   Why did I call, and no one answered? In the word call there is a
   repetition of the same statement in different words. When God "calls,"
   we ought to be ready and submissive; for this is the "answer" which, he
   complains, was refused to him; that is, we ought to yield implicitly to
   his word. But this expression applies strictly to the matter now in
   hand; because God, when he offered a termination to their distresses,
   was obstinately despised, as if he had spoken to the deaf and dumb.
   Hence he infers that on themselves lies the blame of not having been
   sooner delivered; and he supports this by former proofs, because he had
   formerly shewn to the fathers that he possessed abundance of power to
   assist them. Again, that they may not cavil and excuse themselves by
   saying that they had not obtained salvation, though they heartily
   desired it, he maintains, on the other hand, that the cause of the
   change ought to be sought somewhere else than in him, (for his power
   was not at all diminished,) and therefore that he would not have
   delayed to stretch out his hand to them in distress, if they had not
   wickedly refused his aid.

   By shortening hath my hand been shortened? By this interrogation he
   expresses greater boldness, as if he were affirming what could not be
   called in question; for who would venture to plead against God that his
   power was diminished? He therefore relates how powerfully he rescued
   his people out of Egypt, that they may not now imagine that he is less
   powerful, but may acknowledge that their sins were the hinderance. [14]
   He says that by his reproof he "dried up the sea," as if he had struck
   terror by a threatening word; for by his authority, and at his command,
   the seas were divided, so that a passage was opened up, (Exodus 14:21,)
   and Jordan was driven back. (Joshua 3:16.) The consequence was, that
   "the fishes," being deprived of water, died and putrified.

   3. I clothe the heavens with blackness. He mentions also that thick
   darkness which was spread over all Egypt during the space of three
   days. (Exodus 10:22.) At that time the heaven was clothed as with a
   mouming dress; for, as fine weather has a gladdening influence, so
   blackness and darkness produce melancholy; and therefore he says, that
   the heavens were covered as with sackcloth or with a mouming dress, as
   if they had been tokens and expressions of mouming, [15] If any one
   prefer to view them as general statements, let him enjoy his opinion;
   but I think it probable that he glances at the history of the
   deliverance from Egypt, [16] front which it might easily be inferred
   that God, who had so miraculously assisted the fathers, was prevented
   by their ingratitude from granting relief to the miseries which now
   oppressed them.

   4. The Lord Jehovah. After having twice convicted them of guilt, he
   adds a consolation in his usual manner; for when the Lord covers us
   with shame, he intends immediately to free us from shame. Although,
   therefore, he shewed that the people had been rejected for the best
   possible reasons, and had perished by their own fault, because they
   proved themselves to be even unworthy of deliverance, yet he promises
   assistance to them. Again, because in a matter so difficult to be
   believed there needed more than ordinary proof, he begins by saying
   that God has sent and instructed him to execute his commands. This
   passage is commonly explained so as to relate to Christ, as if it had
   not been applicable to the Prophet, because he afterwards says, that he
   had been beaten with rods, which we nowhere read was done to Isaiah.
   But there is no great force in this argument; for David complains that
   his garments were divided, (Psalm 22:18,) which applies literally to
   Christ, (Matthew 27:35; John 19:24,) and yet it does not follow that
   this did not happen to David himself. For my own part, I have no doubt,
   that Isaiah comes forward as one who represents all the servants of
   God, not only those who were from the beginning, but those who should
   come afterwards.

   Hath given me the tongue of the learned. He says that the Lord hath
   given him a "tongue," that the promises by which he cheers the people
   may have greater weight. Our faith wavers, if we suspect that a man
   speaks from himself; and the condition of that people was so wretched
   that no human arguments could induce them to entertain the hope of
   deliverance. It amounts to this, that the message of approaching
   salvation is brought to them from heaven; and if any person do not
   receive it, he must prove himself to be rebellious and disobedient.
   Although these words are literally intended by the Prophet to secure
   the belief of his statements, yet we may infer from them generally,
   that no man is fit to teach who has not first been qualified by God.
   This reminds all godly teachers to ask from the Spirit of God what
   otherwise they could not at all possess. They must indeed study
   diligently, so as not to ascend the pulpit till they have been fully
   prepared; but they must hold by this principle, that all things
   necessary for discharging their office are gifts of the Holy Spirit.
   And, indeed, if they were not organs of the Holy Spirit, it would be
   extreme rashness to come forth publicly in the name of God.

   That I may know a word in season to the weary. Some verb must be
   supplied here, such as, "to administer" or "to utter." The word "know"
   includes wisdom and skill, which a pastor ought to possess, that the
   word of God may be faithfully and profitably administered by him; as if
   he had said that he has been well instructed in the school of God, and
   thus knows well what is suitable to those who are wretched and who
   groan under a burden. [17] The term "weary" is applied to those who are
   overwhelmed by many afflictions; as we have formerly seen, "who giveth
   strength to the weary." (Isaiah 40:29.) Thus also Christ speaks, "Come
   to me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden." (Matthew 11:28.) He
   therefore means that God has been his teacher and instructor, that he
   may be able to soothe wretched men by appropriate consolation, that by
   means of it their dejected hearts may be encouraged by feeling the
   mercy of God.

   Hence we infer that the most important duty of the ministers of the
   word is, to comfort wretched men, who are oppressed by afflictions, or
   who bend under their weight, and, in short, to point out what is true
   rest and serenity of mind, as we have formerly seen. (Isaiah 33:20.) We
   are likewise taught what each of us ought chiefly to seek in the
   Scriptures, namely, that we may be fumished with doctrine appropriate
   and suitable for relieving our distresses, He who, by seasonable
   consolation, in afflictive or even desperate affairs, can cheer and
   support his heart, ought to know that he has made good proficiency in
   the Gospel. I acknowledge that doctrine has indeed various uses; for
   not only is it useful for comforting the afflicted and feeble, but it
   likewise contains severe reproofs and threatenings against the
   obstinate. (2 Timothy 3:16.) But Isaiah shews that the chief duty
   incumbent on him is, to bring some consolation to the Jews who, in the
   present distress, are ready to faint.

   He will waken in the morning. The Prophet here testifies that the Lord
   is so careful about wretched and oppressed persons that he aids them
   "in the morning," that is, seasonably. I do acknowledge that we are
   often destitute of consolation; but, although God often permits us to
   languish, yet he knows every moment that is suitable for seasonably
   meeting the necessity by his aid. Besides, if his assistance be
   somewhat late, this happens through our own fault; for not only by our
   indolence, but likewise by rebellion, we withdraw ourselves from his
   grace. However that may be, he always watches carefully and runs to
   give aid; and even when we fly and resist, he calls us to him, that we
   may be refreshed by tasting his grace and kindness.

   He twice repeats the phrase, "in the morning," by which he expresses
   continuance and earnestness, that we may not think that he is liable to
   sudden impulses like men, to cast off or quickly forget those whom he
   has once undertaken to guard, whom he continues, on the contrary, to
   make the objects of his grace till the end, and never leaves destitute
   of consolation.

   That I may hear as the learned. He means that his ear has not only been
   pulled or twitched, as for sluggish and indolent persons, but has been
   formed and trained. Yet by his example he shews that God efficaciously
   teaches all whose ministry he intends to employ for the salvation of
   his Church; for it would have been a small matter to be instructed
   after the manner of men, if they had not within them the Spirit of God
   as their instructor. This makes still more evident the truth of what we
   have formerly said, that none are good teachers but those who have been
   good scholars. He calls them "learned'and "well-instructed;" for they
   who do not deign to learn, because they think that they are wise
   enough, are doubly fools; since they alone, in the judgment of God, are
   reckoned to be "well-instructed" and "learned," who permit themselves
   to be taught before discharging the office of teachers, that they may
   have clear knowledge of those things which they communicate to others,
   and may publicly bring forward nothing but what they can testify to
   have proceeded from God; and, in a word, they alone are "learned," [18]
   who, by continually learning, do not refuse to make constant progress.
   Some read the word in the accusative, meaning, "that I may hear as
   (hearing) the learned;" but that is harsh and at variance with the true
   meaning.

   5. The Lord Jehovah hath opened mine ear. He again repeats what he had
   formerly said, and here includes everything that belongs to the office
   of a teacher; for the "opening of the ear" must be understood to refer
   not only to doctrine, but to the whole calling; that is, when he takes
   one to be his servant, and intbrms of his duty him whom he has
   determined to send, when he gives commands, and enjoins him to execute
   what he commands. But the Lord "opens the ear," not only when he
   declares what is his will, but when he powerfully affects a man's heart
   and moves him to render obedience, as it is said,

   "Thou hast bored mine ear." (Psalm 40:6.)

   And Christ says,

   "Whosoever hath heard and learned from the Father cometh to me."
   (John 6:45.)

   Such is also the import of the second clause, And I was not rebellious,
   the meaning of which may be thus summed up: "He undertakes nothing at
   random, but, being fully convinced of God's calling, he discharges the
   office of a teacher, though it is laborious and difficult, because he
   is ready to obey."

   6. I exposed my body to the smiters. With the reproaches, jeers, and
   insolence of wicked men, he contrasts the unshaken courage which he
   possesses; as if he had said that, "whatever resistancemay be attempted
   by the despisers of God, yet he will baffle all their insults, so that
   he will never repent of the labors which he has undertaken." Yet this
   passage plainly shows that the ministers of the word cannot perform
   their office faithfully without being exposed to a contest with the
   world, and even without being fiercely assailed on all sides; for as
   soon as Isaiah says that he has obeyed the command of God, he likewise
   adds that "He has exposed his body to the smiters." The faithful
   servants of God, when they administer the doctrine of the word, cannot
   escape from this condition, but must endure fights, reproaches, hatred,
   slanders, and various attacks from adversaries, who loathe that liberty
   of advising and reproving which it is necessary for them to use. Let
   them, therefore, arm themselves with steadfastness and faith; for a
   dreadful battle is prepared for them. And not only does he describe the
   persecutions of wicked men, but the reproach of the world; because
   wicked men desire to be thought to have good cause for opposing the
   ministers of the word and persecuting their doctrine, and wish that
   those ministers should be regarded as criminals and malefactors, and
   held up to universal hatred and abhorrence. For these reasons they lead
   them with various slanders, and do not refrain from any kind of
   reproach, as we know well enough by experience in the present day, when
   our adversaries call us heretics, deceivers, seditious persons, and
   assail us with other slanders, which were also directed against Christ
   and the Apostles. (Matthew 27:63; John 7:12; Acts 16:20.)

   My face I did not hide from shame and spitting. He not only says that
   open and outward foes spat and inflicted blows on him, but glances at
   the slanders which he is compelled to bear from foes who are within and
   belong to the household; for out of the very bosom of the Church there
   always spring up wicked men and despisers of God, who insolently attack
   the prophets. They who wish to serve God must be prepared to endure all
   these things calmly, that they may walk through evil report and through
   good report, (2 Corinthians 6:8,) and may despise not only banishment,
   stripes, imprisonment, and death, but likewise reproaches and disgrace,
   though they may sometimes appear harder to endure than death itself.
   While this doctrine belongs to all believers, it belongs especially to
   the teachers of the word, who ought to go before others, and to be, as
   it were, standard-bearers.

   7. For the Lord Jehovah will help me. The Prophet declares whence comes
   so great courage, which he and the other servants of God need to
   possess, in order to withstand courageously the attacks of every one.
   It comes from God's assistance, by relying on whom he declares that he
   is fortified against all the attacks of the world. After having, with
   lofty fortitude, looked down contemptuously on all that was opposed to
   him, he exhorts others also to maintain the same firmness, and gives
   what may be called a picture of the condition of all the ministers of
   the word; that, by tuming aside from the world, they may tum wholly to
   God and have their eyes entirely fixed upon him. There never will be a
   contest so arduous that they shall not gain the victory by trusting to
   such a leader.

   Therefore I have set my face as a flint. By the metaphor of "a flint"
   he shews that, whatever may happen, he will not be afraid; for terror
   or alarm, like other passions, makes itself visible in the face. The
   countenance itself speaks, and shews what are our feelings. The
   servants of God, being so shamefully treated, must inevitably have sunk
   under such attacks, had they not withstood them with a forehead of
   stone or of iron. In this sense of the term, Jeremiah also is said to
   have been "set for a fortified city, an iron pillar, and a brazen wall,
   against the kings of Judah, and the princes, and the people," (Jeremiah
   1:18;) and to Ezekiel is said to have been given "a strong forehead,
   and even one of adamant, and harder than that, that he might not be
   dismayed at the obstinacy of the people." (Ezekiel 3:9.)

   Therefore I was not ashamed. The word "ashamed" is twice used in this
   verse, but in different senses; for in the former clause it relates to
   the feeling, and in the latter to the thing itself or the effect.
   Accordingly, in the beginning of the verse, where he boasts that he is
   not confounded with shame, because God is on his side, he means that it
   is not enough that God is willing to help us, if we do not also feel
   it; for of what advantage to us will the promises of God be, if we
   distrust him? Confidence, therefore, is demanded, that we may be
   supported by it, and may assuredly know that we enjoy God's favor.

   I shall not be confounded. In the conclusion of the verse he boldly
   declares his conviction that the end will be prosperous. Thus "to be
   confounded" means "to be disappointed;" for they who had entertained a
   vain and deceitful hope are liable to be mocked. Here we see that some
   special assistance is promised to godly teachers and ministers of the
   word; so that the fiercer the attacks of Satan, and the stronger the
   hostility of the world, so much the more does the Lord defend and guard
   them by extraordinary protection. And hence we ought to conclude, that
   all those who, when they come to the contest, tremble and lose courage,
   have never been duly qualified for discharging their office; for he who
   knows not how to strive knows not how to serve God and the Church, and
   is not fitted for administering the doctrine of the word.

   8. He is near that justifieth me. We ought always to keep in
   remembrance that the Prophet mentions nothing that is peculiar to
   himself, but testifies what the Lord chooses to be, and will always be,
   towards faithful ministers, that whosoever has this testimony, that God
   has sent him, and knows that he discharges his office faithfully, may
   boldly despise all adversaries, and may not be moved by their
   reproaches, for he is "justified" by the Lord; and, in like manner, the
   Lord always is, and will be, near to defend and maintain his truth.
   Besides, that any one may be able to make this protestation, it is
   necessary that his conscience be pure; for, if any man thrust himself
   rashly into the office, and have no testimony of his calling, or bring
   forward his dreams publicly, in vain will he boast of this promise,
   which belongs only to those who have been called by God, and who
   sincerely and uprightly perform their duty. Now, although either
   hypocrites or despisers never cease to annoy the servants of God, yet
   Isaiah advances to meet them, as if none would venture to pick a
   quarrel or utter a slander; not that he can keep them in check, [19]
   but because they will gain nothing by all their attempts. He therefore
   declares, that he looks down with utter contempt on the false
   accusations which the enemies of sound doctrine pour out against its
   teachers. There is no crime with which they do not upbraid them; but
   their efforts are fruitless; for the Judge, by whom their integrity is
   maintained, is not far off. They may, therefore, as Paul did, boldly
   appeal from the wicked and unjust judgments of men to "the day of the
   Lord," by whom their innocence will be made manifest. (1 Corinthians
   4:4.)

   Let us stand together. Godly teachers ought to have so great confidence
   as not to hesitate to give a bold defiance to adversaries. Satan, with
   his agents, does not always venture to attack openly, especially when
   he fights by falsehoods, but by ambuscade, and by burrowing under
   ground, endeavors to take them by surprise; but the servants of God are
   not afraid to "stand up" openly, and enter into contest with the enemy,
   and contend by arguments, provided that adversaries are willing to
   enter into the lists. So great is the force of truth that it does not
   dread the light of day, as we say that Isaiah here attacks boldly those
   whom he perceives to be plotting against him; and therefore he repeats,
   --

   Let him draw near to me. Godly ministers ought to be ready to assign a
   reason for their doctrine. But where is the man that is willing to hear
   them patiently, and to consider what is the nature of that doctrine
   which they publicly declare? True indeed, adversaries will approach,
   but it is to draw their swords to slay them; to sharpen their tongues,
   that by every kind of slander they may tear them in pieces. In short,
   their whole defense consists in arms or deceitful stratagems; for they
   do not venture to contend by scriptural arguments. Relying, therefore,
   on the justice of our cause, we may freely defy them to the conflict.
   Though they condemn us without listening to our vindication, and though
   they have many that support the sentence which they have pronounced, we
   have no reason to be afraid; for God, whose cause we plead, is our
   Judge, and will at length acquit us.

   9. Who is he that condemmeth me? Paul appears to allude to this
   passage, in his Epistle to the Romans, when he says, "It is God that
   justifieth; who shall condemn?" (Romans 8:33, 34.) We may safely have
   recourse to the judgment-seat of God, when we are well assured that we
   have obtained his righteousness by free grace through Christ. But here
   Isaiah handles a different subject; for he does not speak of the
   universal salvation of men, but of the ministry of the Word, which the
   Lord will defend against the attacks of wicked men, and will not suffer
   his people to be overwhelmed by their fraud or violence.

   Lo, they shall all wax old as a garment. He now shews more clearly that
   it is not in the shade or at case that he boasts of his courage, as if
   none were giving him any disturbance; but he declares that, though he
   is assailed by deadly foes, still he boldly maintains his position;
   because all who fight with the Word of God shall fall and vanish away
   through their own frailty. In order to place the matter before their
   own eyes, he employs a demonstrative particle, "Behold, like garments
   shall they perish, being consumed by worms." The Psalmist makes use of
   the same metaphor, when he compares the men of this world to the
   children of God. (Psalm 49:14, 15.) The former, though they make a show
   and shine like dazzling garments, shall perish; but believers, who now
   are covered with filth, shall at length obtain new brightness and shine
   brilliantly like the stars. Here he speaks literally of fierce dogs
   that attack and bark at godly teachers. Though such persons are held in
   high estimation by men, and possess very high authority among them, yet
   their lustre shall perish and fade away, like that of garments which
   are eaten by worms.

   10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord? After having spoken of
   God's invincible aid, by which all prophets are protected, he directs
   his discourse to believers, that they may suffer themselves to be
   guided by the Word of God, and may become obedient. Hence we may infer
   how far a holy boasting raised him above his slanderers; for, in
   consequence of wicked men, through their vast numbers, possessing at
   that time great influence among the Jews, there was a risk of
   overwhelming the faith of the small minority. [20] When he asks, "Where
   are they that fear God?" he points out that their number is small. Yet
   he addresses them separately, that they may detach themselves from the
   mixed crowd, and not take part in counsels which are wicked, and which
   God has condemned. In like manner we have formerly met with these
   words, "Say ye not, A confederacy." (Isaiah 8:12.) Although therefore
   the enemies of God are so numerous as to constitute a vast army, yet
   Isaiah does not hesitate to say that there are some left who shall
   profit by his doctrine.

   He speaks to those who "fear God;" for, wherever there is no religion
   and no fear of God, there can be also no entrance for doctrine. We see
   how audaciously doctrine is rejected by those who, in other respects,
   wish to be reckoned acute and sagacious; for, in consequence of being
   swelled with pride, they detest modesty and humility, and are
   exceedingly stupid in this wisdom of God. It is not without good
   reason, therefore, that he lays this foundation, namely, the fear of
   God, that his Word may be attentively and diligently heard. Hence also
   it is evident that true fear of God is nowhere to be found, unless
   where men listen to his Word; for hypocrites do proudly and haughtily
   boast of piety and the fear of God, but they manifest rebellious
   contempt, when they reject the doctrine of the Gospel and all godly
   exhortations. The clear proof of such persons is, that the mask which
   they desire to wear is torn off.

   Let him hear the voice of his servant. He might have simply said, "the
   voice of God," but he expressly says, "of his servant;" for God does
   not wish to be heard but by the voice of his ministers, whom he employs
   to instruct us. Isaiah speaks first of himself, and next of all others
   who have been invested with the same office; and there is an implied
   contrast between that "hearing" which he demands and that wicked
   eagerness to despise doctrine in which irreligious men indulge, while
   they also, by their insolence, encourage many idle and foolish persons
   to practice similar contempt.

   He who hath walked in darkness. Believers might have brought it as an
   objection, that the fruit of their piety was not visible, but that they
   were miserably afflicted, as if they had lived a life of abandoned
   wickedness; and therefore the Prophet anticipates and sets aside this
   complaint, by affirming that believers, though hitherto they have been
   harshly treated, yet do not in vain obey God and his Word; for, if they
   "have walked in darkness," they shall at length enjoy the light of the
   Lord. By "darkness" the Prophet here means not the ignorance or
   blindness of the human understanding, but the afflictions by which the
   children of God are almost always overwhelmed. And this is the
   consolation which he formerly mentioned, when he declared that "the
   tongue of the learned had been given to him, that he might speak a word
   to one who was faint." (Ver. 4.) Thus he promises that they who have
   hitherto been discouraged and almost overwhelmed by so many distresses
   shall receive consolation.

   11. Lo, all of you kindle a fire. He upbraids the Jews with choosing to
   kindle for themselves their own light, instead of drawing near to the
   light of God. This passage has been badly expounded; and if we wish to
   understand its true meaning, we must attend to the contrast between the
   light of God and the light of men; that is, between the consolation
   which is brought to us by the Word of God and the empty words of
   comfort uttered by men, when by idle and useless things they attempt
   and toil to alleviate their distresses. Having formerly spoken of
   "light" and "darkness," and having promised light to believers, who
   hear the voice of the Lord, he shews that the Jews had rejected this
   light, in order to kindle another light for themselves, and threatens
   that ultimately they shall be consumed by this light, as by a
   conflagration. Thus Christ upbraids the Jews with "rejoicing in John's
   light," (John 5:35,) because they made a wrong use of his official
   character, in order to obscure or rather to extinguish the glory of
   Christ. To bring forward John's official character, in order to cover
   with darkness the glory of Christ, was nothing else than to extinguish
   the light of God shining in a mortal man, in order to kindle another
   light for themselves, not that it might guide them by pointing out the
   road, but that, by foolishly rejoicing in it, they might be driven
   about in every direction.

   When he says that they are surrounded by sparks, he glances at their
   various thoughts, by which they were agitated and carried about in
   uncertainty sometimes in one direction and sometimes in another; and in
   this way he mocks at their folly, because they willingly and eagerly
   ran wheresoever their foolish pleasures drew them.

   Walk in the light of your fire. As if he had said, "You shall know by
   experience how useless and transitory is your light, when your
   unwarranted hopes shall have deceived you." The ironical permission
   denotes disappointment. Others explain it, that wicked men kindle
   against themselves the fire of God's wrath; but the Prophet looked
   higher, and that sentiment appears not to agree with this passage.

   From my hand. Because wicked men, being intoxicated by false
   confidence, think that they are placed beyond the reach of all danger,
   and, viewing the future with reckless disregard, trust to "their own
   light," that is, to the means of defense with which they imagine
   themselves to be very abundantly provided; the Lord declares, that they
   shall lie down in sorrow, and that this shall proceed "from his hand;"
   and, in a word, that men who have forsaken the light of the Word, and
   who seek consolation from some other quarter, shall miserably perish.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [14] "Ains recognoissent que leurs vices empeschent que ceste puissance
   ne se monstre;" "But may acknowledge that their sins hinder that power
   from being manifested."

   [15] "This gives a great idea of God's power. Though the sun shines so
   bright that no mortal eye can steadily behold its lustre, I can at
   pleasure send a thick cloud and intercept its rays, and make the
   heavens appear as if they had put on mourning." -- White.

   [16] "A l'histoire de la deliverance d'Egypte."

   [17] "Qui gemissent sous le fardeau de leurs pechez;" "Who groan under
   the burden of their sins."

   [18] "Ceux-la sont doctes."

   [19] "Non pas qu'il puisse tenir les meschans en bride;" "Not that he
   can keep wicked men in check."

   [20] "Le danger estoit qu'ils n' estaignissent la foy d'une petite
   troupe de fideles;" "The danger was that they would extinguish the
   faith of a small body of believers."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 51.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 51:1-23

   1. Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the
   LORD: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit
   whence ye are digged.

   1. Audite me, qui sequimini justitiam, qui qumritis Iehovam; aspicire
   ad petram excisionis vestrae, et ad cavernam specus unde eruti estis.

   2. Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for I
   called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.

   2. Aspicite ad Abraham patrem vestrum, et ad Sarare, qum peperit vos;
   quoniam unitum vocavi eum, et benedixi, et multiplicavi eum.

   3. For the LORD shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste
   places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like
   the garden of the LORD; joy and gladness shall be found therein,
   thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.

   3. Utique consolabitur Iehova Sion, consolabitur omnes vastitates ejus,
   ponetque desertum ejus quasi ocum deliciarum, et solitudinem ejus quasi
   hortum Iehovae. Laetitia et gaudium invenientur in ea; confessio et vox
   cantici.

   4. Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a
   law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a
   light of the people.

   4. Attendite ad me, popule mi; et plebs men audite me; quoniam Lex a me
   egredietur, et judietum meum in lucem populorum patifaciam.

   5. My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms
   shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm
   shall they trust.

   5. Prope est justitia mea; egressa eat salus mea; et brachia mea
   populos judicabunt. Me insulae expectabunt, et in brachium meum
   sperabunt.

   6. Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath:
   for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax
   old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like
   manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall
   not be abolished.

   6. Levate in coelum oculos vestros, et aspicite in terram deorsum;
   quoniam coeli ut fumus peribunt; et terra ut vestis veterascet; et
   incolae ejus in eundem modum interibunt. Atque salus mea in aeternum
   manebit, et justitia mea non interibit.

   7. Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose
   heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid
   of their revilings.

   7. Audite me, qui cognoscitis justitiam, populus in cujus corde est lex
   mea. Ne timeatis probrum hominis eta contumelia eorum ne frangamini
   animo.

   8. For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
   eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my
   salvation from generation to generation.

   8. Quoniam sieur vestimentum comedet eos tinea; sicut lanam comeder eos
   vermis. At justitia inca perpetuo manebit, et salus mea in seculum
   seculorum.


   9. Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the LORD; awake, as in the
   ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut
   Rahab, and wounded the dragon?

   9. Suscita re, suscita to, indue fortitudinem, brachium Iehovae. Excita
   re, sicut in diebus antiquis, seculis olim praeteritis. Annon tu illud
   es, proscindens superbam, conficiens draconem?

   10. Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great
   deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to
   pass over?

   10. Annon tu illud es, quod exsiccavit mare, aquam voraginis magnae;
   quod vertit profundum maris in viare, ad transitum redemptotum?

   11. Therefore the redeemed of the LORD shall return, and come with
   singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they
   shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

   11. Ergo redempti ad Iehovam revertentur; venient in Sion cure cantico,
   eritque gaudium perpetuum super caput eorum. Laetitiam et gaudium
   obtinebunt, fugientque dolor et gemitus.

   12. I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou
   shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man
   which shall be made as grass;

   12. Ego, ego sum, qui vos consolor. Quaenam es, ut timeas ab homine qui
   morietur? a filio hominis, qui foenum reputabitur?

   13. And forgettest the LORD thy maker, that hath stretched forth the
   heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared
   continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he
   were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the oppressor?

   13. Et oblita es Iehovae factoris tui, qui extendit coelos, et fundavit
   terram; et formidasti jugiter tota die a furore affligentis, dum ad
   vastandum se parat. Et ubi furor affligentis?

   14. The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he
   should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail.

   14. Festinat exul ut solvatur, ut non moriatur in specu, nec deficiat
   eum panis suus.

   15. But I am the LORD thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves
   roared: The LORD of hosts is his name.

   15. Et ego Iehova Deus tuus, qui seco mare, et sonabunt fluctus ejus;
   Iehova exercituum nomen ejus.

   16. And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in
   the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the
   foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.

   16. Et posui verba mea in ore tuo; et in umbra manus mere protexi to,
   ut plantem coelos, et fundem terram. Dieam Sioni, Populus meus tu.

   17. Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand
   of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup
   of trembling, and wrung them out.

   17. Expergiscere, expergiscere, surge, Ierusalem, quae bibisti e manu
   Iehovae calicem furoris ejus; faeces calicis angustiae (vel,
   trepidationis) bibisti exprimens.

   18. There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought
   forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons
   that she hath brought up.

   18. Non est qui regat eam ex omnibus illils quos genuit; non est qui
   apprehendat manum ejus ex onmibus illils quos educavit.

   19. These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee?
   desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom
   shall I comfort thee?

   19. Duo haec acciderunt tibi. Quis condolebit tibi? Vastitas et
   contritio, et fames, et gladius. Quis consolabitur to?

   20. Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as
   a wild bull in a net: they are full of the fury of the LORD, the rebuke
   of thy God.

   20. Filii tui exanimati sunt; jacuerunt in capite omnium viarum, sicut
   bos sylvestris in reti, pleni furore Iehovae, increpatione Dei tui.

   21. Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with
   wine:

   21. Itaque nunc audi hoc, misera et ebria, non a vino.

   22. Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, and thy God that pleadeth the cause
   of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of
   trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more
   drink it again:

   22. Sic dicit Dominus tuus, Iehova, et Deus tuus, vindex populi sui:
   Ecce abstuli e mae tua calicem angustiae (vel, trepidationis;) faecem
   calicis furoris mei. Non fiet ut bibas amplius.

   23. But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; which
   have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast
   laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them that went over.

   23. Et tradam eum in manus oppressorum tuorum, qui dixerunt animae
   'tuae, Incurvate, et transibimus. Et posuisti quasi terram corpus tuum,
   et quasi viam transeuntibus.


   1 Hearken to me, ye that follow righteousness. The Prophet now exhorts
   the Jews not to despair because they are few in number; for they had
   been cut down and diminished to such a degree that they appeared to be
   on the eve of being reduced to nothing, while there was little or no
   hope of any to succeed them. He therefore reminds them of their origin,
   that they may know that, though they are a small remnant, God can
   increase and multiply them; and he bids them contemplate their father
   Abraham, who, though he was a single individual, grew to a vast number,
   and received from God a numerous posterity. Hence they might infer that
   God, who, in so short a period, had multiplied their fathers, would in
   future multiply them also; because his power has not been diminished,
   and his will has not been changed.

   Look to the rock of your hewing. [21] Some are of opinion that Abraham
   is called a "Rock," because, as Paul declares, "he was strong in
   faith." (Romans 4:20.) Others assign a totally opposite meaning to this
   metaphor; for they think that he is called a "Rock," because he was
   worn out by age, and that Sarah is called a Pit, because she was
   barren. But both, in my opinion, are in the wrong; for it is a simple
   metaphor, taken from quarries, and declares that they have descended
   from Abraham and Sarah, as stones are cut out of a "rock" and a "pit."
   Amidst the ruin of the nation it was highly necessary that the godly
   should be supported by this doctrine and admonition. God had promised
   that the seed of Abraham should be "as the stars of heaven," (Genesis
   15:5,) and as "the sand of the sea." (Genesis 22:17.) This promise had
   apparently failed amidst that desolation in which they who were left
   hardly differed at all from a few clusters when the vintage was ended.

   But since they had already known by experience how powerful was the
   strength of God to create a vast people out of nothing, the Prophet
   bids them cherish favorable hopes, that they may not be ungrateful to
   God; and he addresses his discourse directly to believers, to whom this
   was a sore temptation. He does not speak to all, but to those only who
   could rely on the promise, that is, to those whom he calls "followers
   of righteousness;" for the country abounded with unbelievers and
   hypocrites, who had formerly revolted from the practice of piety; and
   so much the more laudable was the steadfastness of those who did not
   cease to follow what was right. Wherever "righteousness" is practiced,
   there God is listened to; and wherever unbelief reigns, reliance cannot
   be placed on any promise. [22] Although therefore they boasted that
   they were the children of Abraham, yet all were not capable of
   receiving this doctrine.

   Ye that seek Jehovah. He explains the method of "following
   righteousness" to consist in "seeking the Lord;" for they who make an
   outward shew of "righteousness," and do not aim at this end, must have
   wandered during their whole life. These two things, therefore, must be
   joined together; namely, the practice of righteousness and seeking God.

   2. For I called him alone. This application plainly shews what was the
   design of this exhortation of the Prophet. It was to encourage the
   hearts of believers to cherish the hope of a better condition. He says
   that he "called him one or alone," not only because he had none along
   with him, when he was called out of his country, but because the Lord
   suffered him to dwell in the land of Canaan without children up to a
   worn out old age, so that he had no hope of having children, especially
   because Sarah (Genesis 16:2) also was barren; and when at length, as a
   solace for their childless condition, one son was given to them, not
   long afterwards he appeared to be led forth to slaughter. Yet the Lord
   increased and enriched him with a great number of children.

   How needful this consolation was to the Jews has been remarked by me a
   little before, and may be easily learned from their condition, which
   history plainly declares to have been wretched and unhappy. To us also,
   in the present day, amidst this distracted condition of the Church, it
   is highly necessary, that we may not be discouraged because our number
   is small, and that we may hope that God will increase his Church by
   unexpected methods. We behold a very clear and striking testimony of
   this in the blessing by which the Lord increased, even to extreme old
   age, the posterity of Abraham, who was childless and solitary. That
   promise relates not to the Jews only, but to other nations; and on this
   account also he

   "was no longer called Abram, but Abraham."
   (Genesis 17:5.)

   3. Surely Jehovah will comfort Zion. The Prophet shews that in the
   person of Abraham there was exhibited an example which applies to all
   ages; for, as the Lord suddenly produced from one man so numerous an
   offspring, so he will also people his Church by wonderful and unknown
   methods, and not once only, but whenever she shall be thought to be
   childless and solitary. In like manner, Paul, after having spoken of
   the faith of Abraham and praised his excellence, applies that doctrine
   to each of us, that

   "he believed in hope against hope, and that his mind was not driven
   hither and thither, but that he was fully persuaded that what God had
   promised he was able also to perform, though it appeared to be
   incredible and at variance with all reason."
   (Romans 4:18-21.)

   He will comfort all her desolations. This may be explained to mean,
   "The Lord will comfort his Church, not only when she shall be in a
   flourishing condition, but likewise when she shall be desolate and
   reduced to solitude;" for she must have been laid desolate, and her
   frightful ruins must have brought her to the verge of destruction,
   before she felt the aid which is here described.

   And will make her desert like a place of delights. The Prophet here
   alludes to a passage in the writings of Moses, in which he relates that
   man was at first placed in "the garden of Eden," (Genesis 2:15,) that
   is, in "a place of delights," from which he was driven out by his own
   fault. (Genesis 3:24.) Now we, who have been deprived of that blessing
   which he bestowed on our first parent, are exiles throughout the whole
   world, and are deprived of that paradise. Accordingly, whenever great
   calamities happen, and the order of events is overturned, and
   everything is thrown into wretched desolation and ruin, let us know
   that we are punished for our unbelief and for our heinous sins; and let
   us remember that sentence which was pronounced on our first parent, or
   rather on all mankind; and that in every part of life, but especially
   when we see the condition of the Church ruined and overturned. The
   earth, which otherwise would abound in blessings of every kind, has
   been reduced to solitude through our fault; and the Church, which would
   flourish everywhere, has been ruined and laid desolate.

   Joy and gladness. He means that the change shall be so great that the
   Church will no longer groan or complain; for, so long as the Church was
   oppressed by a harsh captivity, nothing could be heard in her but
   mouming and lamentation. Now restored, she shall rejoice and render
   thanksgiving to God. Thus we are also exhorted to gratitude, that we
   may burst out into praise and thanksgiving to God, when we have had
   experience of his goodness.

   4. Attend to me, my people. There are good reasons why the Lord so
   frequently demands that he shall be heard. We know by experience how
   slow we are to hear him, especially in adversity; and even when we
   would have great need of consolation, we reject it by our impatience,
   and faint. Each of us, therefore, the sorer are the afflictions which
   press upon him, ought to endeavor more earnestly to enlarge his heart,
   and in this way to arouse himself, and to shake off his slothfulness,
   that he may receive consolation. What is here demanded is attention, to
   sustain our hearts by patience, till the season of grace be fully come.

   For the law shall go forth from me. The meaning is, that the Lord will
   again reign, and will arouse his Church to call on his name. Though the
   word Law is equivalent to the edict which God shall order to be
   proclaimed, when he shall be pleased to gather his Church, yet at the
   same time he describes his manner of reigning; namely, by his "Law" and
   byhis doctrine. Hence we see that wherever doctrine is rejected, God's
   government is not found, that is, is not recognised by men. By judgment
   he means the order and administration of government, by which he shall
   restore his kingdom.

   For a light of the peoples, He says that this will be "for a light of
   the peoples," because, when God begins to reign, miserable men [23] are
   rescued from darkness and enlightened by the doctrine of the word.

   I will reveal. This vero 'rgy (argiang) is variously expounded by
   commentators, because rg (ragang) has various significations. Sometimes
   it signifies to "cut" and "open," and sometimes "to be at rest." Some
   therefore explain it, "I will cause to rest," that is, "I will
   establish;" and that meaning is not inappropriate. Most of the Jewish
   writers explain it differently, but I shall not relate their crooked
   and harsh interpretations. I rather approve of this translation, "I
   will manifest judgment," or, "I will cause judgment to break forth,"
   or, which means the same thing, "I will reveal;" because I think that
   it agrees better with the former clause. Repetitions, we know, are very
   customary among the Hebrew writers. Although, therefore, he employs
   different words, still the meaning is the same. Having formerly said
   that "the law shall go forth from him," he now says that "he will
   reveal judgment."

   5. My righteousness is near. He confirms the former doctrine. The
   "righteousness" of the Lord has relation to men, who know by experience
   that he is "righteous." While the people were oppressed by cruel
   bondage, they knew, indeed, that they were justly punished for their
   sins; but they might wonder that they were so much forsaken, because
   the worship of God ceased, and his name was blasphemed by wicked men,
   who pursued their wicked career without punishment. In order,
   therefore, to bring them some consolation, he promises that God will
   speedily assist them, so that all shall acknowledge that he is faithful
   and just. By the word "righteous" the Prophet does not mean that he
   renders to every one a "righteous" reward, but that he yields the best
   protection, and dispenses the largest kindness to his people, that he
   faithfully performs his promises to all believers, when he delivers
   them and does not suffer them to be finally overwhelmed.

   This appears more clearly from the following clause, in which, for the
   purpose of explanation, he adds, My salvation hath gone forth; for the
   "righteousness" of God shone brightly in the deliverance of the people.
   Now, the captivity in which the Jews were held in Babylon was a kind of
   death, in consequence of which that deliverance is here called
   "Salvation."

   My arms shall judge the peoples. By "arms" he means the wide exercise
   of his power. That figure of speech which describes God under forms of
   expression drawn from the human frame occurs frequently in Scripture.
   Because God's government appeared to be confined within narrow limits,
   or rather was not at all visible, on this account he mentions arms, by
   which he means that he will spread his kingdom far and wide.

   6. Lift up your eyes toward heaven. When we see so great changes in the
   world, we are apt to think that the Church comes within the influence
   of the sanhe violent motion; and therefore we need to have our minds
   elevated above the ordinary course of nature; otherwise, the salvation
   of the Church will appear to hang on a thread, and to be carried hither
   and thither by the billows and tempests. Yet, we may see both in heaven
   and in earth how wisely God regulates all things, with what fatherly
   kindness he upholds and defends his workmanship and the frame of the
   world, and with what equity he provides for all his creatures. But in a
   remarkable manner he deigns to watch over his Church, as he has
   separated her from the ordinary rank.

   And look upon the earth beneath. Both of the views now stated are here
   embraced by the Prophet; for he bids believers turn their eyes upwards
   and downwards, so as to perceive both in heaven and in earth the
   wonderful providence of God, by which he so beautifully preserves the
   order and harmony which he at first established. But he adds that,
   though heaven and earth hasten to decay, it is impossible that the
   Church shall fail, the stability of which is founded on God; as if he
   had said, "A thousand times rather shall leaven mingle with the earth
   than the promise on which your salvation rests shall fail of its
   accomplishment."-

   My salvation shall endure for ever. First of all, he mentions
   "salvation," and next he speaks of "righteousness," on which it rests
   as on a solid foundation. Whenever, therefore, dangers shall press upon
   us on every hand, let us learn to betake ourselves to this place of
   refuge. And with this sentiment agree the words of the Psalmist,

   "The heavens shall wax old and vanish away; but thou, Lord, art always
   the same, and thy years are not changed."
   (Psalm 102:26, 27)

   Both passages remind us that the grace of God, which he displays in the
   preservation of his Church, surpasses all his other works. Everything
   that is contained in heaven and earth is frail and fading; but God's
   salvation, by which he guards the Church, is eternal, and therefore
   cannot be liable to these dangers.

   7. Hearken to me. Because wicked men, when they enjoy prosperity, laugh
   at our faith, and ridicule our distresses and afflictions, on this
   account the Prophet exhorts believers to patience, that they may not
   dread their reproaches or be dismayed by their slanders. The reason
   assigned is, that their prosperity shall not be of long duration.
   Whatever may be their insolent boasting, they are already pronounced
   (verse 8) to be the food of moths and worms; while God holds in his
   hand the salvation of believers, from which they appear to be thrown to
   the greatest possible distance. Here we ought again to observe the
   repetition of the word Hearken. This is now the third time that the
   Lord demands a "hearing;" because, when we tremble with anxiety on
   account of our distresses, it is with the greatest difficulty that we
   rely on his promises, and therefore we need to be often roused and
   stimulated, till we have conquered every difficulty.

   Ye that know righteousness, Here he does not address unbelievers, but
   those who "know righteousness;" because, though they do not
   intentionally reject the word of God, yet they often shut the door
   against his "righteousness," so that it does not reach them, when,
   under the influence of adversity, they shut their ears and almost
   despair. In order therefore that they may receive the promises, and
   that they may admit consolation, the Prophet stirs up and arouses them.

   A people in whose heart is my law. We must attend to the train of
   thought. First, he describes what kind of people the Lord wishes to
   have, namely, "those who know righteousness;" and next he explains what
   is the nature of this knowledge, that is, when the people have "the
   law" fixed and deeply rooted in their hearts. Without the word of the
   Lord there call be no "righteousness." No laws of men, however well
   framed, will lead us to true righteousness, of which they may indeed
   give us a feeble idea, but which they never can justly describe. At the
   same time, he shews in what manner we ought to make progress in the law
   of the Lord; namely, by embracing it with the heart; for the seat of
   the law is not in the brain, but in the heart, that, being imbued with
   heavenly doctrine, we may be altogether renewed.

   8. But my righteousness shall continually endure. Because the believing
   servants of God must endure many reproaches and slanders from the
   enemies of the word, the Prophet exhorts and encourages them to bear it
   courageously. It frequently happens that we are more deeply moved by
   the contumely and insults of men than by fire and sword; but we ought
   to reckon it praise and glory to be the object of their contempt and
   abhorrence. True valor springs from this consideration, that, although
   the world reject us as "filth and offscourings," (1 Corinthians 4:13,)
   God holds us in estimation; because we maintain the same cause with
   himself. Let us with Moses, therefore, "prefer the reproach of Christ
   to the treasures of the Egyptians." (Hebrews 11:26.) Let us rejoice
   with the Apostles, who

   "departed from the council glad and joyful, because they were accounted
   worthy to suffer shame for the name of Jesus." (Acts 5:41.)

   And my salvation for ever and ever. Because the death of wicked men
   would yield to us small consolation, if we were not saved, he shews
   what will be our condition, namely, that we shall never be left
   destitute of "God's righteousness and salvation." But the comparison
   may appear to be inappropriate, when he contrasts the destruction of
   the wicked with his righteousness. Far more clearly and suitably it
   might have been thus expressed: "though the reprobate indulge in mirth,
   yet they shall speedily perish; but believers, though they appear to be
   dead, shall live." Again, because he makes no mention of us, and
   commends only the eternity of God's righteousness, it may be objected,
   that to us who are almost overwhelmed this is of no avail. But by these
   words the Prophet instructs us, that in our afflictions we ought to
   seek consolation from the thought, that our health and salvation are,
   as it were, shut up in God; for, so long as men trust or rely on
   themselves, they cannot cherish any good hope that does not speedily
   decay; and therefore we ought to turn our hearts to God, whose "mercy
   endureth from everlasting to everlasting on them that fear him," as
   David says, "and his righteousness to children's children." (Psalm
   103:17.)

   Because salvation is founded on the goodness of God, Isaiah reminds us
   of it, that men may be reduced to nothing, and that confidence may be
   placed in God alone. The meaning may be thus summed up, "Salvation is
   in God, that by it he may preserve, not himself, but us; righteousness
   is in God, that he may display it for our defense and preservation."
   Accordingly, from the eternity of God's "salvation and righteousness"
   we ought to infer that the servants of God cannot possibly perish;
   which agrees with the passage quoted a little before from David,

   "Thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. The children of thy
   servants shall dwell, and their posterity shall be established for
   ever." (Psalm 102:27, 28.)

   Thus we see how he applies this eternity to the children of God, who do
   not subsist in themselves, but in God, and have the foundation of their
   salvation in him.

   9. Awake, awake. Here the Prophet instructs us, that, when God cheers
   us by his promises, we ought also to pray earnestly that he would
   perform what he has promised. He does not comfort us in order to render
   us slothful, but that we may be inflamed with a stronger desire to
   pray, and may continually exercise our faith. The Prophet speaks
   according to our feelings; for we think that God is asleep, so long as
   he does not come to the relief of our wants; and the Lord indulges us
   so far as to permit us to speak and pray according to the feeling of
   our weakness. Believers therefore entreat the Lord to "awake," not that
   they imagine him to be idle or asleep in heaven; [24] but, on the
   contrary, they confess their own sluggishness and ignorance, in not
   being able to form any conception of God, so long as they are not awaro
   of receiving his assistance. But yet, though the flesh imagine that he
   is asleep, or that he disregards our calamities, faith rises higher and
   lays hold on his eternal power.

   Put on strength, O arm of Jehovah. He is said to "awake" and "put on
   strength," when he exhibits testimonies of his power, because otherwise
   we think that he is idle or asleep. Meanwhile, the Prophet, by
   addressing the arm of God which was concealed, holds it out to the view
   of believers as actually present, that they may be convinced that there
   is no other reason why they are so bitterly and painfully afflicted by
   their enemies than because God has withdrawn his aid. The cause of the
   delay has been already shewn, that they had estranged themselves from
   God.

   In ancient days. By the term "ancient days" he shews that we ought to
   bear in remembrance all that the Lord did long ago for the salvation of
   his people. Though he appears to pause and to take no more care about
   us, still he is the same God who formerly governed his Church; and
   therefore he can never forsake or abandon those whom he takes under his
   protection.

   In ages long ago past. This repetition tells us still more clearly,
   that we ought to consider not only those things which have happened
   lately, but those which happened long ago; for we ought to stretch our
   minds even to the most remote ages, that they may rise above
   temptations, which otherwise might easily overwhelm us.

   Art thou not it that crushed the proud one? [25] The numerous
   testimonies of grace which God had displayed in various ages are here
   collected by the Prophet, so that, if a few are not enough, the vast
   number of them may altogether confirm the faith of the Church. But,
   since it would be too tedious to draw up an entire catalogue, he brings
   forward that singular and most remarkable of all such events, namely,
   that the people were once delivered from Egypt in a miraculous manner,
   for I have no doubt that by Rahab [26] he means proud and cruel Egypt;
   as it is also said,

   "I will mention Rahab and Babylon among my friends."
   (Psalm 87:4.)

   In like manner Ezekiel calls the king of Egypt "a Dragon."

   "Behold, I am against thee,O Pharaoh, king of Egypt, the great dragon,
   who dwellest in the midst of thy rivers."
   (Ezekiel 29:3.)

   It is sufficiently evident, and is universally admitted, that the
   Prophet here calls to remembrance the miraculous deliverance of the
   people from Egypt. "If at that time the pride of Egypt was tamed and
   subdued, if the dragon was put to flight, why should we not hope for
   the same thing?"

   By putting the question, if it be the same arm, he argues from the
   nature of God; for this could not be affirmed respecting the "arm" of
   man, whose strength, though it be great, is diminished and fails
   through time? Milo, who had been very strong, when he became old and
   looked at his arms, groaned because the strength which he possessed at
   an earlier period had now left him. But it is not so with God, whose
   strength no lapse of time can diminish. These words ought to be read
   emphatikos emphatically, "Art thou not it?" For he shews that the Lord
   is the same as he formerly was, because he remains unchangeable.

   10. Which dried up the sea. Though Isaiah does not relate all the
   miracles which God performed when he brought out his people from the
   bondage of Egypt, yet he intended to include in a few words all that
   are related by Moses, that the Jews, having been briefly addressed,
   might consider the various ways in which the Lord had demonstrated his
   power. The drying up of the Red Sea is mentioned, not only on account
   of the extraordinary excellence of the miracle, but because the
   numerous miracles which preceeded it were directed to this end, that
   the people, rescued from unjust violence and tyranny, might pass into
   the promised land. Accordingly, the Prophet expressly mentions that a
   way was opened up for the redeemed. From this example we ought to
   consider what God will be to us, so as to draw this conclusion, that in
   future God will always be like himself, as is evident from the context.

   11 Therefore the redeemed by Jehovah shall return. He now describes
   more plainly what he had briefly remarked; for, after having related
   the magnificent works of God, by which he formerly displayed his power
   in Egypt, in order to deliver his people, he concludes that neither the
   sea, nor the lofty rocks, nor the whirlpools, nor even hell itself, can
   prevent him from leading forth his people out of Babylon. And in order
   to confirm it more fully, and to apply that example, he calls them
   "redeemed," that they may know that, when God calls himself the
   deliverer of his people, this belongs to them, and that they may not
   doubt that, in delivering them, he will produce such an example as had
   been already exhibited; for the reason is the same.

   Shall come to Zion. Namely, to that place where he wished that men
   should call on his name, that the temple may be rebuilt and the pure
   worship of God restored; for, since the Jews, during the Babylonish
   captivity, ought to expect the same aid as had been obtained by their
   fathers, because God was in like manner the Redeemer of the children
   also, they were superior to the fathers in one respect, that God had at
   that time chosen Mount Zion, in which he had promised that his rest
   would be eternal. (Psalm 132:14.) But since the work of God, which
   Isaiah promises, was worthy of admiration, on this account, he exhorts
   the people to praise and thanksgiving.

   With a song. rnh (rinnah) may indeed be taken simply for "rejoicing;"
   but, as it frequently denotes the praise which is rendered to God when
   we acknowledge his benefits, I prefer to take it in that sense in this
   passage. [27] The meaning is, that there will be a great and unexpected
   change, so that they shall have very abundant ground of joy and
   thanksgiving. When he says that joy shall be on their head, he alludes
   to the chaplets of flowers with which they were wont to adorn
   themselves at banquets. He adds that "they shall obtain joy," which
   denotes that their enjoyment shall be solid and lasting. Lastly, for
   the purpose of amplification, he adds that all sorrow shall be
   banished, that they may not dread what frequently happens, that joy, by
   a sudden change, shall give place to mourning. (Proverbs 14:13.) Yet
   the Prophet instructs them, though they groan and are sorrowful, to
   wait patiently for that issue which he promises.

   12. I, I am. Here the Lord not only promises grace and salvation to the
   Jews, but remonstrates with them for refusing to believe him, and for
   valuing his power less than they ought. It is exceedingly base to
   tremble at the threatenings of men to such a degree as to care nothing
   about God's assistance; for he displays his power for this purpose,
   that he may at least fortify; us against every attack. Accordingly, by
   an excessive fear of men we betray contempt of God.

   Hence it is evident how sinful it is to be agitated by the terrors of
   men, when God calls us to repose. And indeed it is amazing ingratitude
   in men, who, when they hear that God is on their side, derive no hope
   from his magnificent promises, so as to venture boldly to exclaim, "If
   God be for us, who can be against us?" (Romans 8:31.) The consequence
   is, that when dangers arise, they are terrified and confounded, and
   attribute far more to the power of mortal man in attacking than to the
   power of God in defending. Justly, therefore, does he upbraid the Jews
   with not fortifying themselves by these promises, and with not
   rendering themselves invincible against every danger; for God is
   treated with the highest dishonor when we doubt his truth, that is,
   when we are so completely overcome by human terrors that we cannot rest
   on his promises.

   The repetition, I, I, is highly emphatic. He who promises consolation
   is the God of truth, against whom neither the strength nor the
   contrivances of men will be of any avail. When thou distrustest him, it
   follows that thou dost not consider who he is.

   That thou shoudest be afraid of a man. He describes how frail, fading,
   transitory: and unsubstantial is the condition of men, in order to
   exhibit more fully their criminal stupidity in preferring a shadow and
   smoke to God. He shews that men, so long as they are mindful of God,
   cannot be struck down by fear. Consequently, when we are stunned by
   dangers that assail us, it follows that we have forgotten God; and
   therefore he adds, --

   13. And hast forgotten Jehovah thy Maker. It is not enough to imagine
   that there is some God, but we ought to acknowledge and embrace him as
   ours. When he calls him "Maker," this must not be understood to refer
   to universal creation, but to spiritual regeneration, as we have
   already explained under other passages. In this sense Paul calls us (to
   poiema) "the workmanship of God," (Ephesians 2:10,) because he hath
   created us to every good work. Thus, if we remember our creation and
   adoption, these beginnings may encourage us to hope for continued
   progress, that we may not be ungrateful to God, when he has proved his
   veracity by undoubted experience.

   Who hath stretched out the heavens and founded the earth. To the
   special kindness which God had exercised towards his people he likewise
   adds his boundless power which he contrasts with the weakness of men,
   whom he formerly compared to withered grass. (Isaiah 40:7.) He
   demonstrates that power by his works, so that they who do not perceive
   it must be exceedingly stupid; for we cannot tum our eyes in any
   direction without perceiving very abundant testimonies of divine
   goodness and power, which, however, are briefly described by a figure
   of speech in which a part is taken for the whole, when he says that it
   is "He who stretched out the heavens and founded the earth." It is
   therefore the greatest folly and indolence to forget him, for so
   numerous are the signs and testimonies which recall him to the
   remembrance of men.

   And hast dreaded continually. He follows out the same comparison. "What
   are men," says he, "that thou shouldst dread them, if thou compare them
   to God, who promises thee his assistance?" Assuredly, God is grievously
   blasphemed, if we refuse to believe that he is more powerful to
   preserve than enemies are to destroy us; and therefore the Lord bids us
   consider who and what he is, how vast and extensive is his power, that
   we may not dread the fury of a mortal man, who vanishes like a
   whirlwind or like smoke.

   14. The exile hasteneth to be loosed. This verse is expounded in
   various ways; for some think that it refers to Cyrus, and take the
   word, tsh (tzoeh) [28] in a transitive sense, and explain it to mean,
   "Causing to migrate." [29] But it is more customary to interpret it as
   meaning one who is imprisoned and oppressed, or an exile who wanders
   about without any settled abode. Now, the Jews were not only exiles but
   captives, so that they were not at liberty to return to their native
   land; and therefore I explain it as referring to the Jews.

   But still there are two senses in which it may be understood, either
   that the Prophet reproves their excessive haste, in impatiently
   desiring to return, or that the Prophet means that their return to
   their native country is immediately at hand, that they may not sink
   under the discouragement of long delay; as if he had said, that the
   time when they must prepare for departure will speedily arrive. The
   second of these expositions has been more generally approved; and I
   adopt it the more readily, because it agrees best with the context.

   But it may appear strange that he should say that the people will
   quickly return, since their captivity was of long duration. Yet with
   good reason does God say that that event will come quickly which he
   delays till a fit season; for, although to us it may appear to be long,
   yet, being appropriate and suitable, the time is short. And indeed it
   was a short time, if we look at the condition of that monarchy, which
   was so vast and strong that it appeared as if it could never be
   destroyed. Thus, what appears to be long in the promises of God will
   appear to be short, provided that we do not refuse to lift up our eyes
   to heaven. This meaning is confirmed by what immediately follows.

   That he may not die in a pit. Such then is God's haste to come early to
   deliver his people; that they may come forth safely out of the dungeon.
   The Lord does not promise to his people some sudden assistance, that he
   may only bring them out of prison, but also that, after having been
   delivered, they may be the objects of his kindness; for he promises
   everything necessary for their food and support, that they may be
   convinced that God will always take care of them; and he is wont not
   only to assist his people for a moment, but to remain with them
   continually.

   15. And I am Jehovah thy God. Again the Lord declares his power; for so
   great is the unbelief and sluggishness of men, that, although it is
   frequently declared, yet the very smallest temptation shews that they
   are not fully convinced of it. They quickly fall back upon themselves,
   when they are hard pressed by afflictions; and when they hear that
   anything is in the power of God, they do not think that it belongs to
   them.

   Who divide the sea. He does not speak in general terms, but brings
   forward the instance which he had often mentioned before; for, by once
   redeeming the fathers, he held out to posterity the hope of eternal
   salvation. Justly, therefore, does he exclaim that he is the same God
   who long ago "divided the sea;" and next he magnifies the miracle by
   saying that its roaring billows were stilled at his command. (Exodus
   14:21.) We ought to know, therefore, that there are no raging billows
   which God cannot allay and calm in order to deliver his Church. "It is
   he who," by his power, "stills the sea and makes it calm," (Job 26:12,)
   though it rage furiously; and he likewise drives and swells its waves,
   when he thinks fit; though literally, as I have remarked, the Prophet
   alludes to the history of the deliverance from Egypt. [30]

   Jehovah of hosts. The Lord is adorned with this title, that we may know
   how extensive is his power; and he exhibits that power as often as he
   is pleased to render assistance to his Church.

   16. And I have put my words in thy mouth. He again retums to the
   doctrine which he had formerly stated, namely, that the Lord comforts
   his Church: "I, I am he that comforteth you," (ver. 12.) So he now says
   that he put into the mouth of the prophets what they should say. Hence
   we may infer that these words do not proceed from men, who often prove
   false, but from "God, who cannot lie." (Titus 1:2.) The Lord speaks to
   all the prophets, first to Isaiah, and then to the rest in their order;
   but at last we must come to Christ. These things must not be limited
   either to Isaiah or to Christ, but must be extended to all the
   prophets. The Lord wishes that believers should hear the consolation
   from the prophets, as if he were present and addressed them, and even
   declares that he speaks openly by their mouth.

   Hence also we ought to conclude that none ought to come forward to
   comfort the Church but they who speak from the mouth of the Lord; for
   they who alter their own dreams, though they take shelter under the
   name of God, ought to be rejected. But; we must understand the
   Prophet's meaning; for, seeing that he shows that the consciences of
   men always tremble, till the Lord confirm them, he instructs us to
   abide by this principle, that it is God who speaks by the prophets; for
   otherwise consciences will always remain in doubt and uncertainty. Yet
   the mode of expression is highly emphatic, when he repeats the
   commandments of God, by which he was encouraged to the execution of his
   office.

   And in the shadow of my hand. Though he had already said this, yet the
   repetition is not superfluous, that we may fully believe that God will
   always assist his ministers, so that, relying on his immediate aid,
   they may be raised by him above all obstructions. Now, in order to
   being covered with that shadow of the Lord, two things are necessary;
   first, that they are certain that what they utter is the word of God,
   and secondly, that they do so by God's command. They who rashly put
   themselves forward may indeed boast of the name of God, but in vain;
   for when they come to fight in earnest, they will faint. And if we have
   the testimony of conscience, we have no reason for entertaining doubts
   as to God's protection and aid, by which he will enable us to gain the
   victory. Next comes the object of the embassy.

   That I may plant the heavens; that is, that I may restore everything to
   its proper order. There are, indeed, various interpretations of these
   words; but the true meaning appears to me to be this, that heaven and
   earth are said to be restored by the doctrine of salvation; because "in
   Christ," as Paul says, "are collected all things that are either in
   heaven or in earth." (Ephesians 1:10.) Since the fall of the first man
   we see nothing but frightful confusion, which troubles even the dumb
   creatures, and makes them suffer, in some respects, the punishment of
   our sins; and, consequently, that confusion cannot be repaired but by
   Christ. Since therefore the whole face of the world is disfigured by
   frightful desolation, there are good grounds for saying that godly
   teachers renovate the world, as if God formed heaven and earth anew by
   their hand. And hence it is evident how great is the heinousness of our
   guilt, which has been followed by such dreadful confusion in the nature
   of things. Thus, "the heavens" are said to be "planted and the earth to
   be founded," when the Lord establishes his Church by the word; and he
   does this by the agency of ministers, whom he directs by his Spirit,
   and protects against hidden enemies and various dangers, that they may
   effectually accomplish what he has enjoined.

   That I may say to Zion, Thou art my people. At length he shews that
   this aims at something higher than the visible form of the world, which
   shall quickly perish; namely, to excite and nourish in the hearts of
   believers the hope of a heavenly life. The true stability of the
   Church, the restoration of the world, consists in this, that the elect
   be gathered into the unity of faith, so that, with one consent, all may
   lift their hearts to God, who also invites them sweetly and gently by
   these words, "I am thy God." And hence we see how highly God values the
   salvation of the Church, since he not only prefers it to the whole
   world, but even shews that the stability of the world depends upon it.
   We must likewise observe what is the word which the Lord enjoins to be
   proclaimed; for it not only lays down a rule of life, but also gives a
   testimony of our adoption, in which our salvation chiefly consists.

   17. Awake, awake. The Church was about to endure grievous calamities,
   and therefore he fortifies her by consolation, and meets a doubt which
   might arise, that the Jews, being now oppressed by tyrants, saw no
   fulfillment of these promises. The meaning therefore is, that the
   Church, though afflicted and tossed in various ways, will nevertheless
   be set up again, so as to regain her full vigor. By the word "Awake" he
   recalls her, as it were, from death and the grave; as if he had said,
   that no ruins shall be so dismal, no desolations shall be so horrible,
   as to be capable of hindering God from effecting this restoration. And
   this consolation was highly necessary; for when grief seizes our
   hearts, we think that the promises do not at all belong to us; and
   therefore we ought frequently to call to remembrance, and to place
   constantly before our eyes, that it is God who speaks, and who
   addresses men who are not in a prosperous or flourishing condition, but
   fallen and dead, and whom notwithstanding he can raise up and uphold by
   his word; for this doctrine of salvation is intended not for those who
   retain their original condition, but for those who are dead and ruined.

   Who hast drunk from the hand of Jehovah the cup of his wrath. There are
   two senses in which the term, "cup of wrath," may be understood; for
   sometimes the Lord is said to put into our hands a "cup of wrath," when
   he strikes us with some kind of giddiness, or deranges our intellect;
   as we see that affliction sometimes takes away men's understanding; but
   sometimes it is used in a simpler sense, to denote the sharp and heavy
   punishments by which the Lord severely chastises his people. This is
   evidently the meaning in which it must be taken here, as appears from
   the addition of the pronoun His. Nor is this inconsistent with what he
   says, that the Church was stupified and drunk; for he shews that this
   happened in consequence of the Lord having severely chastised her. It
   is an ordinary metaphor by which the chastisement which God inflicts on
   his people is called a "potion," [31] or a certain measure which he
   assigns to each. But whenever it relates to the elect, this term "cup"
   serves to express the moderation of the divine judgment; that the Lord,
   though he punish his people severely, still observes a limit. [32]

   Pressing out the dregs of the cup of distress (or of trembling.) I
   consider the word trlh (targnelah) to denote "anguish" or "trembling,"
   by which men are nearly struck dead, when they are weighed down by
   heavy calamities. Such persons may be called "drunk," as having
   exhausted all that is in the cup, because nothing can be added to their
   affliction and distress.

   This is also denoted by another term, "pressing out." The Church is
   here reminded that all the evils which befall her proceed from no other
   source than from the hand of God, that she may not think that they
   happen to her by chance, or that she is unjustly afflicted. The object
   which the Prophet has in view is, that the people may know that they
   are justly punished for their sins. No one can rise up till he first
   acknowledge that he has fallen, or be delivered from misery till he
   perceive that it is by his own fault that he is miserable. In short,
   there can be no room for consolations till they have been preceded by
   the doctrine of repentance.

   Dregs, therefore, must not here be understood in the same sense as in
   Jeremiah 25:15, where the reprobate are spoken of, whom the Lord chokes
   and kills by his cup, but as denoting complete and righteous
   punishment, to which the Lord has been pleased to assign a limit. Thus,
   when the Lord has inflicted on us such punishment as he thought fit,
   and puts an end to our afflictions, he declares that the "dregs" are
   exhausted; as we have seen before at the fortieth chapter. [33]

   18. There is no one to guide her. He describes the sorest calamity of
   the Church; for the heaviest and sorest of all undoubtedly is, that she
   receives no sympathy or consolation from her own children. This
   accumulated misery is described by him, in order that, though her
   condition be desperate, she may still expect consolation from God, who
   will never disappoint his servants, though they be sunk to the depth of
   hell. Although the Church has been forsaken by men, and even by those
   whom she nourished in her bosom and carried in her arms, yet she shall
   receive assistance from God. No affliction more severe can befall a
   mother than to be deserted by her children, who ought in their turn to
   have treated her with kindness. Such ingratitude and want of natural
   affection is certainly much liarder to bear than the violent and
   unbridled cruelty of enemies; for why does she give birth to children,
   and why does she bring them up, but in expectation of being supported
   by them in return? Since her children do not perform their duty, what
   remains but that she shall think that to have born and reared them has
   been of no advantage to her? Although therefore the Church has
   performed the duty of a mother, and has brought up her children to the
   age of maturity, yet the Prophet declares that she must not expect any
   assistance or consolation from ungrateful persons.

   Yet his discourse conveys something more, and pronounces those children
   who have rendered no assistance to their mother to be bastards and
   reprobates, with the view of inducing her to bear the loss of them more
   patiently. It was sad and distressing for the Church to be deprived of
   all her offspring, and to be reduced to childlessness; though this has
   sometimes happened. But the Prophet reminds the mother that the
   children do not deserve that she should mourn for them, and that, on
   the contrary, she ought to desire additional offspring, as it is said
   by the Psalmist,

   "The people that shall be created shall praise the Lord." (Psalm
   103:18.)

   What is here described by the Prophet is entirely applicable to our own
   age; for many boast of being the children of the Church; but where is
   the man that cares about his mother's distresses? Who is grieved for
   her ruin? Who is moved so deeply as to put his shoulders to her
   support? How many betray her, and, under presence of this title,
   persecute her more cruelly than open and avowed enemies? Accordingly,
   after all her calamities this is added as the copestone of her
   miseries. Moreover, they who wish to be regarded as holding the first
   rank in the Church, and who not only boast of being children, but vaunt
   of being called fathers, treacherously desert her when she implores
   their aid. We need not wonder, therefore, if God shall drive them out,
   in order to make way for the increase of his Church by lawful and
   dutiful children. [34]

   19. These two things have happened to thee. Nearly the same thing was
   already asserted concerning Babylon,

   "These two things shall befall thee suddenly in one day, childlessness
   and widowhood." (Isaiah 47:9.)

   But here Isaiah promises to the Church that there shall eventually be a
   different issue; for the Lord will rescue her from the deepest abyss.
   He threatens extreme wretchedness, that believers may gird themselves
   for patience, and not cease to send upwards prayers and supplications
   from the depth of their distresses. The general meaning is, that the
   Church shall be burdened with afflictions of every kind, so that she
   shall appear to be on the brink of utter ruin; because from without she
   shall endure very heavy calamities, and from within shall obtain no aid
   or sympathy from her own children. These are two very sore evils which
   the Prophet relates. But it appears as if the division were not quite
   appropriate; for, after having related one evil, that there is none to
   bewail her, he enumerates four kinds --

   Desolation and destruction, and the sword and famine. Some explain it
   to mean that the Church is visited by famine within, and harassed by
   enemies without. But I interpret it differently, as I have already
   hinted; for it is very customary among Hebrew writers to put a
   question, when they wish absolutely to deny anything; and among them it
   is elegant, though in Greek or Latin authors it would be ungraceful.
   Isaiah therefore describes "two evils," one external, for both by the
   devastations of "war" and by "famine" they will be brought to the verge
   of "destruction" and "desolation," which he describes by these four
   classes; and another internal, because she is deprived of consolation,
   and "there is none to bewail her." By putting the question, "Who shall
   bewail her?" he affirms that she shall have no consolation; and this
   verse agrees with the former, in which we have already explained the
   design which the Prophet has in view, in describing this highly
   calamitous and wretched condition of the Church.

   20. Thy sons have fainted. He describes more fully the lamentable and
   wretched condition of the Church, when he says that her children he
   prostrate. A mother cannot be visited with any grief more bitter than
   to have her children slain before her eyes, and not one or two of them,
   but so great a number as to fill the roads with the slaughter.

   As a wild bull in a net. The metaphor is taken from bears or other
   savage animals, by which he means that even the strongest of them have,
   as it were, been caught in snares.

   Full of the indignation of Jehovah. By this expression he distinctly
   states that none of these events are accidental, lest they should
   suppose that any of them has happened by chance, or lest they should
   accuse the Lord of cruelty for having punished them severely; because
   his judgment is just and righteous. This is what he means, when he says
   that this punishment has proceeded from the rebuke of the Lord. Yet we
   must bear in mind his object which I have already mentioned, that
   believers ought not to throw away the hope of grace, though innumerable
   calamities prompt and urge them to despair.

   21. Therefore now hear this. He now shews more plainly the reason why
   he spoke of the calamities of the Church. It was, that believers might
   be fully persuaded that they would obtain consolation from God, though
   they were reduced to the extremity of distress. But why does he call
   the Church wretched, since nothing is more happy than to be God's
   people, and that happiness cannot be taken away by any tribulations?;
   Not without cause is it said,

   "Blessed is the people whose God is Jehovah."
   (Psalm 144:15.)

   I reply, she is apparently "wretched," and not in vain does the Lord
   address her by that name; for, as we have already said, he helps the
   wretched, and succors the destitute.

   And drunken, not with wine. [35] When he calls her "drunken," it ought
   to be observed that believers never endure so patiently the
   chastisements which are inflicted on them as not to be sometimes
   stupified; but, although stupified, they ought to remember that the
   Lord punishes them justly, and ought to believe that the Lord will
   assist them. He does not speak to robust or healthy men, but to those
   who are feeble, wretched, prostrate, and who resemble drunken persons,
   and says that he brings to them consolation. Finally, by this word he
   soothes the grief of the Church, and shews that he preserves a limit,
   by which he restrains the violence even of the greatest afflictions,
   and restores her when ruined, as if he were raising from the dead a
   rotten corpse.

   22. Thus saith Jehovah. Not at random does the Prophet add to the name
   Jehovah three epithets, namely, that he is the Lord or Defender of his
   Church, that he is God, and lastly, that he is her Avenger. We ought
   always to consider what is the nature of our relation to God; for he
   addresses us in a familiar manner, in consequence of having once chosen
   us to be his people, by uniting himself to us in an everlasting
   covenant. This preface encouraged the Jews, in ancient times, not to
   hesitate to embrace what is here promised; and at the present day the
   same argument applies to a new people, who have been taken under God's
   care and protection not less than they. The Lord declares himself to
   hold the office of an "Avenger," in order that, when we shall be
   threatened with the most alarming dangers, and when it shall appear as
   if all were over with us, we may betake ourselves to this anchor, that
   God is the "Avenger" of his people; and this ought to support us, not
   only when we are assailed by outward enemies, but also when we are
   assailed by Satan.

   Behold, I have taken from thy hand. He holds out the ground of hope;
   for it is only by temporary stripes that the Lord chastises his Church.
   Hence also the Jews ought to learn that all the calamities to which
   they were subjected were the just reward of their transgressions; for
   those calamities would never come to an end but by their being
   reconciled to God. The general meaning is, that the wrath of the Lord
   will be appeased, so that he will restrain and bring to a close the
   chastisements which he had formerly inflicted on his Church.

   The cup of thy affliction, or, the cup of thy trembling. We have
   already spoken of the metaphor of "the cup;" and the explanation of it
   which we gave is fully confirmed by this passage, in which God calls it
   "the cup of his indignation," though it had made the Church to tremble,
   as if she had been seized with giddiness. Yet it is the same word which
   he formerly used, trlh (targnelah,) which some translate "anguish," and
   others "trembling." By dregs, as I have said, he means the full measure
   of vengeance with which God is satisfied on account of his fatherly
   kindness.

   23. And I will put it into the hand of thy oppressors. This is another
   part of the consolation, in which he promises that the Lord will not
   only deliver the Church from those heavy distresses, but will also lay
   upon her enemies the calamities with which she is afflicted. If
   therefore we are afflicted, [36] our condition will be speedily
   changed, and our enemies will be severely punished. Truly, as Paul
   says, it is righteous with God to render tribulation to them that
   trouble you, and to you who are troubled rest along with us, when the
   Lord shall be revealed from heaven, with the angels of his power, with
   flame of fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that
   obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ." (2 Thessalonians 1:6-8.)
   Thus the temporary punishments which God inflicts on them are the
   beginnings of that eternal punishment to which they shall be finally
   condemned.

   Who said to thy soul. In order to describe more fully the insolence and
   haughtiness of their enemies, such as we too experience every day in
   our adversaries, he quotes their words, by which they slandered and
   insulted the unhappy children of God. Impiety is always accompanied by
   pride and cruelty; for, as the true knowledge of God renders men
   gentle, so ignorance makes them ferocious and savage. They who are
   ignorant of God please themselves, and pour out unmeasured reproaches
   against God and those who truly worship him. This truly is most
   wretched and base; but since he frequently permits his name to be
   exposed to the insults of wicked men, let us not wonder that we are
   assailed on account of his name; for we are not more excellent than
   God, and our condition ought not to be better than that of the ancient
   Church. David employs a different metaphor, (Psalm 129:3,) when he says
   that the Church resembles a field which is cut and broken up by the
   plough; for he shews that frequently it is deeply furrowed and trodden
   upon, that we may not think that our condition is different.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [21] "Regardez a la pierre dont vous avez este coupez." "Look to the
   stone whence you were hewn."

   [22] "On ne sauroit recevoir promesse queleonque." "No promise whatever
   can be believed."

   [23] "Les hommes miserables de nature." "Men who are by nature
   miserable."

   [24] "Non pas qu'ils le pensent oisif ni endormi au ciel."

   [25] "Here is a noble mixture of lively figures; the Prophet first
   addressing himself to the Lord, as if he were fast asleep, tired with
   fatigue and labor; then painting him in a martial posture, dressing
   himself in arms, and putting on his accoutrements; then raising his
   courage by a narration of his former valorous performances, Art not
   thou that Arm which cut off the Egyptian Rahab, when with all the
   strength of his kingdom he pursued the naked Israelites to the further
   banks of the Red Sea? Certainly thou art the same, not at all decayed
   in strength, but able to do as much for thy people now, as for their
   fathers then." -- White.

   [26] "Par Rahab, que nous avons traduit l'orgueilleuse." "By Rahab,
   which we have translated The proud."

   [27] "J'aime mieux le prendre pour cantique en cest endroit-ci." "I
   prefer to take it for a song in this passage."

   [28] "Que nons avons traduit banni." "Which we have translated
   banished."

   [29] That is, they treat it as the Kal participle of an active verb,
   signifying "Banishing," and not as the participle of a passive or
   neuter verb, signifying "Banished," or "Wandering." -- Ed.

   [30] "A l'histoire de la deliverance d'Egypte."

   [31] "He sets forth God like a physician, mixing a bitter potion for
   Jerusalem, putting as it were into one cup all the anger he had
   conceived against her, and standing by to see her take it off, that not
   a drop should be spilt, or any of the nauseous settlings left behind: a
   potion so strong that it made her tremble every limb of her, and so
   giddy that she stood in need of one to lead her: but such were her
   misfortunes that none of her inhabitants were able to support her; by
   all which the Prophet means that her afflictions should be so great as
   to turn her brain, and make her sink under the load of them." --
   W'hite.

   [32] "Pource qu'il retient son bras." "Because he restrains his arm."

   [33] The allusion appears to be to a different but analogous
   expression. See Com. on Isaiah, [3]Vol. 3, pp. 201,202. -- Ed.

   [34] "Afin de donner puis apres a son Eglise des enfans legitimes qui
   luy assistent." "In order afterwards to give to his Church lawful
   children to assist her."

   [35] skrt dvr 'hd sl' myyn (shekurath dabar ehad shello miyain).
   Drunken with something which is not wine." -- Jarchi.

   [36] "si nous sommes persecutez." "If we are persecuted."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 52.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 52:1-15

   1. Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful
   garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no
   more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.

   1. Excitare, excitare, indue fortitudinem tuam, Sion, indue vestes
   decoris tui, Ierusalem, civitas sancta; quia non fiet amplius ut veniat
   in to incircumcisus et immundus.

   2. Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose
   thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.

   2. Excute to de pulvere, surge, sede, Ierusalem; extricate a vinculis
   colli tui, captiva filia Sion.

   3. For thus saith the LORD, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye
   shall be redeemed without money.

   3. Quia sic dicit Iehova: Gratis venditi estis; ideo sine pecunia
   redimemini.

   4. For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down aforetime into
   Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.

   4. Quia sic dicit Dominus Iehova: In AEgyptum olim descenderat populus
   meus ut peregrinaretur illic; verum Assur absque causa oppressit eum.

   5. Now therefore, what have I here, saith the LORD, that my people is
   taken away for nought? They that rule over them make them to howl,
   saith the LORD; and my name continually every day is blasphemed.

   5. Et nunc, Quid mihi hic, dicit Iehova, ut ablatus sit populus meus
   gratis, et qui in eum dominantur faciant eum ululare, dicit Iehova, et
   jugiter tota die nomen meum contumeliae expositum sit?

   6. Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in
   that day that I am he that doth speak; behold, it is I

   6. Propterea sciet populus meus nomen meum; propterea in die illa, quod
   ego idem qui loquor; ecee, adero.

   7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth
   good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of
   good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God
   reigneth!

   7. Quam speciosi super montes pedes annuntiantis, publicantis salutere,
   dicentis Sioni, Regnat Deus tuus.

   8. Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall
   they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the LORD shall bring
   again Zion.

   8. Vox speculatorum tuorum; levaverunt vocem, pariterjubilabunt;
   quoniam oculo ad oculum videbunt, cum Iehova reducet Sion.

   9. Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem:
   for the LORD hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

   9. Laudate, exultate pariter, solitudines Ierusalem; qnoniam consolatus
   est Iehova populum suum, redemit Ierusalem.

   10. The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the
   nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our
   God.

   10. Nudavit Iehova brachium sanctitatis sum coram oculis omnium
   gentium; et videbunt omnes fines terrae salutem Dei nostri.

   11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean
   thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the
   vessels of the LORD.

   11. Discedite, discedite, exite inde, immundum ne attingite, exite e
   medio ejus, mundamini qui ferris vusa Iehovae.

   12. For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the LORD
   will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward.

   12. Quoniam non in festinatione exibitis, neque in fuga erit iter
   vobis; quandoquidem praecedet vos Iehova, et congregabit vos Deus
   Israel.

   13. Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and
   extolled, and be very high.

   13. Ecce prosperum successum habebit servus mens; exaltabitur,
   elevabitur, et valde sublimis erit.

   14. As many were astonied at thee; his visage was so marred more than
   any man, and his form more than the sons of men:

   14. Quemadmodum obstupuerunt super to multi, adeo deformata fuit ab
   hominibus species ejus, et forran ejus a filiis hominum:

   15. So shall he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their
   mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall they see;
   and that which they had not heard shall they consider.

   15. Sic asperget gentes multas; super eum reges claudent os suum; quia
   quod non fuerat ipsis narratum videbunt; et qued non audierant
   intelligent.


   1. Awake, awake. He confirms the former doctrine, in order still more
   to arouse the people who had been weighed down by grief and sorrow.
   These things were necessary to be added as spurs, that the doctrine
   might more easily penetrate into their drowsy and stupified hearts; for
   he addresses the Church, which appeared to be in a benumbed and drowsy
   condition, and bids her "awake," that she may collect her strength and
   revive her courage, he repeats it a second time, and with great
   propriety; for it is difficult to arouse and reanimate those whose
   hearts have been struck, and even laid prostrate, by a sense of God's
   anger.

   Put on thy strength. As if he had said, "Formerly thou wast dejected,
   and wallowedst in filth and pollution; now prepare for a happy and
   prosperous condition, to which the Lord will restore thee." Thus he
   contrasts "strength" with despondency, such as is usually found when
   affairs are desperate; and he contrasts garments of beauty with filth
   and pollution.

   For henceforth there shall not come to thee. The reason assigned by him
   is, that henceforth God will not permit wicked men to indulge their
   sinful inclinations for destroying it. Freed from their tyranny, the
   Church already has cause to rejoice; and security for the future holds
   out solid ground for joy and gladness. Yet Isaiah exhorts us to mutual
   congratulation when God is reconciled to his Church; and indeed if we
   have any piety in us, we ought to be deeply affected by her condition,
   that we may rejoice in her prosperity, and be grieved in her adversity.
   [37] In short, it ought to be the height of our gladness, as also the
   Psalmist says,

   "Let my tongue cleave to my jaws, if I remember not thee, and if thou
   be not the crown of my gladness." (Psalm 137:6.)

   By the word come, he means what we commonly express by the phrase,
   (Avoir e entree,) "to have access."

   By the uncircumcised and unclean, he means all irreligious persons who
   corrupt the worship of God and oppress consciences by tyranny. It was
   customary to apply the term "uncircumcised" to all who were estranged
   from the Church, which had for its symbol "circumcision," by which all
   believers were distinguished. But as very many persons, though they
   bore this outward mark of the covenant, were not better than others, in
   order to remove all doubt, he added the word "unclean;" for the mark of
   "circumcision is nothing in itself," (Galatians 5:6,) and (unless, as
   Paul says, there be added purity of heart) "is even reckoned
   uncircumcision." (Romans 2:25,) Accordingly, he declares that
   henceforth such persons shall not be admitted into the Church, in order
   that, by the removal of corruptions, and the restoration of the worship
   of God, she may possess perfect joy. Yet I do not object to viewing
   these words as applied to outward foes, whom he calls by hateful names,
   that even the severity of the punishment may warn the Jews of the
   heinousness of their offenses.

   2. Shake thyself from the dust; arise. He explains more fully the
   deliverance of the Church, and exhibits it prominently by hupotuposin,
   "a lively description." When he bids her "shake off the dust and
   arise," let us not on that account think that our liberty is in our
   power, so that we can obtain it whenever we think fit; for it belongs
   to God alone to raise us from the dust, to lift us up when we are
   prostrate, and, by breaking or loosing our chains, to set us at
   liberty. Why then does the Prophet make use of the imperative mood? for
   it is unreasonable to demand what we cannot perform. I reply, the
   imperative form of address has a much more powerful tendency to arouse
   than if he had employed plain narrative; and therefore he declares
   that, when God shall have restored her to her former freedom, she shall
   come out of the mire.

   Sit, O Jerusalem,. The word "sit" denotes a flourishing condition, and
   is contrasted with the word "to lie," which denotes the lowest
   calamity. Sometimes indeed it means "to be prostrate," as when he
   formerly said to Babylon, "sit in the dust." (Isaiah 47:1.) But here
   the meaning is different; for, after ordering her to arise, he likewise
   adds, "that she may sit;" that is, that she may no longer lie down, but
   may regain her former condition, and not be in future laid prostrate by
   enemies.

   3. For thus saith Jehovah. This verse has been badly expounded by many
   commentators, who have here chosen to enter into philosophical
   subtleties; for they have dreamed of many things at variance with the
   Prophet's meaning. It agrees with what he had formerly stated,

   "To which of my creditors have I sold you?" (Isaiah 1:1.)

   For here, in the same manner, he says, "Ye have been sold for nought;"
   as if he had said that he has received no price, and is under no
   obligations to a creditor who can claim them as having been purchased
   by him. This tends greatly to confirm the promise; because the Jews
   might entertain doubts of the liberty which was promised to them, in
   consequence of their having been long held in possession by the
   Babylonians, who were the most powerful of all nations. The Lord meets
   this doubt. "I did not sell or make a conveyance of you to them; for
   nought were ye sold; and therefore I can justly claim you as nay
   property and sell you. Do not then consider how great are your
   difficulties, when I promise you liberty, and do not reason on this
   matter by human arguments; for the Babylonians have no right to detain
   you, and cannot prevent your being set at liberty.

   Therefore shall ye be redeemed without money. Lastly, as he had
   formerly said, that he is not like a spendthrift, who is compelled to
   sell his children, or offer them in payment, so in this passage he
   declares that "for nought he sold" and gave them up to their enemies,
   for no other reason than because they had provoked him by their sins;
   and therefore that there will be no greater difficulty in delivering
   them than in giving them up to their enemies.

   Some explain it more ingeniously thus, that Christ has redeemed us by
   free grace. This doctrine must indeed be maintained, but does not agree
   with the Prophet's meaning, who intended to correct the distrust of the
   Jews, that they might have no doubt as to their being set at liberty.
   Let it suffice to know, that when God shall be pleased to deliver his
   people, it will not be necessary to make a pecuniary bargain with the
   Babylonians, whom, in spite of their opposition, he will have no
   difficulty in driving out of their unjust possession.

   4. Into Egypt my people went down aforetime. Here also the commentators
   touch neither heaven nor earth; for the Jews dream of three
   captivities, and Christians differ from them by thinking that this
   denotes a third captivity, which shall be under Antichrist, and from
   which Christ will deliver them. But the Prophet's meaning, in my
   opinion, is quite different; for he argues from the less to the
   greater, by quoting the instance of the Egyptian captivity, from which
   the people were formerly recalled by the wonderful power of God.
   (Exodus 14:28.) The argument therefore stands thus: "If the Lord
   punished the Egyptians because their treatment of his people was harsh
   and unjust, (Genesis 15:14,) much more will he punish the Babylonians,
   who have cruelly tyrannized over them."

   But the Assyrian has oppressed them without cause. There was much
   greater plausibility in Pharaoh's claim of dominion over the Jews than
   in that of the Babylonians; for Jacob, having voluntarily come down to
   Egypt with his family, (Genesis 46:5,) undoubtedly became subject to
   the power of Pharaoh, who, in return for the kindness received from
   Joseph, [38] had assigned to him a large country and abundant
   pasturage. Pharaoh's successors, ungrateful and forgetful of the
   benefit conferred on them by Joseph, afflicted all the posterity of
   Jacob in various ways. This ingratitude and cruelty the Lord severely
   punished. But far more base and savage was the wickedness of the
   Babylonians, who drove the Jews out of a lawful possession, and dragged
   them into bondage. If then the Lord could not bear the Egyptians, who
   were unthankful and ruled by unjust laws, though in other respects they
   had a just title to possession, much less will he endure the violent
   and cruel Babylonians, who have no right to govern his people and
   oppress them by tyranny.

   By "the Assyrian," he means the Babylonians, who were united under the
   same monarchy with the Assyrians; but he takes special notice of "the
   Assyrian," because he was the first that grievously distressed the
   Jews, and that prepared the way for this captivity.

   5. What have I here? He follows out and confirms what I have already
   said, that it; is not reasonable that he should silently permit his
   people to be any longer oppressed. By these words he reproves, in some
   measure, his own delay; as if he had said, "Shall I not stretch out my
   hand? Shall I not avenge my people? If Pharaoh did not hinder me,
   though he was a lawful master, shall the violence of robbers hinder
   me?" He next enumerates the reasons which ought to move him to bring
   back the people.

   That my people should be carried away for nought. There must be
   understood an implied contrast to the participle "carried away;" for
   the Egyptians did not "carry away" Jacob by force; he came down to it
   of his own accord when he was pressed by famine, yet he was delivered
   from it; [39] how much more shall he be rescued out of the hand of
   those who tore him from his native country, and carried him by violence
   into captivity?

   That they should cause them to howl. In order to express more forcibly
   the baseness of this conduct, he says that they are constrained to howl
   without ceasing. Some translate the vero as neuter; [40] but I think
   that it is intended to express the strength of their hatred, and
   therefore I consider it to be an active verb, expressive of the
   violence which the Babylonians exercised towards the Jews; for they not
   only ruled unjustly over them, but also treated them harshly. To "howl"
   is more than to sigh or weep; for there is reason to believe that the
   pain which sends forth loud and strong cries is exceedingly severe. The
   metaphor is taken from wild beasts, and denotes extreme despair.

   The third and principal reason why the Lord will deliver his people is,
   that his name is continually exposed to the reproach and blasphemy of
   wicked men. For the sake of his own honor the Lord preserves the
   Church, and defends the pure worship of his name. Because wicked men
   seize on the Church's calamitous state as a reason for blasphemy, and
   insolently mock God, with good reason does he say, that by delivering
   his people, he will plead his own cause. I do not here relate the
   various interpretations, or stay to refute them; for it will be enough
   for me to have briefly explained the Prophet's real meaning.

   6. Therefore shall my people know. In this verse he concludes what he
   had glanced at in the two preceding verses, that at length the people
   must be redeemed by God, who cannot be unlike himself; for, if he
   redeemed the fathers, if he always assisted the Church, their
   posterity, whom he has adopted in the same manner, will never be
   suffered by him to be overwhelmed. We ought carefully to observe the
   word "know;" for to "know the name of the Lord" is to lay aside every
   false opinion, and to know him from his word, which is his true image,
   and next from his works. We must not imagine God according to the fancy
   of men, but must comprehend him as he declares himself to us. The Lord,
   therefore, concludes that he will actually assist them, and will
   fulfill all that he has promised, that the people may know that their
   hope has not been without foundation, and that they may be more and
   more confirmed in the knowledge of his name. We must keep in
   remembrance what we have elsewhere said about experimental knowledge,
   which confirms the truth of the word.

   That it is I who speak. The verb "to speak" relates to the promises.
   hnny (hinni,) Behold I, relates to actual power; as if he had said,
   "Although now there be nothing more than that there sound in your ears
   the words by which I promise what is hardly probable, yet you shall
   speedily obtain it; for I will actually accomplish what I promise."
   Hence we ought to draw the universal doctrine, that the promises of God
   and the fulfillment of them are linked together by an indissoluble
   bond. Whenever, therefore, Satan tempts and urges us to distrust, as if
   God had forsaken and abandoned us, we must come back to this point, and
   place our confidence in God, who never promises anything in vain. "If
   hitherto he does not perform, yet he will assist in due time."

   7. How beautiful upon the mountains. The Prophet again confirms
   believers as to the certainty of the word of God, that they may be
   fully persuaded that they shall be restored to their former liberty,
   and may comfort their hearts by assured hope during that hard bondage.
   He pronounces magnificent commendations on this message, that believers
   may be convinced that God holds out to them, in their calamity, the
   hope of future salvation; and indeed, when God speaks, they ought to
   accept the consolation, that, relying on it, they may calmly and
   patiently wait for the fulfillment of the promise. Thus, in order that
   believers may bridle their desires by patience, he splendidly adorns
   the word of God. "Will you be so ungrateful as not to rest satisfied
   with that incomparable treasure of the word which contains so many
   benefits? Will you give way to unruly passions? Will you complain of
   God?" He wishes to guard against distrust the people who were drawn
   away by various allurements, and did not fully rely on the word of God;
   and therefore he praises the excellence of the doctrine, and shews that
   the Lord bestows upon "us more than we can say or think." (Ephesians
   3:20.)

   He states that he does not now speak of every kind of doctrine, but of
   that which is adapted to consolation, and therefore shews that
   "beautiful" and lovely is the approach of those who bring consolation
   from the mouth of God, which can not only alleviate our grief, but even
   impart to us abundant joy. Here he speaks of the doctrine of salvation,
   and consequently says that peace, happiness, salvation, is proclaimed.
   By the word "peace" he denotes a prosperous and happy condition, as we
   have already in other passages explained fully the signification of
   this term.

   That saith to Zion. Hence we infer what is the beginning of that
   doctrine which Isaiah preaches, and what we ought chiefly to desire,
   namely, that the kingdom of God may be erected among us; for until he
   reign among us, everything must go in with us, and therefore we must be
   miserable, as, on the other hand, when God is pleased to take care of
   us, this of itself is the chief part of salvation; and this, too, is
   the only way of obtaining peace, though the state of affairs be ruinous
   and desperate. And let us remember that this message is sent to the
   Church; for it cannot apply to heathens that know not God.

   Paul quotes this passage, in order to prove that the preaching of the
   Gospel proceeds not from men but from God, and that the ministers who
   bring the message of salvation are sent by him. He employs this chain
   of reasoning, -- "Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be
   saved. But it is impossible for any one to call on God till he know
   him; for there can be no entrance to calling on him till it is opened
   up by faith, that, embracing God as our Father, we may familiarly pour
   our cares into his bosom. Now, the foundation of it is doctrine, by
   which the Lord has revealed himself to us, and for that purpose employs
   the agency and ministry of men. Therefore he adds, lastly, that there
   will be none to preach till he be sent by God." (Romans 10:15.)

   But it may be thought that Paul tortures the Prophet's words; for
   Isaiah does not say that God sends ministers, but that their approach
   and presence is desirable. I reply, Paul took this principle for
   granted, that nothing is desirable but what comes from God. But whence
   comes salvation? From men? No; for none but God can be the author of
   such a distinguished benefit. Justly, therefore, does he conclude that
   it proceeds from God, and not from man.

   8. The voice of thy watchmen. He continues his argument; for he shews
   that there shall be such a restoration of the people, that the
   messengers shall venture boldly to proclaim it. To lift up the voice
   has the same meaning with the phrase, "on the mountains," which he
   formerly employed. (Verse 7.) The matter will not be hidden, but so
   clear and evident as to draw forth universal admiration. They who speak
   of what is doubtful matter mutter inaudibly, [41] and do not venture to
   "lift up the voice;" but here there will be nothing doubtful or
   uncertain.

   The Prophet borrowed the metaphor from sentries which are commonly
   placed in cities, though the designation of "watchmen" is usually given
   to all Prophets, because they are placed, as it were, on watch-towers,
   to keep watch over the safety of the people. When he says that they
   shall lift up the voice, he means that there will be silence during the
   captivity, because the voice of the Prophets shall not be heard; for
   although they warn every one privately, yet there will be no freedom of
   speech. Hence also Jeremiah says, "I will put my mouth in the dust."
   (Lamentations 3:29) But when the Lord shall be pleased to lead forth
   the people, the mouth of watchmen, who were formerly dumb, shall be
   opened to proclaim that they are at liberty to return; for they will
   not speak within private walls, or impart moderate consolation, but
   will openly proclaim that salvation. On this subject I have spoken
   fully at the beginning of the fortieth chapter. [42]

   Eye to eye; that is, openly. This extends, indeed, to spiritual
   conversion; but let us not on that account depart from the literal
   sense, so as not to include also the benefit which the Lord conferred
   on the ancient people; for, when he restored the Jews to liberty, and
   employed the ministry of Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah, these things
   were fulfilled. Yet at the same time they ought to be continued down to
   the coming of Christ, by which the Church was gathered out of all parts
   of the world. But we ought also to go forward to Christ's last coming,
   by which all things shall be perfectly restored.

   9. Praise ye, rejoice together. He exhorts believers to thanksgiving,
   but chiefly confirms them in the hope and confidence of this salvation;
   as if the actual enjoyment of it already called them to thank God for
   it. [43] We are not sufficiently moved, when the Lord testifies that he
   will assist us, and think that we are deceived, if he do not actually
   show it. On this account the Prophets insist much on strengthening the
   hearts of believers, and placing the fact almost before their eyes.
   Although it appears to be unreasonable and inappropriate to prescribe a
   song of joy in the midst of grief, yet we have elsewhere seen that this
   form of expression is well fitted to arouse those who groan under the
   burden of sorrow, fear, and cares.

   Ye wildernesses of Jerusalem. He calls them "wildernesses" or waste
   places "of Jerusalem," that, notwithstanding its ruin and destruction,
   they might still hope that it would be restored. And this appellation
   is better adapted for shaking off fear than if he had called her
   prosperous or flourishing; for, in consequence of their condition being
   very wretched, nothing would have led them to think that these promises
   related to them except a description of their misery, against which
   they needed to be fortified, in order that, though they beheld nothing
   but desolation and hideous ruin, still they might look for restoration
   with assured confidence.

   For Jehovah hath comforted his people. The Lord hath changed the
   mourning of the people into joy, and out of captivity hath made them
   free. Yet some person will say [44] that this had not yet happened. But
   in the promises of God, as in a mirror, we ought to behold those things
   which are not yet visible to our eyes, even though they appear to us to
   be contrary to reason.

   He hath redeemed Jerusalem. Here we see that to deliver the Church is
   God's own work. And if we ought to judge thus of the redemption from
   Babylon, which was but of a shadowy nature, what shall we say of the
   spiritual redemption? Can it be ascribed to men without grossly
   insulting God? As it belongs to God alone to deliver the Church, so to
   him it likewise belongs to defend its liberty.

   10. Jehovah hath made bare the arm of his holiness. The Prophet has
   borrowed this comparison from soldiers who stretch out their arms when
   they make ready for the battle. To "make bare" does not here mean to
   hold out the naked arm, but to exert it; because, when we sit in
   idleness, we either have our arms folded or conceal them; and in like
   manner, we conceive of God according to the grossness of our senses,
   and think that, like a wearied or indolent man, he does not move a
   finger till he publicly displays his power.

   The Prophet calls it "the arm of holiness," because he intended to
   display his power for the salvation of the people. This implies a
   mutual relation between God and the Church which the Lord has
   consecrated to himself. True, "he maketh bare his arm" in the
   government of the whole world; but he does not call it "the arm of
   holiness," as in this passage, when he renders peculiar assistance to
   his Church. There are two points of view in which the power of God
   ought to be regarded; first, universally, in preserving all the
   creatures; next, specially, in defending the Church; for there is a
   peculiar care which he exercises about his own people, and which the
   rest do not share with them.

   Before the eyes of all nations. He means that this deliverance shall be
   worthy of so great admiration that it shall be visible even to the
   blind. The extension of this magnificent spectacle to the very ends of
   the earth makes it evident that the Prophet does not speak of the
   return of the people, which would take place a few years afterwards,
   but of the restoration of the whole Church. This prophecy is
   maliciously restricted by the Jews to the deliverance from Babylon, and
   is improperly restricted by Christians to the spiritual redemption
   which we obtain through Christ; for we must begin with the deliverance
   which was wrought under Cyrus, (2 Chronicles 36:22, 23,) and bring it
   down to our own time. Thus the Lord began to display his power among
   the Medes and Persians, but afterwards he made it visible to all the
   nations.

   11. Depart ye, depart ye. He now exhorts the people to be always ready
   to set out, and at the same time to bear their misery with patience. As
   the excessive haste of the people needed to be restrained, so it was
   also proper to shake off their slothfulness; for, before the time of
   deliverance arrived, they burned with extravagant eagerness to depart;
   but when the period of the captivity was fulfilled, they had grown
   languid through long delay, and had thrown away all hope and wish to
   return, so that there were few who returned to Judea. [45] They had
   mingled with the Babylonians, whose customs had captivated and depraved
   them so much that they disregarded their native country; and therefore
   they needed to be aroused and admonished, that they might not lose
   heart through long expectation, and might not suffer themselves to be
   corrupted by the pollutions of the Babylonians.

   Touch not what is unclean. [46] This expresses more clearly what we
   have already said. He bids them keep themselves pure and free from the
   defilements with which the Babylonians polluted themselves; for there
   was a risk of their being corrupted by the pollutions of the Gentiles,
   as we are all prone to evil, and easily led away by bad examples.
   Accordingly, he exhorts them, though they are captives, not to do
   anything for the purpose of pleasing their masters, or of having their
   condition improved; not to allow themselves to be drawn aside from the
   pure worship of God; not to be polluted by their idolatries; not to
   pretend that they worship idols or approve of their religion; for this
   is detestable "uncleanness," which the Prophet bids them shun. Captives
   and those who groan under tyranny meet with temptations of this kind,
   under which they frequently sink so as to allow themselves to do many
   things that are unlawful and base, under the pretense of wishing to
   mitigate the rage of tyrants. But how frivolous their excuse is we see
   in this passage; for the Prophet does not exhort the Jews to be clean
   when they shall be free, but so long as they shall be held captive, and
   even when their life shall be in danger. These words undoubtedly relate
   to us also, whom Paul exhorts to be unpolluted, not only "in spirit,"
   but also "in the flesh." (2 Corinthians 7:1).

   Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of Jehovah. This exhortation is
   especially directed to the priests and Levites, who, being
   standardbearers, ought to maintain greater integrity; not that others
   have a right to pollute themselves, but he addresses them chiefly, that
   they may give an example to others, to whom they have been appointed to
   be guides. Besides, we must bear in remembrance what we have already
   seen, and what Isaiah will again repeat at the end of this book, that
   there will be a new priesthood among a redeemed people. (Isaiah 66:21.)

   Yet I approve of the simple meaning, that the Levites and ministers of
   the temple are put, by way of eminence, (kat' exochen) for the whole of
   the people. This doctrine, therefore, relates in the present day, not
   only to ministers of the word, but to all Christians, who are also
   called "a royal priesthood," (1 Peter 2:9,) and not only are appointed
   to carry the vessels of the temple, but are themselves "temples of
   God." (1 Corinthians 16, and 6:19.) Thus Ezekiel has predicted that at
   the restoration of the Church the Levites shall be high priests, and
   the whole people shall be admitted into the order of the Levites.
   Seeing, therefore, that the Lord has raised all to so high a rank of
   dignity, it follows that this "cleanness" is demanded from all without
   exception; and on this account also Paul has applied this passage to
   the whole Church.

   12. For not in haste shall ye go out. The Prophet again magnifies that
   benefit of redemption, for it appeared to be incredible, so deep was
   the despair with which almost all of them had been seized; for he
   chiefly addresses those who would be led into captivity, that they
   might not lose courage in that wretched condition. He promises that
   this deliverance shall not resemble a flight such as that of Egypt; for
   there is an implied contrast between the deliverance from Egypt. and
   the deliverance from Babylon. They fled "by night" out of Egypt,
   (Exodus 12:31,) having pretended that they were only performing "a
   journey of three days to offer sacrifice to God." (Exodus 5:3.) They
   went out "with haste" (Exodus 12:33) and bustle, as they were told to
   do, and Pharaoh pursued them in their journey and attempted to destroy
   them. But the Prophet declares that the present case shall be totally
   different, and that they shall go away like conquerors, so that none
   shall venture to give them any annoyance, or, as we commonly say, "They
   will go out with flying colors," (Ils s'en iront a enseigne desployee,)
   so that this deliverance will be more excellent and wonderful.

   Jehovah will go before you; that is, will be the leader of your
   journey. It will be said that God was also the leader of his ancient
   people when he led them out of Egypt. This is undoubtedly true; but he
   did not at that time display his majesty, as now, when, like a general,
   he brought back his army, after having vanquished his enemies.

   And the God of Israel will assemble you. The word "assemble" will
   confirm the interpretation now given; for there will be no scattering
   such as usually takes place when men are under the influence of terror,
   nor will they wander about here and there, but will march, as under
   banners, in a regular and ordinary manner. As if he had said, "God will
   bring you out as a band or army drawn up; one shall not follow another,
   like those who steal away secretly; but ye shall be openly gathered in
   troops, and shall depart without any fear. None shall molest you; for
   you will be assembled under God as your leader, that you may return
   into your native country.

   13. Behold, my servant shall have prosperous success [47] After having
   spoken of the restoration of the Church, Isaiah passes on to Christ, in
   whom all things are gathered together. Some explain yskyl (yashkil) to
   mean shall "deal prudently;" but, as it is immediately added that he
   shall be exalted, the context appears to demand that we shall rather
   understand it to denote "prosperous success," for skl (shakal) also
   signifies "to be prosperous." He speaks, therefore, of the prosperity
   of the Church; and as this was not visible, he draws their attention to
   the supreme King, by whom all things shall be restored, and bids them
   wait for him. And here we ought carefully to observe the contrasts
   which the Prophet lays down; for the mightiness of this king whom the
   Lord will exalt is contrasted by him with the wretched and debased
   condition of the people, who were almost in despair. He promises that
   this king will be the head of the people, so that under him as the
   leader the people shall flourish, though they be now in a state of the
   deepest affliction and wretchedness; because he shall have a prosperous
   course.

   He calls Christ "his Servant," on account of the office committed to
   him. Christ ought not to be regarded as a private individual, but as
   holding the office to which the Father has appointed him, to be leader
   of the people and restorer of all things; so that whatever he affirms
   concerning himself we ought to understand as belonging also to us.
   Christ has been given to us, and therefore to us also belongs his
   ministry, for the Prophet might have said, in a single word, that
   Christ will be exalted and will be highly honored; but, by giving to
   him the title of "Servant," he means that he will be exalted for our
   sake.

   14. As many. He makes use of an anticipation; for the exalted state of
   Christ was not visible at first sight, and on this pretense it might be
   rejected. On this account, he informs them that Christ must first be
   rejected and humbled, and anticipates that doubt which might have
   arisen from his singularly debased and unseemly condition. As if he had
   said, "There is no reason why men should be shocked at that
   unseemliness and disgrace which will be speedily followed by eternal
   happiness."

   So marred by men. I have translated kn (ken) as meaning so; for it is a
   mistake to suppose that it opens the second part of the comparison.
   [48] I consider m'ys (meish) to mean "by men;" for I do not consider m
   (mem) to be a particle denoting comparison, as others explain it; that
   is "more than" men, or "beyond" what is usually found among men; but I
   adopt a simpler meaning, which is, that Christ was disfigured among
   men, or that his beauty was defaced by the perverse judgment of men.

   Were amazed. [49] This "amazement" is considered by some commentators
   to denote the astonishment with which men were seized on account of the
   miracles performed by Christ, and next, that, when he must come to the
   cross, he was immediately rejected by them. But they have not caught
   the Prophet's meaning; for he says that Christ will be such that all
   men will be shocked at him. He came into the world so as to be
   everywhere despised; his glory lay hid under the humble form of the
   flesh; for though a majesty worthy of "the onlybegotten Son of God"
   (John 1:14) shone forth in him, yet the greater part of men did not see
   it, but, on the contrary, they despised that deep abasement which was
   the veil or covering of his glory.

   The cause of their astonishment was this, that he dwelt among men
   without any outward show; and the Jews did not think that the Redeemer
   would come in that condition or attire. When he came to be crucified,
   their horror was greatly increased. Paul describes this humiliation and
   subsequent exaltation of Christ, when he says,

   "Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to make himself
   equal to God, but emptied himself, taking upon him the form of a
   servant, made in the likeness of man, and found in fashion as a man,
   humbled himself, being made obedient even to death, and the death of
   the cross. Wherefore also God hath raised him to the highest
   exaltation, and hath given him a name which is above every name; that
   at the name of Jesus should bow every knee of those that are in heaven
   and in earth and in hell; and that every tongue should confess that
   Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." (Philippians
   2:6-11)

   It was therefore necessary that Christ should first be humbled and
   covered with shame, and that exaltation to which he was about to be
   raised was not all at once visible; but the shame of the cross was
   followed by a glorious resurrection attended by the highest honor.

   15. So shall he sprinkle many nations. Some explain it, "Shall cause to
   drop," which they take to be a metaphorical expression for "to speak."
   But since nzh signifies "to sprinkle," and is commonly found to have
   this sense in Scripture, I choose rather to adopt this interpretation.
   He means that the Lord will pour out his Word over "many nations." He
   next mentions the effect of doctrine, that kings shall shut their
   mouth, that is, in token of astonishment, but a different kind of
   astonishment from that which he formerly described. Men "shut their
   mouths," and are struck with bewilderment, when the vast magnitude of
   the subject is such that it cannot be expressed, and that it exceeds
   all power of language.

   What they have not heard. He means that this astonishment will not
   arise merely from Christ's outward appearance, but, on the contrary,
   from the preaching of the Gospel; for, though he had risen from the
   dead, yet all would have thought that he was still a dead man, if the
   glory of his resurrection had not been proclaimed. By the preaching of
   the Gospel, therefore, were revealed those things which formerly had
   neither been seen nor heard; for this doctrine was conveyed to kings
   and nations that were very far off, and even to the very ends of the
   world.

   Paul quotes this passage, and shows that it was fulfilled in his
   ministry, and glories on this ground, that he proclaimed the doctrine
   of the Gospel to those who had never heard of it at all. (Romans 15:21)
   This belongs to the office of an Apostle, and not to the office of
   every minister. He means that the kingdom of Christ is more extensive
   than merely to embrace Judea, and that it is not now confined within
   such narrow limits; for it was proper that it should be spread through
   all nations, and extended even to the ends of the world. The Jews had
   heard something of Christ from the Law and the Prophets, but to the
   Gentiles he was altogether unknown; and hence it follows that these
   words relate strictly to the Gentiles.

   They shall understand. By this word he shows that faith consists in
   certainty and clear understanding. Wherever, therefore, knowledge of
   this kind is wanting, faith is unquestionably wanting. Hence it is
   evident how idle is the notion of the Papists about implicit faith,
   which is nothing else than gross ignorance, or rather a mere creature
   of imagination.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [37] "Pour rire et chanter quand elle florit, et pleurer lors qu'elle
   est persecutee." "To laugh and sing when she is flourishing, and to
   weep when she is persecuted."

   [38] "En recognoissance du bien que Joseph avoit fait au royaume." "In
   gratitude for the benefit which Joseph had conferred on the kingdom."

   [39] "Toutes fois sa posterite en a este delivree." "Yet his posterity
   was delivered from it."

   [40] That is, that the verb means "to howl," instead of "to cause to
   howl." -- Ed.

   [41] "Murmurent entre les dents." "Mutter between the teeth."

   [42] See Com. on Isaiah, [4]Vol. 3, p. 197.

   [43] "A en remercier Dieu."

   [44] "Quelqu'un dira."

   [45] "Tellement que le nombre de ceux qui revindrent en Judee fut bien
   petit." "So that the number of those who returned to Judea was very
   small."

   [46] "Ne touchcz point la souillure." "Touch not defilement."

   [47] "Here some begin the 53d chapter, and Salmeron says it is so
   divided in some copies which he had seen; the subject is new, and has
   nothing which smacks of Babylon,' (quod Babylonium olet,) according to
   the expression of Sanctius, and is to be literally understood of the
   Messiah, as all expositors that I have met with agree, except Grotius,
   who thinks the words may in the first lower sense of them be understood
   of Jeremiah the prophet, considered as a type of Christ." -- White.

   [48] Our author's meaning is, that he has rendered the clause, "He was
   so (much) marred," while others render it, "So he was marred;" making
   the So to correspond to the As in the former clause, which he
   pronounces to be a mistake.  Ed.

   [49] "Comme plusieurs t'ont eu en horreur." "As many were shocked at
   thee."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 53.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 53:1-12

   1. Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the LORD
   revealed?

   1. Quis credet auditui nostro? et brachium Iehovae cui (ad verbum,
   super quem)?

   2. For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out
   of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see
   him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

   2. Ascendet tamen sicut virgultum coram eo, et sicut radix e terra
   deserta. Non forma ei, neque decor. Videbimus eum; et non aspectus, ut
   desideremus eum.

   3. He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted
   with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised,
   and we esteemed him not.

   3. Despectus et rejectus inter homines, vir dolorum, peritus
   infirmitatis; quasi abscondimus faciem ab eo, et nihili reputavimus
   eum.

   4. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did
   esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

   4. Sane langoures nostros ipse tulit, et dolores nostros ipse portavit;
   et nos existimavimus eum percussum, vulneratum a Deo et humiliatum.

   5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
   iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
   stripes we are healed.

   5. Atqui Apse vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras, attritus est
   propter peccata nostra. Castigatio pacis nostrae super eum, et in
   livore ejus sanatio (vel, medela) nobis.

   6. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his
   own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

   6. Omnes nos tanquam oves erravimus, quisque in viam suam declinavit.
   Et Iehova traduxit in eum nostras omniurn iniquitatcs.

   7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth:
   he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
   shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

   7. Mulctatus est, et afflictus, (vel, oppressus,) nec aperuit os suum.
   Quasi pecus ad mactationem ducetur, et tanquam ovis coram tonsoribbus
   suis obmutescet, nec aperiet os suum.

   8. He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare
   his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for
   the transgression of my people was he stricken.

   8. E carcere et judicio sublatus est, et generationem ejus quis
   enarrabit? Quoniam succisus est e terra viventium; propter
   transgressionem populi mei plaga illi.

   9. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
   death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his
   mouth.

   9. Et exposuit impiis sepulchrum ejus, et diviti mortem ejus; quamvis
   iniquitatem non fecerit, nec fecerit dolos in ore ejus revelatum est?

   10. Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him; he hath put him to grief:
   when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
   seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the LORD shall
   prosper in his hand.

   10. Voluit tamen Iehova conterere eum, infirmitati subjicere. Cum
   posuerit in sacrificium animam suam, videbit semen, prorogabit dies, et
   voluntas Iehovae in manu ejus prosperabitur.

   11. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by
   his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall
   bear their iniquities.

   11. E labore animae suae videbit, et saturabitur; et doctrina sua (vel,
   cognitione sui) justificabit justus servus meus multos; quia
   iniquitates eorum ipse portabit.

   12. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
   divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul
   unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the
   sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.

   12. Propterea distribuam illi partem cum magnis, et eum robustis spolia
   dividet. Quoniam profudit in mortem animam suam, et cum iniquis
   reputatus est; ipse peccatum multorum tulit, et pro iniquis oravit.


   1. Who will believe our report? This division, or rather dismemberment,
   of the chapter, ought to be disregarded; for it ought to have begun
   with the thirteenth verse of the former chapter, and these words ought
   to be connected with what goes before. [50] Here the Prophet pauses, as
   it were, in the middle of his discourse; for, having formerly said that
   the name of Christ would be everywhere proclaimed, and would be
   revealed to unknown nations, and yet would have so mean an aspect that
   it might appear as if these things were fabulous, he breaks off his
   discourse, and exclaims that "Nobody will believe those things." At the
   same time, he describes his grief, that men are so unbelieving as to
   reject their salvation.

   Thus, it is a holy complaint made by one who wished that Christ should
   be known by all, and who, notwithstanding of this, sees that there are
   few who believe the Gospel, and therefore groans and cries out, "Who
   hath believed our report?" Let us therefore groan and complain along
   with the Prophet, and let us be distressed with grief when we see that
   our labor is unprofitable, and let us complain before God; for godly
   ministers must be deeply affected, if they wish to perform their work
   faithfully. Isaiah declares that there will be few that submit to the
   Gospel of Christ; for, when he exclaims, "Who will believe the
   preaching?" he means that of those who hear the Gospel scarcely a
   hundredth person will be a believer.

   Nor does he merely speak of himself alone, but like one who represents
   all teachers. Although therefore God gives many ministers, few will
   hold by their doctrine; and what then will happen when there are no
   ministers? Do we wonder that the greatest blindness reigns there? If
   cultivated ground is unfruitful, what shall we look for from a soil
   that is uncultivated and barren? And yet it does not detract anything
   from the Gospel of Christ, that there are few disciples who receive it;
   nor does the small number of believers lessen its authority or obscure
   its infinite glory; but, on the contrary, the loftiness of the mystery
   is a reason why it scarcely obtains credit in the world. It is reckoned
   to be folly, because it exceeds all human capacities.

   To whom (literally, on whom) is the arm of Jehovah revealed? In this
   second clause he points out the reason why the number of believers will
   be so small. It is, because no man can come to God but by an
   extraordinary revelation of the Spirit. To suppose that by the word
   "Arm" Christ is meant, is, in my opinion, a mistake. It assigns the
   cause why there are so few that believe; and that is, that they cannot
   attain it by the sagacity of their own understanding. This is a
   remarkable passage, and is quoted by John and Paul for that purpose.
   "Though Jesus," said John, "had performed many miracles in their
   presence, they believed not in him, that the saying of Isaiah the
   Prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake,

   "Lord, who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
   revealed?"
   (John 12:37, 38)

   And Paul says, "But they do not all believe the Gospel; for Isaiah
   saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?" (Romans 10:16) Both of them
   declare that there will be no reason to wonder, if that which was long
   ago foretold shall happen; and they do so for the purpose of removing
   offense which might have arisen from the revolt of that nation, which
   ought to have acknowledged Christ, but obstinately resisted him.

   Isaiah does not include merely the men of his own time, but all
   posterity to the end of the world; for, so long as the reign of Christ
   shall endure, this must be fulfilled; and therefore believers ought to
   be fortified by this passage against such a scandal. These words refute
   the ignorance of those who think that faith is in the power of every
   person, because preaching is common to all. Though it is sufficiently
   evident that all are called to salvation, yet the Prophet expressly
   states that the external voice is of no avail, if it be not accompanied
   by a special gift of the Spirit. And whence proceeds the difference,
   but from the secret election of God, the cause of which is hidden in
   himself?

   2. Yet he shall grow up before him as a twig. This verse refers to what
   was formerly said, that Christ will at first have no magnificence or
   outward display among men; but that before God he will nevertheless be
   highly exalted, and will be held in estimation. Hence we see that we
   must not judge of the glory of Christ by human view, but must discern
   by faith what is taught us concerning him by the Holy Scriptures; and
   therefore the phrase "before him," is here contrasted with human
   senses, which cannot comprehend that lofty greatness. Almost the same
   metaphor was used by the Prophet, (Isaiah 11:1) when he said, "A branch
   shall spring out of the stock of Jesse;" for the house of David was
   like a dry stock, in which no rigor and no comeliness was visible, and
   on that account is there called not a royal house, but "Jesse," a name
   which bore no celebrity. Only the Prophet adds here, --

   In a desert land; by which he means that Christ's power of springing up
   will not be derived from the sap of the earth, as in trees, but
   contrary to the ordinary course of nature. They who in this passage
   speculate about the virgin Mary, and suppose that she is called a
   desert land, because she conceived by the Holy Ghost, and not by
   ordinary generation, speak beside the purpose; for the present subject
   is not the birth of Christ, but his whole reign. He says that it will
   resemble a twig springing out of a dry soil, which looks as if it could
   never become large. If we take into account the whole method of
   establishing his kingdom, and the agency which he employed, and how
   feeble were its beginnings, and how many foes it encountered, we shall
   easily understand that all these things were fulfilled as they had been
   foretold. What sort of men were the Apostles that they should subdue so
   many kings and nations by the sword of the word? Are they not justly
   compared to offshoots? Thus the Prophet shows by what means the kingdom
   of Christ must be set up and established, that we may not judge of it
   by human conceptions.

   He hath no form nor comeliness. This must be understood to relate not
   merely to the person of Christ, who was despised by the world, and was
   at length condemned to a disgraceful death; but to his whole kingdom,
   which in the eyes of men had no beauty, no comeliness, no splendor,
   which, in short, had nothing that could direct or captivate the hearts
   of men to it by its outward show. Although Christ arose from the dead,
   yet the Jews always regarded him as a person who had been crucified and
   disgraced, in consequence of which they haughtily disdained him.

   3. Despised and rejected. This verse conveys the same statement as the
   preceding, namely, that Christ will be "rejected" by men, in
   consequence of their beholding in him nothing but grief and infirmity.
   These things needed to be often repeated to the Jews, that they might
   not form a false conception of Christ and his kingdom; for, in order to
   know his glory, we must proceed from his death to his resurrection.
   Many stumble at his death, as if he had been vanquished and overwhelmed
   by it; but we ought to contemplate his power and majesty in the
   resurrection; and if any one choose to begin with the resurrection, he
   will not follow the order laid down by the Prophet, nor comprehend the
   Lord's strength and power.

   We hid the face from him. Not without reason does he use the first
   person, we; for he declares that there will be a universal judgment;
   and no man will ever be able to comprehend it by his own understanding
   till the Lord correct and form him anew by his Spirit. Although he
   appears chiefly to censure the Jews, who ought not to have so haughtily
   rejected the Son of God promised and offered to them, and therefore
   reckons himself as one of the number, because he was an individual
   belonging to that nation; yet let us learn from this passage that all
   men are accursed and condemned for ingratitude in despising Christ,
   because they do not even consider him to be worthy of being looked at,
   but turn away their eyes as if from something detestable.

   4. Surely he carried our sicknesses. The particle 'kn (aken) is not
   only a strong affirmation, but is likewise equivalent to for, and
   assigns a reason of something which went before, and which might have
   been thought new and strange; for it is a monstrous thing that he to
   whom God has given supreme authority over all the creatures should be
   thus trampled on and scorned; and if the reason were not assigned, it
   would have been universally pronounced to be ridiculous. The reason,
   therefore, of the weakness, pains, and shame of Christ is, that "he
   carried our sicknesses."

   Matthew quotes this prediction, after having related that Christ cured
   various diseases; though it is certain that he was appointed not to
   cure bodies, but rather to cure souls; for it is of spiritual disease
   that the Prophet intends to speak. But in the miracles which Christ
   performed in curing bodies, he gave a proof of the salvation which he
   brings to our souls. That healing had therefore a more extensive
   reference than to bodies, because he was appointed to be the physician
   of souls; and accordingly Matthew applies to the outward sign what
   belonged to the truth and reality.

   We thought him to be smitten, wounded by God, and afflicted. In this
   second clause he shows how great was the ingratitude and wickedness of
   the people, who did not know why Christ was so severely afflicted, but
   imagined that God smote him on account of his own sins, though they
   knew that he was perfectly innocent, and his innocence was attested
   even by his judge. (Matthew 27:24; Luke 23:4, 14, 22; John 18:38) Since
   therefore they know that an innocent man is punished for sins which he
   did not commit, why do they not think that it indicated some
   extraordinary excellence to exist in him? But because they see him
   wounded and despised, they do not inquire about the cause, and from the
   event alone, as fools are wont to do, they pronounce judgment.
   Accordingly, Isaiah complains of the wicked judgment of men, in not
   considering the cause of Christ's heavy afflictions; and especially he
   deplores the dullness of his own nation, because they thought that God
   was a deadly enemy of Christ, and took no account of their own sins,
   which were to be expiated in this manner.

   5. And he was wounded for our iniquities. He again repeats the cause of
   Christ's great afflictions, in order to meet the scandal which might
   have arisen from it. The spectacle of the cross alienates many persons
   from Christ, when they consider what is presented to their eyes, and do
   not observe the object to be accomplished. But all offense is removed
   when we know that by his death our sins have been expiated, and
   salvation has been obtained for us.

   The chastisement of our peace. Some think that this is called "the
   chastisement of peace," on account of men being careless and stupefied
   amidst their afflictions, and therefore that it was necessary that
   Christ should suffer. Others view "peace" as relating to the
   consciences, that is, that Christ suffered, in order that we might have
   peaceful consciences; as Paul says that, "being justified by faith
   through Christ, we have peace with God." (Romans 5:1) But I take it to
   denote simply reconciliation. Christ was the price of "our
   chastisement," that is, of the chastisement which was due to us. Thus
   the wrath of God, which had been justly kindled against us, was
   appeased; and through the Mediator we have obtained "peace," by which
   we are reconciled.

   We ought to draw from this a universal doctrine, namely, that we are
   reconciled to God by free grace, because Christ hath paid the price of
   "our peace." This is indeed acknowledged by the Papists; but then they
   limit this doctrine to original sin, as if after baptism there were no
   longer any room for reconciliation through free grace, but that we must
   give satisfaction by our merits and works. But the Prophet does not
   here treat of a single species of pardon, but extends this blessing to
   the whole course of life; and therefore it cannot be thus undervalued
   or limited to a particular time, without most heinous sacrilege. Hence
   also the frivolous distinction of the Papists, between the remission of
   punishment and the pardon of sin, is easily refuted. They affirm that
   punishment is not remitted to us, unless it be washed out by
   satisfactions. But the Prophet openly declares that the punishment of
   our sins was transferred to him. What, then, do the Papists intend but
   to be Christ's equals and companions, and to lay claim to share with
   him in his authority?

   In his wound (or, in his medicine) we have healing. He again directs us
   to Christ, that we may betake ourselves to his wounds, provided that we
   wish to regain life. Here the Prophet draws a contrast between us and
   Christ; for in us nothing call be found but destruction and death; in
   Christ alone is life and salvation, he alone brought medicine to us,
   and even procures health by his weakness, and life by his death; for he
   alone hath pacified the Father, he alone hath reconciled us to him.
   Here we might bring forward many things about the blessed consequences
   of Christ's sufferings, if we had not determined to expound rather than
   to preach; and therefore let us be satisfied with a plain exposition.
   Let every one, therefore, draw consolation from this passage, and let
   him apply the blessed result of this doctrine to his own use; for these
   words are spoken to all in general, and to individuals in particular.

   6. We all, like sheep, have gone astray. In order to impress more
   deeply on our hearts the benefit of the death of Christ, he shows how
   necessary is that healing which he formerly mentioned. If we do not
   perceive our wretchedness and poverty, we shall never know how
   desirable is that remedy which Christ has brought to us, or approach
   him with due ardor of affection. As soon as we know that we are ruined,
   then, aware of our wretchedness, we eagerly run to avail ourselves of
   the remedy, which otherwise would be held by us in no estimation. In
   order, therefore, that Christ may be appreciated by us, let every one
   consider and examine himself, so as to acknowledge that he is ruined
   till he is redeemed by Christ.

   We see that here none are excepted, for the Prophet includes "all." The
   whole human race would have perished, if Christ had not brought relief.
   He does not even except the Jews, whose hearts were puffed up with a
   false opinion of their own superiority, but condemns them
   indiscriminately, along with others, to destruction. By comparing them
   to sheep, he intends not to extenuate their guilt, as if little blame
   attached to them, but to state plainly that it belongs to Christ to
   gather from their wanderings those who resembled brute beasts.

   Every one hath turned to his own way. By adding the term every one, he
   descends from a universal statement, in which he included all, to a
   special statement, that every individual may consider in his own mind
   if it be so; for a general statement produces less effect upon us than
   to know that it belongs to each of us in particular. Let "every one,"
   therefore, arouse his conscience, and present himself before the
   judgmentseat of God, that he may confess his wretchedness. Moreover,
   what is the nature of this "going astray" the Prophet states more
   plainly. It is, that every one hath followed the way which he had
   chosen for himself, that is, hath determined to live according to his
   own fancy; by which he means that there is only one way of living
   uprightly, and if any one "turn aside" from it, he can experience
   nothing but "going astray."

   He does not speak of works only, but of nature itself, which always
   leads us astray; for, if we could by natural instinct or by our own
   wisdom, bring ourselves back into the path, or guard ourselves against
   going astray, Christ would not be needed by us. Thus, in ourselves we
   all are undone unless Christ (John 8:36) sets us free; and the more we
   rely on our wisdom or industry, the more dreadfully and the more
   speedily do we draw down destruction on ourselves. And so the Prophet
   shows what we are before we are regenerated by Christ; for all are
   involved in the same condemnation. "There is none righteous, none that
   understandeth, none that seeketh God. All have turned aside, and have
   become unprofitable. There is none that doeth good; no, not one."
   (Psalm 14:3) All this is more fully explained by Paul. (Romans 3:10)

   And Jehovah hath laid upon him. Here we have a beautiful contrast. In
   ourselves we are scattered; in Christ we are gathered together. By
   nature we go astray, and are driven headlong to destruction; in Christ
   we find the course by which we are conducted to the harbor of
   salvation. Our sins are a heavy load; but they are laid on Christ, by
   whom we are freed from the load. Thus, when we were ruined, and, being
   estranged from God, were hastening to hell, Christ took upon him the
   filthiness of our iniquities, in order to rescue us from everlasting
   destruction. This must refer exclusively to guilt and punishment; for
   he was free from sin. (Hebrews 4:15; 1 Peter 2:22) Let every one,
   therefore, diligently consider his own iniquities, that he may have a
   true relish of that grace, and may obtain the benefit of the death of
   Christ.

   7. He was punished. Here the Prophet applauds the obedience of Christ
   in suffering death; for if his death had not been voluntary, he would
   not have been regarded as having satisfied for our disobedience. "As by
   one man's disobedience," says Paul, "all became sinners, so by one
   man's obedience many were made righteous. (Romans 5:19) And elsewhere,
   "He became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross."
   (Philippians 2:8) This was the reason of his silence at the
   judgmentseat of Pilate, though he had a just defense to offer; for,
   having become answerable for our guilt, he wished to submit silently to
   the sentence, that we might loudly glory in the righteousness of faith
   obtained through free grace.

   As a lamb shall he be led to the slaughter. We are here exhorted to
   patience and meekness, that, following the example of Christ, we may be
   ready to endure reproaches and cruel assaults, distress and torture. In
   this sense Peter quotes this passage, showing that we ought to become
   like Christ our Head, that we may imitate his patience and
   submissiveness. (1 Peter 2:23) In the word lamb there is probably an
   allusion to the sacrifices under the Law; and in this sense he is
   elsewhere called "the Lamb of God." (John 1:29, 36)

   8. From prison and judgment. There are various ways in which this
   passage is expounded. Some think that the Prophet continues the
   argument which he had already begun to treat, namely, that Christ was
   smitten by the hand of God, and afflicted, on account of our sins. The
   Greek translators render it, en tho tapeinosei autou he krisis autou
   erthe. "In his humiliation his judgment was taken away." Others, "He
   was taken away without delay." Others explain it, "He was taken away to
   the cross;" that is, as soon as Christ was seized, he was dragged to
   "judgment." I rather agree with those who think that the Prophet, after
   having spoken of death, passes to the glory of the resurrection. He
   intended to meet the thoughts by which the minds of many persons might
   have been troubled and distressed; for when we see nothing but wounds
   and shame, we are struck with amazement, because human nature shrinks
   from such a spectacle.

   The Prophet therefore declares that he was taken away; that is, that he
   was rescued "from prison and judgment" or condemnation, and afterwards
   was exalted to the highest rank of honor; that no one might think that
   he was overwhelmed or swallowed up by that terrible and shameful kind
   of death. For, undoubtedly, he was victorious even in the midst of
   death, and triumphed over his enemies; and he was so judged that now he
   has been appointed to be judge of all, as was publicly manifested by
   his resurrection. (Acts 10:42) The same order is followed by the
   Prophet as by Paul, who, after having declared that Christ was abased
   even to the cross, adds that, on this account, he was exalted to the
   very highest honor, and that there was given him a: name to which all
   things both in heaven and in earth must render obedience and bend the
   knee. (Philippians 2:9)

   Who shall relate his generation? This exclamation has been stretched
   and (I may say) tortured into various meanings. The ancients abused
   this passage in reasoning against the Arians, when they wished to prove
   by it Christ's eternal generation. But they ought to have been
   satisfied with clearer testimonies of Scripture, that they might not
   expose themselves to the mockery of heretics, who sometimes take
   occasion from this to become more obstinate; for it might easily have
   been objected that the Prophet was not thinking about that subject.
   Chrysostom views it as relating to the human nature of Christ, that he
   was miraculously, and not by ordinary generation, conceived in the womb
   of the virgin; but that is a wide departure from the Prophet's meaning.
   Others think that Isaiah kindles into rage against the men of that age
   who crucified Christ. Others refer it to the posterity which should be
   born; namely, that Christ's posterity will be numerous though he die.

   But, as dvr (dor) signifies "age" or "duration," I have no doubt that
   he speaks of the "age" of Christ, and that his meaning is, that Christ,
   though almost overwhelmed by sicknesses, shall not only be taken from
   them, but that even his age shall be permanent and eternal; or, in
   other words, that he shall be unlike those who are indeed rescued from
   death, but shall afterwards die; for Christ rose from the dead, to live
   for ever, and, as Paul says, "cannot now die; death shall no longer
   have dominion over him." (Romans 6:9) Yet let us remember that the
   Prophet does not speak of Christ's person alone, but includes the whole
   body of the Church, which ought never to be separated from him. We have
   therefore a striking proof of the perpetuity of the Church. As Christ
   liveth for ever, so he will not permit his kingdom to perish. The same
   immortality shall at length be bestowed on each of the members.

   For he was cut off. This might indeed, at first sight, appear to be
   absurd, that the death of Christ is the cause and source of our life;
   but, because he bore the punishment of our sins, we ought therefore to
   apply to ourselves all the shame that appears in the cross. Yet in
   Christ the wonderful love of God shines forth, which renders his glory
   visible to us; so that we ought to be excited to rapturous admiration.

   For the transgression of my people. He again repeats that the wound was
   inflicted on him "for the sins of the people;" and the object is, that
   we may diligently consider that it was for our sake, and not for his
   own, that he suffered; for he bore the punishment which we must have
   endured, if he had not offered this atonement. We ought to perceive in
   ourselves that guilt of which he bore the accusation and punishment,
   having offered himself in our name to the Father, [51] that by his
   condemnation we may be set free.

   9. And he laid open to wicked men his grave. Jerome renders it, "And he
   gave wicked men for burial;" as if the Prophet spake of the punishment
   by which the Lord took vengeance for the sin of wicked men, who
   crucified Christ. But he rather speaks of the death of Christ, and of
   the fruit of it, and says nothing about that revenge. Others think that
   the particle 't (eth) denotes comparison, in the same manner as the
   particle k (caph). "He gave his grave as of wicked men." Others
   interpret 't (eth) to mean with, and explain "the rich man" to be
   Joseph of Arimathea, in whose sepulcher Christ was buried. (Matthew
   27:60; John 19:38) But such an interpretation is too unnatural. I
   rather think that the real meaning is, that God the Father delivered
   Christ into the hands of wicked men.

   And to the rich man his death. I consider the singular syr (gnashir,)
   "the rich man," to be put for the plural srym (gnashirim), as is
   frequently done by Hebrew writers. I see no reason why Oecolampadius
   rendered it "high places." [52] By "rich men" he means "violent men;"
   for men grow haughty and disdainful on account of their riches, and
   abuse their wealth to savage cruelty. And thus by the terms "wicked
   men" and "rich men" the same thing, in my opinion, is denoted. He
   means, therefore, that Christ was exposed to the reproaches, and
   insolence, and lawless passions of wicked men. For, on the one hand,
   the Pharisees and priests (Matthew 26:66) rush upon him with unbridled
   rage and foul slander; on the other hand, Pilate, though well aware of
   his innocence, (Mark 15:14) condemns him in opposition to law and
   justice; and again, on another hand, the Roman soldiers, ready for
   every kind of barbarity, cruelly and wickedly execute the cruel and
   wicked sentence. (John 19:16) Who would not conclude that Christ was
   crushed and "buried" amidst those impious and bloody hands?

   I consider the word grave to be here used metaphorically, because
   wicked and violent men might be said to have overwhelmed him. If it be
   objected that Christ had an honorable burial, I reply, that burial was
   the commencement of a glorious resurrection; but at present the Prophet
   speaks of death, which is often denoted by "the grave." I consider
   this, therefore, to be the real meaning, though I wish to leave every
   person free to form his own opinion.

   Though he did no iniquity. l (gnal) signifies "because;" but sometimes
   it is used in the sense of "though," as in this passage. [53] Here the
   Prophet applauds the innocence of Christ, not only in order to defend
   him from slander, but to speak highly of the benefit of his death, that
   we may not think that he suffered by chance. Though innocent, he
   suffered by the decree of God; and therefore it was for our sake, and
   not for his own, that he suffered. He bore the punishment which was due
   to us.

   Neither was there deceit in his mouth. In two words he describes the
   perfect innocence of Christ; namely, that he never offended either in
   deed or in word. That this cannot be said of any mortal man is
   universally acknowledged, and hence it follows that it applies to
   Christ alone.

   10. Yet Jehovah was pleased to bruise him. This illustrates more fully
   what I formerly stated in few words, that the Prophet, in asserting
   Christ's innocence, aims at something more than to defend him from all
   reproach. The object therefore is, that we should consider the cause,
   in order to have experience of the effect; for God appoints nothing at
   random, and hence it follows that the cause of his death is lawful. We
   must also keep in view the contrast. In Christ there was no fault; why,
   then, was the Lord pleased that he should suffer? Because he stood in
   our room, and in no other way than by his death could the justice of
   God be satisfied.

   When he shall have offered his soul as a sacrifice. 'sm (asham) [54]
   denotes both sin and the sacrifice which is offered for sin, and is
   often used in the latter sense in the Scriptures. (Exodus 29:14;
   Ezekiel 45:22) [55] The sacrifice was offered in such a manner as to
   expiate sin by enduring its punishment and curse. This was expressed by
   the priests by means of the laying on of hands, as if they threw on the
   sacrifice the sins of the whole nation. (Exodus 29:15) And if a private
   individual offered a sacrifice, he also laid his hand upon it, as if he
   threw upon it his own sin. Our sins were thrown upon Christ in such a
   manner that he alone bore the curse.

   On this account Paul also calls him a "curse" or "execration:" "Christ
   hath redeemed us from the execration of the law, having been made an
   execration for us." (Galatians 3:13) He likewise calls him "Sin;" "For
   him who knew no sin hath he made to be sin for us, that we might be
   made the righteousness of God in him." (2 Corinthians 5:21) And in
   another passage, "For what was impossible for the law, inasmuch as it
   was weak on account of the flesh, God did, by sending his own Son in
   the likeness of flesh liable to sin, and for sin condemned sin in the
   flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us."
   (Romans 8:3, 4) What Paul meant by the words "curse" and "sin" in these
   passages is the same as what the Prophet meant by the word 'sm,
   (asham.) In short, 'sm (asham) is equivalent to the Latin word
   piaculum, [56] an expiatory sacrifice.

   Here we have a description of the benefit of Christ's death, that by
   his sacrifice sins were expiated, and God was reconciled towards men;
   for such is the import of this word 'sm, (asham.) Hence it follows that
   nowhere but in Christ is found expiation and satisfaction for sin. In
   order to understand this better, we must first know that we are guilty
   before God, so that we may be accursed and detestable in his presence.
   Now, if we wish to return to a state of favor with him, sin must be
   taken away. This cannot be accomplished by sacrifices contrived
   according to the fancy of men. Consequently, we must come to the death
   of Christ; for in no other way can satisfaction be given to God. In
   short, Isaiah teaches that sins cannot be pardoned in any other way
   than by betaking ourselves to the death of Christ. If any person think
   that this language is harsh and disrespectful to Christ, let him
   descend into himself, and, after a close examination, let him ponder
   how dreadful is the judgment of God, which could not be pacified but by
   this price; and thus the inestimable grace which shines forth in making
   Christ accursed will easily remove every ground of offense.

   He shall see his seed. Isaiah means that the death of Christ not only
   can be no hinderance to his having a seed, but will be the cause of his
   having offspring; that is, because, by quickening the dead, he will
   procure a people for himself, whom he will afterwards multiply more and
   more; and there is no absurdity in giving the appellation of Christ's
   seed to all believers, who are also brethren, because they are
   descended from Christ.

   He shall prolong his days. To this clause some supply the relative 'sr
   (asher,) "which:" "A seed which shall be long lived." But I expound it
   in a more simple manner, "Christ shall not be hindered by his death
   from prolonging his days, that is, from living eternally." Some
   persons, when departing from life, leave children, but children who
   shall survive them, and who shall live so as to obtain a name only when
   their fathers are dead. But Christ shall ell joy the society of his
   children; for he shall not die like other men, but shall obtain eternal
   life in himself and his children. Thus Isaiah declares that in the head
   and the members there shall be immortal life.

   And the will of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand. The word "hand"
   often denotes "ministry," as the Lord proclaimed the law "by the hand
   of Moses." (Numbers 36:13) Again, the Lord did this "by the hands of
   David;" that is, he made use of David as his minister in that matter.
   (Ezra 3:10) So also "in the hand of Christ shall prosper the will of
   God;" that is, the Lord will cause the ministry of Christ to yield its
   fruit, that it may not be thought that he exposed himself fruitlessly
   to such terrible sufferings.

   These few words contain a very rich doctrine, which every reader may
   draw from them; but we are satisfied with giving a simple exposition of
   the text. "Will" is taken in the same acceptation as before; for he
   makes use of the word chphph (chaphetz) by which he means a kind and
   generous disposition. Two views of God's kindness are held up for our
   admiration in this passage; first, that he spared not his onlybegotten
   Son, but delivered him for us, that he might deliver us from death; and
   secondly, that he does not suffer his death to be useless and
   unprofitable, but causes it to yield very abundant, fruit; for the
   death of Christ would be of no avail to us, if we did not experience
   its fruit and efficacy.

   11. From the labor of his soul he shall see. Isaiah continues the same
   subject. He declares that Christ, after having suffered, shall obtain
   the fruit of his death in the salvation of men. When he says, "He shall
   see," we must supply the words, "Fruit and Efficacy." This is full of
   the sweetest consolation; for Isaiah could not have better expressed
   the infinite love of Christ toward us than by declaring that he takes
   the highest delight in our salvation, and that he rests in it as the
   fruit of his labors, as he who has obtained his wish rests in that
   which he most ardently desired; for no person can be said to be
   satisfied but he who has obtained what he wished so earnestly as to
   disregard everything else and be satisfied with this alone.

   By his doctrine, or by the knowledge of him. He now points out the way
   and method by which we experience the power and efficacy of the death
   of Christ, and obtain the benefit of it. That method is "the knowledge
   of him." I acknowledge that the word dt (dagnath) may be taken either
   in an active or a passive sense, as denoting either "the knowledge of
   him" or "his knowledge." In whichsoever of these senses it is taken, we
   shall easily understand the Prophet's meaning; and the Jews will not be
   able to practice such impudent sophistry as to prevent us from
   extorting from them a reluctant acknowledgment of what is here
   asserted, that Christ. is the only teacher and author of righteousness.

   Shall justify many. By the word "justify" he points out the effect of
   this teaching. Thus, men are not only taught righteousness in the
   school of Christ, but are actually justified. And this is the
   difference between the righteousness of faith and the righteousness of
   the Law; for although the Law shows what it is to be righteous, yet
   Paul affirms that it is impossible that righteousness should be
   obtained by it, and experience proves the same thing; for the Law is a
   mirror in which we behold our own unrighteousness. (Romans 3: 20;
   Galatians 2:16, 21, and 3:10, 11.) Now, the doctrine which Christ
   teaches, as to obtaining righteousness, is nothing else than "the
   knowledge of him;" and this is faith, when we embrace the benefit of
   his death and fully rely on him.

   Philosophers have laid down many excellent precepts, which, as they
   imagine, contain righteousness; but they never could bestow it on any
   man; [57] for who ever obtained by their rules the power of living
   uprightly? And it is of no advantage to know what is true
   righteousness, if we are destitute of it. To say nothing about
   philosophers, the Law itself, which contains the most perfect rule of
   life, could not (as we have said) bestow this; not that there was any
   defect in it, for Moses testified (Deuteronomy 30:19) that "he had set
   before them good and evil, life and death;" but that the corruption of
   our nature is such that the Law could not suffice for procuring
   righteousness. In like manner Paul teaches (Romans 8:3) that this
   weakness proceeds "from our flesh," and not from the Law; for nature
   prompts us in another direction, and our lusts burst forth with greater
   violence, like wild and furious beasts, against the command of God. The
   consequence is, that "the law worketh wrath," instead of righteousness.
   (Romans 4:15) The law therefore holds all men as convicted, and, after
   having made known their sin, renders men utterly inexcusable.

   We must therefore seek another way of righteousness, namely, in Christ,
   whom the law also pointed out as its end. (Romans 10:3.) "The
   righteousness of the law was of this nature: He who doeth these things
   shall live by them." (Leviticus 18:5; Galatians 3:12.) But nobody has
   done them, and therefore another righteousness is necessary, which Paul
   also proves (Romans 10:8) by a quotation from Moses himself, "The word
   is nigh, in thy mouth and in thy heart; that is, the word of faith
   which we preach." (Deuteronomy 30:14) By this doctrine, therefore, we
   are justified; not by the bare and simple doctrine, but inasmuch as it
   exhibits the benefit of the death of Christ, by which atonement is made
   for our sins, and we are reconciled to God. (Romans 5:10.) For, if we
   embrace this benefit by faith, we are reckoned righteous before God.

   For he shall bear their iniquities. The Prophet explains his meaning by
   pointing out what this doctrine contains; for these two clauses agree
   well: "he shall justify by his doctrine," or "by the knowledge of him,"
   inasmuch as "he shall bear their iniquities." Having been once made a
   sacrifice for us, he now invites us by the doctrine of the Gospel, to
   receive the fruit of his death; and thus the death of Christ is the
   substance of the doctrine, in order that he may justify us. To this
   saying of the Prophet Paul fully subscribes; for, after having taught
   that "Christ was an expiatory sacrifice for us, that we might be made
   the righteousness of God in him," he at the same time adds, "We are
   ambassadors for Christ, and beseech you, be ye reconciled to God." (2
   Corinthians 5:20, 21)

   My righteous servant. He shows that Christ justifies us, not only as he
   is God, but also as he is man; for in our flesh he procured
   righteousness for us. He does not say, "The Son," but "My servant,"
   that we may not only view him as God, but may contemplate his human
   nature, in which he performed that obedience by which we are acquitted
   before God. The foundation of our salvation is this, that he offered
   himself as a sacrifice; and, in like manner, he himself declares,

   "For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also may be holy." (John
   17:19)

   12. Therefore will I divide to him a portion. Isaiah again declares
   what will be the result of the death of Christ. It was necessary that
   he should add this doctrine as to the victory which Christ obtained by
   his death; for what was formerly stated, that by his death we are
   reconciled to the Father, would not have sufficiently confirmed our
   hearts. Here he borrows a comparison from the ordinary form of a
   triumphal procession held by those who, after having obtained a signal
   victory, are commonly received and adorned with great pomp and
   splendor. Thus also Christ, as a valiant and illustrious general,
   triumphed over the enemies whom he had vanquished.

   And he shall divide the spoil with the strong. This statement is the
   same as the preceding, and it is a customary repetition among Hebrew
   writers. Those whom he formerly called "great" he now calls mighty or
   "strong." Those who translate rvym (rabbim) by the word "many," [58]
   torture, in my opinion, the Prophet's meaning. In these two clauses
   there is only this difference, that in the former God testifies what he
   gave to Christ, and in the latter he adds that Christ enjoys that
   benefit, he enjoys it not on his own account, but on ours; [59] for the
   fruit of this victory comes to us. For us Christ subdued death, the
   world, and the devil. In a word, the Prophet here applauds the victory
   which followed the death of Christ; for "although he was crucified
   through the weakness of the flesh, yet by the power of the Spirit" he
   rose from the dead, and triumphed over his enemies. (2 Corinthians
   13:4) Such is the import of the metaphor of "Spoil," which the Prophet
   used; for "he ascended on high, that he might lead captivity captive
   and give gifts to men." (Psalm 68:18; Ephesians 4:8)

   For he poured out his soul to death. He now adds that Christ's
   humiliation was the beginning of this supreme dominion; as Paul also
   declares that Christ, "after having blotted out the handwriting which
   was opposed to us, triumphed on the cross." (Colossians 2:14) So far,
   then, is the shame of the death which Christ died from making any
   diminution of his glory, that it is the reason why God the Father
   exalted him to the highest honor.

   And was ranked with transgressors. He describes also the kind of death;
   as Paul, when he magnifies "the obedience" of Christ, and says that "he
   abased himself even to death," likewise adds, that it was no ordinary
   death, but the death "of the cross," that is, accursed and shameful.
   (Philippians 2:8) So in this passage Isaiah, in order to express deeper
   shame, says that he was ranked among malefactors. But the deeper the
   shame before men, the greater was the glory of his resurrection by
   which it was followed.

   Mark quotes this passage, when he relates that Christ was crucified
   between two robbers; for at that time the prediction was most fully
   accomplished. (Mark 15:28) But the Prophet spoke in general terms, in
   order to show that Christ did not die an ordinary death. For the
   purpose of disgracing him the more, those two robbers were added; that
   Christ, as the most wicked of all, might be placed in the midst of
   them. This passage is, therefore, most appropriately quoted by Mark as
   relating to that circumstance.

   He bore the sin of many. This is added by way of correction, that, when
   we hear of the shame of Christ's death, we may not think that it was a
   blot on the character of Christ, and that our minds may not, by being
   prejudiced in that manner, be prevented from receiving the victory
   which he obtained for us, that is, the fruit of his death. He shows,
   therefore, that this was done in order that he might take our sins upon
   him; and his object is, that, whenever the death of Christ shall be
   mentioned, we may at the same time remember the atonement made for us.
   And this fruit swallows up all the shame of the death of Christ, that
   his majesty and glory may be more clearly seen than if we only beheld
   him sitting in heaven; for we have in him a striking and memorable
   proof of the love of God, when he is so insulted, degraded, and loaded
   with the utmost disgrace, in order that we, on whom had been pronounced
   a sentence of everlasting destruction, may enjoy along with him
   immortal glory.

   I have followed the ordinary interpretation, that "he bore the sin of
   many," though we might without impropriety consider the Hebrew word
   rvym (rabbim,) to denote "Great and Noble." And thus the contrast would
   be more complete, that Christ, while "he was ranked among
   transgressors," became surety for every one of the most excellent of
   the earth, and suffered in the room of those who hold the highest rank
   in the world. I leave this to the judgment of my readers. Yet I approve
   of the ordinary reading, that he alone bore the punishment of many,
   because on him was laid the guilt of the whole world. It is evident
   from other passages, and especially from the fifth chapter of the
   Epistle to the Romans, [60] that "many" sometimes denotes "all."

   And prayed for the transgressors. Because the ratification of the
   atonement, with which Christ has washed us by his death, implies that
   he pleaded with the Father on our behalf, it was proper that this
   should be added. For, as in the ancient Law the priest, who "never
   entered without blood," at the same time interceded for the people; so
   what was there shadowed out is fulfilled in Christ. (Exodus 30:10;
   Hebrews 9:7) First, he offered the sacrifice of his body, and shed his
   blood, that he might endure the punishment which was due to us; and
   secondly, in order that the atonement might take effect, he performed
   the office of an advocate, and interceded for all who embraced this
   sacrifice by faith; as is evident from that prayer which he left to us,
   written by the hand of John, "I pray not for these only, but for all
   who shall believe on me through their word." (John 17:20) If we then
   belong to their number, let us be fully persuaded that Christ hath
   suffered for us, that we may now enjoy the benefit of his death.

   He expressly mentions "transgressors," that we may know that we ought
   to betake ourselves with assured confidence to the cross of Christ,
   when we are horrorstruck by the dread of sin. Yea, for this reason he
   is held out as our intercessor and advocate; for without his
   intercession our sins would deter us from approaching to God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [50] "While most modern writers detach the three preceding verses and
   prefix them to this chapter, Hitzig goes to the opposite extreme of
   saying that the writer here begins afresh, without any visible
   connection with the previous context. Ewald more reasonably makes this
   a direct continuation, but observes a change of tone, from that of
   joyous confidence to that of penitent confession, on the part of the
   believing Jews, in reference to their former incredulity."  Alexander.

   [51] "Au pere celeste." "To the heavenly Father."

   [52] "Je ne voy point de raison pourquoy OEcolampade a traduit, II a
   expose ses hants lieux au riche." "I see no reason why OEcolampadius
   translated it, He laid open his high places to the rich man.'"

   [53] "l(gnal), for l 'sr (gnal asher), is properly a causative
   particle, equivalent to for that' or because;' but most interpreters
   regard it as equivalent to although,' which is more agreeable to our
   idiom in this connection. Knobel observes, with great naivete, that the
   reference of this verse to the burial of Christ has found its way into
   the exposition of the passage in connection with its general
   application to that subject; to which we may add, that it can only find
   its way out in connection with a wish to get rid of that unwelcome
   application. At the same time it must be observed, that even if syr
   (gnashir) be taken in the sense of wicked,' although we lose the
   striking allusion to the burial of Christ in the sepulcher of Joseph,
   the verse is still applicable to his burial, as the last clause then
   means, like the first, that they appointed him his grave with
   malefactors."  Alexander

   [54] 'sm (asham) primarily signifies a trespass or offense, and
   secondarily a trespassoffering. In the law of Moses it is technically
   used to designate a certain kind of sacrifice, nearly allied to the
   ht't (hattath) or sinoffering, and yet very carefully distinguished
   from it, although etymologists have never yet been able to determine
   the precise distinction, and a learned modern Rabbi, Samuel Luzzatto,
   expresses his conviction that they differed only in the mode of
   offering the blood. The word is here used not with spedfie reference to
   this kind of oblation, but as a generic term for expiatory sacrifice.
   The use of analogous expressions in the New Testament will be dear,
   from a comparison of Romans 3:25; 8:3; 2 Corinthians 5:21; 1 John 2:2;
   4:10; Hebrews 9:14 In the case last quoted, as in that before us,
   Christ is represented as offering himself to God."  Alexander

   [55] In both of the passages quoted by our author, the word is not 'sm
   (asham) but ht't (hattath), which, as appears from the preceding note,
   is closely analogous.  Ed

   [56] This Latin word, which bore the primary meaning of "an atonement
   for a transgression," and the secondary meaning of "any wickedness that
   requires expiation," is strikingly analogous to the Hebrew word in
   question, though the transference of the senses is exactly opposite.
   "Distulit in seram commissa piacula mortem, Virg. id est, Piacula
   commissa propter quae expiatio debetur."  Serv. "Piaculum committere"
   means literally to "commit a sacrifice," that is, "to commit a crime
   for which a sacrifice is required."  Ed.

   [57] "Mais ils n'ont jamais peu faire un seul hornroe juste." "But they
   never could make one man righteous."

   [58] "Ceux qui traduisent, Je luy distribueray portion avec plusieurs."
   "Those who translate, I will divide to him a portion with many."

   [59] "Non point pour soy, mais pour nous." "Not for himself, but for
   us."

   [60] Romans 5:12,18.  fj.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 54.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 54:1-17

   1. Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing,
   and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the
   children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith
   the LORD.

   1. Exulta, sterilis, quae non pariebas; exulta et jubila, quae non
   parturiebas; quoniam plures filii viduae quam filii conjugatae, dicit
   Iehova.

   2. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
   curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and
   strengthen thy stakes;

   2. Dilata locum tabernaculorum tuorum, et cortinas tentoriorum tuorum
   extendant: ne parcas. Produc funes tuos, et clavos tuos consolida.

   3. For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and
   thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be
   inhabited.

   3. Quia ad dextram et sinistram multiplicaberis: et semen tuum Gentes
   possidebit; et urbes desolatas inhabitabunt.

   4. Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded;
   for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of
   thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any
   more.

   4. Ne timeas, quia non pudifies; et ne erubescas, quia non afficieris
   ignominia; imo pudoris adolescentiae tuae oblivisceris; et opprobrii
   viduitatis tuae non recordaberis amplius.

   5. For thy Maker is thine husband; The LORD of hosts is his name; and
   thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall
   he be called.

   5. Quid maritus tuus, fictor tuus, cui nomen Iehova exercituum; et
   redemptor tuus Sanctus Israel, Deus universae terrae vocabitur.

   6. For the LORD hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in
   spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.

   6. Quoniam sicut mulierem relictam et destitutam spiritu vocavit to
   Iehova; et uxorem adolescentiae, quae repudiata fueras, dicit Deus
   tuus.

   7. For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will
   I gather thee.

   7. Ad exiguum momentum reliqui to, et in misericordiis magnis colligam
   to.

   8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with
   everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the LORD thy
   Redeemer.

   8. In momento irae abscondi faciem meam paulisper a to; at clementia
   sempiterna misertus sum tui, dicit redemptor tuus Iehova.

   9. For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that
   the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn
   that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.

   9. Quoniam aquae (vel, sicut dies) Noe, hoc mihi; quandoquidem juravi
   non fore ut amplius transirent aquae Noe super terram; ita juravi non
   fore ut tibi irascar vel increpem to.

   10. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my
   kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my
   peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath mercy on thee.

   10. Nam montes quidem movebuntur, et colles nutabunt; misericordia
   autem mea non recedet a to, nec foedus pacis meae vacillabit, dicit
   miserator tuus Iehova.

   11. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I
   will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with
   sapphires.

   11. Paupercula tempestate jactata, consolatione destituta; ecee ego
   struam super carbunculum lapides tuos, et fundabo to in sapphiris.

   12. And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles,
   and all thy borders of pleasant stones.

   12. Et ponam e margaritis fenestras tuas, et portas tuas ex lapide
   rutilante, et omnes fines tuos ex lapide pretioso.

   13. And all thy children shall be taught of the LORD; and great shall
   be the peace of thy children.

   13. Nam omnes filii tui docti ab Iehova, et multa pax filiis tuis.

   14. In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from
   oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not
   come near thee.

   14. In justitia praeparaberis, longe aberis ab oppressione, quia non
   timebis eam; et a pavore, quia non appropinquabit tibi.

   15. Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever
   shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.

   15. Et conveniens conveniet contra to absque me; qui convenerit in to,
   contra to cadet.

   16. Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the
   fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have
   created the waster to destroy.

   16. Ecce ego creavi fabrum, sufflantem in igne prunas, et proferentem
   instrumentum ad opus suum. Ego, inquam, creavi vastatorem ad perdendum.

   17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every
   tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.
   This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and their
   righteousness is of me, saith the LORD.

   17. Omne instrumenturn quod formaturn est contra to non habebit
   successum; et omnem linguam quae in to surrexerit in judicium tu
   damnabis. Haec haereditas servorum Iehova, et justitia eorum a me,
   dicit Iehova.


   1. Shout. After having spoken of the death of Christ, he passes on with
   good reason to the Church; that we may feel mere deeply in ourselves
   what is the value and efficacy of his death. We cannot behold it in
   Christ, if he be viewed by himself; and therefore we must come to his
   body, which is the Church; because Christ suffered for the Church, and
   not for himself. And this is the order in our Confession of Faith [61]
   for, after having professed that we believe in Christ, who suffered and
   was crucified for us, we add that we believe in the Church, [62] which
   flowed, as it were, from his side. Accordingly, after having discoursed
   concerning the death and resurrection and triumph of Christ, he
   properly comes down to the Church, which ought never to be separated
   from her Head, that each individual believer may learn by his own
   experience that Christ has not suffered in vain. And if he had not
   mentioned this doctrine, believers could not have so well strengthened
   their hearts by the hope of restoring the Church. This congratulation
   plainly shows that, when Christ shall come forth as a conqueror over
   death, he will not merely conquer for himself as an individual, but
   will, at the same time, breathe life into his body.

   Thou barren, that didst not bear. He calls the Church "barren," because
   no offspring could be expected from her, so long as she groaned under
   wretched bondage; for if any one had judged of her from her outward
   condition, he would have concluded that she was very near destruction.
   And even apart from her external wretchedness, there was nothing pure
   within; everything was corrupted and defiled by superstitions; for they
   had degenerated into the idolatrous rites of the Gentiles.

   The children of the widow. He calls the Church not merely "Barren," but
   a "Widow," though either of them might have taken away the hope of
   having offspring; but when these two are combined, what else can be
   looked for than wretched destruction? But against such accumulated
   distress he bids her be of good courage, because she shall have more
   children than the married woman.

   This passage may be explained in two ways; either as a comparison of
   the Church with the Gentiles, who flourished like "a married woman," or
   as a comparison with that condition in which the Church was before the
   captivity. Both senses will be perfectly admissible, but I prefer to
   adopt the more simple view; for I do not think that it is a comparison
   between two conditions of the Church, but that it is an ordinary form
   of expression which the Prophet employs in order to denote that this
   extraordinary fertility of the Church will be at variance with what
   usually takes place, so that men may not judge of her condition by the
   ordinary course of nature; because the work of God will be
   extraordinary and wonderful. And yet I acknowledge that she was at that
   time in widowhood; for God had long before sent to her by his servants
   a bill of divorcement, and had actually divorced that nation, by
   driving it into banishment. But the Prophet declares that this
   punishment will be temporary, as we shall immediately see more clearly.

   2. Widen the place of thy tabernacles. He continues his argument under
   other metaphors, and promises that the Lord will not only restore his
   Church, but will bestow upon her a condition far more excellent. They
   who think that the Church is compared in this passage to a synagogue
   are, in my opinion, mistaken, and only succeed in increasing the
   obstinacy of the Jews, who perceive that the Prophet's meaning is
   tortured. I do indeed acknowledge that these things relate to the
   kingdom of Christ, and that they were at length fulfilled as soon as
   the Gospel began to be preached; but it does not therefore follow that
   the Prophet did not, at the same time, keep his eye upon that period
   which preceded the coming of Christ.

   This prophecy began to be fulfilled under Cyrus, who gave the people
   liberty to return, and afterwards extended to Christ, in whom it has
   its full accomplishment. The Church therefore conceived, when the
   people returned to their native country; for the body of the people was
   gathered together from which Christ should proceed, in order that the
   pure worship of God and true religion might again be revived. Hitherto,
   indeed, this fertility was not visible; for the conception was
   concealed, as it were, in the mother's womb, and no outward appearance
   of it could be seen; but afterwards the people were increased, and
   after the birth the Church grew from infancy to manhood, till the
   Gospel was preached. This was the actual youth of the Church; and next
   follows the age of manhood, down to Christ's last coming, when all
   things shall be fully accomplished.

   All these things must be taken together, if we wish to learn the
   Prophet's real meaning. In this way Zechariah 2:5 Malachi 4: 2 and
   Haggai encouraged the people by the hope of their future condition,
   when they saw that little progress was made in building the temple; for
   they promised that "the glory of the latter temple should be greater
   than the glory of the former." (Haggai 2:9) This was not at all
   visible, and therefore they extended those promises till Christ; and by
   hope and confidence in him the people must have been encouraged to
   build the temple. Consequently, this consolation was common to the Jews
   who lived under the Law, and to us who see more clearly in Christ this
   restoration of the Church.

   The curtains of thy tents. The metaphor is borrowed from tabernacles,
   which were extensively used in that country. The Church is compared to
   them, because it has no solid building in the world; for it appears to
   be wandering and unsettled, in consequence of being necessarily moved
   from one place to another on account of various changes. But still I am
   fully persuaded that the Prophet had in his eye that former deliverance
   (as we have stated to have been customary with the prophets) when,
   being led through the wilderness, they dwelt in tents for forty years;
   for which reason they kept a public festival every year by the command
   of God. (Leviticus 23:3943)

   It will be objected that the building which is erected by the ministers
   of the Word is so solid that it ought not to be compared to
   "tabernacles." But I reply, this metaphor of "tabernacles" relates
   rather to the outward aspect of the Church than to its spiritual and
   (what, may be called) its internal condition; for the actual building
   of the Church is nothing else than the kingdom of God, which is not
   fading or similar to tents. Yet the Church does not cease to be
   conveyed from one place to another; for it has no stable or permanent
   habitation. In short, its solid firmness is such that it surpasses the
   best fortified citadels; for, relying on the invincible power of God,
   it scorns all danger. On the other hand, it resembles "tents," because
   earthly wealth, forces, and strength are not its support.

   3. Because thou shalt be multiplied. Now follows the reason why he
   commanded the cords to be lengthened for enlarging the tents. It is,
   that a moderate space would not contain a numerous people, whom the
   Lord will gather into one from every quarter. Now, because Judea was
   hideous on account of its ruins and desolation, he says that the
   forsaken cities shall be inhabited.

   4. Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed. Here, as formerly, he
   strengthens the hearts of believers, and addresses the whole Church;
   for the calamity was universal, and the Church appeared to be totally
   ruined. He bids her be of good cheer, and next assigns the reason; that
   the issue of her troubles will be such that she "shall not be ashamed;"
   as if he had said, "Although for a time thou art wretched, yet thy
   affairs shall be prosperous;" and as it is elsewhere said, "They who
   hope in the Lord shall not be ashamed." (Psalm 25:3)

   Blush not; that is, "cherish good hope, and be confident." Those men
   "blush" who are ashamed, and who, being disappointed of their hope,
   suffer their hearts to be cast down. He next assigns the same reason,
   "for thou shalt not be exposed to shame." I consider that here, as
   formerly, ky (ki) signifies for; and therefore the same sentence is
   twice repeated under a variety of expressions, except that the former
   clause may relate to the disposition of the heart, and the latter to
   the external cause. But the more simple meaning of both clauses is,
   that it is a promise of success and prosperity, as if he had said that
   the calamity shall be brought to an end.

   Yea, thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth. This is a confirmation
   of the former clause. He means the calamities which befell the Church
   while she was still young, and the remembrance of which will be wholly
   obliterated by the prosperity which she shall afterwards enjoy. We
   mentioned a little before, that widowhood is a term used in regard to
   her, because God had forsaken, and, so to speak, had divorced her.

   5. For thy Maker is thy husband. He assigns the reason why she will
   forget all the distresses and calamities which she formerly endured. It
   is because God will again receive her into favor; for captivity might
   be said to be a kind of divorce, as we formerly saw. (Isaiah 1:1) He
   now says, "He who created thee shall be thy husband;" for such is the
   import of the words. He calls himself the "Maker" of his Church, not
   only because he created the Church as he created other men, but because
   he condescended to adopt her as his heritage; and this privilege may be
   regarded as a new life. Although the Jews fell from their dignity, as
   men are speedily led to revolt, [63] if they are not renewed by the
   Spirit of strength, yet their spiritual creation was not wholly
   extinguished, for the remembrance of the covenant remained, and hence
   also God created them anew.

   Whose name is Jehovah of hosts. This refers to his power, that we may
   be permitted to glory in it., seeing that we are his children; for the
   greater the power of God, and the more honorable his name, so much the
   greater is our boasting, so long as we are his children and do not
   boast of an empty title. Now, the Prophet magnifies this kindness of
   God, that he condescends to have us instead of a wife, that we may be
   able to glory in his power and strength.

   Thy Redeemer. He calls himself the "Redeemer," in order that he may
   more fully confirm the people in that hope; that, although the former
   deliverance appeared to be cancelled, because the people were again led
   into captivity, yet they shall be restored in such a manner as to know
   that the grace of God is not without effect.

   Shall be called. The verb, yqr' (yikkare) "shall be called," may refer
   either to the name "Redeemer," or to the name "Holy One," or to both I
   willingly connect both together in this manner, "The Holy One of Israel
   shall be called thy Redeemer, and the God of the whole earth." [64] He
   employs the expression, the whole earth, because the name of God had
   formerly been, in some respects, confined to Judea, but, by the
   preaching of the Gospel, the Gentiles have been called to the same hope
   of salvation. (Psalm 76:2) The Lord is "the God of the Gentiles"
   (Romans 3:29) as well as "of the Jews;" for the Gentiles, though
   formerly "far off," (Ephesians 2:13,) have been united to the Jews
   under his government.

   6. For as a woman forsaken. He meets a doubt which might arise in the
   minds of believers amidst so distressing a calamity. It seemed as if
   the Lord had rejected them, so that they had nothing to look for but
   destruction. The Prophet therefore reminds them that they ought not to
   despair, because they have been thus forsaken; for God, according to
   his mercy, is ready to be reconciled, and is even willing to raise them
   from the dead. [65]

   And a wife of youth. He employs this expression in order that, by this
   metaphor, he may more fully confirm their hearts in that hope; for the
   hearts of young husbands are more easily reconciled than the hearts of
   older husbands, being attracted, and, as it were, driven forward by
   youthful age and tender love. In like manner, he shows that God will be
   easily reconciled. "True, thou wast divorced; but the divorce shall not
   be of long duration. The Lord will show himself ready to be reconciled,
   and will even, of his own accord, be the first to invite thee to
   reconciliation." [66]

   7. For a little moment I forsook thee. The Prophet explains more fully
   the former statement, and shows what will be the nature of this
   divorce, namely, that she shall be speedily restored to her former
   condition. He magnifies the mercy of God, and extenuates the sorrow by
   which the hearts of believers might be oppressed. It was not enough for
   believers to expect some revival, if they were not convinced that God's
   wrath would be of short duration. We quickly lose courage and faint, if
   the Lord be not nigh, and if he do not quickly stretch out his hand to
   us. For this reason Isaiah, after having spoken of restoring the
   Church, adds that this divorce shall last but "for a moment," but that
   his mercy shall be everlasting

   When he says that he forsook his people, it is a sort of admission of
   the fact. [67] We are adopted by God in such a manner that we cannot be
   rejected by him on account of the treachery of men; for he is faithful,
   so that he will not cast off or abandon his people. What the Prophet
   says in this passage must therefore refer to our feelings and to
   outward appearance, because we seem to be rejected by God when we do
   not perceive his presence and protection. And it is necessary that we
   should thus feel God's wrath, even as a wife divorced by her husband
   deplores her condition, that we may know that we are justly chastised.
   But we must also perceive his mercy; and because it is infinite and
   eternal, we shall find that all afflictions in comparison of it are
   light and momentary. Whenever, therefore, we are pressed by adversity,
   we ought to betake ourselves to this consolation. At the same time it
   ought to be observed, that what was said was actually true as to the
   whole body of the people, who had been divorced on account of their
   wickedness; and although God did not receive all of them
   indiscriminately into favor with him, but only the elect remnant, yet
   there is nothing absurd or improper in addressing his discourse as if
   it had been to the same persons. [68]

   8. In a moment of wrath. He again repeats and enforces this statement,
   in order to impress it more deeply on the hearts of believers, that
   they may not be at all discouraged by adversity, and with good reason;
   for, amidst that frightful darkness, it was not easy for the captives
   to behold God's smiling face. And although the literal sense in which
   the "wrath" is here said to last but for "a moment" [69] be, that God
   in due time brought back the captives to their native country, yet we
   draw from it a general doctrine, that the afflictions of the Church are
   always momentary, when we raise our eyes to its eternal happiness. We
   ought to remember what Paul has taught us, (2 Corinthians 4:17) that
   all the afflictions of believers are light and easy to be endured, and
   are justly considered to be momentary, while they look at the "eternal
   weight of glory;" for if we do not attend to this comparison, every day
   will seem to us like a year. There would be no propriety in comparing
   the seventy years of the captivity of the Jews to "a moment," if it
   were not contrasted with the uninterrupted progress of the grace of
   God.

   9. For the waters of Noah, or, As the days of Noah. There are two
   readings of this passage; for if we read it ky my (ki me), ky (ki) must
   be translated for; and if we read it kymy, (kime,) k (caph) must be
   translated As, and ymy (yeme) must be translated Days. [70] As to the
   general meaning, it makes little difference; and therefore we ought
   chiefly to consider what the Prophet meant, for commentators do not
   appear to me to have caught his meaning. They explain it generally,
   that the Lord promised to: Noah by an oath, that there would never be a
   deluge, and that this oath would perpetually remain in force. (Genesis
   9:10) But for this, the good man might have trembled, and, at the
   approach of rain, might have dreaded a similar calamity, if the Lord
   had not sworn that this should never again happen. In like manner, when
   afflictions are at hand, we might dread that we should be ruined, if
   the Lord did not promise that the Church would be safe.

   But I think that this ought to be limited to the period of the
   Babylonish captivity. He compares that captivity to a deluge, which
   destroyed the face of the earth; for it appeared as if the Church was
   utterly ruined. The people had almost entirely passed over to another
   nation, and had no kingdom and no civil government of their own; they
   underwent very hard bondage, and thought that their name was wholly
   extinguished. And at that time was actually fulfilled what the Prophet
   formerly declared,

   "If the Lord had not left to us a seed, we should have been like Sodom
   and Gomorrah." (Isaiah 1:9)

   Justly, therefore, does he compare that calamity to "the waters of
   Noah," that is, to the deluge; and on this account I rather agree with
   those who read ky my (ki me) that is, "For the waters;" for I consider
   that reading to rest on better evidence than the other, and it is
   generally adopted by Jewish writers.

   This is to me. I think that we ought carefully to inquire into the
   meaning of these words, which are slightly passed over by commentators.
   He means that this calamity will resemble the deluge; so that, as he
   was satisfied with a single deluge, and would never again send another,
   so he is satisfied with this one destruction, so to speak, of the
   Church, and will never again permit the face of it to be destroyed.
   Such is therefore the manner in which I think that we ought to explain
   this passage and apply the metaphor, that the desolation of Judea will
   be to God like the deluge which happened in "the days of Noah;" for as
   he swore at that time that he would never afterwards inflict such
   punishment on the crimes which stripped the earth of its inhabitants,
   so he will not again destroy the Church, as he did in the Babylonish
   captivity. And indeed, whatever might be any confused state of affairs
   that afterwards followed, still the Church retained some name, and
   preserved some form, until, at the manifestation of Christ in the
   flesh, the seed of the Gospel was everywhere scattered, that it might
   bring sons to God out of all nations. In a word, the Lord promises that
   henceforth he will restrain his wrath, and will not punish his people
   with so great severity.

   It will be objected, that since that time the Church sustained very
   grievous calamities; from which it might be concluded, either that this
   oath failed of its accomplishment, or that this is not the Prophet's
   meaning. I reply, the Church did not sustain so grievous a calamity as
   to have its face altogether destroyed, which happened when the people
   were carried away into Babylon. For although Antiochus and other
   tyrants brought upon it dreadful calamities, although afterwards there
   also happened those apostasies which Paul foretold, (2 Thessalonians
   2:3; 1 Timothy 4:1,) and everything was defiled by innumerable
   superstitions, so that the Christian name was nearly buried; yet still
   there remained some form of a Church, however disfigured, and the
   building was not in so ruinous a condition that there did not exist
   some remnants of Christianity above the deluge, so that this oath was
   in full force.

   That I will not be wroth with thee. This must not be taken in an
   absolute, but in a comparative sense. He contrasts this clause with the
   preceding; for he promises that he will never chastise his people so
   severely as not to mitigate the severity of the punishment. Although
   therefore tyrants indulge in wanton and unbridled rage, and Satan
   employ his utmost efforts in attacking the Church, and the Lord give
   him a loose rein, in order to punish our ingratitude, yet he will never
   suffer the Church to be ruined.

   10. For the mountains shall indeed be moved. He confirms the former
   statement, and declares that sooner shall the whole world be turned
   upside down, than his mercy shall fail. It would be idle to put the
   question here, how "the mountains shall be moved, or the hills shall
   shake;" for the comparison is drawn from those things which appear to
   be strongest and most deeply rooted, in order to show that the
   foundation of the Church is far more durable. "Mountains" are very
   strong, and earthquakes do not so frequently take place in them as in
   plains; and therefore the Lord declares that, although that vast and
   huge mass of "mountains be moved," or the heavens fall, yet his
   covenant shall endure, and his mercy towards the Church shall not fail.
   In this sense it is said in the Psalm, "The Lord shall reign, the world
   shall be established." (Psalm 93:1) In another passage it is even said,

   "Though the heavens pass away, the Church of God shall remain
   unshaken."
   (Psalm 102:26, 28)

   My mercy. In the word "mercy," it ought to be remarked what is the
   nature of the foundation of the covenant; for we can have no friendship
   with God: unless he have mercy upon us, and receive us by free grace.
   [71]

   The covenant of my peace. He calls it "the covenant of peace," because
   the Lord offers to us all that belongs to perfect happiness; as the
   Hebrew writers also, under the word "peace," include all posterity.
   Since therefore this covenant contains solid and perfect happiness, it
   follows that all who are excluded from it are miserable.

   Saith Jehovah, who hath compassion on thee. By saying that it is he
   "who hath compassion" on her, he again confirms what was formerly said,
   that he will be reconciled in no other way, and for no other reason,
   than because he is compassionate and ready to pardon.

   11. Thou wretched. He continues the same subject, and promises not only
   that the Church shall be restored to her ancient splendor, but that God
   will cause her to be adorned with attire of greater magnificence, as if
   it had been wholly composed of precious stones. All this was expressed
   by Haggai in a single word, when he said,

   "The glory of the latter temple shall be greater than the glory of the
   former."
   (Haggai 2:10)

   As to the names of the jewels [72] which are here described by the
   Prophet, and about which even the Hebrew writers are not agreed, we
   need not give ourselves much trouble, provided we understand the
   meaning of the passage.

   This earnest address is exceedingly well fitted for soothing the grief
   of believers; for it represents the Church, which was ready to be
   drowned, as being now rescued by him from shipwreck. Whenever therefore
   we shall see her violently shaken by tempests, and weighed down by a
   load of distresses, and deprived of all consolation, let us remember
   that these are the very circumstances which induce God to give
   assistance.

   12. And I will lay thy windows with pearls. By these metaphors he shows
   that the condition of the Church, as has been formerly said, will be
   far better than at any former period. The Church is compared to a
   building, which is customary in every part of Scripture. (Jeremiah
   24:6; Matthew 16:18.) For this reason he now draws a picture of a
   costly and magnificent structure. But it ought to be remarked, that the
   Prophet represents God as the architect of this building; for this work
   ought to be entirely ascribed to him alone.

   But it may be asked what the Prophet means by "carbuncles, sapphires,
   pearls," and other kinds of jewels; for by a similar metaphor Paul
   meant doctrine. "As a wise architect," says he, "I have laid the
   foundation." And again,

   "If any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
   wood, hay, stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest." (1
   Corinthians 3:10-13)

   Whether or not this be the Prophet's meaning, will appear from the
   following verse.

   13. For all thy children. I consider that the copulative v (vau,)
   "and," here, as in many other passages, denotes for; and hence we may
   easily conclude that Isaiah spoke not of doctrine, but of men, of which
   the spiritual building of the Church is reared. It is by doctrine,
   indeed, that the Church is built; but, the building of it is effected
   by assembling men together, and reducing them to a state of obedience
   to God. The difference then between Paul and Isaiah is this, that Paul
   makes those "precious stones" relate to doctrine, and Isaiah makes them
   relate to the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which are bestowed on men, in
   order that the Church may be built of them. It is proper to observe the
   diversity of gifts with which the Lord adorns his Church; for all are
   not "emeralds," and all are not "carbuncles," but the Lord assigns to
   every one his rank according' to his own pleasure. (Ephesians 4:11)

   Taught by Jehovah. It deserves attention, that all that belongs to the
   ornament of the Church, proceeds from no other source than from the
   grace of God; for if we are "carbuncles" and "sapphires" in consequence
   of our being taught by the Lord, it follows that this does not proceed
   from nature. Now there are two ways in which the Lord teaches us; by
   external preaching, and by the secret revelation of the Holy Spirit.
   What kind of teaching the Prophet means is explained by Christ, when he
   quotes this passage; and therefore we ought not to seek a better
   interpreter. "It is written in the prophets," says he, "All shall be
   taught by God. Every man who hath heard and learned from the Father
   cometh to me." (John 6:45) If this passage were to be understood as
   relating to external preaching, the conclusion which Christ draws from
   it would not be well founded; for it does not follow, "The Gospel is
   preached, and therefore all believe." Many oppose, others openly scorn,
   and others are hypocrites. Those only "who have been foreordained to
   life" (Acts 13:48) are sincerely teachable, and are entitled to be
   ranked among the disciples. The Gospel is preached indiscriminately to
   the elect and the reprobate; but the elect alone come to Christ,
   because they have been "taught by God," and therefore to them the
   Prophet undoubtedly refers.

   This makes it evident in what way we become living and precious stones
   for building the temple of God. It is when the Lord has formed and
   polished us by his Spirit, and has added to the external preaching of
   the word the internal efficacy of the Spirit. Hence we learn how great
   is the depravity of the human mind, which cannot be bent and formed
   anew, unless the Lord move it by the power and efficacy of his Spirit.
   Isaiah has connected both modes of teaching, the internal and the
   external; for he gives the appellation of "children of the Church" to
   those who are "taught by the Lord." If they are her children, they must
   then have been conceived in her womb and nourished by her, first "with
   milk, and next with solid food," as Paul says, (1 Corinthians 3:2) till
   they "grow up and arrive at manhood." (Ephesians 4:13)

   Thus the external administration of the word is necessary if we wish to
   be disciples; and this shows the extreme madness of fanatics, who abuse
   this passage for the purpose of overturning the preaching of the word
   and the ministry which the Church enjoys; for they cannot be "the
   children" of the Church, if they do not allow themselves to be educated
   in her. In vain will they boast of secret revelations; for the Spirit
   does not teach any but those who submit to the ministry of the Church,
   and consequently they are the disciples of the devil, and not of God,
   who reject the order which he has appointed; for we see that these two
   things, "Children of the Church" and "Taught by God," are united in
   such a manner that they cannot be God's disciples who refuse to be
   taught in the Church. They ought likewise to be properly distinguished,
   as Isaiah also distinguishes them, that we may not apply to men what
   ought to be ascribed to the efficacy of the Spirit; but at the same
   time they ought to be joined together, so that we may know that in this
   matter God chooses to employ the agency of men.

   Besides, we are taught by this passage that the calling of God is
   efficacious in the elect. Augustine examines this passage judiciously,
   and applies it skillfully against the Pelagians, who extolled man's
   freewill in opposition to the grace of God. They appeared, indeed, to
   ascribe something to the grace of God, but in such a manner that, when
   they brought it forward, they gave to it an inferior place to man's
   freewill; just as the Papists do, who assert that any person can either
   receive or reject it. "But" (says Augustine) "all shall be taught by
   God. Now, God's disciples are efficaciously taught, and follow his
   calling." He likewise adds that passage of John's Gospel which we have
   quoted. This shows clearly that it is not from free choice made by man,
   and which is capable of being bent in either direction, that it
   proceeds.

   From these words it ought also to be observed how highly the Lord
   values his doctrine, by means of which he admits us into his building,
   so that we become "pearls, sapphires, and carbuncles;" for they who
   wish to build the Church by rejecting the doctrine of the word, build a
   hog's sty, and not the Church of God. We see also what opinion we ought
   to form about implicit faith, about which the Papists yelp, who wish
   men to become fools, that they may suffer themselves to be imposed
   upon; for, since we must be taught by God, it is not reasonable that we
   should resemble beasts.

   It may be asked, were not the prophets also, and the patriarchs, and
   other believers under the Law, taught by God? They undoubtedly were;
   but here the Prophet spoke by comparison, because there is a more
   abundant revelation in Christ, and the Lord hath spoken so plainly as
   to give a public manifestation that he is the teacher of the Church,
   and also to gain many disciples. This passage agrees with one in the
   Prophet Jeremiah.

   "Every one shall not teach his neighbor, nor a man his brother; for all
   shall know me from the least even to the greatest, saith Jehovah."
   (Jeremiah 31:34)

   Accordingly, if in ancient times it was necessary that all the children
   of God should be disciples of the Holy Spirit, much more in the present
   day, seeing that this prediction relates strictly to the kingdom of
   Christ.

   And great peace. By the word "peace" he denotes happiness, that is, all
   prosperity. And hence we may infer what is the true happiness of men.
   It is, when God enlightens our understandings, so that we embrace the
   salvation which has been revealed to us in Christ; for, so long as we
   are destitute of that knowledge, we are at the greatest possible
   distance from happiness; because even God's blessings, till they are
   sanctified by faith, become a curse to us.

   14. In righteousness. He means that God will be the maker and architect
   of his Church. I am aware that there are some who explain it
   differently, and who think that "righteousness" means "goodworks." And
   indeed that exposition has some plausibility, arising from the Prophet
   having spoken about doctrine; for we are taught for this very purpose,
   that we may lead a pious and holy life. But the Prophet's meaning was
   different, namely, that the Church shall be restored under God's
   guidance, who wishes to be its guardian and defender, he contrasts
   "righteousness" with the violence and oppression by which the Church
   has been thrown down, or, at least, he expresses "stability," as if he
   had said that it shall not be a frail building, or one that might
   impose on men for a short time by mere deceitfulness of appearance;
   because God will sincerely defend his work, and, being "righteous,"
   will not only restore it completely, but will afterwards preserve it in
   safety for a long period. Thus, although men are leagued in every way
   for the destruction of the Church, they will gain nothing; for the Lord
   guards her by his "righteousness." We have formerly [73] seen this form
   of expression; and on this account I think that the interpretation
   which I have given is more simple, though some may think that another
   interpretation is more plausible.

   15. Behold, he who assembleth shall assemble. The general import is,
   that, although many rise up for the purpose of overwhelming the Church,
   yet all their efforts and attacks shall fail; and he appears to promise
   God's assistance not only against external foes, but against foes that
   are domestic and internal. Many "assemble" in the bosom of the Church,
   as if they wished to join themselves to her, but afterwards carry on
   internal war. These words are commonly translated, "By gathering he
   shall gather himself against thee," and are generally understood to
   relate to all the enemies of the Church of every kind. That
   interpretation is most generally approved; nor do I object to it,
   provided that it be acknowledged to include the fraud, and ambush, and
   treachery by which the Church is attacked. Yet I have no doubt that
   here the meaning is the same as in Psalm 2:1, namely, the conspiracies
   and insurrections of the Gentiles against Christ and the Church of God;
   for not a single nation only, but various nations rise up against, her.

   It is probable, however, that here he expressly joins together domestic
   foes and those who from without had penetrated even into her bosom; for
   he says, In thee, Against thee, that is, "They shall attack thee
   within, in the midst of thee." In a word, he shows that the Church will
   not enjoy such peace as not to be attacked by many adversaries. But it
   may be thought that these statements are contradictory; for he formerly
   said that she would be far from terror and oppression, and now he says
   that there shall be conspiracies within her bosom. I reply, the Prophet
   instantly added this, that believers might not promise to themselves a
   state of peace in the world, as if they had no annoyance to suffer from
   wicked men and hypocrites. The defense of the Church against oppression
   and slander shall be of such a kind as not to preserve her from
   carrying on uninterrupted war with enemies; for Satan will raise up
   against her every day new attacks, so that she can never be at rest.
   These words may therefore be regarded as a correction of the preceding
   statement, in order that believers may always carry their weapons of
   war, and may not promise to themselves repose.

   Without me. A promise is added, that the Lord will nevertheless
   preserve them in the midst of dangers. Without God signifies "in vain"
   or "unsuccessfully;" for he means that the attacks of wicked men,
   though they do their utmost [74] shall utterly fail. They rush forward
   with blind fury, but it is the Lord's hand alone that gives prosperity.
   He alludes to what was formerly said, (Isaiah 41:25) that the
   Babylonians should come, under God's guidance, to destroy Judea. At
   that time the people were ruined, because they had God for their enemy;
   but now, because "without God," that is, without his guidance, the
   enemies shall attack her, they shall be ashamed and turn back. This is
   more fully expressed by what immediately follows --

   He who shall assemble in thee shall fall against thee. That is, "All
   that he shall attempt against thee shall fall back on his own head.
   Though the whole world rise up against thee, it shall be crushed by its
   own weight." The phrase, in thee, deserves notice; for when the Lord
   drives our enemies to a distance, we are confident, but if they come
   near us, we fall into despair. Therefore he says, "Although they
   penetrate even into thy bowels, the Lord will destroy them, and will
   deliver thee."

   16. Behold, I have created the workmen. The Lord shows how easily and
   readily he delivers his Church from the base attacks of wicked men; for
   they can do nothing but so far as the Lord permits them, though he
   makes use of them as instruments for chastising his people. Moreover,
   this may be appropriately viewed as referring both to the Babylonians
   and to other foes who afterwards distressed the elect people. If the
   former sense be preferred, God undertakes to prove that he can easily
   drive away those whom he led against them, and east down those whom he
   raised up. If it be supposed to refer to Antiochus and others of the
   same description, the meaning will not be very different; namely, that
   they too shall not be permitted to hurt them, because they cannot even
   move a finger but by God's direction.

   But it may be thought that the Prophet contradicts himself; for in the
   former verse he said, that wicked men attack the Church "without the
   Lord," and now he says that they fight under God as their leader, that
   under his guidance and direction they may waste and destroy. I reply,
   we must keep in view the contrast; namely, that the Lord had raised up
   the Babylonians to destroy the Church. We must observe the metaphor of
   the deluge, by which he denoted utter extermination; for at that time
   the Church might be said to have been drowned, and he made use of the
   Babylonians as his agents for that purpose. But he solemnly declares
   that henceforth he is resolved to restrain his anger, so as never to
   permit the Church to be destroyed by her enemies, though he chastise
   her by his own hand. The object at which the enemies of the Church aim,
   and which they labor with all their might to accomplish, is to ruin and
   destroy the Church; but the Lord restrains their attacks; for "without
   him," that is, without his command, they do nothing. Some explain the
   meaning to be, that. "the workman has been created for his work," that
   is, that he may effect his own destruction, and the waster, to destroy
   himself. But the former sense appears to me more simple.

   I have created the waster to destroy. When the Lord says that he
   "createth the waster," this does not refer merely to the nature with
   which men are born, but to the very act of "wasting." And yet we must
   not, on that account, lay blame on God, as if he were the author of the
   unjust cruelty which dwells in men alone; for God does not give assent
   to their wicked inclinations, but regulates their efforts by his secret
   providence, and employs them as the instruments of his anger. But on
   this subject we have treated in the exposition of other passages.

   17. Every weapon. He again infers what has been already said, that
   wicked men, even though they exert themselves to the utmost, will gain
   nothing; for their attacks are guided and restrained by the secret,
   purpose of God. He makes use of the word "every," meaning by it that
   wicked men will have the means of attempting many and diversified
   methods for destroying the Church, but that their efforts shall be vain
   and fruitless, [75] for the Lord will restrain them. Heaven permits
   them, indeed, to a great extent, in order to try the patience of
   believers; but, when God thinks proper, he strips them of their
   strength and armor.

   And every tongue. After having spoken of the "weapons" with which
   wicked men attack the Church, he expressly mentions the "tongue;"
   because no other "weapon" is so deadly and destructive. Not only do
   they revile, and slander, and defame the servants of God, but, as far
   as lies in their power, they extinguish the truth of God, and alienate
   the hearts of men from it; which ought to distress us more than if life
   were taken from us a hundred times. Besides, good and upright men find
   slander to be more distressing, and to inflict more severe pain than
   any bodily stroke; and, therefore, there was good reason for mentioning
   this deadly "weapon."

   That shall rise up against thee in judgment. When he says that tongues
   "rise up in judgment," he means that wicked men are so daring and
   insolent, that they openly attack and annoy the children of God. He
   adds that this is done "in judgment;" because they hold out plausible
   pretexts, which give them the appearance of having a just cause. In
   like manner, the Papists, when they call us heretics, schismatics, and
   dogs, plead against us, as it were, "in judgment," and wish to be
   regarded as the defenders of catholic truth, though they maintain
   falsehood and idolatry. And yet so plausible are the pretexts by which
   their slanders are covered, that they produce very strong hatred
   against us among those who are ignorant of our cause. But although they
   assail us by arms, and by the "tongue," and by "weapons" of every kind,
   yet, relying on this prediction, let us hope that we shall be
   victorious; for victory is here promised to us, and, since we are
   certain of it, we ought to fight valiantly and with unshaken courage.

   This is the inheritance. He shows that the Lord has granted this to
   believers, as it were, by a right of "inheritance," so that they shall
   never be deprived of it; for, as no title is more certain than that of
   an heir, so he shows that there is nothing of which the Lord's servants
   ought to be more certain than of his constant guardianship and
   preservation, by which he defends them against all dangers.

   And their righteousness from me. "Righteousness" here denotes what is
   conveyed by us in the ordinary expression, (Leur droit,) "Their right."
   In a word, he means that the Lord will defend his people, so as to
   protect their innocence. Whenever, therefore, we are attacked and
   injured by men, let us learn to betake ourselves forthwith to the Lord;
   for, when we seek other assistance, the consequence is, that we are
   deprived of his guardianship and protection.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [61] "En nos articles de foy." "In our articles of faith."

   [62] Our author evidently speaks of what is usually called "The
   Apostle's Creed."  Ed.

   [63] "Comme les hommes sont incontinent destournez du droit chemin."
   "As men are quickly turned aside from the right path."

   [64] "Le Sainct d'Israel, qui est ton Redempteur, sera appele le Dieu
   de toute la terre, ou, Le Sainct d'Israel sera appele ton Redempteur et
   Dieu de toute la terre." "The Holy One of Israel, who is thy Redeemer,
   shall be called the God of the whole earth, or, The Holy one of Israel
   shall be called thy Redeemer, and God of the whole earth."

   [65] "Et mesmes vent redresser celuy qui est au sepulcher." "And even
   wishes to revive him who is in the grave."

   [66] "He compares the Hebrew nation to a wife of youth;' that is, to a
   wife whom he married in youth, (Proverbs 5:18; Malachi 2:14) towards
   whom he retained his former love. Compare Isaiah 62:4."  Rosenmuller.
   "A wife of youth, not merely a young wife, but one married early."
   Alexander.

   [67] "C'est comme s'il accordoit qu'il fust ainsi." "It is as if he
   admitted that this was actually the case."

   [68] "En ce qu'il addresse sa parole a tous." "In addressing his
   discourse to all."

   [69] In explaining the words vstsph qtsph (beshetzeph ketzeph,)
   commentators differ, being uncertain as to the meaning of the word;
   stsph, (shetzeph.) Most commentators, on no other grounds, as Kimchi
   himself acknowledges, than the context of this passage, think that it
   denotes something little,' which some, concurring with the Chaldee
   interpreter, refer to a little time; but as this is afterwards
   expressed by the word rg, (regang,) others refer it to a small
   measure,' agreeing with the Septuagint, which translate it en Thumo
   mikro, for a short time,' compared with Zechariah 1:15. But A.
   Schultens, in his Animadversiones Philologicae on this passage, has
   justly remarked that there are good grounds for hesitation as to this
   received interpretation, because in none of the cognate languages can
   any trace of this meaning of the word; stsph (shetzeph) be found, nor
   even from the context is it very evident. By comparison with an Arabic
   root, he makes it signify In vehemence of wrath I hid,' etc. In great
   wrath' is the sense justly expressed by the Syriac version."
   Rosenmuller

   [70] my, (me,) "waters of," is the construct form of mym, (maim,)
   "waters;" and ymy, (yeme,) "days of," is the construct form of ymym,
   (yamim,) "days."  Ed.
   "On peut lire ceci en deux sortes, assavoir comme nous l'avons traduit,
   Car ceci m'est comme les eaux de Noe, ou, Ceci m'est comme les jours de
   Noe." "This may be read in two ways, namely, as we have translated it,
   This is to me as the waters of Noah, or, This is to me as the days of
   Noah."

   [71] "S'il ne nous recoit gratuitement, en pardonnant nos offenses;"
   "Unless he receive us through free grace, by pardoning our offenses."

   [72] "These seem to be general images to express beauty, magnificence,
   purity, strength, and solidity, agreeably to the ideas of the eastern
   nations; and to have never been intended to be strictly scrutinized, or
   minutely and particularly explained, as if they had each of them some
   precise moral or spiritual meaning."  Lowth.

   [73] See Commentary on Isaiah, [5]Vol. 1, p. 488; [6]3, p. 411.

   [74] "Encore qu'ils facent du pis qu'ils pourrent." "Though they do the
   worst that they can."

   [75] "Mais tout s'evanouira comme fumee." "But all shall vanish away
   like smoke."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 55.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 55:1-13

   1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that
   hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk
   without money and without price.

   1. Heus sitientes omnes, venite ad aquas; et qui non habetis pecuniam,
   venite, emite, et comedite. Venite, inquam; emite absque pecunia, et
   absque ullo pretio vinum et lac.

   2. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your
   labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and
   eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.

   2. Quare expenditis pecuniam, non in panem? et laborem vestrum, non ad
   saturitatem? Audite audiendo me, et comedite bonum, et oblectet se
   pinguedine anima vestra.

   3. Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live;
   and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies
   of David.

   3. Inclinate aurem vestram, et venite ad me; audite, et vivet anima
   vestra. Et percutiam vobiscum foedus deculi, misericordias Davidis
   fideles.

   4. Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and
   commander to the people.

   4. Ecce testem populis dedi eum, ducem et praeceptorem populis.

   5. Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and nations
   that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the LORD thy God, and
   for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee.

   5. Ecce gentem quam ignoras vocabis; et gens quae to non cognovit
   current ad to; propter Iehovam Deum tuum, et Sanctum Israel; quia
   glorificavit to.

   6. Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is
   near:

   6. Quaerite Iehovam, dum invenitur; invocate eum, dum prope est.

   7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
   thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon
   him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

   7. Derelinquat impius viam suam, et vir iniquus cogitationes suas;
   revertatur ad Iehovam, et miserebitur ejus; ad Deum nostrum, quia
   multus est ad remittendum.

   8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
   ways, saith the LORD.

   8. Neque enim cogitationes meae cogitationes vestrae, neque viae
   vestrae viae meae, dicit Iehova.

   9. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher
   than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

   9. Nam quanto excelsiores sunt coeli terra, tantum superant viae meae
   vias vestras, et cogitationes meae cogitationes vestras.

   10. For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and
   returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring
   forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the
   eater:

   10. Certe, quemadmodum descendit pluvia et nix e coelis, neque illuc
   revertitur, sed irrigat terram, et eam facit concipere et germinare, ut
   det semen seminanti et panem comedenti;

   11. So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not
   return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and
   it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

   11. Sic erit verbum meum quod egredietur ex ore meo; non redibit ad me
   vacuum, donec faciat quod volo, et successum afterat, quo misi ipsum.

   12. For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the
   mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and
   all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.

   12. Itaque cum laetitia egrediemini, et cum pace deducemini; montes et
   colles erumpent coram vobis in gaudium, et omnia ligna agri plaudent
   manu.

   13. Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the
   brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the LORD for a
   name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.

   13. Pro rubo ascendet abies, et pro urtica (vel, spina) myrtus (vel,
   ulmus) crescet; et erit Iehovae in nomen, in sugnum perpetuum quod non
   auferetur.


   1. Ho, all that are thirsty. Here the Prophet describes in lofty terms
   of commendation the goodness of God, which was to be poured down more
   copiously and abundantly than before under the reign of Christ, "in
   whose hand are hid all the treasures" (Colossians 2:3) of the grace of
   God; for in him God fully explains his mind to us; so that the saying
   of John is actually fulfilled, "We have all drawn from his fullness,
   and have received grace for grace." (John 1:16) The fathers were,
   indeed, partakers of that divine goodness and spiritual kindness which
   is here mentioned. "How great," says David, "is thy goodness, which
   hath been laid up for them that fear thee!" (Psalm 31:19) But he hath
   poured it out far more liberally and abundantly in Christ. Thus, it is
   a remarkable commendation of the grace of God, which is exhibited to us
   in the kingdom of Christ; for the Prophet does not instruct us what has
   been done once, but also what is done every day, while the Lord invites
   us by his doctrine to the enjoyment of all blessings.

   Come to the waters. Some view the word "waters" as referring to the
   doctrine of the Gospel, and others to the Holy Spirit; but neither of
   these expositions, in my opinion, is correct. They who think that it
   denotes the doctrine of the Gospel, and who contrast it with the law,
   (of which the Jewish writers think that the Prophet speaks in this
   passage,) include only one part of what the Prophet meant. They who
   expound it as denoting the Holy Spirit have somewhat more plausibility,
   and quote that passage of John's Gospel,

   "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee,
   Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have
   given thee living water." (John 4:10)

   And a little after, Christ appears to expound this passage when he
   says,

   "Every one that drinketh of this water shall thirst again; but
   whosoever shall drink of the water which I shall give to him shall
   never thirst; but the water which I shall give to him shall become in
   him a fountain of water springing up to everlasting life." (John 4:13,
   14)

   But I have no doubt that under these words, "waters, milk, wine,
   bread," Isaiah includes all that is necessary for spiritual life; for
   the metaphors are borrowed from those kinds of food which are in daily
   use amongst us. As we are nourished by "bread, wine, milk, and water,"
   so in like manner let us know that our souls are fed and supported by
   the doctrine of the Gospel, the Holy Spirit, and other gifts of Christ.

   The Prophet exclaims, as with a voice above the usual pitch, HO! for so
   great is the sluggishness of men that it is very difficult to arouse
   them. They do not feel their wants, though they are hungry; nor do they
   desire food, which they greatly need; and therefore that indifference
   must be shaken off by loud and incessant cries. So much the more base
   and shameful is the indolence of those who are deaf to this
   exhortation, and who, even when they are so sharply urged forward,
   still indulge in their slothfulness. Besides, the invitation is
   general; for there is no man who is not in want of those "waters," and
   to whom Christ is not necessary; and therefore he invites all
   indiscriminately, without any respect of persons. But men are so
   miserable that, although they know that they are in need of Christ,
   they contrive methods by which they may be deprived of this benefit,
   and rather believe the devil, who offers various obstructions, than
   this kind invitation.

   We must therefore inquire what is the true preparation for receiving
   this grace. The Prophet describes it by the word "thirsty." Those who
   are puffed up with vain confidence and are satiated, or who,
   intoxicated by earthly appetites, do not feel thirst of soul, will not
   receive Christ; because they have no relish for spiritual grace. They
   resemble those persons who are in want of nourishments, but who,
   because they are filled and swollen with wind, loathe food, or who,
   being carried away by their own vain imaginations, feed on their own
   stupidity, as if they were in want of nothing. The consequence is, that
   they who are puffed up with pride or a false opinion of their own
   righteousness, or whom the allurements of the flesh have seized with
   lethargy, despise or reject the grace of God. It is therefore necessary
   that we have "thirst," that is, an ardent desire, in order that it may
   be possible for us to receive so great blessings.

   Buy without money. He does not mean that there are any persons who have
   money in abundance, but the words ought to be explained thus. "Although
   they are poor, although they are sunk in the deepest poverty, yet the
   way is open for them to come to Christ, through whom these blessings
   are freely bestowed." "But how is it possible," it will be said, "to
   buy without a price?" I reply, "buying" denotes figuratively the method
   by which we procure anything; and svr (shabar) is here put for
   "procure," and "price" for labor or industry, or any other method by
   which men obtain anything, he shows that we are poor and utterly
   destitute, and that we have nothing by which we can become entitled to
   God's favor; but that he kindly invites us, in order that he may freely
   bestow everything without any recompense.

   2. Wherefore do ye spend money? [76] He complains of the ingratitude
   and madness of men, in rejecting or disdaining the kindness of God who
   offers all things freely, and yet harassing themselves greatly about
   various trifles which cannot yield them any advantage. Men are so
   enchanted by the devil, that they choose rather to wander through
   deserts, and to vex themselves in vain, than to rely on the grace which
   God offers to them. The experience of the present age abundantly shows
   that the Prophet not only expostulated with his own nation, but
   exclaimed against all men, to whatever age they might belong; for all
   the posterity of Adam have been seized with such madness that, in
   seeking the road to a heavenly life, [77] they altogether go astray,
   and follow their own vain opinions rather than the voice of God.

   The Prophet does not complain of the slothfulness of those who,
   altogether forgetful of themselves and of God, take no concern about
   the spiritual life of the soul; (there are many such persons;) but of
   those who desire life, and yet do not understand the method or way of
   obtaining it, and wander in uncertainty through deserts and untrodden
   paths. Here, therefore, are condemned all the methods which men
   contrive, in opposition to the Word of God, for obtaining salvation,
   and they are pronounced to be useless expenses; for by the word "money"
   he denotes all the industry, study, or labor which belongs to man. Not
   that God values a single farthing all our idle attempts to worship him,
   but because labors foolishly undertaken are reckoned valuable by the
   judgment of the flesh.

   And your labor, not so as to be satisfied. We see that by the word
   "bread" is here meant the same as was formerly meant by "waters," and
   that he gives the name "labor" to that which he formerly called
   "money." As if he had said, "Men toil without any advantage; for, when
   they follow their own inventions, however eagerly they may vex and
   weary themselves, they have no right to expect any reward." Thus he
   affirms that they who labor in an inconsiderate manner cannot "be
   satisfied;" for they who forsake God, and attempt new methods of
   salvation, can never "be satisfied." "They feed on wind," as Hosea
   says. (Hosea 12:1) They may, indeed, imagine that they are full, when
   they are swelled with vain confidence, but are like persons who, in
   consequence of being swollen with wind, do not perceive their hunger.
   Yet it would be better for them to be sore pressed by hunger and
   thirst, that it might lead them to call on the Lord with earnestness of
   heart, as it is said in the Psalm, "My soul is as a thirsty land before
   thee." (Psalm 143:6) But bread alone, or water alone, would not be
   enough to "satisfy," and by neither of them could life be supported;
   and that is the reason why the Prophet has made use of a variety of
   terms, in order to show that the Lord abundantly supplies everything
   that is necessary for life, that we may not think that we ought to seek
   aid from any other quarter.

   Hear ye by hearing me. [78] Because every person is led into error by
   his own counsel, and all who neglect God vanish away in wicked
   imaginations, the Prophet here adds the remedy, which is, that we must
   depend entirely on the mouth of God. Whoever shall submit to his word
   will have no reason to fear that he shall spend his strength on things
   of no value. Here we see the amazing goodness of God, who offers his
   grace to men, though they are unthankful and unworthy.

   But he adds the condition; for there is no way by which we can enter
   into life but by "hearing" him; and as the cause of our destruction is,
   that we are deaf to the voice of God, so the road to life is open, if
   we lend our ears to him. [79] In order to make a deeper impression upon
   us, he repeats the same admonition, and doubles the same word, "Hear ye
   by hearing;" and, in order to draw us more gently, he solemnly declares
   that it depends entirely on ourselves whether or not he will "delight"
   us even to fullness with all abundance of blessings.

   3. Incline your ear. This assemblage of words makes still more evident
   what I slightly mentioned a little before, that God leaves nothing
   undone which is fitted to correct and arouse our tardiness. Yet there
   is an implied reproof; for they must be excessively stupid who, when
   they are so gently called, do not instantly obey. This is a remarkable
   passage, from which we see that our whole happiness lies in obeying the
   word of God. When God speaks in this manner, the object which he has in
   view is to lead us to life; [80] and therefore the blame lies wholly
   with ourselves, because we disregard this saving and lifegiving word.

   And come unto me. If God only commanded what we ought to do, he would
   indeed lay down the method of obtaining life, but without advantage;
   for the Law, which proceeded from the mouth of God, is the minister of
   death; but when he invites us "to himself," when he adopts us as
   children, when he promises pardon of sin and sanctification, the
   consequence is, that they who hear obtain life from him. We ought,
   therefore, to take into view the kind of doctrine which contains life,
   in order that we may seek our salvation from it; and hence we infer
   that there is no hope of salvation if we do not obey God and his word.
   This reproves all mankind, so that they can plead no excuse for their
   ignorance; for he who refuses to hear can have no solid argument to
   defend his cause.

   These repetitions describe the patience of God in calling us; for he
   does not merely invite us once, but when he sees that we are sluggish,
   he gives a second and even a third warning, in order to conquer our
   hardheartedness. Thus he does not all at once reject those who despise
   him, but after having frequently invited them.

   Besides, this is a description of the nature of faith, when he bids us
   "come to himself." We ought to hear the Lord in such a manner that
   faith shall follow; for they who by faith receive the word of God have
   laid aside their desires and despised the world, and may be said to
   have broken their chains, so that they readily and cheerfully "draw
   near to God." But faith cannot be formed without hearing, (Romans
   10:17,) that is, without understanding the word of God, and so he bids
   us "hear" before we "come to him." Thus, whenever faith is mentioned,
   let us remember that it must be joined to the word, in which it has its
   foundation.

   And I will strike a covenant of eternity with you. It is asked, Did not
   the Jews formerly enter into an everlasting covenant with God? For he
   appears to promise something that is new and uncommon. I reply, nothing
   new is here promised for which the Lord did not formerly enter into an
   engagement with his people; but it is a renewal and confirmation of the
   covenant, that the Jews might not think that the covenant of God was
   made void on account of the longcontinued banishment. For when they
   were banished from the country that had been promised to them, [81]
   when they had no temple or sacrifices, or any marks of the "covenant"
   except circumcision, who would not have concluded that it was all over
   with them? This mode of expression, therefore, Isaiah accommodated to
   the capacity of the people, that they might know that the covenant into
   which God entered with the fathers was firm, sure, and eternal, and not
   changeable or temporary.

   This is also what he means by the mercies of David, but by this phrase
   he declares that it was a covenant of free grace; for it was founded on
   nothing else than the absolute goodness of God. Whenever, therefore,
   the word "covenant" occurs in Scripture, we ought at the same time to
   call to remembrance the word "grace." By calling them "the faithful
   mercies of David," [82] he declares that he will be faithful in it, and
   at. the same time states indirectly that he is faithful and steadfast,
   and cannot be accused of falsehood, as if he had broken his covenant;
   that the Jews, on the other hand, are covenantbreakers and traitors,
   (for they have revolted from him,) but that he cannot repent of his
   covenant or his promise.

   He calls them "the mercies of David," because this covenant, which has
   now been solemnly confirmed, was made in the land "of David." The Lord
   indeed entered into a covenant with Abraham, (Genesis 15:5; 17:7)
   afterwards confirmed it by Moses, (Exodus 2:24; 33:1) and finally
   ratified this very covenant in the hand of David, that it might be
   eternal. (2 Samuel 7:12) Whenever, therefore, the Jews thought of a
   Redeemer, that is, of their salvation, they ought to have remembered
   "David" as a mediator who represented Christ; for David must not here
   be regarded as a private individual, but as bearing this title and
   character. Yet some regard must be had to the time when this prophecy
   was uttered; for, since the rank of the kingdom had been obliterated,
   and the name of the royal family had become mean and contemptible
   during the captivity in Babylon, it might seem as if, through the ruin
   of that family, the truth of God had fallen into decay; and therefore
   he bids them contemplate by faith the throne of David, which had been
   cast down.

   4. Behold, I have given him a witness to the peoples. The Prophet now
   explains more fully the reason why he mentioned "David." It was because
   into his hand had been committed the promise of a Redeemer that was to
   come, and this discourse might be expressed with a view to his public
   character, so far as he was the surety of the covenant; for he did not
   act for himself individually, but was appointed to be a sort of
   mediator between God and the people. Yet it is beyond all doubt that
   the Prophet leads them directly to Christ, to whom the transition from
   David was easy and natural; as if he had said, "That successor of David
   shall come forth, by whose hand perfect salvation and happiness hath
   been promised."

   By calling him "a witness," he means that the covenant into which he
   entered shall be ratified and confirmed in Christ. There is a weighty
   meaning in the word "witness;" for he clearly shows that this covenant
   shall be proved in Christ, by whom the truth of God shall be made
   manifest. He will! testify that God is not false. But this testimony
   consists in doctrine; and if it were not added, we should receive
   little benefit from Christ's coming, as it is said, "I will publish the
   command." (Psalm 2:7) In this sense also Isaiah said in another
   passage, that Christ will have a mouth like a sword or an arrow.
   (Isaiah 49:2)

   A leader and instructor. This is added, in order to procure attention
   to his doctrine; for, if we do not hear him when he speaks, and if we
   do not embrace by assured faith what he makes known to us concerning
   the Father's good pleasure, his power is set aside. In like manner, the
   name of Christ is pronounced loudly enough by the Papists; but since
   they refuse to receive him as a teacher and instructor, and acknowledge
   him merely by name, their boasting is idle and ridiculous.

   To the peoples. This was added for the purpose of amplification,
   because the Church could not be restored to her ancient dignity, or be
   enlarged, but by assembling the Gentiles; and therefore it was
   necessary that the voice of Christ should pierce even to the remotest
   countries, because he has been appointed a "witness, leader, and
   instructor" to the whole human race.

   5. Behold, thou shalt call a nation which thou knowest not. Isaiah
   explains more largely what he formerly glanced at by a single word; for
   he declares that Christ shall be the "leader," not of a single people,
   but of all the peoples. "To call" here denotes possession; for there is
   a mutual relation between the words "call" and "answer." Christ
   therefore "calls" in the exercise of authority, as one who is invested
   with supreme power; and he "calls" the Gentiles, that he may bring them
   into a state of obedience, and may cause them to submit to his word.

   He says that they shall be ready to obey, though hitherto they were
   unknown; not that the Son of God, by whom they were created, did not
   know them, but because he paid no regard to them [83] until they began
   to be reckoned as belonging to the Church. God had in a peculiar manner
   called the Jews; the Gentiles appeared to be excluded as if they did
   not at all belong to him. But now, addressing Christ, [84] he promises
   that Christ shall constrain the Gentiles to obey him, though formerly
   they were opposed to his authority. He expresses this still more
   plainly in what immediately follows.

   A nation that knew not thee shall run to thee. By putting the verb
   yrvtsv (yarutzu) shall run, in the plural number, he intends to explain
   more fully that the Church shall be collected out of various peoples,
   so that they who were formerly scattered shall be gathered into one
   body; for the word "run" relates to harmony of faith. When he now says
   that the Gentiles "did not know Christ," he employs the expression in a
   different sense from that in which he said, a little before, that they
   were unknown to Christ; for all heathens and unbelievers are declared,
   in a literal sense, to be in a state of ignorance, in consequence of
   their being destitute of the light of heavenly doctrine, without which
   they cannot have the knowledge of God. Although by nature the knowledge
   of God is engraven on the hearts of all men, yet it is so confused and
   dark, and entangled by many errors, that, if the light of the word be
   not added to it, by knowing they know not God, but wander miserably in
   darkness.

   Here we have a remarkable testimony of God as to the calling of the
   Gentiles, for whom, as well as for the Jews, Christ was appointed.
   Hence also we learn that God takes care of us, if we bow to his
   authority, and not only such care as he takes of all the creatures, but
   such care as a father takes of his children.

   Yet the word "run" describes more fully the efficacy of this calling,
   for the object of it is, that we shall obey God, that we shall readily
   and cheerfully place ourselves before him as teachable, and ready to
   comply with any expression of his will; in like manner, as Paul shows
   that obedience is the end of our calling. (Romans 1:5; 16:26) But as
   the Gentiles were at a great distance from God, it was necessary that
   they should labor earnestly to surmount every obstacle, that they might
   draw near to him.

   For the sake of Jehovah thy God. He shows what is the source of this
   readiness and cheerfulness. It is because the Gentiles shall know that
   they have to do with God; for, if we contemplate Christ merely as man,
   we shall not be powerfully affected by his doctrine, but when we behold
   God in him, an astonishing warmth of affection is kindled in our
   hearts. Now, Christ is here described as a minister appointed by God to
   perform his work; for he assumes the character of a servant along with
   our flesh, and in this respect there is no impropriety in his being
   subjected to the Father, as if he belonged to the rank of other men.

   Yet we ought to keep in remembrance what we have frequently seen as to
   the union of the Head and the members; for what is now said concerning
   Christ relates to the whole body, and therefore the glorifying is
   common to the whole Church. Yet Christ always holds the highest rank;
   for, being raised on high, he is exalted above the whole world, that to
   him there may be a concourse of all nations. In a word, he shows that
   men obey Christ and submit to his doctrine, because God hath exalted
   him, and hath determined to make his pre-eminence known to all men; for
   otherwise the preaching of the gospel would be of little use, if God
   did not give power and efficacy to his doctrine by the Spirit.

   6. Seek ye Jehovah. After having spoken of the good success of the
   gospel among the Gentiles, who formerly were strangers to the kingdom
   of God, he urges the Jews to be ashamed of loitering while others run;
   for since they were the first who were called, it is shameful that they
   should be last. This exhortation, therefore, relates strictly to the
   Jews, to whom the example of the Gentiles is held out in order to
   excite their jealousy; in the same manner as the Lord hath foretold
   that "he would provoke the Jews to jealousy by a foolish nation."
   (Deuteronomy 32:21)

   While he is found. "The time of finding" is here used not exactly in
   the same sense as in Psalm 32:6, [85] but as the time when God offers
   himself to us, as in other passages he has limited a fixed day for his
   goodpleasure and our salvation. (Isaiah 49:8) Yet I readily admit that
   it likewise denotes the time when necessity prompts us to seek God's
   assistance; but we ought chiefly to remember that God is sought at a
   seasonable time, when of his own accord he advances to meet us; for in
   vain shall indolent and sluggish persons lament that they had been
   deprived of that grace which they rejected. The Lord sometimes endures
   our sluggishness, and bears with us; but if ultimately he do not
   succeed, he will withdraw, and will bestow his grace on others. For
   this reason Christ exhorts us to walk while it is day, for the night
   cometh when the means of pursuing our journey shall be taken from us.
   (John 12:35) We ought to draw high consolation from being assured that
   it is not in vain for us to seek God. "Seek," says Christ, "and ye
   shall find; knock, and it shall be opened; ask, and it shall be given
   to you." (Matthew 7:7)

   Call upon him while he is near. The word "call" may here be taken in a
   general sense; but I think that it denotes one description of" seeking"
   God, which is of more importance than all the others, as if he
   commanded us to betake ourselves to him by prayers and supplications.
   He says that he is "near," when he opens the door and gently invites us
   to come to him, or when he comes forth publicly, so that we do not need
   to seek him through long windings. But we must attend to Paul's
   definition, who tells us that it denotes the preaching of the gospel.
   (Romans 10:8) "The Lord is nigh," (Philippians 4:5) and exhibits
   himself to us, when the voice of the gospel cries aloud; and we do not
   need to seek far, or to make long circuits, as unbelievers do; for he
   exhibits himself to us in his word, that we, on our part, may draw near
   to him.

   7. Let the wicked man forsake his way. He confirms the former
   statement; for, having formerly called men to receive the grace of God,
   he now describes more largely the manner of receiving it. We know how
   hypocrites loudly call on God whenever they desire relief from their
   distresses, and yet shut up their hearts by wicked obstinacy; [86] and
   therefore, that the Jews may not be hypocritical in seeking God, he
   exhorts them to sincere piety. Hence we infer that the doctrine of
   repentance ought always to accompany the promise of salvation; for in
   no other way can men taste the goodness of God than by abhorring
   themselves on account of their sins, and renouncing themselves and the
   world. And indeed no man will sincerely desire to be reconciled to God
   and to obtain pardon of sins till he is moved by a true and earnest
   repentance.

   By three forms of expression he describes the nature of repentance, --
   first, "Let the wicked man forsake, his way;" secondly, "The
   unrighteous man his thoughts;" thirdly, "Let him return to the Lord."
   Under the word way he includes the whole course of life, and
   accordingly demands that they bring forth the fruits of righteousness
   as witnesses of their newness of life. By adding the word thoughts he
   intimates that we must not only correct outward actions, but must begin
   with the heart; for although in the opinion of men we appear to change
   our manner of life for the better, yet we shall have made little
   proficiency if the heart be not changed.

   Thus repentance embraces a change of the whole man; for in man we view
   inclinations, purposes, and then works. The works of men are visible,
   but the root within is concealed. This must first be changed, that it
   may afterwards yield fruitful works. We must first wash away from the
   mind all uncleanness, and conquer wicked inclinations, that outward
   testimonies may afterwards be added. And if any man boast that he has
   been changed, and yet live as he was wont to do, it will be
   vain-boasting; for both are requisite, conversion of the heart, and
   change of life.

   Besides, God does not command us to return to him before he has applied
   a remedy to revolt; for hypocrites will willingly endure that we praise
   what is good and right, provided that they be at liberty to crouch
   amidst their filth. But we can have nothing to do with God if we do not
   withdraw from ourselves, especially when we have been alienated by
   wicked variance; and therefore self-denial goes before, that it may
   lead us to God.

   And he will have mercy on him. We ought carefully to examine this
   context, for he shows that men cannot be led to repentance in any other
   way than by holding out assurance of pardon. Whoever, then, inculcates
   the doctrine of repentance, without mentioning the mercy of God and
   reconciliation through free grace, labors to no purpose; just as the
   Popish doctors imagine that they have discharged their duty well when
   they have dwelt largely on this point, and yet do but chatter and
   trifle about the doctrine of repentance. But although they taught the
   true method of repenting, yet it would be of little avail, seeing that
   they leave out the foundation of freelybestowed pardon, by which alone
   consciences can be pacified. And indeed, as we have formerly said, a
   sinner will always shrink from the presence of God so long as he is
   dragged to his judgment-seat to give an account of his life, and will
   never be subdued to fear and obedience till his heart is brought into a
   state of peace.

   For he aboundeth in pardoning. Now, because it is difficult to remove
   terror from trembling minds, Isaiah draws all argument from the nature
   of God, that he will be ready to pardon and to be reconciled. Thus the
   Holy Spirit dwells on this part of doctrine, because we always doubt
   whether or not God is willing to pardon us; for, although we entertain
   some thoughts of his mercy, yet we do not venture fully to believe
   that, it belongs to us. It is not without reason, therefore, that this
   clause is added, that we may not be hindered by uncertainty or doubt as
   to his infinite compassion toward us.

   8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts. This passage is expounded in
   various ways. Some think that it condemns universally the life of men,
   that they may not be satisfied with it or flatter their vices; for we
   cannot approach to God but by taking away a false conviction of our own
   righteousness. And indeed none call for physicians but those who are
   driven by the violence of disease to seek both health and remedies.
   Accordingly, this passage is compared by them to that saying of our
   Lord,

   "What ranks high among men is abomination in the sight of God." (Luke
   16:15)

   But the Prophet's meaning, I think, is different, and is more correctly
   explained, according to my judgment, by other commentators, who think
   that he draws a distinction between God's disposition and man's
   disposition. Men are wont to judge and measure God from themselves; for
   their hearts are moved by angry passions, and are very difficult to be
   appeased; and therefore they think that they cannot be reconciled to
   God, when they have once offended him. But the Lord shows that he is
   far from resembling men. As if he had said, "I am not a mortal man,
   that I should show myself to be harsh and irreconcilable to you. [87]
   My thoughts are very different from yours. If you are implacable, and
   can with difficulty be brought back to a state of friendship with those
   from whom you have received an injury, I am not like you, that I should
   treat you so cruelly."

   9. For as the heavens are higher than the earth. This agrees well with
   that passage in which David, describing the mercy of God, says, (Psalm
   103:11) that it is as much more excellent "as the heavens are higher
   than the earth;" for although the application is different, yet the
   meaning is the same. In short, God is infinitely compassionate and
   infinitely ready to forgive; so that it ought to be ascribed
   exclusively to our unbelief, if we do not obtain pardon from him. [88]

   There is nothing that troubles our consciences more than when we think
   that God is like ourselves; for the consequence is, that we do not
   venture to approach to him, and flee from him as an enemy, and are
   never at rest. But they who measure God by themselves as a standard
   form a false idea and altogether contrary to his nature; and indeed
   they cannot do him a greater injury than this. Are men, who are
   corrupted and debased by sinful desires, not ashamed to compare God's
   lofty and uncorrupted nature with their own, and to confine what is
   infinite within those narrow limits by which they feel themselves to be
   wretchedly restrained? In what prison could any of us be more
   straightly shut up than in our own unbelief?

   This appears to me to be the plain and simple meaning of the Prophet.
   And yet I do not deny that he alludes, at the same time, to the life of
   men such as he formerly described it to be. In a word, he means that
   men must forget themselves, when they wish to be converted to God, and
   that no obstacle can be greater or more destructive than when we think
   that God is irreconcilable. We must therefore root out of our minds
   this false imagination.

   Moreover, we learn from it how widely they err who abuse the mercy of
   God, so as to draw from it greater encouragement to sin. The Prophet
   reasons thus, "Repent, forsake your ways; for the mercy of God is
   infinite." When men despair or doubt as to obtaining pardon, they
   usually become more hardened and obstinate; but when they feel that God
   is merciful, this draws and converts them. It follows, therefore, that
   they who do not cease to live wickedly, and who are not changed in
   heart, have no share in this mercy.

   10. Surely, as the rain cometh down. After having spoken of God's
   tender affection and inconceivable forbearance towards us, he again
   brings forward the promises, that, by relying on them, we may banish
   all doubt of being free from every danger. It would be of little avail
   to speak to us about the nature or the secret purpose of God, if we
   were not reminded of "the word," by which he reveals himself. Now, God
   speaks openly to us, so that it is unnecessary to make longer inquiry.
   We must therefore come to the word, in which his will is declared
   without obscurity, provided that all our senses are confined within
   those limits; for otherwise we remain in suspense, and doubt what he
   has determined concerning us, even though the Lord declare a thousand
   times that he is altogether unlike men; for, although men acknowledge
   this, yet they wish to be certain about themselves and their salvation.
   [89] For this reason we ought carefully to observe the order which is
   followed by the Prophet. Thus also Moses recalled the people to the
   knowledge of God. "Say not thou, Who shall ascend to heaven? or, Who
   shall descend into the deep? The word is nigh, in thy mouth and in thy
   heart." (Deuteronomy 30:12) "That is," saith Paul, "the word of faith
   which we preach." (Romans 10:8)

   He employs a comparison drawn from daily experience and wonderfully
   appropriate; for, if we see great efficacy in the rain, which waters
   and fertilizes the earth, much greater efficacy will God display in his
   word. The rain is transitory and liable to corruption; but the word is
   eternal, unchangeable, and incorruptible, and cannot, like the rain,
   vanish away.

   That we may more fully understand the Prophet's words, we must keep in
   view the end at which he aims. Men doubt if God will actually perform
   what he promises in his word; for we look upon the word, as if it were
   suspended in the air and had no effect. How shocking this is, he
   demonstrates from the very course of nature; for it is in the highest
   degree unreasonable to ascribe less to the word than to a dumb
   creature; and therefore he teaches us, that his word never fails of its
   effect. Some understand this to mean that the preaching of the Gospel
   is never unprofitable, but always produces some fruit. This is true in
   itself; for the Lord worketh by his Spirit, and "giveth increase," (1
   Corinthians 3:7) so that the labor of his servants is not unproductive.
   But the Prophet's meaning was different; namely, that God does not
   speak in vain or scatter his promises into the air, but that we shall
   actually receive the fruit of them, provided that we do not prevent it
   by our unbelief.

   But watereth the earth, and causeth it to bring forth. He mentions two
   effects produced by the watering of the rain, which fertilizes the
   earth; first, that men have abundance of food for their support; and
   secondly, that they have seed for procuring a crop in the following
   year. If therefore in things of a transitory nature the power of God is
   so great, what must we think of the word? [90]

   11. So shall my word be. The word goeth out of the mouth of God in such
   a manner that it likewise "goeth out of the mouth" of men; for God does
   not speak openly from heaven, but employs men as his instruments, that
   by their agency he may make known his will. But the authority of the
   promises is more fully confirmed, when we are told that they proceed
   from the sacred mouth of God. Although, therefore, he brings forward
   witnesses from the earth, he declares that all that they have promised
   shall be ratified and sure; and, in order to impress more deeply on the
   minds of men the power and efficacy of preaching, he declares that he
   does not cast that precious seed at random, but appoints it for a fixed
   purpose, and consequently that we ought to entertain no doubt as to the
   effect; for there is nothing to which mortals are more prone than to
   judge of God from themselves so as to withhold belief from his voice.

   This doctrine must be frequently repeated and inculcated, that we may
   know that God will do what. he hath once spoken. For this reason, when
   we hear the promises of God, we ought to consider what is his design in
   them; so that, when he promises the free pardon of our sins, we may be
   fully assured that we are reconciled through Christ. But, as the word
   of God is efficacious for the salvation of believers, so it is
   abundantly efficacious for condemning the wicked; as Christ also
   teacheth, "The word which I have spoken, that shall judge him at the
   last day."

   12. Therefore ye shall go out with joy. The Prophet concludes the
   subject of this chapter; for, when he spoke of the mercy of God, his
   object was, to convince the Jews that the Lord would deliver them. He
   now applies to his purpose what was contained in his discourse
   concerning the infinite goodness of God, and shows that his thoughts
   are very unlike the thoughts of men. And the true way of teaching is
   this, that we should apply general statements for present use. Finally,
   he treats of the restoration of the people, which depended on the
   undeserved mercy of God.

   The mountains and hills shall break out before you. By "the mountains
   and hills" he means that everything which they shall meet in the
   journey, though in other respects it be injurious, shall aid those who
   shall return to Jerusalem. They are metaphors, by which he shows that
   all the creatures bow to the will of God, and rejoice and lend their
   aid to carry on his work. He alludes to the deliverance from Egypt,
   (Exodus 14:22) as is customary with the Prophets; for thus is it
   described by the Psalmist, "The mountains leaped like rams, and the
   hills like lambs. What ailed thee, O sea, that thou fleddest, and
   Jordan, (Joshua 3:16) that thou wast driven back? (Psalm 114:4, 5) For
   the restoration of the Church may be regarded as a renovation of the
   whole world, and in consequence of this, heaven and earth are said to
   be changed, as if their order were reversed. But all this depended on
   former predictions, by which they had received a promise of their
   return.

   13. Instead of the bramble [91] shall come up the fir-tree. He still
   extols the power of God, which would be visible in the restoration of
   the people; for he shows that the change will be such that they shall
   have an easy road to return. Some explain it allegorically, and suppose
   that by "brambles" are meant men who wish to do injury, and who inflict
   wounds on others, and that these shall be "firtrees," that is, trees
   that bear fruit and that are useful to their neighbors; but in
   expositions of that kind ingenuity is carried to excess. When they say
   that these things relate to the kingdom of Christ, and on that account
   ought to be understood in a spiritual sense, I agree with them; for the
   Prophet begins with the departure from Babylon, and includes the whole
   condition of the Church, till Christ was manifested to the world. But
   the propriety of that allegory must not therefore be admitted; for he
   speaks of the departure from Babylon, and, in order to open it up for
   his people, he says that he will remove every obstacle, and will supply
   them with everything necessary, so that they shall suffer no
   inconvenience. In like manner, when Christ promises the benefit of
   redemption, he likewise takes away everything that would injure or
   retard, and even turns those things to a different and totally opposite
   purpose, that from them also they may receive some benefit. All things
   (Romans 8:28) tend to the advantage of believers, and those things
   which would otherwise be injurious and destructive, are employed by God
   as remedies to purify them, that they may not be devoted to the world,
   but may become more ready and cheerful in the service of their Master.
   [92]

   And shall be to Jehovah for a name. When he says that it shall be to
   God "for a name," he shows what is the design of the restoration of the
   Church. It is, that the name of God may be more illustrious among men,
   and that the remembrance of him may flourish and be maintained. On this
   account he adds that it shall be a perpetual sign, that is, a monument,
   and, as we commonly say, a memorial; and although, amidst these
   tempests, the Church be tossed and agitated in various ways, yet,
   because the Lord wishes that the remembrance of his name may be
   everlasting, he will guard and defend her.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [76] "Spend. Hebrews Weigh." (Eng. Ver.) "In the first clause there is
   reference to the primitive custom of weighing instead of counting
   money, from which have arisen several of the most familiar
   denominations, such as the Hebrew shekel,' the Greek talent,' the
   French livre,' and the English pound.' The essential idea here is that
   of paying."  Alexander.

   [77] "En cherchant le chemin de vie eternelle." "In seeking the road to
   eternal life."

   [78] "Hearken diligently unto me."  Eng. Ver.

   [79] "Si nons l'escoutons attentivement." "If we listen to him
   attentively."

   [80] "De nons amener a salut." "To lead us to salvation."

   [81] "Hors du pays qui leur avoit este promis et donne." "Out of the
   country, that had been promised and given to them."

   [82] "The sure mercies of David."  Eng. Ver.

   [83] "Pource qu'elles ont este mesprisees et rejettees." "Because they
   were despised and rejected."

   [84] "The question which has chiefly divided interpreters, in reference
   to this verse, is, whether the object of address is the Messiah or the
   Church. The former opinion is maintained by Calvin, Sanctus, and
   others; the latter by Grotins and Vitringa. The masculine forms prove
   nothing either way, because the Church is sometimes presented in the
   person of Israel, and sometimes personified as a woman. The most
   natural supposition is, that after speaking of the Messiah, he now
   turns to him and addresses him directly."  Alexander.

   [85] "In a time when thou mayest be found. Heb., in a time of finding."
   (Eng. Ver.) Our author's rendering is, "Therefore shall every one that
   is meek pray unto thee in the time of finding thee." In his commentary
   he makes reference to this passage of Isaiah.  Ed.

   [86] "Par une obstination mechante."

   [87] "Pour vous estre rude et ennemi a jamais." "So as to be harsh and
   an enemy to you for ever."

   [88] "Do not think," saith God, "that what I promise is difficult, and
   let it not seem incredible to you, that a wicked and unjust man, or the
   people of the Jews, or all who among the Gentiles knew not God, can be
   saved. Consider this, that there is a wide difference between your
   purposes and mine, and that the difference of will is as great as the
   difference of nature; for there are many thoughts in the heart of a
   man, but the purpose of the Lord endureth for ever. You, like men who
   often repent of what they have promised, have thrown down the ancient
   will, and have set up in its place a modern will. But the thoughts of
   his heart are from generation to generation, and whatever he hath
   decreed cannot be changed."  Jerome.

   [89] "Lesquels desirent (s'ils veulent dire la verite) estre certains
   de leur salut, et que ce qu'ils deviendront." "Who desire (if they are
   willing to tell the truth) to be certain about their salvation, and
   what shall become of them."

   [90] "These words depend on what goes before, and their meaning may
   thus be briefly stated. Let not the people refuse to believe that a
   wicked man, after having committed great crimes, shall suddenly be
   saved. For my thoughts are not as the thoughts of men; and as far as
   heaven is distant from the earth, so are my thoughts separated from the
   thoughts of men. I am most merciful and ready to forgive. Would you
   wish to have another metaphor? As the rain and snow come down from
   heaven, and do not return thither, but water and refresh the earth, and
   cause it to bring forth various productions, that the corn-fields may
   produce abundance of bread for the use of men; so the word of my
   promise, which I have promised once and again, and which hath gone out
   of my mouth, shall not be void, but all shall be actually fulfilled."
   Jerome.

   [91] "Instead of the thorn."  Eng. Ver.

   [92] "Au service de leur maistre."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 56.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 56:1-12

   1. Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my
   salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.

   1. Sic dicit Iehova: Custodite judicium, et facite justitiam; quonoiam
   propinqua est salus mea, ut veniat; et justitia mea, ut reveletur.

   2. Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth
   hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his
   hand from doing any evil.

   2. Beatus homo qui fecerit hoc, et filius hominis qui hoc
   apprehenderit; custodiens sabbatum, ita ut non violet illud; et
   custodiens manum suam ut ab omni male abstineat.

   3. Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to the
   LORD, speak, saying, The LORD hath utterly separated me from his
   people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.

   3. Et ne dicat filius alienus aggregatus ad Iehovam, dicendo, Separando
   separavit me Iehova a populo suo; et ne dicat eunuchus, Ego sum lignum
   aridum.

   4. For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and
   choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant;

   4. Quoniam sic dicit Iehova, eunuchis qui custodiunt sabbata mea, et
   eligunt quae mihi placent, atque apprehendunt foedus meum;

   5. Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place
   and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an
   everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.

   5. Dabo eis in domo mea et intra murosmeos locum, et nomen melius quam
   filiorum et filiarum; nomen perpetuum dabo eis, qued non delebitur.

   6. Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the LORD, to
   serve him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be his servants, every
   one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my
   covenant;

   6. Filios, inquam, alieni, qui aggregati erant ad Iehovam, ut
   ministrent ei, et diligant nomen Iehovae; ut sint illi in servos,
   quisquis custodierit sabbatum, ita ut non profanet illud, et amplexus
   fuerit foedus meum.

   7. Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in
   my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be
   accepted upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called an house of
   prayer for all people.

   7. Hos adducam in montes sanctitatis meae; et laetificabo eos in domo
   orationis meae. Holocausta eorum et sacrificia grata erunt in altari
   meo; quoniam domus mea Domus orationis vocabitur cunctis populis.

   8. The Lord GOD, which gathereth the outcasts of Israel, saith, Yet
   will I gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him.

   8. Dicit Dominus Iehova, qui congregat expulsos Israel: Adhuc
   congregabo super eum congregatos ejus.

   9. All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in
   the forest.

   9. Omnes bestiae agri, venitead devorandum, omnes bestiae sylvestres.

   10. His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb
   dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.

   10. Speculatores ejus caeci, omnes nescierunt, omnes canes muti,
   nesciunt latrare, jacentes dormiunt, amant dormitationem.

   11. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are
   shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every
   one for his gain, from his quarter.

   11. Et canes illi anima fortes nesciunt saturitatem; pastores ipsi
   nesciunt, nec intelligunt; universi respiciunt ad vias suas; quisque ad
   commodum suum a fine ejus (vel, suo).

   12. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves
   with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
   abundant.

   12. Venite, accipiam vinum, potabimus siceram; et erit sicut hodie, ita
   crastinus dies, vel major, excellentior multo.


   1. Thus saith Jehovah. This is a remarkable passage, in which the
   Prophet shows what God demands from us, as soon as he holds out tokens
   of his favor, or promises that he will be ready to be reconciled to us,
   that our reconciliation may be secured. He demands from us such a
   conversion as shall change our minds and hearts, that they may forsake
   the world and rise towards heaven; and next he likewise calls for the
   fruits of repentance.

   Keep ye judgment, and do righteousness. Under the names "judgment" and
   "righteousness," he includes all the duties which men owe to each
   other, and which consist not only in abstaining from doing wrong, but
   also in rendering assistance to our neighbors. And this is the sum of
   the second table of the Law, in keeping which we give proof of our
   piety, if we have any. For this reason the prophets always draw our
   attention to that table; because by means of it our real character is
   better known, and true uprightness is ascertained; for hypocrites, as
   we have formerly seen, [93] often practice deceit by ceremonies.

   For my salvation is near, and my righteousness. He assigns the reason,
   and at the same time points out the source and the cause why it is the
   duty of all to devote themselves to newness of life. It is because "the
   righteousness of the Lord approaches to us," that we, on our part,
   ought to draw near to him. The Lord calls himself "righteous," and
   declares that this is "his righteousness," not because he keeps it shut
   up in himself, but because he pours it out on men. In like manner he
   calls it "his salvation," by which he delivers men from destruction.

   Although this discourse was addressed to the Jews, that, by sincere
   affection of heart, and by the practice of integrity, they might show
   their gratitude to God their Redeemer, yet it refers to every one of
   us; for the whole world is ruined in itself, if it do not obtain
   salvation from God alone. We must therefore attend to this exhortation,
   which instructs us that the nearer we are to God, so much the more
   powerfully ought we to be excited to the practice of godliness. Hence
   also Paul admonishes believers, [94] "Cast away the works of darkness;
   put on the armor of light; for our salvation is nearer than we
   thought." (Romans 13:11, 12)

   2. Happy is the man that shall do this. When he calls those persons
   "happy" who, having embraced this doctrine, devote themselves to walk
   uprightly, he indirectly leads us to conclude that many will be deaf or
   disobedient; but, lest their wickedness or indifference should retard
   the elect, he recommends the exhortation which he has given from the
   advantage which it yields. Thus, in order that believers may abandon
   all delay, he exclaims that they are "happy" to whom it hath been given
   [95] to possess such wisdom.

   Keeping the Sabbath. We have said that the words "justice" and
   "judgment," in the preceding verse, include all the duties of the
   second table; but here he mentions the Sabbath, which belongs to the
   first table. I reply, as I have already mentioned briefly, that they
   who live inoffensively and justly with their neighbors, testify that
   they serve God; and therefore we need not wonder that the Prophet,
   after having glanced at the second table, mentions also the first; for
   both ought to be joined together In a word, Isaiah declares that he who
   shall obey God by keeping his law perfectly shall be "happy;" for the
   salvation and the righteousness of God shall belong to him. Since,
   therefore, men wander at random amidst their contrivances, and adopt
   various methods of worshipping God, he shows that there is only one
   way, that is, when men endeavor to frame and regulate their life by the
   injunction of the Law; for otherwise they will weary themselves in vain
   by taking other roads. In short, this is a remarkable passage, showing
   that nothing pleases God but keeping the Law.

   If the question be put, "Can men obtain righteousness and salvation by
   their own works?" the reply will be easy; for the Lord does not offer
   salvation to us, as if he had been anticipated by our merits, (for, on
   the contrary, we are anticipated by him,) but offers himself freely to
   us, and only demands that we, on our part, draw near to him. Since
   therefore he willingly invites us, since he offers righteousness
   through free grace, we must make every effort not to be deprived of so
   great a benefit.

   Again, because the Sabbath, as Moses declares, (Exodus 31:13, 17) and
   as Ezekiel 20:12 repeats, was the most important symbol of the worship
   of God, so by that figure of speech in which a part is taken for the
   whole, and which is called a synecdoche, the Sabbath includes all the
   exercises of religion. But we must view the Sabbath in connection with
   everything that attends it; for God does not rest satisfied with
   outward ceremony, or delight in our indolence, but demands from us
   earnest selfdenial, that we may be entirely devoted to his service.

   So that he may not profane it. This clause is commonly rendered, "That
   he may not profane it;" and literally it runs thus, "From profaning
   it;" and therefore we have thought it proper to prefix the word "so" to
   the clause, "So that he may not profane it," in order to remove all
   ambiguity.

   And keeping his hand, that he may abstain from all that is evil. He now
   adds another synecdoche, to describe the duties which men owe to each
   other. The amount of it is, that there is no other way of serving God
   aright but by sincere piety and a blameless life, as he has also
   included in these two parts the rule of leading a holy life. In a word,
   it is an exposition of true righteousness which is contained in the Law
   of the Lord, that we may acquiesce in it; for in vain do men seek any
   other road to perfection. Here also are thrown down all false worship
   and superstitions, and, finally, everything that is contrived by men in
   opposition to the word of God.

   3. And let not the son who is a foreigner [96] say. The Prophet shows
   that this grace of God shall be such that even they who formerly were
   estranged from him, and against whom the door might be said to have
   been shut, may obtain a new condition, or may be perfectly restored.
   And he meets their complaint, that they may not say that they are
   rejected, or unworthy, or "foreigners," or excluded by any mark; for
   the Lord will remove every obstacle. This may refer both to Jews, who
   had been brought into a condition similar to that of foreign nations by
   a temporary rejection, and to the heathen nations themselves. For my
   own part, I willingly extend it to both, that it may agree with the
   prediction of Hosea,

   "I will call them my people who were not my people." (Hosea 1:10)

   Joined to Jehovah. When he says that they are "joined to God," he gives
   warning that this consolation belongs to those only who have followed
   God when he called them; for there are many "eunuchs" on whom God does
   not bestow his favor, and many "foreigners" who do not join themselves
   to the people of God. This promise is therefore limited to those who
   have been called and have obeyed.

   By calling them "foreigners" and "eunuchs," he describes under both
   classes all who appear to be unworthy of being reckoned by God in the
   number of his people; for God had separated for himself a peculiar
   people, and had afterwards driven them out of his inheritance. The
   Gentiles were entirely shut out from his kingdom, as is sufficiently
   evident from the whole of Scripture. Paul says,

   "Ye were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the
   covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. But
   now by Christ Jesus, ye who formerly were far off have been made nigh
   by the blood of Christ."
   (Ephesians 2:12, 13)

   The Gentiles, therefore, might at first doubt whether or not the
   benefit of adoption, which was literally intended for the Jews,
   belonged to them. We see also how much the Apostles shrunk from it,
   when the Lord commanded them (Mark 16:15) to "preach the Gospel through
   the whole world;" for they thought that the doctrine of salvation was
   profaned if it was communicated indiscriminately to Gentiles as well as
   to Jews. The same hesitation might harass the elect people, from the
   time that their banishment from the holy land became a sign of the
   rejection of them; and therefore the Prophet commands them to dismiss
   their doubts.

   And let not the eunuch say. By the same figure of speech, in which a
   part is taken for the whole, he includes under this designation all who
   bore any mark of disgrace which kept them apart~ from the people of
   God; for "eunuchs," and those who had no children, appeared to be
   rejected by God and shut out from the promise which the Lord had made
   to Abraham, that "his seed should be as the stars of heaven, (Genesis
   15:5) and as the sand of the sea." (Genesis 22:17) In a word, he warns
   all men against looking at themselves, that they may fix their minds
   exclusively on God's calling, and may thus imitate the faith of
   Abraham, (Genesis 15:6) who did not look at either his own decayed body
   or the barren womb of Sarah, so as through unbelief to dispute with
   himself about the power of God, but hoped above all hope. (Romans
   4:1820) The Prophet addresses persons who were despised and reproached;
   for, as Peter says,

   "there is no respect of persons with God, but in every nation he who
   feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted by him." (Acts
   10:34, 35)

   4. For thus saith Jehovah. Now follows a confirmation; for the sincere
   worshippers of God, who keep the sabbaths and follow the righteousness
   of the Law, though they be "eunuchs," [97] or labor under any other
   obstruction, shall nevertheless have a place in the Church. He appears
   to annihilate in this manner all the external marks [98] in which alone
   the Jews gloried; for the high rank of the Church is not external, but
   spiritual; and although believers have no emblems of distinction in the
   eyes of the world, and are even despised and reproached, yet they rank
   high in the sight of God.

   And choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant.
   With the "keeping of the Sabbath," he connects obedience and adherence
   to "the covenant;" and hence we may readily infer that, when he spoke
   hitherto about the Sabbath, he had in view not an idle ceremony but
   perfect holiness. At the same time, he again lays a restraint on the
   children of God, not to make even the smallest departure from the
   injunction of the Law; for they are permitted to "choose," not whatever
   they think fit, but that which God declares to be pleasing and
   acceptable to himself. Wherefore both hypocrisy and inconsiderate zeal
   are here condemned, when God not only contrasts his own commandments
   with the inventions of men, but enjoins them earnestly to "take hold of
   his covenant."

   5. I will give to them in my house. Here we see that all men, however
   unworthy, may obtain admission into the kingdom of God: he alludes to
   Jerusalem, and to the temple in which the Lord placed a memorial of his
   name. No place was given in it to any but to the Jews alone; and they
   would have reckoned the temple to be polluted, if any of the Gentiles
   had entered into it. Hence also a serious insurrection arose against
   Paul for having brought into the temple uncircumcised persons. The Lord
   now admits, without distinction, those whom he previously forbade; and
   indeed he set aside this distinction, when we, who were the children of
   strangers, were brought by him into the temple, that is, into his
   Church, which is not confined, as formerly, within those narrow limits
   of Judea, but is extended through the whole world.

   A place and a name. yd (yad) is here put for place, as in many other
   passages. It might also be supposed to denote "authority," or "power;"
   for they shall be elevated to such dignity as to be accounted the
   children of God.

   Better than of sons and of daughters. A question may arise, Does the
   Lord compare the Jews who were at that time in the Church, with the
   believers whom he shall afterwards place in their room; or, does he
   contrast the future condition of the people with their condition at
   that time? For it is certain that "the name" of the Gentiles is
   "better" than that of the Jews, who were "cut off on account of their
   unbelief;" and we have succeeded in their room, "as wild olives
   ingrafted into a good olive tree," as Paul says. (Romans 11:24) The
   meaning' might therefore be, that "eunuchs" and "foreigners" shall have
   "a better name" than children and domestics, who were regarded as God's
   heritage. But I choose rather to explain it in a different manner,
   namely, that the dignity of believers shall be higher under Christ than
   it was under the Law. The patriarchs had a very excellent "name," when
   they called upon God as their Father, and were joined in covenant with
   him; but the grace of God has been far more abundantly poured out upon
   us since the coming of Christ; and therefore we have obtained in him a
   far more excellent name.

   A perpetual name. He calls this name "perpetual," because it is written
   in heaven, where it shall live and flourish throughout all ages. Wicked
   men wish to have their name made illustrious in this world, and labor
   to promote their reputation, that the remembrance of their name may
   last for ever; but it is fading and of short duration. But far
   different is this name; for it makes us heirs of the heavenly kingdom,
   so that in the presence of angels we are reckoned to be the children of
   God.

   We might also interpret mvnym (mibbanim) to mean, "than the name which
   is derived from children; [99] for men, by having children, do in some
   respect perpetuate their own name. He promises that this name shall be
   far more excellent. But I prefer to follow the former exposition.

   6. The children of the foreigner who shall be joined to Jehovah. He
   repeats the same thing which he had formerly said, that God will open
   the doors of his temple to all men without distinction, so that there
   shall no longer be a distinction between the Jew and the Greek. He
   declares that those whom God brings into a state of friendship with
   himself by the word, which is the bond of our adoption, are "joined to
   God." This is "the betrothing in mercy and faithfulness" which is
   mentioned by Hosea. (Hosea 2:19, 20) Not only does he grant to them a
   temple in which they may adore him as the body of the people were wont
   to do, but he assigns to them a more honorable rank, that they, nay
   minister to him; that is, God acknowledges as priests or Levites those
   who were formerly heathens.

   And that they may love the name of Jehovah. We must observe the end of
   the calling, which is here stated; for he says that they shall be God's
   ministers on condition that they love his name. Thus hypocrites are
   here excluded; for the calling joins two things together, that we serve
   God, and that our service be with a ready and cheerful disposition of
   mind. There can be no worship of God, if we do not willingly and
   readily yield obedience. What is said about alms, that "God loveth a
   cheerful giver," (2 Corinthians 9:7) ought to be applied to every part
   of life, that we render to God willing service.

   Whosoever shall keep my Sabbath. He again mentions the Sabbath; and we
   have said that under this word is included the whole worship of God. In
   observing it the people overlooked that which was of the highest
   importance; for, by resting satisfied with outward ceremony, they
   neglected the truth, that is, reformation of life. The Lord enjoined
   them to rest in such a manner as to keep both their hands and their
   minds from all crime and wickedness.

   And shall embrace my covenant. Here he describes the zeal and
   steadfastness of those who submit themselves to God and cleave to his
   word; and therefore, if we are joined to God by a covenant, we ought to
   hold by it constantly, and adhere firmly to sound doctrine, so that it
   may not be possible to withdraw or separate us from him in any manner.

   7. These will I bring. By these modes of expression he describes what
   he had formerly stated, that foreigners who were formerly excluded from
   the Church of God, are called to it; so that henceforth the distinction
   between circumcision and uncircumcision shall be abolished. This cannot
   refer to proselytes, who were received into the number of God's people
   by circumcision, for that would have been nothing new or uncommon; but
   he testifies that the grace of God shall be diffused throughout the
   whole world; and this cannot be accomplished without uniting the
   Gentiles to the Jews so as to form one body, which happened when the
   difference between circumcision and uncircumcision was taken out of the
   way. There is therefore nothing now to prevent Gentiles from
   ministering to God, seeing that they have been called into the temple,
   that is, into the assembly of believers. Not only so, but we saw a
   little before, that the priesthood is removed from the tribe of Levi,
   not only to the whole body of the people, but even to foreigners.

   How strongly the Jews abhor this sentiment is well known; for, although
   they read these words of the Prophet, yet they reckon it to be utterly
   monstrous that the Gentiles should be called to this distinguished
   benefit of God which was especially intended for them. Yet the
   Prophet's meaning is so plain, that it cannot without the greatest
   impudence be called in question. He extols this grace from the fruit
   which it yields; for true and perfect happiness is, to be reconciled to
   God and to enjoy his favor. We know, indeed, that wicked men indulge
   excessively in mirth; but that mirth is turned into gnashing of teeth,
   because the curse of God rests upon it. But God fills the hearts of
   believers with the most delightful joy, not only by showing that he is
   reconciled to them, but by the manifestation of his favor and kindness
   in their prosperity. Yet their highest joy is that which springs from
   "peace" of conscience, which Paul ascribes to "the kingdom of God,"
   (Romans 14:1-7) and which we enjoy when we are reconciled to God by
   Christ. (Romans 5:1)

   Their burnt-offerings and sacrifices shall be acceptable. He promises
   that their sacrifices shall be acceptable to him, because all have been
   called on this condition, that they shall offer themselves and all that
   they have to God. By the word "sacrifices," he means such spiritual
   worship of God as is enjoined in the Gospel; for the Prophet spoke in
   accordance with what was customary in his time, when the worship of God
   was wrapped up in a variety of ceremonies. But now, instead of
   sacrifices, we offer to God praises, thanksgivings, good works, and
   finally ourselves. When he declares that they shall be acceptable, let
   us not imagine that; this arises from their own value or excellence,
   but from God's undeserved kindness; for he might justly reject them, if
   he looked at them in themselves. This ought to be a spur to excite in
   us a strong desire to worship God, when we see that our works, which
   are of no value, are accepted by God as if they had been pure
   sacrifices.

   He adds, On my altar; because in no other manner could the sacrifices
   be acceptable to God than "on the altar," by which "they were
   sanctified." (Matthew 23:19) Thus all that we offer will be polluted,
   if it be not "sanctified" by Christ, who is our altar.

   For my house shall be called a house of prayer. Formerly the temple was
   appointed for the Jews alone, whom in an especial manner the Lord
   desired to call upon him; for, when Paul shows that the Jews have a
   superiority over the Gentiles, he says that latreia, that is, "the
   worship of God," is theirs. (Romans 9:4) Thus by an extraordinary
   privilege, such as the rest of the nations were not permitted to enjoy,
   a temple was built among them. But now the distinction has been
   removed, and all men, to whatsoever nation or place they belong, are
   freely admitted into the temple, that is, into the house of God. This
   temple has been enlarged to such a degree, that it extends to every
   part of the whole world; for all nations have been called to the
   worship of God.

   Here we have the manifest difference between the Law and the Gospel;
   for under the Law the true worship of God was observed by one nation
   only, for whose sake the temple was especially dedicated to him; but
   now all are freely admitted without distinction into the temple of God,
   that they may worship him purely in it, that is, everywhere. We must
   attend to the form of expression, which is customary and familiar to
   the Prophets, who employ, as we have already said, figures that
   correspond to their own age, and, under the name of "Sacrifices" and of
   "the Temple," describe the pure worship of God. He paints the spiritual
   kingdom of Christ, under which we may everywhere "lift up pure hands,"
   (1 Timothy 2:8) and call upon God; and, as Christ saith, God is not now
   to be adored in that temple, but "the true worshippers worship him in
   spirit and in truth." (John 4:24)

   For this reason we see a fulfillment of this plain prophecy, namely,
   that "to all peoples the house of God hath become the house of prayer,"
   that all may "call upon him, Abba, Father," (Romans 8:15; Galatians
   4:6) that is, in every language; that henceforth the Jews may not boast
   that they alone have God. Thus the prophets were under a necessity of
   accommodating their discourse to their own time, and to the ordinary
   services of religion, that they might be understood by all; for the
   time of full revelation was not yet come, but the worship of God was
   clothed with various figures. Yet undoubtedly the temple, which had
   been consecrated to the name of God, was actually his house; for he
   testified by Moses that he would be in all places where he made mention
   of his name, (Exodus 20:24) and Solomon, at the dedication of the
   temple, said, "When they shall come to pray in this house, thou wilt
   hear in heaven, in thy habitation." (1 Kings 8:30) And accordingly
   Christ reproves the Jews for "turning his Father's house into a den of
   robbers," (Matthew 21:13; Mark 11:17) and connects this passage with a
   passage in the book of the Prophet Jeremiah 7:11

   Christ calls the temple "the house of prayer," with reference to that
   time when the Gospel had not yet been published; for although he was
   come, he was not yet known, and the ceremonies of the Law were not
   abolished. But when "the vail of the temple was rent," (Matthew 27:51)
   and pardon of sins was proclaimed, these applauses of the temple ceased
   along with other ceremonies; for God began to be everywhere called upon
   by "all peoples."

   Yet it must here be observed that we are called into the Church, in
   order that we may call on God; for in vain do they boast who neglect
   prayer and true calling upon God, and yet hold a place in the Church.
   In whatever place we are, therefore, let us not neglect this exercise
   of faith; for we learn from the words of Isaiah, as it is also said,
   (Psalm 50:14) that this is the highest and most excellent sacrifice
   which God demands; so that the holiness of the temple consists in
   prayers being there offered continually.

   8. The Lord Jehovah saith. Isaiah again confirms what he formerly
   testified as to the restoration of the people; for although he extolled
   in lofty terms the grace of God, by which he would deliver his people,
   yet the condition of the Church was such that promises of this kind
   appeared to be ridiculous. Such repetitions, therefore, are not
   superfluous, but were necessarily added in order to strengthen feeble
   minds, that they might be fully convinced of that which was otherwise
   incredible.

   Who gathereth the outcasts of Israel. It is with reference to the
   subject in hand that he bestows on God this title; for it belongs to
   him to gather a scattered church, and the same words, "he gathereth the
   outcasts of Israel," are used here in the same sense. (Psalm 147:2)
   Thus he promises that he will assemble them, and not them only, but
   that he will add to them various "peoples," that the Church may be very
   numerously increased and multiplied. Whenever therefore we are drawn by
   various calamities of the Church to doubt as to his gathering them
   together, we ought to interpose this shield: "It belongeth to the Lord
   to gather the dispersed of Israel; and, though they are widely
   dispersed and scattered, yet he will easily and perfectly restore
   them."

   Still more will I gather upon him his gathered. I willingly keep by the
   literal meaning of the words of the Prophet. l (gnal) that is, "To,' or
   "Upon;" for he appears to me to have in view what he had said in the
   former verse, that the temple would be opened to all peoples; and he
   means that he will yet add many others to the Jews who have been
   gathered. This actually happened; for not only did he gather the
   dispersed in Babylon, but he also gathered other dispersions, which
   were frequent and almost of daily occurrence. Nor has he ever ceased to
   gather; so that he has added a large mass to those who have been
   gathered.

   9. All ye beasts of the field. This prediction appears to be at
   variance with what goes before; for what the Prophet has hitherto said
   was full of the most delightful consolation, but now he appears to
   threaten fiercely, and to predict frightful ruin. These statements
   might indeed appear to be contradictory; but, after having comforted
   believers, it ought not to be thought inconsistent if he forewarn them
   of a future calamity that they might not lose courage when they saw
   everything near destruction, and that necessity might likewise prompt
   them to betake themselves more warmly and earnestly to the grace of
   God. There is also another reason, that hypocrites abuse the promises
   of God and hold them out under false pretenses, cherish unfounded hope,
   and insolently boast of those things which do not at all belong to
   them; and therefore Isaiah intended to take from them the ground of
   false boasting.

   And thus his design was twofold; first, that the hearts of believers
   might not be discouraged by various calamities, which should bring them
   almost, to utter destruction, and that even when, amidst prosperity and
   peace, they beheld by faith at a distance a future calamity, they might
   rest satisfied with this single consolation; and secondly, that he
   might strike hypocrites with dread and horror, so that they might not
   exalt themselves by vain confidence, or freely indulge their sinful
   inclinations under the pretense of these promises. For this reason God
   calls not men, but savage "beasts," that they might devour the people.
   He therefore forbids believers to be alarmed and tempted to unbelief,
   when these wild beasts shall be sent. And yet he intended also to
   strike terror into them, that he might arouse them to repentance, and
   to exhort them to seek the mercy of God, that the promises might not
   lose their value.

   When he calls them "beasts of the field," he means beasts of every
   kind, and includes not only the Babylonians and Assyrians, but
   Antiochus, the Romans, and other enemies of the people, who brought
   various calamities upon them. But he has chiefly in view the defeat
   which they received from the Babylonians, who carried them away into
   wretched bondage.

   10. Her watchmen are blind. He now assigns the reason why the people
   must be destroyed. It is because they are governed by wicked princes
   and pastors; not that he wishes to throw the blame on them alone, and
   thinks that the people are innocent, but because this was the beginning
   of the evil. We are not exempted from blame, if we follow blind guides,
   but, on the contrary, are justly punished for our transgressions; for
   the Lord takes away good guides from those whom he intends to punish
   for their ingratitude.

   By the word "Watchmen" [100] he means not only the prophets, to whom
   was committed the office of teaching, but likewise judges, princes, and
   kings, who ought to have governed everything in a proper manner. He
   includes both kinds of government, that of princes, and that of the
   ministers of the word, whom the Lord has placed, as the two eyes in the
   body, to govern the Church. Consequently, if they are wicked or
   unfaithful, there cannot arise a more destructive plague to a
   commonwealth.

   All are ignorant. First, he reproaches them with want of knowledge;
   for, as it is the chief excellence of a good shepherd to know his duty,
   that he may judge what is profitable and what is pernicious to the
   flock, and to watch laboriously, and to stand, as it were, on a
   watchtower, that he may promote their safety in every respect, so
   nothing is more inconsistent with that office than ignorance and
   blindness. No man, therefore, will be a good shepherd, unless he
   understands the right method of governing the people. And hence we see
   what we ought to think of the idols of our time, who haughtily and
   insolently boast of the name of shepherds or pastors; for they are
   untaught and ignorant beasts.

   All are dumb dogs. By calling them, secondly, "dumb dogs," he charges
   them with slothfulness and indifference; for, since it is the duty of a
   good shepherd to be industrious and careful, when he calls them
   slothful and indifferent, he shows that they had nothing about them
   that ought to belong to a shepherd. Thus, when we are deprived of good
   shepherds, and when lazy or even savage beasts come in their room, let
   us acknowledge God's wrath, and let us know that destruction is not far
   off; for the Prophet threatens and foretells the ruin of the people,
   when shepherds are "dumb."

   Hence also it follows, that God appoints them to discharge the office
   of "dogs," that is, to keep watch, to drive away robbers and thieves,
   and not to permit them to enter into the fold. And if dogs are so
   faithful guardians and so warmly attached to their masters, that they
   continually watch for their safety, and do not cease to drive away, by
   barking, those from whom danger is apprehended, shepherds, when they
   give themselves up to sloth and drowsiness, ought to be ashamed of
   being surpassed by a brute beast.

   11. And those dogs strong of appetite. The third vice which he remarks
   in wicked pastors is insatiable avarice. Though they are lazy in all
   that relates to good government, yet they have a strong and ravenous
   appetite for food. Some view the Prophet's words as still more
   extensive, and as meaning that they rule tyrannically. Ezekiel
   expressly reproves them for this vice; for false prophets are commonly
   fierce, and act cruelly and barbarously towards the people of God.
   (Ezekiel 34:4) But if any person examine the matter carefully, he will
   perceive that the Prophet speaks of their insatiable avarice, which he
   afterwards describes by a variety of expressions.

   They look to their ways. That is, "They attend eagerly to their own
   affairs; every person consults his own advantage." In short, he means
   that there is no man who does not wish to be preferred to others, as if
   every man had been born for himself.

   Every one to his gain from his end. [101] mqtshv (mikkatzehu) has
   received various expositions. Some render it, "In his end," that is,
   "In his affairs;" as if the reading had been, vqtshv, (bekatzehu) But
   this does not agree with the Prophet's meaning. Others render it, "From
   the end of his avarice." I think that a more simple interpretation is,
   "From his end," that is, "On his part;" or as we commonly say, (Chacun
   en son endroict,) "Every one in his place." Thus every one is bent on
   avarice, and draws and appropriates everything to himself, and consults
   his own advantage, without attending to the duties of his office.

   Hence we learn, that no man can serve God who is given up to wicked
   desires; and he who shall labor to amass wealth, will not apply his
   mind to build up the Church of the Lord. No kind of blindness can be
   more dangerous than avarice; and so much the more ought it to be
   avoided by pastors, if they wish to be faithful servants of God. When
   we see the Prophet complaining of the bad pastors of his time, let us
   not be alarmed if we meet with the same thing in the present day, and
   let us not look upon it as an unusual occurrence that so few are
   earnestly employed in the work of the Lord.

   12. Come ye, I will fetch wine. After having spoken of the avarice and
   carelessness of pastors, he points out their desperate wickedness and
   obstinacy; for he represents them as speaking, [102] and brings forward
   their hardhearted speeches, from which it is evident that they could
   not be brought back to the right path by any admonitions or
   threatenings, but fearlessly despised them all. In another passage the
   Prophet quoted the words of scorners, who, when the servants of God
   exhorted them to sackcloth and ashes, invited each other to feasting
   and drinking. "Let us eat and drink; for tomorrow we shall die."
   (Isaiah 22:13) Why do those prophets annoy us? It will never fare well
   with us, if we give ear to them. (Isaiah 28:15) A similar complaint is
   here repeated by Isaiah, that the pastors held out obstinately and
   seared themselves against the judgments of God.

   Nor does he merely reprove them for drinking wine and strong drink,
   which in itself is not sinful, but for that mental drunkenness and
   brutality by which men haughtily and insolently despise the word of
   God. In other passages drunkenness and the abuse of wine are condemned;
   but here the Prophet exclaims against the madness and insolence with
   which pastors exalted themselves against God, and trampled under foot
   all threatenings, warnings, reproofs, and, in short, all religion. Yet
   there can be no doubt that he reproves the gross and shameful
   wickedness of burying reflection, as if on purpose, by excess of wine
   and feasting, that no shame or fear, no reverence for God or men, might
   disturb their repose; as ungodly persons do all they can to stupefy
   themselves by unlawful pleasures, that they may more daringly, and with
   less reserve, abandon themselves to wickedness.

   It is a shocking and monstrous sight to behold such contempt of God and
   of religion, not in foreigners, not in the common people, but in
   governors and princes themselves, who ought to have instructed others
   by their example, in that sacred order which bore the image of Christ;
   for both kings and priests bore his likeness and image. How intolerable
   this pride is, by which men furiously oppose the word, is well known.
   We are ruined and undone, when this medicine, which is the last, is
   rejected by us; for we do not permit the Lord to lead us back into the
   right path. [103] For this reason he has threatened in another passage
   that "this wickedness shall not be expiated." (Isaiah 22:14) Thus he
   rebukes the height of impiety; and it is of great importance for us to
   weigh carefully the words which follow --

   As today, so tomorrow. That is, "If it is well with us today, it shall
   be well tomorrow. Let us not be miserable before the time." [104] He
   describes their aggravated guilt, in treating with mockery God's
   gentleness and forbearance, and assuring themselves that they would
   escape punishment, as if God were asleep or enjoyed luxurious ease in
   heaven, whenever he suspended his judgments. By such diabolical
   proverbs, do men, even in the present day, labor to soothe and even to
   fascinate their consciences, that they may more fully wallow in every
   kind of pleasures, and indulge in their iniquities and crimes. That we
   may not fall, therefore, under this terrible judgment of the Lord, let
   every one examine himself, and perceive at a distance the wrath of God,
   that it may not attack us suddenly and unprepared.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [93] Commentary on Isaiah, [7]Vol. 1, pp. 56, 57

   [94] "Admonneste les fideles."

   [95] "Ausquels la grace a este faite." "To whom grace hath been given."

   [96] "The essential meaning of this verse is, that all external
   disabilities shall be abolished, whether personal or national. To
   express the latter, he makes use of the phrase vn nkr, (ben nekar,)
   which strictly means not the son of the stranger,' as the common
   version has it, but the son of strangeness,' or of a strange country;'
   nkr (nekar) corresponding to the German Fremde, which has no equivalent
   in English.  Alexander

   [97] "According to the Law, (Deuteronomy 23:1) eunuchs could not be
   received into the Hebrew nation; so that their situation, in that
   respect, was the same as that of the foreigners who were formerly
   mentioned. Of what use (might such a person say) are those splendid
   promises to me, who cannot be admitted into the Jewish commonwealth?"
   -- Rosenmuller.

   [98] "Toutes les marques exterieures."

   [99] "A place and name more excellent than that which comes from
   children."  Doederlein.
   "More excellent and longer lived than that name which the fathers of
   families procure for themselves by the succession of posterity."
   Rosenmuller.

   [100] "The prophets are called Watchmen,' (Jeremiah 6:17; Ezekiel 3:17;
   33:2, 6, 7; Isaiah 52:8) because it is their duty to see far, and to
   look out, and carefully to observe the evils, and the causes of the
   evils which may be pernicious to the people. The metaphor is drawn from
   guards or military sentinels, who, being placed on the watch-towers of
   fortified cities, carefully attend to everything that may bring
   mischief on the city."  Rosenmuller.

   [101] "From his quarter." (Eng. Ver.) "Heb. this extremity,' his
   quarter, be it ever so remote; that is, universally."  Stock.
   "Literally, From his extremity.' Jerome correctly renders it, From
   first to last,' that is, without any exception; and that is the meaning
   which the word bears in Genesis 19:4; 47:2; Ezekiel 33:2."
   Rosenmuller.
   "All to a man."  Doederlein.

   [102] "Thus they spoke one to another."  Jarchi.

   [103] "Au bon chemin."

   [104] "Thus, in all probability, these drunken guardians of the people
   said, in derision of the prophets, who were continually threatening
   them with destruction. They tell us of imminent danger and strange
   calamities which hang over our heads. But mind them not. Let us cheer
   our hearts with wine, and drown the thoughts of such improbable
   chimeras. Let us take our pleasure today, and never doubt but tomorrow
   we shall be full as merry, and so on for many years." -- White.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 57.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 57:1-21

   1. The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and merciful
   men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
   from the evil to come

   1. Justus periit, et nemo est qui cor adjiciat. Viri misericordiae
   colligantur, nec est qui animadvertat, quod a facie mali colligatur
   justus.

   2. He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one
   walking in his uprightness.

   2. Veniet pax, quiescent in cubilibus suis, quisquis ambulat coram eo.

   3. But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the
   adulterer and the whore.

   3. Et vos accedite huc, filii veneficae, semen adulteri et meretricis.

   4. Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide
   mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a
   seed of falsehood,

   4. Super quem oblectati estis? Super quo aperuistis os? Exeruistis
   linguam? Annon vos filii praevaricatores? Semen mendax?

   5. Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the
   children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?

   5. Incalescentes in quercubus (vel, cum diis) sub omni arbore frondosa,
   immolantes pueros in convallibus, sub prominentiis riparum.

   6. Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are
   thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast
   offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these?

   6. In politis lapidibus (vel, in partibus torrentis) vallis pars tua;
   ipsi, ipsi sors tua. Etiam ipsis fudisti libamen, obtulisti
   sacrificium; an super his oblectationem capiam (vel, poenitentia
   ducar)?

   7. Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither
   wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.

   7. Super montem excelsum et elevatum posuisti stratum tuum. Etiam illuc
   ascendisti ad immolandum victimam.

   8. Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy
   remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and
   art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with
   them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it.

   8. Post ostium et postem posuisti memoriale tuum; discooperta es a me;
   ascendisti, dilatasti lectum tuum, fecisti cum iis foedus, dilexisti
   lectum eorum, loco quem vidisti.

   9. And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy
   perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase
   thyself even unto hell.

   9. Et profecta es ad regem cum oleo, multiplicasti pigmenta tua;
   misisti legatos tuos ad locum remontum humiliata es usque ad inferos.

   10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet saidst thou not,
   There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand; therefore
   thou wast not grieved.

   10. Fatigata es in multiplici itinere tuo; nec dixisti, Desperatum est.
   Invenisti vitam manus tuae, ideo non doluisti.

   11. And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied,
   and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I held
   my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not?

   11. Et quem reverita es, et timuisti, quod mentita es, et mei non es
   recordata, nec posuisti super cor tuum? Annon quia ego dissimulavi, et
   a seculo ideo me non times?

   12. I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not
   profit thee.

   12. Ego annuntiabo justitiam tuam et opera tua, nec proderunt tibi.

   13. When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind
   shall carry them all away; vanity shall take them: but he that putteth
   his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy
   mountain;

   13. Dum clamaveris, liberent to collectitii tui. Atqui omnes tollet
   ventus, rapiet vanitas. Qui autem in me sperat haereditate obtinebit
   terram, et possidebit montem sanctitatis meae.

   14. And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the
   stumblingblock out of the way of my people.

   14. Et dicet, Sternite, sternite, complanate vaim, tollite offendiculum
   e via populi mei.

   15. For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
   whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
   that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
   humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

   15. Quoniam sic dixit excelsus et sublimis, habitans in perpetuitate,
   cui nomen Sanctus: Excelsum et sanctum incolo, et cum afflicto et qui
   humilis est spiritu, ut vivificem spiritum humilium, ut vivificem cot
   afflictorum.

   16. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth:
   for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made.

   16. Quia non in perpetuum litigabo, neque semper irascar. Nam spiritus
   a facie mea induetur (vel latebit, aut deficiet;) et flatus ego feci.

   17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I
   hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
   heart.

   17. Propter iniquitatem cupiditatis ejus iratus fui, et percussi eum;
   abscondi me, et irascar; ipse autem aversus abiit in via cordis sui.

   18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and
   restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.

   18. Vias ejus vidi, et sanabo eum, et ducam eum, reddens ei
   consolationes et lugentibus ejus.

   19. I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far
   off, and to him that is near, saith the LORD; and I will heal him.

   19. Creo fructum labiorum. Pax, pax, longinquis et propinquis, dicit
   Iehova, et sano eum.

   20. But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest,
   whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

   20. Impii autem quasi mare dispulsum, quod quiescere non poterit; et
   projicient aquae ejus coenum et lutum.

   21. There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.

   21. Non est pax, dixit Deus meus, impiis.


   1. The righteous man hath perished. Isaiah continues his subject; for,
   after having shown how fearlessly hypocrites indulge in their luxuries,
   and with what impudence they despise the word of God, he likewise
   complains that they do not consider the works of God. We have been
   placed here, as in a spacious theater, to behold the works of God; and
   there is no work of God so small that we ought to pass by it; lightly,
   but all ought to be carefully and diligently observed.

   And no man layeth it to heart. The Lord holds out as a mirror this
   event of his providence, more remarkable than all others, that he takes
   away good and worthy men out of this life, when he determines to
   chastise his people severely. But no man considers it, or reflects that
   it is a token of approaching destruction, that God gathers them, and
   places them in safety from being distressed by prevailing afflictions.
   The general meaning is, that wicked men grievously deceive themselves
   by supposing that there is no greater happiness than to have life
   continued to a great age, and by thus pluming themselves on their
   superiority to the servants of God, who die early. Being attached to
   the world, they likewise harden themselves by this pretense, that, by
   nothing else than a manifestation of God's favor towards them, while
   others die, they continue to be safe and sound.

   Men of mercy are gathered. If by "men of mercy" be meant kind or
   tender-hearted men, this description ought to be carefully studied, by
   which the Prophet shows what is the true righteousness of the children
   of God; for hypocrites reckon this to be of no value. But nothing is
   more acceptable to God than kindness, by which we give evidence of our
   righteousness, and manifest that our heart is free from all hypocrisy.
   Yet we may with equal propriety take the phrase "men of mercy" in a
   passive sense, as meaning those whom the Lord has embraced by his
   mercy; for it is a phrase of frequent occurrence in Hebrew writings.
   Nor will it be inappropriate to suppose that there is an implied
   contrast between the grace of God and the wicked and unfavorable
   judgments of men; for they are wont to look on those persons as
   condemned who are taken away in the flower of their age. But, since
   God, in many passages of Scripture, represents gentleness and kindness
   as a distinguishing mark of his children, this may be, as I have said,
   a definition of true righteousness.

   Hence we see that the Lord, at that time, gathered many good men, whose
   death portended some dreadful calamity, and yet that the Jews paid no
   regard to such forewarnings, and even proceeded to more daring lengths
   of wickedness; for they thought that all went well with them, when they
   were the survivors of many excellent men. This doctrine is highly
   appropriate to every age. It frequently happens that God takes good men
   out of this world, when he intends to punish severely the iniquities of
   the ungodly; for the Lord, having a peculiar regard to his own people,
   takes compassion upon them, and, as it were, snatches them from the
   burning, that even survivors may perceive in it the wrath of God. And
   yet this is not an invariable rule; for righteous men are frequently
   involved, along with the reprobate, in temporal punishments; but it is
   so frequent that it rarely happens otherwise. [105]

   In our own times a remarkable instance of this was given in the death
   of Luther, who was snatched from the world a short time before that
   terrible calamity befell Germany, which he had foretold many years
   before, when he exclaimed loudly against that contempt of the Gospel,
   and that wickedness and licentiousness which everywhere prevailed.
   Frequently had he entreated the Lord to call him out of this life
   before he beheld that dreadful punishment, the anticipation of which
   filled him with trembling and horror. And he obtained it from the Lord.
   Soon after his death, lo, a sudden and unforeseen war sprang up, by
   which Germany was terribly afflicted, when nothing was farther from her
   thoughts than the dread of such a calamity.

   Instances of this kind occur every day; and if men observed them, they
   would not so heedlessly flatter themselves and their vices. But I
   thought it right to take special notice of this event, both because it
   happened lately, [106] and because in so distinguished a preacher of
   the Gospel and prophet of God it must be more clearly seen. We ought,
   therefore, to consider diligently the worlds of the Lord, both in the
   life and in the death of "the righteous," but especially in their
   death, by which the Lord calls them away to a better life, that they
   may be rescued from those afflictions in which the wicked must be
   plunged.

   2. Peace shall come. The Prophet describes what shall be the condition
   of believers in death; for the wicked, who think that there is no life
   but the present, imagine that good men have perished; because in death
   they see nothing but ruin. For this reason he says that "Peace shall
   come," which is more desirable than a thousand lives full of trouble;
   as if he compared them to discharged soldiers, who are and allowed to
   enjoy case and quietness.

   They shall rest in their beds. He adds the metaphor of sleep, in order
   to show that they shall be absolutely free from all the uneasiness of
   cares, just as if they were safely pleasantly asleep "on their beds."

   Whosoever walketh before him. [107] I do not think that the verb
   "walketh" is connected with slvm, (shalom,) "peace," as some do, who
   suppose the meaning to be this, that peace shall go before believers,
   so as to be, as it were, the guide of their life. But I am of opinion
   that believers, on the contrary, are described by it; as if he had
   said, "Whosoever walketh before God shall enjoy peace." Thus, when
   righteous men die, and their various labors are finished, and their
   course is ended, they are called to peace and repose. They "rest in
   their beds," because they do not yet enjoy perfect blessedness and
   glory; but they wail; for the last day of the resurrection, when
   everything shall be perfectly restored; and that, I think, is what
   Isaiah meant.

   It will be said, "Do not righteous men enjoy this peace while they
   live?" for the fruit of faith is, that; "in patience we may possess our
   souls." (Luke 21:19) Although faith produces peace in our hearts,
   (Romans 5:3) yet we are tossed about by various storms and tempests;
   and never in life are we so calm and peaceful as when the Lord takes us
   to himself. Peaceful and calm, therefore, is the death of the
   righteous, (Psalm 116:15) for it is "precious in the sight of God;" but
   stormy is the death of the wicked. [108] Hence also we may learn that
   souls are immortal; for if souls had no feeling, (as some fanatics have
   dreamed,) they could not enjoy "peace." Thus they enjoy peace and
   repose, because they live in Christ.

   3. And draw near, ye sons of the sorceress. After having spoken of the
   happy and peaceful death of good men, he breaks out with very great
   vehemence against the wicked, who did not cease to lead a base and
   shameful life, and were not moved by the death of believers. As he had
   said that good men enjoy peace, so he threatens that the wicked shall
   have ceaseless war. He taught that to the holy servants of God death
   shall even be like a hiding-place, to shelter them from the whirlwind,
   and storm, and other tempests, that he might threaten the worst of
   evils against the obstinate despisers of God. Here we ought to observe
   the contrast, between good men who walk before God, and the wicked, who
   cease not rebelliously to resist God. The former shall enjoy peace when
   they die; the latter shall have no peace during life, and shall feel
   dreadful torments in death.

   He orders them to come forth to the judgmentseat of God, which they
   hope that they will be able to escape by their disguises; and therefore
   he affirms that they gain nothing by their refusal, for they shall be
   dragged against their will. The more hardened they were, the sharper
   were the excitements that must be applied to them; and therefore the
   harshness of the Prophet could not be excessive, either in arousing
   their stupidity, or in casting down their pride. And indeed it is well
   known how insolent was the vanity of the Jews on account of their
   genealogy; for which reason the prophets frequently beat down their
   haughtiness and pride, and affirmed that they were not the children of
   Abraham, because they were bastards and traitors.

   On this account Isaiah calls them "the seed of the adulterous and the
   whore." In like manner Ezekiel reproaches them, "Thy father is an
   Amorite; thy mother a Hittite." (Ezekiel 16:3) Similar forms of
   expression are found ill many parts of Scripture. Thus he beats down
   their intolerable hardihood, and drags them forward unwillingly and
   reluctantly, that they might not think that they could escape the
   judgmentseat of God.

   4. On whom have ye made sport? The Prophet shows that there is no
   reason why the Jews should boast so proudly on the pretense of their
   birth, seeing that they mocked at God and the prophets. They thought
   that they had to deal with men, when they rejected the word; as we see
   that wicked men in the present day, while they fearlessly despise the
   doctrine of God and laugh at ministers, nevertheless shelter
   themselves, and falsely glory in the name of God. This is the reason
   why the Prophet bears hard upon them and censures with severity.

   On whom have ye opened the mouth? The meaning of the words is, "When ye
   put forth the tongue against God, and mock his word, do ye think that
   ye have to deal with a mortal man?" The question ("On whom?") means
   that they resorted to disguises and concealments, in order to conceal
   their impiety; for wicked men do not confess that they are rebels
   against God, and even complain that they are very unjustly treated. But
   they must be dragged to the light and convicted of their wickedness;
   for if there be a God in heaven, they carry on war with him, by
   attacking and rejecting his word and treating it as a fable.

   To "open the mouth" and to "put forth the tongue" mean the same thing,
   except that by these expressions he has more fully described their
   wickedness, in not only rejecting God, but also mocking him. The inward
   contempt of the heart had driven them to open jeers and blasphemies, so
   that they were not moved by any fear of disgrace.

   Seed of the adulterer and the whore. At length he concludes that they
   are treacherous children, a lying seed, and that he has justly
   reproached them with being "the children of the whore;" for such
   contempt of God could not be found in the children of Abraham. Hence we
   learn in what manner wicked men ought to be treated, and with what
   severity they ought to be reproved, that they may not flatter
   themselves; and the more they despise everything that is held out in
   the name of God, the more ought their sacrilegious wickedness to be
   exposed and dragged forth to public view.

   5. Inflaming yourselves. Others render it, "Taking delight" or
   "consolation;" but the Prophet makes use of a metaphor which is often
   found in Scripture, and which is exceedingly adapted to the present
   subject; for the Lord compares the ardor by which idolaters are hurried
   along to the love of a harlot, by which poor wretched men are inflamed
   so as to be transported with blind eagerness. (Jeremiah 3:1; Hosea 2:2;
   4:5) Idolaters have no moderation, and do not permit themselves to be
   reclaimed from their madness by any arguments. In the sight of God
   idolatry is a very base kind of fornication.

   Under the oaks, or, with the gods. Some translate 'lym (elim) "gods,"
   and others "oaks." [109] I leave every one at liberty to adopt either
   reading; for the meaning will always be the same, and commentators are
   agreed that the Prophet condemns idolatry. I do not dispute, therefore,
   about the reading; though it is probable that the same thing is twice
   repeated, in accordance with the practice of Hebrew writers, in a
   particular and in a general form, and yet that the Prophet, by means of
   an ambiguous word, alludes to "the gods."

   Sacrificing children. Here he bears still harder on the Jews, and shows
   that they are not the true seed of Abraham; seeing that they pollute
   themselves with superstitions of every kind. In consequence of the
   delight which the Jews took in such practices, he exposes their
   vileness. "You shelter yourselves, indeed, under the name of religion,
   but I declare that you commit fornication with idols." In this manner
   it was proper to expose and freely to point out that wickedness which
   base and malicious men endeavor to cloak under various pretenses; and
   thus the Prophet boldly discharges his duty by summoning men to the
   judgmentseat of God, and holding them to be guilty, though they wish to
   take every method of excusing themselves. He shows that they are
   treacherous, and have departed from the law of God by abominable
   idolatry, and mentions one kind of shocking and even accursed and
   monstrous worship; namely, the "sacrificing of children," from which it
   is very evident how powerful is the spirit of error, when men have once
   turned aside from God. Satan seizes their minds (2 Thessalonians 2:9)
   in such a manner that he drives them altogether to madness and rage.
   They who do not hesitate to slay their children, as if on the ground of
   its being a righteous sacrifice, must be in a state of furious madness.

   And yet those cruel murderers of their children did not want some
   pretense; for they cloaked their crime under the example of Abraham,
   who did. not spare (Genesis 22:16) his onlybegotten son; and the
   ancient Hebrew writers pronounce it to have been (kakozelia) a wicked
   imitation "If we are Abraham's descendants, we ought not to spare our
   children." But Abraham did this (Genesis 22:2) by the command of God;
   while they did it of their own accord, and without God's command. It
   was an extraordinary example, by which the Lord intended to try and
   attest Abraham's faith. Besides, Isaac was not sacrificed; for the Lord
   was satisfied with Abraham's cheerful and ready will. (Genesis 22:12)
   They slew their children. It was, therefore, a perverse and damnable
   imitation, for they differed widely from their father This should be
   carefully observed; for a large portion of superstitions has proceeded
   from this source of (kakozelia) wicked imitation. Men have rashly and
   without discrimination seized on everything that was done by the
   fathers.

   6. Amidst polished stones, or, in parts of the valley. He continues the
   same subject, and reproves in various ways the superstitions which
   abounded in Judea; for no place was altogether free from idolatry.
   There were no rocks, no rivers, no valleys, no corner whatever, in
   which they had not erected a monument of their superstition. They had
   their groves and mountains, in which they sacrificed after the manner
   of the Gentiles.

   Whether we here adopt the reading, "Polished stones," or "Parts of the
   river," the meaning will be the same. The Prophet means that the Jews
   chose their own method of worshipping God, and turned aside from the
   rule which he had laid down in his Law; and consequently that every
   kind of worship which they followed by their own choice was abominable
   and wicked; for in religion and in the worship of God it is only to the
   voice of God that we ought to listen. If it be thought preferable to
   render it "polished stones," then Isaiah rebukes the contempt of the
   Law by which God forbade the use of hammers, (Exodus 20:25) in hewing
   or chiselling the stones to be employed in building the altar; for he
   did not wish that sacrifices should be offered on any but one altar.
   But as it was customary with the Gentiles to dedicate temples near
   fountains and rivers, the other meaning will be equally appropriate.

   They, they are thy lot. The repetition of "they, they" is highly
   emphatic. A word may be supplied by way of permission, as if the Lord
   permitted the Jews to abide by their practices, since they had forsaken
   him and preferred idols and false worship; as it is said, "Go,
   sacrifice to idols." (Ezekiel 20:39) I am disposed to favor this
   reading; as if he had said, "I leave to you your inventions, and
   willingly permit you to be entirely devoted to them, and relinquish my
   right; for I have nothing to do with traitors and apostates." And yet
   he undoubtedly alludes to that passage in the writings of Moses, by
   whose mouth God said that he would be the inheritance of his people, so
   that they ought to be satisfied with having him alone. (Numbers 18:20)
   This was also followed by David, who says, "The Lord is my portion, my
   inheritance." (Psalm 16:5) Since, therefore, the Jews had revolted from
   God, and had followed idols, the Lord justly commanded them to keep the
   idols to themselves, and intimated that he would have nothing in common
   with them.

   Even to them hast thou poured a drink-offering. He proceeds in
   enumerating superstitions, and confirms the statement that he has been
   rejected and cast off by them; for they alienated to false gods what he
   wished to belong to himself alone. The Jews might have replied to every
   word of the Prophet, that they had no other intention than to worship
   God. But the Prophet pays no regard to such idle and frivolous
   pretenses; for the wrath of God is provoked by false worship, and is
   the more inflamed by it in proportion as it is more constant and longer
   continued. Hence we learn what sobriety we ought to observe in the
   worship of God, that we may depend on his word alone; for whosoever
   shall swerve from it in the smallest degree, will not only lose his
   labor, but will kindle the wrath of God, whose majesty he wickedly
   insults and does all that is in his power to lessen.

   Shall I take pleasure in these things? It might also be translated,
   "Shall I repent?" This interpretation has been most generally adopted,
   because he wishes to assign a reason why he punishes the people. As if
   he had said, "When I take vengeance for these transgressions, is it
   possible that I shall repent?" Yet the interpretation which I have
   followed appears to me preferable, "Shall I take delight, or
   consolation, from those sacrifices which thou hast offered to me?" For
   idolaters commonly take delight in their own inventions, and imagine
   that God also is delighted with everything that they pursue with mad
   and furious eagerness. Nor is such a question superfluous; for men
   think that God is like themselves, and will approve of everything that
   is agreeable to them. On the contrary, he declares that nothing is
   approved by him, or is acceptable to him, but what agrees with his
   word. [110]

   7. Upon a lofty and high mountain. He again repeats that metaphor at
   which we have formerly glanced. Superstitious persons commit
   fornication with their idols, because, by forsaking the simplicity of
   the word, they violate the bond of that holy marriage into which God
   has entered with them, and prostitute themselves to Satan. But now
   Isaiah intended to express something more; for, when he says that they
   set up their bed on a lofty place, he means that they are not at all
   ashamed of their shameful conduct. As a harlot, who has lost all shame,
   dreads not the sight of men, and cares not about her reputation, so
   they openly and shamefully committed fornication in a lofty and
   conspicuous place. He compares altars and groves to "beds" on which
   that accursed crime is committed, and he compares men who sacrifice on
   them to impudent and abandoned harlots. As to the opinion entertained
   by some, that this relates to the couches on which they reclined at
   their sacrificial feasts, there is no good foundation for it.

   To offer a sacrifice. Here he describes without a figure that kind of
   fornication which he rebukes, namely, that they offered sacrifices to
   idols. They imagined, indeed, that in doing so they were rendering
   obedience to God; but the Lord rejects all that men contrive according
   to their own pleasure, and abhors that licentiousness.

   8. Behind the door. He dwells largely on the crime of which we have
   already spoken, that the people may no longer flatter themselves in
   their inventions. It is probable that Isaiah alludes to the words of
   Moses, by which God commanded them to have the Law continually placed
   before them, to attach it to the posts of their houses, and to keep it
   written and wrapped around their arms and the fringes of their
   garments, that they might be constantly reminded of their duty.
   (Deuteronomy 6:9; 11:20) But the Jews, on the contrary, polluted the
   doors and posts of their houses by tokens of idolatry, and left no
   corner free or pure from such pollutions. Thus they came to forget
   everywhere God and the Law, and substituted in their room the
   excitements of their own lust.

   Thou hast enlarged thy bed. He again repeats what he formerly said, and
   returns to that clause, that the Jews most basely commit fornication
   with idols when they think that they are worshipping God; because they
   do not follow the rule of the word. It is the same as if a woman,
   having forsaken her husband, should prostitute herself in a brothel,
   and freely receive all that came, as if the bed had been a large plain,
   and capable of containing a vast multitude.

   For this reason he says that she was detected by him, because, having
   laid aside the modesty of the married state, she allowed herself to be
   dishonored and ravished by others; for God holds the place of a
   husband, to whom she ought to have been subject, but she sought new
   husbands, and broke the bond of marriage, he describes their aggravated
   guilt, by saying that the Jews of their own accord devoted themselves
   to idols, as if a base woman ran after a man with blind eagerness.

   Thou lovedst their bed in the place which thou sawest. By a different
   figure he accuses them of that hasty love, because, as if by a single
   glance, they were suddenly and eagerly hurried on to any place
   whatever. Yet he blames the rashness of men, who think that they are
   sagacious in worshipping God, and select places according to their own
   pleasure. But this sagacity is diabolical; for God commands us to keep
   our eyes fixed on himself and his word, so as to be closed against
   everything else.

   9. And thou wentest to the king with ointment. Here the Prophet
   censures another vice closely allied to the former; for ungodliness
   begets various errors, and leads into grievous and intricate distresses
   those minds which are frivolous and destitute of the fear of God; for
   it is proper that they who refuse to rest on God should be tossed
   about, or rather driven up and down. He therefore reproaches the Jews
   with having labored much and long in seeking the assistance of the
   wicked; that is, with having attempted to bring the Egyptians against
   the Assyrians, and next, when they had been disappointed of their hope,
   with having begun to betake themselves to the Babylonians. When their
   hearts have been estranged from God, they seek assistance from another
   quarter, and by great labor and expense bring upon themselves severer
   distresses. Yet while the Lord grants repose to his people, that they
   may perform their work in peace, wicked men "vex themselves in vain,
   rise early, go late to rest, eat the bread of sorrow," as it is said,
   (Psalm 127:2) and yet do not gain a farthing, because all that they do
   is without God's authority or guidance. But the Spirit inflicts on them
   this punishment, so that they incessantly wander and are tossed about
   in doubt and uncertainty, and never can find rest in their minds.

   10. Thou art wearied. He means that men undertake superfluous and
   useless labors, when they do not follow God. They vex themselves in
   vain, as has been already said; for nothing that is attempted in
   opposition to God can ever be successful. Besides, he wittily ridicules
   the wicked practices of those who choose rather to waste themselves by
   incessant toil than to advance calmly wherever God calls them.

   And hast not said, There is no hope; that is, "Although thou seest that
   thy labors are fruitless, yet thou obstinately perseverest and pursuest
   thy designs; whereas even fools, when they are unsuccessful, commonly
   repent." Men must therefore be obstinate and desperate, when an unhappy
   and unsuccessful issue of their schemes does not sometimes lead them to
   ask themselves, What are you doing? Jeremiah glances at this obstinacy,
   hut in different words; for he says that the Jews were so foolhardy as
   to say,

   "We are undone, yet we will follow our own thoughts. This has been
   determined by us, and our opinion cannot be changed." (Jeremiah 18:12)

   But here he censures that stupidity which bewildered them so much that
   they could not acknowledge their folly and repent, and turn again to
   the right road.

   Thou hast found the life of thine hand. "Life" is here supposed by some
   to mean "food; "as if the Prophet had said, "Thy labor was as
   delightful to thee as if thou wert gaining food for thyself by thy
   hand." [111] Others take "the life of the hand" to mean delight, or the
   highest pleasure; and both interpretations amount to the same thing.

   But there is somewhat greater difficulty in the question, "Does he
   speak sincerely or ironically?" If the words be taken in the literal
   sense, the meaning will be, "Thou didst not grieve, because fortune
   appeared to favor thee for a time." When unbelievers succeed to their
   wish, they encourage themselves the more in their unbelief, and, as the
   common saying is, "Men are blinded by prosperity." But especially this
   happens when men have forsaken God, and abide by their own ways and
   schemes; for then they fearlessly despise God. But they may also be
   viewed as ironical, "How comes it that thou dost not retrace thy steps
   and repent? Why dost thou not acknowledge thy folly? Is it because thou
   hast life in thy hand, and because everything goes prosperously with
   thee? [112]

   I prefer the latter interpretation, though I do not reject the former.
   It is plain enough from history that the Jews had no good reason for
   being proud of their prosperity or success; for the treaty into which
   they entered, first with the Egyptians, next with the Assyrians, and
   lastly with the Babylonians, was destructive and fatal to them; and
   they found by experience how rash they had been in calling allies to
   their aid; so that the Prophet justly taunts them with having found
   "the life of their hand." Thus he heightens his description of the
   foolishness of this people, who willingly rush forward to their own
   destruction, and obstinately bring down ruin on themselves, when they
   ought, at least, like fools, to have gained wisdom by the misery which
   they had experienced.

   11. And whom hast thou worshipped and feared? Here he breaks out more
   vehemently against the Jews, because they were destitute of the fear of
   God, though they boasted of their holiness and sheltered themselves
   under an empty title of religion. Not only do hypocrites flatter
   themselves in their superstitions, but they are likewise regarded by
   the common people as holy and pious; and, therefore, they act haughtily
   and insolently towards God and men. But the Prophet declares that true
   fear of God cannot exist, where the worship is not pure and agreeable
   to his word. All the opinions entertained by men, as to the plausible
   forms of worship observed by superstitious persons, are absolute
   wickedness and folly, he declares, therefore, that there is no fear of
   him and no religion among them, although they are greatly delighted
   with their masks.

   What is more, by their religious ceremonies, as manifest proofs, they
   show that they have no reverence or fear of God; for God testifies, by
   Moses, that he makes trial whether or not they love him with all their
   heart, when he permits superstition and idolatry to be introduced by
   the false prophets. (Deuteronomy 13:3) All that fly to them, therefore,
   show that they are altogether destitute of the fear of God; for, if
   they considered that they must one day give an account to him, they
   would not so daringly trample under foot his commandments.

   And hast not remembered me. When he complains of having been forgotten,
   he shows that it was through obstinate wickedness that they fought
   against God, and not through ignorance that they wandered from him;
   because, having a sure rule of leading a holy life, they willingly
   revolted from him, and broke the promise which they had made to him. We
   ought to consider diligently how dreadful is the thunder launched
   against hypocrites, who mock at all threatenings, and cover themselves
   by vain disguises, when he declares that they are destitute of the fear
   of God, and that they are liars and have forgotten him.

   Is it not because I held my peace? [113] Here I have thought it right
   to insert the word "because," which needs to be supplied, in order to
   bring out more fully the Prophet's meaning; for those who do not supply
   some word subject themselves to a vast amount of trouble in bringing
   out an exposition; and we know how frequently this mode of expression
   is employed by the Hebrew writers. He reproaches the Jews with having
   abused God's forbearance and patience, by which their hearts ought
   rather to have been softened. But such is the wickedness of men, that
   it renders them bolder in transgression, and leads them to think that
   they may do what they please without being punished.

   Accordingly, in the last clause of the verse I consider the particle v
   (vau) to mean therefore. "And therefore thou dost not fear me, because
   I held my peace, whereas thou oughtest rather to have been melted by my
   goodness." Hence we infer that the Jews could not complain of God's
   excessive severity, since he bore patiently with them for a long time,
   and they grew worse and worse in consequence of having been exempted
   from punishment. It was therefore necessary that he should assume a
   totally different character, and punish them more severely for their
   iniquities.

   12. I will declare thy righteousness. The Prophet affirms that the Lord
   will no longer endure what he formerly endured, and that henceforth he
   must follow a different method. He calls it ironically "their
   righteousness;" for he means by it all the wickedness and all the
   errors by which they were stained and corrupted; as if he had said, "I
   will show what is the nature of your righteousness." So long as God
   "holds his peace," they who are most unrighteous and most unholy appear
   to be "righteous" persons; but when the Lord ascends his judgment-seat,
   men are brought out of their lurkingplaces, and their baseness is
   dragged forth to public view. And so the Prophet means that the
   greatest wickedness passes in the world for "righteousness," so long as
   God holds his peace, but that it shall at length be scattered, when he
   ascends his judgmentseat; for men, after having much and long flattered
   themselves, shall at length feel that he is their judge.

   And they shall not profit thee. This relates to the effect, by which
   men almost always judge; for they do not inquire whether a thing be
   righteous or unrighteous, but think that whatever is profitable to them
   ought to be approved. The Prophet therefore threatens that all the
   works from which they hoped to derive some profit shall be destructive
   to them.

   13. When thou shalt cry, let thy troops deliver thee. He states more
   fully what he had slightly touched in the former verse, that, when they
   shall come to close quarters, they shall be ashamed; for the potential
   mood, "Let them deliver," amounts to saying, "They will not do it." He
   alludes to what he had formerly said, (verse 9) "Thou wentest to the
   king with ointments." And accordingly he gives the name of "troops" to
   all the means of defense by which the Jews thought that they would be
   safe; for, by trusting to them, they abandoned themselves to every kind
   of vices, as if they should be certain of escaping punishment, because
   they were guarded and fortified on every side. But the Lord shows how
   unavailing are all the troops which are assembled without his
   authority.

   "Cry" denotes here that calamity by which they were to be afflicted;
   for, relying on their treaties and on the aid of allies, they thought
   that they would enjoy profound peace, as if they had never at any
   former period been deceived. But he declares that all the military
   defenses which they have collected for themselves shall be of no
   advantage to them whatever. Detestable and accursed is that confidence
   which men, having forsaken God, place in things of this world or in
   human defenses. (Jeremiah 17:5) Formerly he brought it as a reproach
   against the people, that they were not satisfied with the gentle waters
   of Shiloah, and desired to have the rapid and impetuous rivers which
   would at length overflow them. (Isaiah 8:6) This actually happened; for
   the Assyrians and Egyptians, and lastly the Babylonians, were not only
   unprofitable, but even ruinous, to the Jews whose allies they were.

   But he who hopeth in me. Next follows a contrast, in which he invites
   them to confidence in God, which is the remedy that ought to be
   employed against all evils; as, on the other hand, all evils arise from
   unbelief and distrust. As to the promise of an inheritance to those who
   hope in God, it amounts to this, -- "What else do you seek than to
   remain safe and sound, and to have your inheritance uninjured? It is I
   who can do this. For who brought you into this country? Who gave you
   possession of it? And yet you run after Egypt, and seek from men
   assistance which will be of little avail, and disregard my help."

   Shall have the land by inheritance. I have no doubt that by the word
   "inheritance" he means Judea, in which the Jews were desirous to remain
   in safety; for he afterwards mentions the "mountain of his holiness,"
   that is, the mountain on which the temple was built. So, then, the Jews
   did not ascribe to the Lord that which belonged to him, when they fled,
   not to him, but to the Assyrians or Egyptians, for help. Hence we ought
   to draw a universal doctrine, namely, that our affairs will succeed
   admirably, if we hope in the Lord; and if we throw away confidence in
   him, we certainly need not wonder if we waver and are tossed about in
   various ways.

   When he calls the mountain to which the Jews were to be brought back
   "the mountain of holiness," he means that life and all its comforts are
   not in themselves desirable, except that we may worship God; for the
   end of human life is this, that God may have a people who shall render
   to him purity of worship. Let our eyes, therefore, be always fixed on
   the worship and service of God, if we desire life, or deliverance, or
   any of the comforts of life.

   14. And he shall say, Prepare, prepare. Because this promise, that they
   who hoped in the Lord should possess the land, might be thought
   ridiculous, (for soon afterwards they were to be driven out of it,) for
   the sake of believers that still remained, there is added this second
   promise, by which he pledges himself that, although they have been
   driven out of the land of Canaan, and banished to a distant country,
   yet they shall be brought back to it. He therefore meets a doubt which
   might arise, that good men might not despair during that painful and
   longcontinued banishment, or imagine that the promise of God had failed
   of accomplishment. Some explain it to mean, that the Lord will send
   true and faithful prophets, to cleanse from its scandals the Church
   which had been corrupted by false prophets and wicked rulers; as he
   formerly showed that from them arose the cause of her ruin; and so they
   think that this is a promise of a better and happier condition. But
   such an interpretation is excessively forced, and therefore I choose
   rather to adopt the former interpretation, that, although for a time
   the Jews shall be deprived of that land, yet they shall be restored to
   it by the Lord, who will order the roads to be levelled, in order to
   bring them back.

   This passage agrees with that which we formerly examined, (Isaiah
   40:1-4) in which the Lord commanded to bring comfort to his people, to
   proclaim and publish the return to Judea, and to clear the roads; for,
   in consequence of their having been shut up in Babylon as in a grave,
   and of the length and difficulty of the journey, and of the vast
   wilderness that lay between, they could scarcely have any hope of
   returning to their native country. It was therefore proper that Isaiah
   should not pass by this matter lightly, that they might not dread the
   mountains or the sea that lay between, or any other obstructions.

   Level the road. He addresses Cyrus and Darius, whose minds the Lord
   inspired to open up the path, and grant protection to the Jews; as if
   he had said, that the Lord will send ministers, who are now unknown to
   them, by whose agency he will "prepare the way" and bring out the
   people. The apostrophe, also, by which he directly addresses them,
   carries greater force than if he had spoken in the third person. By
   ordering them to remove the stumbling blocks, he shows that there is no
   reason why they should be terrified by the difficulties and
   obstructions of the roads, which the Lord will easily "take away,"
   whenever he thinks fit.

   Out of the way of my people. The hope of return is contained in this,
   that the Lord determines to bring back his people, and place them again
   in the land of Canaan. Wherefore, though there were no other road, yet
   there must be one, and every bar and obstacle must be removed; because
   the Lord hath promised their return, and consequently is their leader
   in the journey.

   15. For thus hath spoken the High and Lofty One. He confirms the former
   statement about the restoration of the people from captivity. But this
   verse may be explained in two ways; either that the Prophet meets the
   doubt which might spring up in the hearts of good men, and thus
   compares things which are contrasted with each other; or, that he draws
   an argument from the nature of God, in order to strengthen weak minds.
   To explain these things more clearly, we know, first, that our hearts
   are often distracted by these thoughts, that God is actually in heaven,
   but that there is a great distance between him and us, and that, he
   overlooks or despises human affairs, and, in a word, that he takes no
   care at all about us. In order to correct this imagination, the Prophet
   says that God does indeed dwell in a lofty place, but does not the less
   on that account look at this world and govern it by his providence; for
   he is anxious about the salvation of men, and dwells with the
   afflicted, and with them that are of a broken and humble heart; as it
   is said, "Jehovah is high, and hath respect to the lowly," (Psalm
   138:6) and in other passages.

   The other meaning is, that the Prophet shows that God is very unlike
   us; for we tremble in adversity, because we measure him by our
   standard, and say, "How shall the Lord render assistance to us, who are
   oppressed?" Besides, men who are in distress are commonly overlooked
   and despised. Thus we think that God holds us in no estimation, because
   we form our ideas of him from our own nature. But we ought to entertain
   very different views of him; and therefore he says, that he "dwelleth
   in heaven," in order to intimate that he is not liable to human
   passions; for he is like himself at all times, and never changes his
   purpose; and therefore as he has once promised restoration to his
   people, so he will perform it. I do not dislike this interpretation,
   nor do I reject the former, which is fuller and more abundant, and
   agrees with other passages of Scripture, that commonly join together
   those two things; that the Lord dwelleth in heaven, and taketh care of
   human affairs, and especially of his children, as I stated briefly a
   little before.

   Who dwelleth in eternity. We are fickle, and apply our minds sometimes
   to one subject, and sometimes to another; and our hearts do not
   continue to be fixed on that which we have once embraced. On this
   account he distinguishes between God and men, for on him no shadow of
   change falls; but we have not such steadfastness as to exercise
   constant care about those who need our assistance.

   I inhabit the high and holy. qdvs (kadosh) sometimes denotes the
   temple, but here it denotes heaven itself. We see the reason why he
   calls him "the Holy One," and "the inhabitant of the holy and lofty
   place." It is in order to inform us how much he differs from us, and
   how unlike he is to our nature. Besides, we ought to draw from it a
   singular consolation, that the Lord wishes to assist the wretched, and
   even chooses for himself a habitation amongst them, that is, provided
   that they acknowledge their wretchedness.

   And with him who is lowly in spirit. Wicked men are oppressed by
   various calamities, but do not cease to be fierce and haughty. It will
   be vain for them to hope that God will draw near to them; [114] for
   their hearts must be lowly and utterly cast down, if they expect to
   obtain any assistance from God. Accordingly, he descends even to the
   lifeless, that he may breathe new life into them and form them anew.
   Twice he expressly mentions the "lowly spirit," and the "afflicted
   heart," that we may know that these promises belong to those who, in
   their afflictions, shall not be hardhearted and rebellious, and who, in
   short, shall lay aside all haughtiness and be meek and lowly.

   16. Because not for ever will I strive. He continues the same doctrine;
   for it was difficult to persuade them of this, seeing that during that
   painful captivity they perceived that God was their enemy, and could
   scarcely obtain any taste of the grace of God, by which their hearts
   might be encouraged or relieved. The Prophet therefore meets this
   doubt, and shows that the punishments which they shall endure will be
   for a short time, and that God will not always be angry with them; that
   God has indeed very good reason to be angry, but yet that he will
   relinquish his right, and will make abatement of that which he might
   have demanded. Thus he connects the wrath of God with that moderation
   by which he soothes believers, that they may not be discouraged; for,
   although he draws an argument from the nature of God, yet this promise
   is especially directed to the Church.

   This sentence, therefore, ought always to be remembered by us amidst
   our sorest afflictions, lest we should think that God is our enemy, or
   that he will always contend with us. When he says that God is angry, he
   speaks as if he made an admission, and in accordance with the feelings
   of our flesh; for we cannot form any other conception of God during our
   afflictions, than that he is angry with us. It is even profitable to be
   moved by this feeling, that it may instruct us to repentance; and
   therefore this form of expression must be viewed as referring
   exclusively to our capacity, and not to God.

   For the spirit shall be clothed, (or, shall be concealed, or, shall
   fail.) He assigns the reason why he will not always strive. There are
   various interpretations of this passage. Among others this appears to
   me to be the more appropriate; that "the spirit is clothed" with the
   body, as with a garment. Hence also the body is called the tabernacle,
   and, as it were, the habitation of the spirit. If we adopt this
   signification of the word, there will be two modes of interpreting this
   clause. Some explain it as referring to the last resurrection: "the
   spirit shall be clothed;" that is, after having gone out of the body,
   will again return to it as to its habitation. Thus there will be an
   argument from the greater to the less: "I will raise up dead bodies;
   why then shall I not restore you, though halfdead, to a better life?"
   Another meaning, which is also adopted by some, will be simpler and
   better; for the interpretation of the clause, as referring to the last
   resurrection, is too remote from the context. "I surrounded the spirit
   with a body;" as if he had said, "I created men, and therefore will
   take care of them."

   But for my own part, I think that the Prophet rises higher; for he
   shows that the Lord deals so gently and kindly with us, because he
   perceives how weak and feeble we are; as is also pointed out in other
   passages of Scripture, such as Psalm 103:13, 14. "Like as a father
   pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. He
   knoweth our condition, remembering that we are dust. The age of man is
   like grass, and flourisheth as a flower in the field." The same thing
   is said in Psalm 78:38, 39. "Yet being inclined to mercy, he was
   gracious to their iniquity, and did not destroy them, and often
   recalled his anger, and did not stir up all his indignation,
   remembering that they were flesh, and a wind that passeth away and
   returneth not again." Here the Prophet appears to me to mean the same
   thing; as if the Lord had said, "I am unwilling to try my strength with
   breath or wind, which would be as if with grass or a leaf, that shall
   suddenly vanish away when they have felt the heat of the sun." ytvph
   (yagnatoph) is explained by some to mean "Shall fail;" which agrees
   very well with this passage; for our spirit shall fail, when the Lord
   puts forth his power against us. Leaving the signification of the words
   as somewhat doubtful, we sufficiently understand the Prophet's design.
   He shows that God deals gently with us, and acts with little severity
   in correcting our sins, because he takes into account our weakness, and
   wishes to support and relieve it.

   17. For the iniquity of his lust. Here he complains of the obstinate
   wickedness of the people, and shows that the Lord had very good reason
   for punishing him in this manner; so that there can be no complaint of
   his immoderate cruelty. vtsv (betzagno) is translated by some "lust,"
   and by others "covetousness." If it be "covetousness," it will then be
   a figurative mode of expression, in which a part is taken for the
   whole; for this is the source from which all evils arise. (1 Timothy
   6:10) But we may take it generally for every kind of sinful desire; for
   it was on account of the various and numerous vices by which the Jews
   were polluted, that the Lord was angry, and inflicted on them severe
   punishments. But he expressly mentions "lust," in order to intimate
   that they were punished, not because they were openly wicked, but
   because they were sinful in the sight of God; for it is enough to
   condemn them, that God is Judge of the hearts, and punishes not only
   for outward crimes, but likewise for wicked dispositions and "lusts."
   At the same time he reminds them that their punishment is just, in
   order that, being conscious of guilt, they may humbly pray for pardon.

   I struck him, I hid myself. He means that his favor was, in some
   respects, withdrawn and "hidden" for a time. Now, he speaks according
   to the opinion of men, because, as we have already said, we imagine
   that God is an enemy, and is angry with us, when he punishes for our
   transgressions. And it is necessary that we should have those views and
   conceptions of him, that we may arrive at a true acknowledgment of our
   sins; for we should never acknowledge them sincerely, or be distressed
   on account of them, if we did not reflect with ourselves, and know that
   we had provoked God's wrath. But, while it is desirable that we should
   be led to repentance in this manner, we must beware, on the other hand,
   lest in consequence of imagining that God is hostile and unwilling to
   be reconciled to us, we should be swallowed up by sorrow. The Prophet
   therefore restrains these immoderate terrors, and forbids us to judge
   of God according to our natural disposition; for although he chastises
   us, he does not cease to cherish a father's love and affection towards
   those whom he has once embraced.

   But he went away. This is the rebelliousness which the Prophet blames
   and rebukes, that the people were in no degree made better, but
   persevered in their wickedness. He shows that they were desperate,
   because the violent remedies which the Lord had tried could not bring
   them back into the right way.

   18. I have seen his ways. [115] Here the Lord, on the contrary,
   magnifies his mercy, because he is gracious to that people, though
   obstinate and rebellious, and anticipates them by his grace and mercy.
   As if he had said, "I labored to bring back this people to repentance
   by my chastisements, because they violently pursued their lusts; but
   they were obstinate and untameable; all that I did was of no avail. I
   might justly, indeed, have ruined him, but I choose rather to heal and
   preserve. This cannot be done but by distinguished and incomparable
   mercy. I will therefore cease to punish them." For these reasons Isaiah
   gradually magnifies the mercy of God, whom he represents as a physician
   considering what remedies are best adapted for healing this people.
   Now, our diseases are incurable, if the Lord do not anticipate us by
   his mercy.

   And will guide him. No chastisements, however severe, will drive us to
   repentance, if the Lord do not quicken us by his Spirit; for the
   consequence will be, to render us more rebellious and hardhearted. And
   so we may behold, in the example of this people, an image of mankind;
   that we may clearly see what is our rebellion and obstinacy against
   God, and what remedies are necessary for curing our diseases; and that,
   when we are diseased and almost beyond hope, we are healed, are brought
   back to the right path, and afterwards continue in it. Hence follows
   consolation:

   Restoring comforts to him. If piety be wanting, there can be no faith
   and no consolation; for they who are not dissatisfied with themselves
   on account of their vices can look for nothing but the wrath of God,
   terrors and despair. It is proper, therefore, to observe the context,
   in which the Prophet, after mentioning "healing," next mentions
   "consolation;" for they whose diseases have been cured obtain, at the
   same time, that joy of heart and that consolation of which they had
   been deprived.

   When he adds, To his mourners, he appears especially to denote good
   men, [116] who were few in number; as appears clearly from the
   complaints of the prophets, who exclaim loudly against the stupidity
   which had seized the people on every side. Thus he describes those who,
   amidst the universal guilt, were constrained by sincere grief to mourn,
   and who not only bewailed the miseries of the people, but deeply
   groaned under the burden of God's wrath, while others indulged freely
   in their pleasures.

   19. I create the fruit of the lips. This is an explanation of the
   former statement, or of the manner in which the Lord will give
   consolation to this people. It is, because he will promise and offer
   peace to them; for by "the fruit of the lips" he means that he will
   cause them to hear the glad tidings of peace, by which they shall be
   filled with joy.

   Peace, peace. I think that he speaks of the publication of "peace," the
   ministry of which was committed to the prophets, and was afterwards
   enjoined on the apostles and the other ministers of the Gospel; as Paul
   teaches that they "are ambassadors for Christ, to reconcile men to
   God." (2 Corinthians 5:20) The repetition of the word "Peace" is
   intended to express not only certainty, but also uninterrupted
   continuance. As if he had said, "You now hear nothing but dreadful
   threatenings. The doctrine of grace and salvation is silent, because
   you are incapable of it. Such is your obstinacy that I must deal with
   you by threatenings and terrors. But I will one day restore the
   doctrine of peace,' and open the lips of the prophets, that they may
   proclaim it to you."

   To them that are far off. This is added, because the people who had
   been carried into captivity did not think that these things belonged to
   them, (because they were "far off,") but perhaps to those who were at
   home; for captivity was a sort of casting off. But the Prophet
   foretells that, though they are at a great distance, yet they shall be
   partakers of this grace.

   And I heal him. At length he adds the end or effect, that the Lord
   determines to heal the people; that is, to make them safe and sound.
   Hence we infer what I remarked a little before, that all that relates
   to the full and perfect happiness of the Church is absolutely the gift
   of God.

   Paul appears to have glanced at this passage, when he says that Christ

   "brought peace to them that are near, and to them that are far off."
   (Ephesians 2:17)

   He speaks of Gentiles and Jews; for the Jews were "near," because God
   had entered into a covenant with them; but the Gentiles were "far off,"
   because they were strangers to that covenant. But the Prophet appears
   to speak of Jews only.

   I reply, Paul adheres to the true meaning of the Prophet, if the whole
   be but carefully examined; for the Jews are said, in this passage, to
   be "far off," because the Lord appeared to have driven them out of his
   house; and in that respect they resembled the Gentiles. Since,
   therefore, at the time of that casting off, there was no difference
   between them and the Gentiles, Paul, by putting both, as it were, in
   the same rank, justly placed them on a level with the Jews, and thus
   applied to them what the Prophet had spoken about the Jews; as, in a
   manner not unlike, he elsewhere applies to the Gentiles a passage in
   Hosea. (Romans 9:25; Hosea 1:10)

   20. But the wicked. Having formerly spoken of the "peace" which good
   men shall enjoy, he threatens that the wicked, on the contrary, shall
   have continual war and incessant uneasiness and distress of heart; in
   order that good men may value more highly the excellent blessing of
   "peace," and next, that the reprobate may know that their condition
   shall in no degree be improved in consequence of that peace which is
   promised to the children of God. But because the reprobate make false
   pretensions to the name of God, and vainly glory in it, the Prophet
   shows that there is no reason why they should flatter themselves, or
   advance any claim, on the ground of this promise, since they can have
   no share in this peace. Nor will it avail them anything, that God,
   having compassion upon his people, receives them into favor, and
   commands peace to be proclaimed to them.

   As the troubled sea. That metaphor of "the sea" is elegant and very
   well fitted to describe the uneasiness of the wicked; for of itself
   "the sea is troubled." Though it be not beaten by the wind or agitated
   by frightful tempests, its billows carry on mutual war, and dash
   against each other with terrible violence. In the same manner wicked
   men are "troubled" by inward distress, which is deeply seated in their
   hearts. They are terrified and alarmed by conscience, which is the most
   agonizing of all torments and the most cruel of all executioners. The
   furies agitate and pursue the wicked, not with burning torches, (as the
   fables run,)but with anguish of conscience and the torment of
   wickedness; for every one is distressed by his own wickedness and his
   own alarm; [117] every one is agonized and driven to madness by his own
   guilt; they are terrified by their own evil thoughts and by the pangs
   of conscience. Most appropriately, therefore, has the Prophet compared
   them to a stormy and troubled sea. Whoever then wishes to avoid these
   alarms and this frightful agony of heart, let him not reject that peace
   which the Lord offers to him. There can be no middle course between
   them; for, if you do not lay aside sinful desires and accept of this
   peace, you must unavoidably be miserably distressed and tormented.

   21. There is no peace to the wicked. He confirms the preceding
   statement, namely, that in vain shall the reprobate endeavor to seek
   peace, for everywhere they will meet with war. It is God who threatens
   war, and therefore there can be no hope of "peace." Wicked men would
   indeed wish to enjoy peace, and ardently long for it; for there is
   nothing which they more eagerly desire than to be at ease, and to lull
   their consciences, that they may freely take their pleasures and
   indulge in their vices. They drive away all thoughts about the judgment
   of God, and endeavor to stupify themselves and to repose in indolence,
   and think that these are the best ways and methods of obtaining peace.
   But they never shall enjoy it; for, until men have been reconciled to
   God, conscience will never cease to annoy and carry on war with them.

   Saith my God. Thus he represents God as the only author of peace, that
   he may, by this dreadful threatening, tear from the Jews their dearest
   pleasures; and calls him "his God," in opposition to the vain boasting
   of those who falsely boasted of his name; for they cannot acknowledge
   God, so long as they reject his Prophet and his doctrine. For this
   reason the Prophet boldly declares that he has received a command from
   God to declare perpetual war against them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [105] "This is a beautiful sentiment, that God removes righteous and
   good men from a world unworthy of them, and takes them to himself, so
   that they are not stained by the offenses of their time, or mingled
   with the prevailing corruption that universally devours, and do not
   consent to it, or connive at it, and thus expose themselves to similar
   judgments of God, which have been decreed and appointed for the
   ungodly. It has undoubtedly been remarked by the wise in every age,
   that the sudden death of good and judicious men is a clear indication
   of the approaching ruin of a state."  Vitringa.

   [106] "Pource que c'est une chose avenue depuis peu d'annees." "Because
   it is an event that happened but a few years ago."

   [107] "Walking in his uprightness, or, before him." (Eng. Ver.) "The
   phrase denotes, One who walks straight before him,' so as to follow
   constantly the rule, not turning aside from it to the right hand or the
   left, and observing and keeping the straight line and road towards the
   end or mark which the Lord has held out to them, according to the
   example of the Apostle. (Philippians 3:14)" -- Vitringa.

   [108] "Mais celle des meschans est effroyable." "But that of the wicked
   is frightful."

   [109] See Commentary on Isaiah, [8]Vol. 1, p. 84, n. 1.

   [110] "Jehovah adds a question, Should I take consolation in these
   things?' Should I shake off from my mind, and bury in oblivion, my
   indignation which arises from your heinous crimes, so as to allow them
   to pass unpunished? The meaning has been accurately expressed by the
   Septuagint, epi toutois ous ouk orgisthesomai; Shall I not be enraged
   on account of these things?' which has been followed by Jerome, Nunquid
   super his non indignabor?"  Rosenmuller

   [111] "Comme si tu eusses gaigne ta vie en travaillant de tes mains."
   "As if thou hadst gained thy life by labouring with thy hands."

   [112] "Dathius thus translates the Hebrew text, Thou hast found thy
   life, therefore thou dost not feel thy disease,' and adds in a note,
   The phrase, (thy life,) is used ironically by the Prophet to denote
   idols, which brought destruction instead of life to the people. He
   calls them the life of the hand for this reason, that they employed all
   their industry in making them.' The simplest meaning appears to me to
   be, to take the life of the hand' as denoting either their strength or
   the supports of life procured by the hand; so that the meaning is,
   Still thou thinkest that by these thy labors thou wilt procure strength
   and assistance."  Rosenmuller.

   [113] "Have I not held my peace?"  (Eng. Ver.)

   [114] "Que telles gens n'esperent point que Dieu s'approche d'eux."
   "Let not such persons hope that God will draw near to them."

   [115] "When he (the people of Israel) humbled himself during the
   affliction which came upon him."  Jarchi.

   [116] "Fideles." "Believers."

   [117] "Et gehenne." "And by the hell within him."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 58.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 58:1-14

   1. Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my
   people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

   1. Clama in gutture, ne cohibeas; quasi tuba exalta vocem tuam, et
   annuntia populo meo peccatum suum, et domui Iacob iniquitatem snare.

   2. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation
   that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God:
   they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in
   approaching to God.

   2. Me tamen quotidie quaerunt, et scire vias meas nolunt; quasi gens
   quae justitiam fecerit, et judicium Dei sui non intermiserit;
   sciscitandur ex me judicia justitiae, appropinquare Deo volunt.

   3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? Wherefore
   have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in
   the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours.

   3. Quare jejunavimus, et non aspexisti? humiliavimus animas nostras, et
   nesciisti? Ecce quo die jejunatis, invenitis voluntatem, et omnes
   facultates vestras exigitis.

   4. Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
   wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to
   be heard on high.

   4. Ecce, ad litem et contentionem jejunatis; atque ut percutiatis pugno
   impio. Ne jejunetis sicut hodie, ut audiri faciatis in excelso vocem
   vestram.

   5. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his
   soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth
   and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day
   to the LORD?

   5. An tale est jejunium quod elegi? ut die affligat homo animam suam,
   et quasi juncus demittat caput suum, sternat saccum et cinerem? An hoc
   vocabis jejunium, et diem gratum Iehovae?

   6. Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of
   wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
   free, and that ye break every yoke?

   6. Annon hoc est jejunium quod elegi? solvere colligationes impias,
   dissolvere fasciculos graves, oppressos dimittere liberos, atque ut
   omne jugum abrumpatis?

   7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
   poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that
   thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?

   7. Annon ut partiaris esurienti panem tuam, et pauperes vagos inducas
   domum? Si videris nudum, operias eum, et a carne tua ne to abscondas?

   8. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health
   shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before
   thee; the glory of the LORD shall be thy rereward.

   8. Tunc proferetur ut aurora lux tua; et sanitas tua protinus
   germinabit; justitia anteibit faciem tuam, et gloria Iehovae colliget
   to.

   9. Then shalt thou call, and the LORD shall answer; thou shalt cry, and
   he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the
   yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;

   9. Tunc invocabis, et Iehova exaudiet; clamabis, et dicet, Ecce adsum;
   si abstuleris e medio tui onus, et emissionem digiti, et sermonem
   vanitatis, (vel, inutilem.)

   10. And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the
   afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
   darkness be as the noonday:

   10. Si effuderis famelico animam tuam, et animam afflictam satiaveris,
   orietur in tenebris lux tua, et caligo tua erit sicut meridies.

   11. And the LORD shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
   drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered
   garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

   11. Et deducet to Iehova semper, et saturabit in siccitatibus animam
   tuam, et ossa tua saginabit. Et eris quasi hortus irriguus, et
   scaturigo aquarum, cujus aquae non deficiunt.

   12. And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places:
   thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt
   be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell
   in.

   12. Et erunt ex to qui instaurent deserta seculi; fundamenta
   generationis et generationis excitabis. Et voeaberis rupturae
   reparator, director semitarum ad inhabitandum.

   13. If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy
   pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of
   the LORD, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways,
   nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:

   13. Si averteris a sabbato pedem tuum, nec facies voluntatem tuam, in
   die sancto meo, et vocaveris sabbatum delicias ad consecrandum Iehovae,
   eo quod sit honorabile, et honorem illi tribueris, ut non exequaris
   vias tuas, nec inveniatur voluntas tua, nec loquutus faeris verbum;

   14. Then shalt thou delight thyself in the LORD; and I will cause thee
   to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the
   heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

   14. Tunc delectaberis in Iehova, et equitare to faciam super excelsa
   terrae, et pascam to haereditatis Iacob patris tui; quia os Iehovae
   loquutum est.


   1. Cry with the throat. This chapter has been badly divided; for these
   words are connected with what goes before; and therefore, if we wish to
   understand the Prophet's meaning, we ought to read them as if there had
   been no separation. The Prophet has testified that the people shall be
   punished in such a manner as to leave some hope of peace, and next has
   threatened that the wicked, who by indolent pride endeavor to escape
   from God, shall have continual war. He now confirms that doctrine, and
   informs them that God has given him this command, to "cry with the
   throat," that is, to use a common expression, (a plein gosier) "at the
   full stretch of the voice."

   Why is this? It is to make known to the people their sins He does not
   speak merely of the stretch of the voice, but means by it that keenness
   and severity of language which hypocrites especially need, as if God
   were throwing thunderbolts against them from heaven; for they are
   delighted with their vices, if they be not severely reproved and
   dragged forth to the light, or rather if they be not violently thrown
   down.

   When he adds, Spare not, it is a mode of expression very frequently
   employed by Hebrew writers, such as, "I cry, and am not silent." (Psalm
   22:2) It is equivalent to a common expression, (Crie sans espargner,)
   "Cry without sparing." We have said that the Prophet does not speak of
   the mere sound of the voice, but means a severe and harsh reproof,
   which is very necessary to be sharply used towards hypocrites. For
   instance, if the prophets merely spoke of the Law of the Lord, and
   showed what is the rule of a good and holy life, and recommended the
   worship of God, and likewise reproved vices, but. without employing any
   vehemence of language, what impression would they produce on
   hypocrites, whose conscience is lulled in such a manner that they
   cannot be aroused but by applying spurs? And so a simple manner of
   teaching would not be enough, unless they were sharply attacked, and
   the thunderbolts of words were launched against them.

   Paul also, imitating the prophets, after having condemned all mankind,
   breaks out with greater vehemence against those who made some
   profession of holiness and abused God's patience. "Behold, thou art
   called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and boastest in God, and knowest
   his will, and approvest what is excellent, being instructed out of the
   Law; and trustest that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light
   of those who are in darkness, an instructor of fools, a teacher of the
   ignorant, having the form of knowledge and of truth by the Law. Thou
   therefore that teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? Thou who
   preachest that men ought not to steal, dost thou steal? (Romans
   2:17-21) Against such persons he threatens the judgment of God and
   terrible vengeance, because they have abused his goodness, and vainly
   boast of his name.

   Thus the Prophet, in this passage, sharpens his pen expressly against
   the Jews, who gloried in the name of God, and yet proudly rose up
   against him. This is the method, therefore, that ought to be followed
   against hypocrites, who hold out an empty show of holiness; at least,
   if we wish to discharge our duty in a proper and useful manner. As the
   Lord exercised the prophets in this kind of combat, so we must be
   exercised in it at the present day; so that we must not hold our peace,
   or give them a slight reproof, but must exclaim against them with all
   our might.

   It might be objected, "If the Lord commands his servants to reprove the
   sins of the people, to whom he promises peace, he undoubtedly intended
   to leave to them the hope of salvation. And yet it is certain that
   those words are addressed to the reprobate, against whom he had
   formerly declared war." I reply, believers were at that time reduced to
   a small number; for there were few who embraced the peace that was
   offered to them. Accordingly, when Isaiah holds out the hope of
   approaching peace, he has his eye on that little flock; when he
   threatens war, his aim is to terrify the multitude, who were estranged
   from God and despised his warnings; for the state of the people was
   such, as we have formerly seen, (Isaiah 1:21) that scarcely any pure or
   sound morality remained.

   And to the house of Jacob their iniquity. With good reason does he call
   them "the house of Jacob," when the greater part of the people were
   corrupted. And we ought carefully to observe this distinction: that the
   prophets sometimes address the multitude at large, and sometimes limit
   their discourse to a few believers. Nor is it without witty and bitter
   mockery that he gives the designations of "his people" and "children of
   Jacob" to those who had degenerated from their stock and had basely
   revolted from the faith of the fathers. The concession made is
   therefore ironical; as if he had said that there is no privilege which
   hinders them from hearing what they deserve.

   2. Yet they seek me daily. Here he intended to take away every ground
   of objection from hypocrites, who had their answers ready. "We fear,
   serve, and love God, and seek him with the whole heart. Why do you
   rebuke us as if we were irreligious persons; for we wish to regulate
   our life according to the injunctions of the Law." To meet this
   objection, he affirms that they do nothing in a pure or sincere manner,
   that everything is pretended and hypocritical, and consequently is of
   no value before God, who demands the whole heart. (Genesis 17:1)

   It is proper to observe this order which the Prophet has followed.
   After having threatened war against wicked men and hypocrites, he now
   rebukes them severely, and takes away the pretenses and disguises under
   which they shrouded themselves. This is the manner in which hypocrites
   should be treated, and dragged, as it were, out of their lurkingplaces;
   for otherwise doctrine could produce no good effect upon them. And not
   only should godly teachers observe this order, but every person ought
   to apply this manner of teaching for his own use, that he may not be
   satisfied with himself or flatter his vices; that he may not practice
   hypocrisy on himself, or suffer himself to be deceived by the tricks of
   Satan. Let him therefore bring a pure and upright heart, if he wish to
   profit by the doctrine of the word, and to be acceptable to God.

   And wish to know my ways. Although Isaiah admits that traitors and
   liars have some show of holiness, yet, on the other hand, by a bitter
   figure of speech, he censures them, as if he had said that in their
   shameful boasting there was excessive wickedness. Thus it is not simple
   irony, but there is likewise added a complaint, that, while they
   apparently labor to serve God, still, if any person examine them more
   closely, and inquire into their whole manner of life, he will perceive
   that their hearts are altogether estranged from God.

   They ask of me the judgments of righteousness. [118] Those who think
   that in these words hypocrites blame God, and rise up against him, as
   if they would enter into controversy with him, have not understood the
   Prophet's meaning. I acknowledge that he does this soon afterwards; but
   before coming down to it, he tears off their mask of pretended
   godliness. After having said that they "seek God daily," as if there
   were nothing that occupied their thoughts more earnestly than religion,
   he proceeds in the same strain, and says, that they "ask judgments,"
   that they may serve God, and observe the rule of a holy life, that is,
   by pretending to burn with zeal for religion. And indeed the Prophet
   here enumerates the most important exercises of believers, which
   sometimes are ostentatiously imitated by the wicked. Now, the chief
   point of religion is, to inquire into the will of God, that we may
   regulate our life by the rule which he has laid down for us, and to
   depend on his mouth. But the children of God, in this respect, are
   falsely copied by hypocrites, so that they appear to practice all that
   relates to the true worship of God, and sometimes to exceed the very
   best of men.

   3. Wherefore have we fasted? He proceeds farther with the same subject,
   and says that feigned and perverse worshippers of God are not only
   blinded by their hypocrisy, but likewise swell with pride, so that they
   venture openly to murmur at God, and to complain when he presses hard
   upon them, as if he had done them a grievous injury. "Dost thou reject
   our services, fastings, and prayers? Why are they not acceptable to
   thee? Do we not vex ourselves in vain?"

   He has admitted, as we have already said, that hypocrites have some
   outward show of holiness, by which they deceive men; but now he
   declares that inwardly they are also puffed up and intoxicated by
   pride, while they have pretended good works, by which they think that
   they satisfy God, and, on this pretense, they carry themselves high
   against the prophets, and indulge in the worst vices, such as unbelief,
   rebellion, and obstinacy against God, distrust, cruelty, fraud, and
   pillage. These are light matters in themselves, and are easily washed
   away by other external exercises; for the former are their preeminent
   merits, in which they think that the worship of God consists, and from
   which they hope to obtain the pardon of all their sins. Thus they
   "strain out a gnat, [119] and do not scruple to swallow a whole camel."
   (Matthew 23:24) If such characters had been found among the Jews only,
   and if the world had changed its disposition, we should have needed to
   seek far for examples; but since we have experience of the same thing
   every day, there is no necessity for giving ourselves much trouble
   about the exposition of this passage.

   This complaint may be viewed as referring both to the word and to the
   hand of God. In both ways God judges hypocrites; for he rebukes by the
   word, and punishes for their obstinate malice; and therefore those
   words may be viewed as referring both to the chastisements and to the
   preceding reproof. For my own part, I interpret it as relating to the
   word, and as a rebuke to hypocrites, who boasted of their fastings, and
   contrasted them with the censures of the prophets; as if they were the
   true worshippers of God, and were unjustly rebuked. I differ from those
   who think that the people blame God for treating them harshly during
   their captivity. On the contrary, it appears to me that they complain
   of the prophets for rebuking them with great sharpness and severity;
   for the Jews wished to be regarded as devout and religious persons, and
   could not patiently endure to be condemned for impiety and wickedness.
   For this reason the Prophet exposes their dispositions, and shows that
   they make war with God, that they may not suppose that they have to
   deal with him as a private individual.

   Ye find pleasure and exact all your labors. In the second part of the
   verse he refutes, in the name of God, those virtues which hypocrites
   proclaim with the sound of a trumpet. It is, because they do not
   nevertheless lay aside the sinful dispositions of the flesh, or begin
   to deny themselves; for he condemns them chiefly on the ground of
   having been devoted to their desires, and next he enumerates particular
   kinds of vices. Hence we may easily infer that their heart is not moved
   by any anxiety to repent.

   4. Behold, for strife and contention ye fast. This verse ought to be
   connected with the end of the preceding verse; for, having in the
   former clause introduced hypocrites as complaining of the violence and
   harshness of the prophets, he assigns, in the latter clause, the reason
   why the Lord loathes their fasts and their other performances. It is
   because they do not proceed from pure affection of heart. What the
   inclination of their heart is, he shows from its fruits; for he sends
   them back to the duties of the second table, from which it is easily
   seen what we are. Purity of heart is manifested by our living
   innocently, and abstaining from all deceit and injustice. These are the
   marks of pure affection, in the absence of which the Lord rejects, and
   even abhors, all external worship. Wherever, on the other hand,
   cheating, and plunder, and extortion prevail, it is very certain that
   there is no fear of God.

   Thus he reproaches hypocrites with making their fasts to give greater
   encouragement to sin, and with giving a looser rein to their lusts. We
   have experience of this every day. Not only do many people fast in
   order to atone for their cheating and robberies, and to plunder more
   freely, but even that, during the time of the fast, they may have
   greater leisure for examining their accounts, perusing documents, and
   calculating usury, and contriving methods by which they may lay hold on
   the property of their debtors. On that account they frequently throw
   this labor on Lent and on the stated times of fasts; and, in like
   manner, other notable hypocrites hear many Masses every day, that they
   may more freely, and with less interruption, and under the pretense of
   religion, contrive their cheating and treachery.

   Fast not, as ye do this day. At length he rejects their fasts, however
   highly they may value them; because in this manner the wrath of God is
   still more provoked. Immediately afterwards he rejects also their
   prayers.

   That ye may make your voice to be heard on high. [120] Hence it is
   evident, (as we have explained fully in our exposition of Isaiah 1:11,)
   that God approves of no duties which are not accompanied by sincere
   uprightness of heart. Certainly no sacrifice is more excellent than
   calling upon God; and yet we see how all prayers are stained and
   polluted by impurity of heart. Besides, in consequence of fasting being
   usually joined to prayer, the Prophet takes this for granted; for it is
   an appendage to prayer, he therefore forbids such men to offer up
   solemn prayer accompanied by fasting; because they will gain nothing,
   except that the Lord will punish them more severely. And hence we infer
   (as has been already said) that the Lord pays no regard to external
   works, if they be not preceded by sincere fear of God.

   Such fasting as was customary among the Jews is not here blamed in
   itself, as if it were a superstitious ceremony, but abuse of fasting,
   and false confidence. This ought to be carefully observed; for we would
   need to deal very differently with the Papists, if we blamed their
   fasts. They contain nothing but superstition, being tied to this or
   that day, or to fixed seasons, as if during the rest of the time they
   were at liberty to gormandize; while they think that the flesh is
   unclean, and yet allow every kind of indulgence to it; provided only
   that they do not once gormandize on a fastday, they think that they
   have discharged their duty admirably well. Since therefore there is
   nothing in them that can be approved, we may absolutely condemn them.

   But the dispute on this occasion was different. That fasting which the
   Jews observed was laudable in itself, because God had appointed it; but
   a false opinion respecting it was censurable. Among the Papists, on the
   other hand, we must condemn both the false opinion and the institution
   itself; because it is wicked. The Papists have this in common with the
   Jews, that they think that they serve God by it, and that it is a
   meritorious work. Yet fasting is not the worship of God, and is not in
   itself commanded by him, in the same manner as those works which he
   enjoins in the Law; but it is an external exercise, which is auxiliary
   to prayer, or is useful for subduing the flesh, or testifying our
   humiliation, when, as guilty persons, we implore that the wrath of God
   may be turned away in adversity. But the reader will find the use and
   design of fasting more fully discussed in our Institutes. (Book 4,
   chapter 12:1521)

   5. Is it such a fast as I have chosen? He confirms the preceding
   statement, and shows that fasting is neither desired nor approved by
   God in itself, but so far as it is directed to its true end. He did not
   wish that it should be altogether abolished, but the improper use of
   it; that is, because they believed the worship of God to consist in it,
   and by neglecting or even despising true godliness, thought that bodily
   exercise was enough; just as hypocrites always put forward external
   ceremonies, as if they were satisfactions to appease God.

   Again, because men, through their rashness, define what is the worship
   of God, he expressly refers us to his own will, that we may not suppose
   that he approves of everything which our own judgment pronounces to be
   right. Although men are well pleased with themselves, and swell with
   astonishing haughtiness, and indulge in insolent boasting, the Lord
   rejects and abhors them, because he claims for himself alone the right
   to "choose." Now, "to choose" a thing is of the same import as "to take
   pleasure in it."

   And hanging his head like a bulrush. He says that he is not delighted
   if a man passes a day in hunger, and then walks with a sad and downcast
   look. The Prophet employs all appropriate metaphor; because the
   bulrush, though it is straight, is easily bent. So hypocrites bend
   themselves, and bow down the head, as if under the influence of
   oppressive leanness, or display some empty appearance of humility. The
   Prophet therefore intended to censure superstitious attitudes, in which
   hypocrites imagine that there is some holiness.

   And spread sackcloth and ashes. These things also were added to
   fasting, especially when they made solemn professions of repentance;
   for they clothed themselves with "sackcloth," and threw "ashes" on
   their head. (Joel 1:13) Now, such an exercise was holy and approved by
   God; and we see that the prophets, while they exhort the people to
   repentance, cry aloud for "sackcloth and ashes." But as we have said
   that fasting is not here condemned on its own account, so Isaiah does
   not condemn those outward ceremonies, but reproves hypocrites for
   separating them from reality.

   If it be asked, Are "sackcloth" and "ashes" suitable to our time? I
   reply, they are indifferent matters, which may be used for edification;
   but in the light of the Gospel, which has brought liberty to us, we
   have no need of such figures. At the same time, we should attend to the
   difference between Eastern nations, which make use of a great abundance
   and variety of ceremonies, and Western nations, whose habits are far
   more simple. If we wished to imitate the former, it would be nothing
   else than to enact the part of apes, or of stageplayers. Yet there is
   nothing to hinder those who intend to confess their guilt, from wearing
   soiled and faltered garments, after the manner used by suppliants.
   [121]

   A day acceptable to Jehovah. Hence it is evident that to solemn prayer,
   when a holy assembly was held, there was added fasting; for fasting, as
   we have already said, is an appendage to prayer; as we see that it was
   added to prayer by Christ himself. (Matthew 17:21) It is not appointed,
   therefore, for its own sake, but is directed to a different end.

   6. Is not this the fast which I have chosen? The Prophet shows what are
   the real duties of piety, and what God chiefly recommends to us;
   namely, to relieve those who are wretched and pressed with a heavy
   burden. But the Prophet appears to abolish fasting universally, when,
   in place of it, he enumerates those works which are most highly
   acceptable to God. I reply, fasting is approved when it is accompanied
   by that love which we owe to our fellowmen; and therefore the Prophet
   directs that we shall be tried by this principle, that our consciences
   be entire and pure, that we exercise mutual kindness towards each
   other; for if this order prevail, then fasting, which shall be added to
   it, will be pleasing and acceptable to God. But here he does not at all
   mention purity of heart. I reply, it is described by works, as by its
   fruits, from which it is easily seen what kind of heart we have. Next,
   he enumerates the duties of the Second Table, under which, as we have
   elsewhere seen, by a figure of speech in which a part is taken for the
   whole, he includes the whole observation of the Law; for it would not
   be enough to assist our neighbor by kind offices, if at the same time
   we despised God. But we must observe the Prophet's design; because the
   love which we owe to our neighbors cannot be sincerely cultivated,
   unless when we love them in God. In order to make trial of our fear of
   God, he demands these as more immediate signs, if we live justly,
   inoffensively, and kindly with each other. Besides, he was not
   satisfied with outward appearance; and indeed the love of our neighbor
   does not thrive where the Spirit of God does not reign; and therefore
   Paul includes it in the enumeration of "the works of the Spirit."
   (Galatians 5:22) Thus when the observation of the Law is spoken of, not
   only outward works, but likewise the dispositions of the heart, must be
   taken into the account.

   To loose wicked bindings. Some explain it to mean "sinful thoughts," by
   which the hearts of men are entangled. But Isaiah appears to me to have
   had another object in view, namely, that hypocrites are exceedingly
   cruel in distressing the poor, and lay heavy burdens upon them. He
   therefore calls them "bonds," or "bindings," or, as we commonly say,
   "oppressions." Of the same import is what he adds, to undo the heavy
   burdens, under the weight of which the poor groan and are overwhelmed.
   he again adds, "to let the oppressed go free," and expresses the same
   thing in a variety of words. Thus the Prophet does not define what is
   meant by "fasting," but shows what the Lord requires in the first place
   and chiefly, and in what manner our obedience can be approved by him,
   and what ought to be the dispositions of those who endeavor to fast in
   a right manner.

   7. Is it not to break thy bread to the hungry? He goes on to describe
   the duties of love of our neighbor, which he had described briefly in
   the preceding verse; for, having formerly said that we must abstain
   from every act of injustice, he now shows that we ought to exercise
   kindness towards the wretched, and those who need our assistance.
   Uprightness and righteousness are divided into two parts; first, that
   we should injure nobody; and secondly, that we should bestow our wealth
   and abundance on the poor and needy. And these two ought to be joined
   together; for it is not enough to abstain from acts of injustice, if
   thou refuse thy assistance to the needy; nor will it be of much avail
   to render thine aid to the needy, if at the same time thou rob some of
   that which thou bestowest on others. Thou must not relieve thy
   neighbors by plunder or theft.; and if thou hast committed any act of
   injustice, or cruelty, or extortion, thou must not, by a pretended
   compensation, call on God to receive a share of the plunder. These two
   parts, therefore, must be held together, provided only that we have our
   love of our neighbor approved and accepted by God.

   By commanding them to "break bread to the hungry, [122] he intended to
   take away every excuse from covetous and greedy men, who allege that
   they have a right to keep possession of that which is their own. "This
   is mine, and therefore I may keep it for myself. Why should I make
   common property of that which God has given me?" He replies, "It is
   indeed thine, but on this condition, that thou share it with the hungry
   and thirsty, not that thou eat it thyself alone." And indeed this is
   the dictate of common sense, that the hungry are deprived of their just
   right, if their hunger is not relieved. That sad spectacle extorts
   compassion even from the cruel and barbarous. He next enumerates
   various kinds, which commonly bend hearts of iron to sumpatheian
   fellowfeeling or compassion; that the savage disposition of those who
   are not moved by feeling for a brother's poverty and necessity may be
   the less excusable. At length he concludes --

   And that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh. Here we ought to
   observe the term flesh, by which he means all men universally, not one
   of whom we can behold, without seeing, as in a mirror, "our own flesh."
   It is therefore a proof of the greatest inhumanity, to despise those in
   whom we are constrained to recognize our own likeness.

   8. Then shall break forth as the dawn [123] thy light. The Prophet
   shows that God is not too rigorous, and does not demand from us more
   than what is proper; and that hypocrites complain of him without cause,
   when they accuse him of excessive severity. When their works are
   condemned, they murmur, and reply that God can never be satisfied, that
   they do not know what they should do, or what course they should
   follow. He replies that he demands nothing else than a pure and honest
   heart, that is, an upright conscience; that if they have this, God will
   graciously receive them, and will bear testimony to their holiness, and
   will bestow every kind of blessing on those whose faults he justly
   chastises; and lastly, that there is no reason why they should murmur
   at him as excessively stern and harsh, because they will find him to be
   kind and bountiful when they shall lay down all hypocrisy, and devote
   themselves sincerely to his service.

   We should observe the particle then; for it means that hypocrites, on
   the contrary, are very far from the true worship of God, though they
   wish to be reckoned very holy persons. But he holds them to be fully
   convicted, when he shows from their works that they neither worship nor
   fear God. By the word light he means prosperity, as by the word
   "darkness" is meant a wretched and afflicted life; and this mode of
   expression occurs frequently in Scripture.

   And thy health. By "health" he means prosperity and safety, as we shall
   afterwards see in another passage, because the wounds inflicted by the
   hand of God on account of their sins had brought the people so low that
   they wasted away like a sick man under terrible disease. No kind of
   disease is more severe than to be pursued by God's righteous vengeance,
   or consumed under his curse.

   Righteousness shall go before thy face. "Righteousness" may be taken in
   two senses, either for the testimony of "righteousness," or for good
   order; because God will put an end to the confusion, and will restore
   everything to its proper place. Thus the former meaning amounts to
   this, "When God shall be pacified towards thee, the testimony of thy
   righteousness shall be visible before God and men, as if some herald
   went before thee." There are some who prefer to expound the word
   "righteousness" as meaning just government, which is the gift of God,
   and a token of his kindness as a Father; and we have seen that this
   word is sometimes used in that sense by Hebrew writers. But the latter
   clause which follows, And the glory of Jehovah will gather thee, leads
   me to prefer the former exposition, "Thy righteousness shall go forth;"
   that is, "All shall acknowledge thee to be holy and righteous, though
   formerly thou wast guilty and convicted. So shalt thou also be adorned
   with the glory of the Lord, though formerly thou wast loaded with
   reproaches." For we are reproached and disgraced, while we suffer the
   punishment of our sins.

   9. Then shalt thou call. Isaiah follows out what he had formerly begun,
   that everything shall prosper well with the Jews, if they shall be just
   and inoffensive and free from doing wrong to any one, so that it shall
   manifest their piety and religion. He pronounces what is said by Hosea,
   (Hosea 6:6) and repeated by Christ, that "mercy shall be preferred to
   sacrifice." (Matthew 9:13; 12:7) Thus after having spoken of the duties
   which men owe to one another, and testified that it shall be well with
   those who shall perform those duties, he adds, "Then shalt thou call,
   and the Lord will listen to thee." The chief part of our happiness is,
   if God listen to us; and, on the other hand, nothing could be more
   miserable than to have him for an enemy. In order to try our faith, he
   attributes to our prayers what he bestows willingly and by free grace;
   for if he always bestowed his blessings while we were asleep, the
   desire to pray would become utterly cold, and indeed would cease
   altogether; and so the kindness of God would be an encouragement to
   slothfulness. Although he anticipates us by his free grace, yet he
   wishes that our prayers for his blessings should be offered, and
   therefore he adds, Thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Behold, here I am.
   This promise likewise contains an exhortation, that we may not lie
   idle. When he says that he is present, this indeed is not visible to
   our eyes; but he gives a practical declaration that he is near and
   reconciled to us.

   If thou shalt take away from the midst of thee the yoke. In the latter
   part of the verse he again repeats that God will be reconciled to the
   Jews if they repent. Under the word "yoke" he includes all the
   annoyances that are offered to the poor; as if he had said, "If thou
   shalt cease to annoy thy brethren, and shalt abstain from all violence
   and deceit, the Lord will bestow upon thee every kind of blessing."

   And the pointing of the finger. [124] This includes every kind of
   attack; for we are said to "point the finger," when we threaten our
   neighbors, or treat them cruelly, or offer any violence.

   And speech of vanity, or unprofitable speech. This is the third class
   of acts of injustice, by which we injure our neighbor when we impose
   upon him by cunning and deceitful words or flatteries; for every
   iniquity consists either of concealed malice and deceit, or of open
   violence.

   10. If thou shalt pour out thy soul to the hungry. He goes on to
   recommend the duties of that love which we owe to one another. The sum
   of the whole discourse is this, that in vain do men serve God, if they
   only offer to him trivial and bare ceremonies; and that this is not the
   right and proper worship of God, who rigidly commands and enjoins us to
   lead an upright and innocent life with our neighbors, willingly to give
   ourselves and our labors to them, and to be ready to assist, them
   readily and cheerfully, whenever it is necessary. We should observe the
   two parts of this duty which the Prophet has expressly described; for
   in the first place, he recommends to us the feeling of mercy and
   kindness; and, in the second place, he exhorts us to the work itself
   and the effect. It would not be enough to perform acts of kindness
   towards men, if our disposition towards them were not warm and
   affectionate. "If I give all my goods to the poor," says Paul, "and
   have not love, I am nothing." (1 Corinthians 13:3) To "pour out the
   soul," therefore, is nothing else than to bewail their distresses, and
   to be as much affected by their own poverty as if we ourselves endured
   it; as, on the other hand, all who are limited and devoted to
   themselves are said to have a hard and seared heart, to "shut up their
   bowels," (1 John 3:17) and to restrain their feelings. [125] Another
   translation given by some commentators, "If thou shalt offer thy soul,"
   is unworthy of notice.

   Thy light shall arise in darkness. Again, there follows the same
   promise, and under the same figure or metaphor. By "darkness" he
   denotes adversity, and by "light" prosperity; as if he had said to the
   people, "The Lord will cause all the miseries by which thou art now
   oppressed to cease, and sudden prosperity shall spring up." He shows,
   therefore, that there is no reason why they should blame God for
   punishing them so severely; for they would immediately be delivered and
   enjoy prosperity if they sincerely worshipped and obeyed God.

   11. And Jehovah will always conduct thee. He now describes more clearly
   what he had spoken briefly and figuratively, that God will be their
   guide, so that they shall be in want of nothing for a full abundance of
   blessings. God is said to "conduct" us, when we actually feel that he
   goes before us, as if he were placed before our eyes.

   And will satisfy thy soul in drought. The Prophet adds that the aid
   promised shall not be of short duration, because God never forsakes his
   people in the middle of the journey, but continues his kindness towards
   them with unwearied regularity, and for this reason promises that they
   shall be satisfied amidst the deepest poverty; because God never is in
   want of any benefits for relieving their poverty, and his act of
   blessing is of more value than the most abundant rains of the whole
   year. And yet he does not promise to believers a rich and abundant
   produce of fruits, or a plentiful harvest, but that God will nourish
   them, though the earth yield no food. In this way he bids them depend
   on God's assistance and be satisfied with it, though they be not
   altogether free from the distresses of famine. In this sense he adds,
   --

   And will make fat thy bones. He does not say that they shall be fully
   and highly fattened, but that they shall be so lean that the "bones"
   shall protrude even through the skin. Thus he gives the appellation of"
   bones" to those who have been worn bare by hunger or famine, men who
   have hardly anything remaining but dry skin and "bones;" and he means
   that the Jews will have to contend with want of all things and with
   leanness, till God shall restore them.

   Of the same import are the metaphors which he adds, a watered garden,
   and a spring of waters. Isaiah cannot satisfy himself in describing the
   kindness of God, which he displays towards his sincere worshippers,
   that men may not seek anywhere else than in themselves the causes of
   barrenness. It amounts to this, that this fountain of God's kindness
   never dries up, but always flows, if we do not stop its course by our
   own fault.

   12. And from thee shall be those who shall restore the deserts of the
   age. By "deserts" Isaiah means frightful desolation, which befell the
   Jews, when they were carried into captivity; for the country was
   reduced to a wilderness, the city was sacked, the temple was razed, and
   the people were brought into bondage and scattered. He calls them
   "deserts of the age," (or of perpetuity,) because the temple could not
   be immediately repaired, and there was no hope of rebuilding it or of
   delivering the people. If any city has been ruined or destroyed, while
   its inhabitants remain, it may be speedily restored; but if none of the
   inhabitants survive, and if they have been carried away into a distant
   country, and are very far off, there can be no hope of rebuilding that
   city; and it will be reckoned monstrous if, after it has lain for a
   long time in ruins, some person shall say that the people who appear to
   have perished shall restore and rebuild it.

   Since therefore the promise appeared to be incredible, the Prophet
   intended to meet the doubt; for they might have objected, "If God
   wishes to restore us, why does he suffer us to languish so long?" He
   replies that no continuance of delay prevents God from raising again to
   a lofty situation those who had been sunk low for a long period. Nor
   must this be limited to the rebuilding of the temple, which was begun
   by Zerubbabel, (Ezekiel 3:8) and continued by Nehemiah; but it includes
   the restoration of the Church, which followed after the lapse of
   several centuries.

   The phrase "From thee," means that from that people, though seemingly
   half dead, there shall arise those who shall repair the melancholy
   ruins, and shall be architects or workmen to rebuild Jerusalem. The
   verb vnv (banu) "shall build," is translated by some in a passive
   sense; but as that way renders the meaning doubtful, the active
   signification ought to be retained. [126] A little afterwards, he
   appears to ascribe to the whole people what he had said of a few
   individuals; but the meaning is the same; for, if the question be put,
   "Who rebuilt Jerusalem?" undoubtedly it was that people; but out of
   that vast multitude the Lord selected a small number and cut off the
   rest. Some suppose the meaning to be, that the cities will be
   insufficient for the number of inhabitants, so that they shall be
   constrained to rebuild other cities which had been formerly destroyed;
   but this appears to be too unnatural.

   Thou wilt raise up the foundations of generation and generation. Some
   think that this clause conveys what the Prophet had formerly said, and
   that by "the foundations of generation and generation" are meant those
   which lay long in a ruinous state; because out of them must the
   building be immediately raised and set up; for various hinderances had
   arisen, by which that work was interrupted. But we may view it as
   referring to the time to come: "Thou wilt raise up buildings, which
   shall last for a very long period;" for he seems to promise that the
   condition of the Church shall be of long duration; as if he had said,
   "Other buildings do not last long, but this shall last for many ages."
   Yet if any one prefer to view it as referring to the past, I am not
   much disposed to dispute with him.

   And thou shalt be called. Here the Prophet includes both statements;
   namely, that the people would resemble a ruined building, and next,
   that they would be perfectly restored. He ascribes this to the Jews,
   that they shall be repairers and directors of the ways; that is, that
   the Lord will make use of their labors; for we ought to ascribe
   everything to the power of God, who is pleased to bestow upon us so
   high an honor as to permit our hands to be applied to his work. We have
   here a remarkable promise about gathering and raising up the ruins of
   the Church; and since the Lord is pleased to make use of our labor, let
   us not hesitate to be entirely devoted to it; and although the world
   oppose and mock at us, and account us fools, let us take courage and
   conquer every difficulty. Our hearts ought to cherish assured
   confidence, when we know that it is the work of the Lord, and that he
   has commanded us to execute it.

   13. If thou shalt turn away thy foot from the sabbath. Some think that
   the Prophet alludes to the external observation of the Sabbath, because
   it was not lawful to perform a journey on that day. (Exodus 20:8)
   Though I do not reject that opinion, yet I think that the meaning is
   far more extensive; for by a figure of speech, ill which a part is
   taken for the whole, he denotes the whole course of human life; as it
   is very customary to employ the word "going" or "walking" to denote our
   life. He says, therefore, "If thou cease to advance in thy course, if
   thou shut up thy path, walk not according to thine own will,"' etc. For
   this is to "turn away the foot from the Sabbath," when we lay ourselves
   under the necessity of wandering freely and without restraint in our
   own sinful desires. As he formerly included under the class of fasting
   all ceremonies and outward masks, in which they made their holiness to
   consist, and showed that they were vain and unprofitable; so in this
   passage he points out the true observation of the Sabbath, that they
   may not think that it consists in external idleness but in true
   selfdenial, so as to abstain from every act of injustice and
   wickedness, and from all lusts and wicked thoughts. First, by the word
   "foot" he denotes actions; because the Jews, though they did not
   venture to perform a journey, or to cook flesh on a Sabbathday, yet did
   not scruple to harass their neighbors and to mock at the afflicted. Yet
   he immediately passes on to the will and to speeches, so as to include
   every part of the obedience which we owe to God.

   And shalt call the Sabbath a delight This word, "delight," must be
   viewed as referring to God, and not to men; because nothing can be more
   pleasing or acceptable to God, titan the observation of the Sabbath,
   and sincere worship. He carefully inculcates this, that men do wrong,
   if, laying aside the commandments of God, they esteem highly those
   things which are of no value; and he warns them that they ought to form
   their judgment from his will alone. Certain classes of duties are again
   enumerated by him, by which he shows clearly that the true observation
   of the Sabbath consists in selfdenial and thorough conversion. And thus
   he pronounces the foundation to be the will, from which proceed
   speeches, and next actions; for we speak what we have conceived in our
   heart, and by speech we make known our will, and afterwards carry it
   into effect. Whoever then wishes to serve God in a proper manner, must
   altogether renounce his flesh and his will. And hence we see the reason
   why God so highly recommends, in the whole Scripture, the observation
   of the Sabbath; for he contemplated something higher than the outward
   ceremony, that is, indolence and repose, in which the Jews thought that
   the greatest holiness consisted. On the contrary, he commanded the Jews
   to renounce the desires of the flesh, to give up their sinful
   inclinations, and to yield obedience to him; as no man can meditate on
   the heavenly life, unless he be dead to the world and to himself. Now,
   although that ceremony has been abolished, nevertheless the truth
   remains; because Christ died and rose again, so that we have a
   continual sabbath; that is, we are released from our works, that the
   Spirit of God may work mightily in us.

   14. Then wilt thou delight in Jehovah. He appears to allude to the word
   delight in the preceding verse; for the verb ttgg (tithgnanneg) which
   the Prophet employs, is derived from the same root as gg (gnoneg) which
   he formerly used, when he said that the Lord takes the highest delight
   in the true observation of the Sabbath. In a word, he means that the
   people take no delight in God, because they provoke him, and do not
   obey his will; for if we framed our life in obedience to God, we should
   be his delight, and, on the other hand, he would be our delight. Thus
   he affirms that it is owing entirely to the Jews themselves that they
   do not, by relying on a reconciled God, lead a cheerful and joyful
   life. By these words he indirectly reproaches them with bringing upon
   themselves, by their own fault, many calamities.

   And I will cause thee to ride on the high places of the earth. By these
   words he promises a return to their native country, and a safe
   habitation in it. We know that Judea was situated on a lofty place
   above the neighboring countries; while the situation of Babylon was
   much lower, so that the people trembled as if they had been shut up in
   a cave. He next tells more plainly what he meant by the word ride [127]
   for he promises the possession of that country which had been promised
   and given to the fathers, [128] and which they at that time enjoyed,
   and of which they were afterwards deprived for a time.

   For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it. He added this, that they might
   know, beyond all controversy, that all these things were true; and this
   must be viewed as referring not only to those promises, but likewise to
   the beginning of the chapter. For he rebuked hypocrites, who thought
   that they were defending themselves in a just cause, and showed that
   they were suffering the just punishment of their sins; and that it was
   in vain to contend with God, and to bring forward in opposition to him
   their own works, which were altogether empty and worthless. On that
   account he brings them back to the true observation of the Sabbath, and
   shows that it will be well with them, if they shall worship God in a
   right manner. At length he concludes that they have not to deal with a
   mortal man, but that he who pronounces these things is God the Judge.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [118] "They consult the priests and prophets as to those laws and
   statutes about which there is any uncertainty, as if they were afraid
   of breaking the commandments of God through ignorance.  Rosenmuller.

   [119] For the meaning of this phrase, see our author's Commentary on
   the harmony of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, [9]Vol. 3, p. 93.  Ed.

   [120] "Luther and other early writers understand the last clause as a
   prohibition of noisy quarrels, to make the voice heard on high,' being
   taken as equivalent to letting it be heard in the street. (Isaiah 42:3)
   Vitringa and the later writers give it a meaning altogether different,
   by taking mrvm (marom) in the sense of heaven, (Isaiah 57:15,) and the
   whole clause as a declaration that such fasting would not have the
   desired effect of gaining audience and acceptance for their prayers.
   (See Joel 1:14; 2:12)" -- Alexander.

   [121] "Selon la coustume des criminels qui demandent misericorde."
   "According to the custom of criminals who implore mercy."

   [122] Grotius says that "the bread in those countries was such as could
   be easily broken,' [like the thin cakes which are still common in the
   East]; and that to break,' consequently, meant to impart,' or to
   distribute. The phraseology is borrowed from the breaking of the bread
   which is distributed by the head of a family to the domestics at his
   table." -- Rosenmuller.

   [123] "As the pillar of the dawn bursts through the clouds."  Jarchi.

   [124] "Grotius thus explains this clause, If thou shalt cease to point
   at good men with "the disreputable finger," (as Persius calls it,)and
   to mock at their simplicity.' In like manner Juvenal says, (Sat. 10:52)
   Quum fortunic ipsi minaci
   Mandaret ]aqueum, mediumque ostenderet unguem. On this passage
   scholiasts observe, that it was an ancient custom, when any person was
   the object of scorn, or was treated with marked contempt or disgraceful
   reproach, to point at him by holding out the middle finger."
   Rosenmuller.

   [125] "Qui ferment les entrailles, et sont sans affection." "Who shut
   up their bowels, and are without affection."

   [126] "Ewald reads vnv (bunnu,) [in the Puhal form,] They shall be
   built by thee;' but this passive form does not occur elsewhere, and is
   here sustained by no external evidence." -- Alexander

   [127] "The word ride is borrowed from a powerful conqueror, who, riding
   on a horse or in a chariot, while carrying on battle, seizes mountains,
   hills, citadels, castles, fortifications, and subjects them to his
   donfinion. By high places of the earth,' he means what I have just now
   enumerated, lofty places difficult of ascent, on which citadels and
   fortresses are commonly situated, and the storming and seizing of which
   brings applause to the conqueror. See Deuteronomy 32:13."  Vitringa.
   "The whole phrase is descriptive, not of a mere return to Palestine,
   the highest of all lands (Kimchi), nor of more security from enenfies
   by being placed beyond their reach (Vitringa), but of conquest and
   triumphant possession, as in Deuteronomy 32:13, from which the
   expression is derived by all the later writers who employ it."
   Alexander.

   [128] "To eat the heritage is to enjoy it, and derive subsistence from
   it. Kimchi correctly says that it is called the heritage of Jacob, as
   distinct from that of Ishmael and Esau, although equally descended from
   the father of the faithful."  Alexander.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 59.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 59:1-21

   1. Behold, the LORD'S hand is not shortened, that it cannot save;
   neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear:

   1. Ecce non est mutilata manus Iehovae, quin servet; neque aggravata
   auris ejus, quin audiat.

   2. But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and
   your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

   2. Sed iniquitates vestrae dissidium fecerunt inter vos et Deum
   vestrum; et peccata vestra operuerunt faciem ejus a vobis, ne audiat.

   3. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
   iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered
   perverseness.

   3. Nam manus vestrae pollutae sunt sanguine, et digiti vestri
   iniquitate; labia vestra protulerunt mendacium; lingua vestra
   iniquitatem loquuta est.

   4. None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust in
   vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth
   iniquity.

   4. Nemo est qui clamet pro justitia, nemo qui disceptet pro veritate;
   confidunt rebus vanis; loquuntur inania, concipiunt molestiam, pariunt
   iniquitatem.

   5. They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web: he that
   eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into
   a viper.

   5. Ova reguli excludunt, et telas aranearum texunt; qui comederit ex
   ovis eorum morietur; si comprimantur, exibit ripera.

   6. Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
   themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the
   act of violence is in their hands.

   6. Telae eorum non erunt in vestimentum; neque se tegent eorum
   operibus. Nam opera eorum sunt opera iniquitatis (aut, vanitatis); et
   opus violentiae in manibus eorum.

   7. Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood:
   their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in
   their paths.

   7. Pedes eorum ad malum currunt, et properant ad fundendum sanguinem
   innoxium; cogitationes eorum cogitationes vanae (vel iniquitatis);
   vastitas et contritio in viis eorum.

   8. The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their
   goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goeth therein
   shall not know peace.

   8. Viam pacis non noverunt; nec judicium est in gressibus eorum;
   semitas suas perverterunt sibi; quisquis graditur per eas nesciet
   pacere.

   9. Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth justice overtake us:
   we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in
   darkness.

   9. Propterea longe recessit a nobis judicium; nec apprehendit nos
   justitia. Expectavimus lucem, et ecce tenebrae; splendorem, et ecce in
   caligine versamur.

   10. We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no
   eyes: we stumble at noonday as in the night; we are in desolate places
   as dead men.

   10. Palpamus sicut caeci parietem: sicuti qui oculis capti sunt,
   palpamus. Impingimus in meridie tanquam noctu; in locis solitariis
   tanquam mortui.

   11. We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for
   judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.

   11. Nos onmes quasi ursi vociferamur; et quasi columbrae susurrando
   susurramus. Expectavimus judicium, et non apparet; salutem, et longe
   stetit a nobis.

   12. For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
   testify against us: for our transgressions are with us; and as for our
   iniquities, we know them;

   12. Quoniam multiplicatae sunt iniquitates nostrae coram to, et peccata
   nostra testata sunt contra nos, (vel, respondent nobis.) Quoniam
   iniquitates nostrae nobiscum sunt, et peccata nostra cognoscimus.

   13. In transgressing and lying against the LORD, and departing away
   from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering
   from the heart words of falsehood.

   13. Inique egimuss, et mentiti sumus Iehovae, et abducti sumns a tergo
   Dei nostri, loquentes calumniam et defectionem; concipientes et
   proferentes ex eorde verba mendacii.

   14. And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar
   off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.

   14. Et actum est retrorsum judicium; et justitia procul stetit. Quoniam
   corruit in platea veritas, et aequitas non potuit prodire.

   15. Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh himself
   a prey: and the LORD saw it, and it displeased him that there was no
   judgment.

   15. Defecit, inquam, veritas: et qui recessit a malo praedae fuit
   expositus. Et vidit Iehova, ac displicuit oculis ejus, quod non esset
   judicium.

   16. And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no
   intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his
   righteousness, it sustained him.

   16. Vidit, inquam, quod non esset vir; et admiratus est quod nemo
   intercederet (vel, occurreret). Itaque salutem ei attulit (vel, salutem
   illi fecit) brachium suum; et justitia ejus, ipsa stabilivit eum.

   17. For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of
   salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for
   clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke.

   17. Et induit justitiam, sicut loricam; et galeam salutis capiti suo.
   Induit, inquam, ultionem quasi vestem, et indignatione amictus fuit
   vice pallii.

   18. According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his
   adversaries, recompense to his enemies; to the islands he will repay
   recompense.

   18. Quasi propter retributiones, quasi ad reddendam vindictam, hostibus
   suis indignationem, vicem inimicis suis, insulis vicem reddet.

   19. So shall they fear the name of the LORD from the west, and his
   glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a
   flood, the Spirit of the LORD shall lift up a standard against him.

   19. Proinde timebunt ab occidente nomen Iehovae, et ab ortu solis
   gloriam ejus; quia veniet quasi flumen hostis, et Spiritus Iehovae
   impellet (vel, fugabit eum).

   20. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from
   transgression in Jacob, saith the LORD.

   20. Et veniet Sioni redemptor, et iis qui redierint ab iniquitate in
   Iacob, dicit Iehova.

   21. As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the LORD; My spirit
   that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
   not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out
   of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the LORD, from henceforth and
   for ever.

   21. Et ego cum ipsis hoc foedus meum (sancio), dicit Iehova. Spiritus
   meus, qui super to est, et verba mea, qae posui in ore tuo, non
   recedent ex ore tuo, neque ex ore seminis tui, neque ex ore seminis
   seminis tui, dicit Iehova, ab hoc tempore usque in aeternum.


   1. Behold, the hand of Jehovah is not shortened. This discourse closely
   resembles the preceding one; for, after having torn off the mask from
   hypocrites, who vainly boasted of themselves, and after having shown
   that the punishment inflicted on them was just, he now replies to other
   objections. Hypocrites are wont to accuse God either of weakness or of
   excessive severity. He shows, therefore, that he does not want either
   power or will to save his people, but that he is prevented by their
   wickedness from exercising his kindness towards them; and therefore
   that they do wrong in blaming God, and in uttering those slanders
   against him, when they ought, on the contrary, to accuse themselves.

   The word hn (hen) "behold," is emphatic, as if the Prophet spoke of
   something actually present, and pointed it out with the finger, for the
   sake of expressing certainty, in order to cut off a handle from
   hypocrites, that they might no longer practice evasion. We must also
   supply the contrasts to the words "shortened" and "benumbed;" as if he
   had said, that formerly there were abundant resources in the hand of
   God to render assistance to his people, and that he always was ready to
   be reconciled and lent a willing car to prayers, and that now he is not
   unlike himself, [129] as if either his hand were broken or his ears
   grown dull, so that he did not hear distinctly.

   2. But your iniquities have made a separation. The amount of what is
   said is, that they cannot say that God has changed, as if he had
   swerved from his natural disposition, but that the whole blame lies
   with themselves; because by their own sins they, in some measure,
   prevent his kindness, and refuse to receive his assistance. Hence we
   infer that our sins alone deprive us of the grace of God, and cause
   separation between us and him; for what the Prophet testifies as to the
   men of his time is applicable to all ages; since he pleads the cause of
   God, against the slanders of wicked men. Thus God is always like
   himself, and is not wearied in doing good; and his power is not
   diminished, but we hinder the entrance of his grace.

   It will be objected, that men cannot anticipate God by deserving well
   of him, and that consequently he must do good to those who are
   unworthy. I reply, this is undoubtedly true; but sometimes the
   frowardness of men grows to such an extent as to shut the door against
   God's benefits, as if they purposely intended to drive him far away
   from them. And although he listens to no man without pardoning him, as
   we always bring before him supplication for the removal of guilt, yet
   he does not listen to the prayers of the wicked. We need not wonder,
   therefore, if the Prophet accuse the people of rejecting God's benefits
   by their iniquities, and rendering him irreconcilable by their
   obstinacy, and, in a word, of making a divorce, which drives away or
   turns aside the ordinary course of grace.

   3. For your hands. He now brings forward their actions, that they may
   not practice evasion, or call in question what are those sins which
   have "caused the separation." He therefore takes away from them every
   excuse, by bringing forward particular instances, as if their shameful
   life were exhibited on an open stage. Now, he speaks in the second
   person, because, like an advocate, he argues and pleads the cause of
   God, and therefore speaks of himself as not belonging to the rank of
   the wicked, with whom he did not wish to be classed, though he was not
   entirely free from sin, but feared and served God, and enjoyed liberty
   of conscience. No man could be at liberty to condemn others, who was
   involved in the guilt of the same vices; and no man could be qualified
   for pleading the cause of God, who deprived himself of his right by
   living wickedly. We must be unlike those whom we reprove, if we do not
   wish to expose our doctrine to ridicule, and to be reckoned impudent;
   and, on the other band, when we serve God with a pure conscience, our
   doctrine obtains weight and authority, and holds even adversaries to be
   more fully convicted.

   Are polluted with blood. The picture which he gives of the wicked life
   of the people is not superfluous; for men seek various subterfuges, and
   cannot be reduced to a state of obedience, unless they have previously
   acknowledged their sins. By mentioning blood, he does not mean that
   murders have been everywhere committed; but by this word he describes
   the cruelty, extortions, violence, and enormities, which were
   perpetrated by hypocrites against the poor and defenseless; for they
   had not to deal with robbers and assassins, but with the king and the
   nobles, who were highly respected and honored. He calls them
   manslayers, because they cruelly harassed the innocent, and seized by
   force and violence the property of others; and so, immediately
   afterwards he uses the word "iniquity" instead of "blood."

   And your fingers with iniquity. Though he appears to extend the
   discourse farther, yet it is a repetition, or rather, a reduplication,
   such as is frequently employed by Hebrew writers, accompanied by
   amplification; for he expresses more by "fingers" than by "hands;" as
   if he had said that not even the smallest part was free from unjust
   violence. [130]

   Your lips have uttered falsehood. Next, he takes notice of one kind of
   wickedness, that is, when men deceive each other by tricks, or
   falsehood, or perjury; for that iniquity by which we wound our
   neighbors is most frequently defended either by cruelty as a bodyguard,
   or by cheating and falsehood. Here the Prophet takes a rapid view of
   the second table, and, from the crimes which they commit against it, he
   shows that they are wicked and destitute of all fear of God; for
   cruelty and treachery, by which human society is infringed, proceed
   from contempt of God. Thus from "the hands," that is, from extortion
   and violence, he descends to falsehoods and deceitful practices, to
   perjuries and crafty devices, by which we take advantage of our
   neighbors.

   4. There is none that crieth for justice. He means that there is not
   among them any study of what is right or proper, that no man opposes
   the acts of injustice which are committed by the strong on the weak;
   and that this leads to growing licentiousness, because all wink at it,
   and there is none who cares about undertaking the defense of justice.
   It is not enough that we abstain from violence, if we do not, as far as
   lies in our power, hinder it from being committed by others. And,
   indeed, whoever permits what he is able to hinder does in some sense
   command it; so that silence is a sort of consent.

   None that contendeth for truth. This clause is of the same import as
   the preceding one. Some take nspht (nishpat) in a passive sense, and
   suppose the Prophet's meaning to be, "None is rightly judged; for
   everything is full of corruptions, and yet nobody makes opposition."
   But the active signification is more appropriate; for these two
   statements are closely connected with each other, that "None crieth for
   justice" and "None defendeth truth or uprightness." The rendering given
   by some, "No man judgeth himself truly," is rather too harsh. But
   because this verb in Niphal is taken, in many passages, for "to
   contend," [131] the whole passage appeared to run more freely thus:
   that "none comes forward to protect what is right, openly and loudly to
   defend justice, and to plead against the wicked." Yet it will perhaps
   be thought preferable to view the words "cry for justice" as referring
   to wretched persons who are unjustly harassed; as if he had said that
   they are dumb, because they would gain nothing by crying. But this
   would also be harsh.

   If God condemns so severely those who pay no attention to the righteous
   causes of men, and do not aid such as are in difficulties, what shall
   become of us, if no zeal for defending the glory of God prompt us to
   rebuke iniquities? If we wink at the mockeries by which wicked men jeer
   at God's sacred doctrine and profane his name; if we pay no attention
   to the efforts which they make to destroy the Church of God, shall not
   our silence be justly condemned for treachery? [132] In a word, Isaiah
   says that good order falls into decay through our fault, if we do not,
   as far as we can, resist the wicked.

   They trust in vain things. He next points out that this is extreme
   confusion, when no one rises up in defense of justice. When he says
   that they "trust in vain things," he means that they heap up perverse
   reliances, by means of which they bring upon themselves insensibility.
   This is the utmost verge of iniquity, when, by seeking flatteries on
   every hand, they willingly harden themselves to despise God; and by
   such allurements Satan caresses the reprobate, till he altogether
   enchants them, so that, shaking off all fear of God, they not only
   despise sound counsels, but become haughty and fearless mockers. Since
   therefore foolhardiness drives us headlong, when we place false hopes
   in opposition to the judgment of God, the Prophet has good reason for
   representing, as a mark of desperate malice, this confidence under
   which cunning men shelter themselves; because the disease is manifestly
   incurable, when men who are openly wicked do not hesitate to flatter
   themselves, and, relying on their obstinate wickedness, think that they
   are at liberty to do whatever they please.

   They talk idly. He adds that their conversation tells plainly what is
   the nature of their dispositions and morals; as the proverb says, that
   "the tongue is the image of the mind." Yet this clause may be explained
   in two ways; either that they speak nothing sincerely, but, by constant
   practice, their tongues are formed to deceive, or, that their
   wickedness breaks out into open boasting. For my own part, I prefer the
   latter of these expositions.

   They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. These are elegant
   metaphors, by which he compares wicked men to women, who support the
   child in the womb, and afterwards give birth to it. Thus he says that
   the wicked, while they inwardly contrive their crimes, may be said to
   be pregnant till they bring forth in due time; that is, when they have
   found occasions and opportunities. "They conceive," he says, "purposes
   of mischief, that afterwards they may unjustly harass simple persons;"
   as if he had said, that they make preparation for their crimes by long
   meditation, and are always ready for any mischief; because they do not
   cease to search in every quarter for indirect methods of annoying those
   who are giving them no disturbance.

   5. They hatch the eggs of the basilisk. The Prophet proceeds farther,
   comparing the Jews not only to women, but to venomous beasts; so as to
   make it more evident that everything that proceeds from them is
   destructive and deadly. First, then, he says, that "they hatch the eggs
   of the basilisk;" because, as a viper cannot lay an egg that is not
   venomous, so they are so inured to wickedness, and so full of it, that
   they can throw out nothing but poison. [133]

   And weave the webs of spiders. By "the webs of spiders" he means that
   they are so barren and destitute of anything good, that even by the
   appearance of virtues they deceive. By two marks he describes wicked
   men; first, that the works which they perform manifest their corrupt
   nature; secondly, that they are of no value whatever, and. contribute
   nothing towards making them kind, amiable, charitable, and faithful to
   those with whom they have intercourse. I am aware that it is explained
   ill a different manner by other commentators; namely, that the wicked,
   while they are contriving the destruction of others, ruin themselves,
   and, while they think that they are industrious, labor fruitlessly and
   to no purpose; that "they are snared in their own nets," (Psalm 9:15)
   and "fall into the pit which they had digged." (Psalm 7:15) But I am of
   opinion that the Prophet meant what I have now said; namely, that the
   wicked do mischief in all places, at all times, and in all
   transactions, and that they never do anything good; and that every
   person who has anything to do with them will find them to be venomous
   and destructive. Such is the import of what he says, that in their eggs
   there lurks a deadly venom, and that, if they are broken, a serpent
   will come out of them.

   6. Their webs shall not be for clothing. He repeats and confirms the
   same statement, that everything that they attempt or undertake is
   always useless to mankind; because they purposely shrink from all acts
   of kindness. Now, it is an indication of a mind utterly abandoned, to
   devote themselves to evil deeds in such a manner, that no advantage of
   any kind can be expected from the life of him who desires to be barren
   and destitute of all justice. Others explain it, that they will toil
   unsuccessfully to acquire wealth and to rise to honor. But I consider
   the meaning to be more simple, that no man will "cover himself with
   their works," because in their texture there is nothing solid or
   durable. [134]

   By various modes of expression he inculcates the same thing, in order
   to demonstrate that their works yield no advantage whatever. But we
   were born for this end, that we should yield assistance to our
   neighbors, and, in our turn, contribute something to the general good.
   Thus they are savage beasts, and ought not to be called men, who are
   only skillful to do mischief, and labor with all their might to avoid
   doing good. he immediately adds, without a figure, that they are given
   up, and, as it were, devoted to iniquity.

   7. Their feet run to evil. In various ways he paints to us the picture
   of what may be called extreme wickedness; that is, when men, having
   shaken off and cast away from them the fear of God, throw themselves
   into every kind of wickedness, and break out into all cruelty,
   extortion, and outrage. He says that they run, because they are eager
   and hasten with excessive keenness to evil actions. Having formerly
   spoken of the "hands" and the "tongues," he likewise adds the feet, in
   order to show that they are proficients [135] in every kind of
   villainy, and that there is no part of their body that is entirely free
   from crime. Some are violent, but restrain their tongues. [136] Others
   resemble harpies, but are satisfied with the first prey that they meet
   with. But the Prophet says that his countrymen are swift of foot for
   committing robberies. [137]

   Wasting and destruction are in their paths. He means that, wherever
   they go, they will resemble wild beasts, which seize and devour
   whatever they meet with, and leave nothing behind, so that, by their
   terrific onset, they drive away every kind of animals from venturing to
   approach to them. Pliny makes use of the same comparison, when speaking
   of Domitian, whose arrival was like that of a savage beast. The same
   thing happens with other violent men, whom all avoid as wild beasts.
   And in this manner their ways are rendered desolate and solitary, when
   none have any intercourse with them.

   8. The way of peace they know not. Some give an ingenious
   interpretation of the word "peace" as meaning a "peaceful" conscience;
   because the wicked must endure continual agony. But the Prophet summons
   wicked men to judgment, in order to show, by the transgression of the
   Second Table, that they have no sincerity and no kindness, and, in a
   word, that they are astorgous without natural affection. He says that
   "they know not the way of peace;" because their cruelty deprives them
   of justice and equity, by which human society is maintained, the very
   food of which is mutual peace and kindness; for justice and integrity
   are nourished by peace. And if every person, with unbridled rage, rush
   on his neighbors and attack them, there is then open war; for harmony
   cannot be preserved among us, unless equity be observed by every
   individual. [138]

   And judgment is not in their steps. What he had just before said is
   expressed more clearly by the word "Judgment;" as if he had said, that
   they excite terror wherever they go, because they lay aside all
   integrity.

   Whosoever walketh by them. The last clause may be taken in various
   senses; either, "Whosoever walketh in them shall also be a stranger to
   peace," or, "He who falleth into the hands of the wicked shall find
   them to be savage and barbarous." Either of those meanings is
   admissible, and I do not think it worth while to dispute much about
   them. Thus, after having spoken in general terms, and after having
   shown that it is not God who prevents the Jews from being prosperous,
   the Prophet descends to particulars, by which he explains more fully
   the manner in which they have become estranged from God, and have
   rendered themselves unworthy of his favor.

   Here arises a difficulty; for Paul (Romans 3:17) quotes this passage
   for the purpose of condemning all mankind as being sinful and
   corrupted, and as having nothing good; while the Prophet appears to
   apply it especially to the men of his own time. But the answer is easy;
   for, while he expressly addresses the Jews, who thought that they were
   holier than other men, the Gentiles must also be included along with
   them. If it be objected that the Gentiles, while they live uprightly,
   "are a law to themselves," (Romans 2:14) and that "uncircumcision is
   counted as circumcision," (Romans 2:26) I reply that the Prophet
   represents God as complaining of all who have not been renewed by the
   Spirit of God. In this manner no man can be excepted, if he be viewed
   in his own nature; but the Prophet speaks of himself as not belonging
   to their number, because he had been regenerated and was guided by the
   Spirit of God.

   Paul's quotation of this passage was therefore appropriate; because he
   intended to show what sort of men they are whom God hath forsaken, and
   who are under the influence of their own nature. Although the depravity
   of men does not always break out into gross vice, and the Prophet's
   design is to rebuke a very corrupt age; yet whenever crimes become so
   prevalent, we may behold, as in a mirror, what a pool and how deep a
   pool of every evil thing is the nature of man. And yet this discourse
   was undoubtedly very distasteful to the Jews, who were puffed up with
   vain glorying of the family from which they were descended; but since
   even they were not spared by the Spirit of God, there is no reason why
   other nations, who are not less sinful by nature, should wallow in
   their pleasures.

   9. Therefore is judgment far from us. After having described how
   corrupt and depraved was the condition of that people, he likewise
   shows that the severe chastisements inflicted on them are richly
   deserved, that they may not complain of being treated with greater
   harshness and severity than was proper. Thus he has painted, as in a
   picture, those vices which were publicly known, that they might more
   fully perceive in how many and how various ways they were guilty before
   God; and now he again repeats that we need not wonder if God treat such
   obstinate dispositions with greater severity, and render to them a just
   reward. He says that "Judgment is far off, because they were the most
   wretched of all men, and had not God for their protector as formerly."

   And justice doth not overtake us. He employs the words "judgment" and
   "justice" as denoting God's guardianship, when he defends us, and shows
   that he takes care of us. He calls it "justice" when he defends us, and
   "judgment" when he revenges the injuries done to us. Here he declares
   that God had cast away the care of his people, and had deprived them of
   his countenance and aid, because they were unworthy of it; and hence we
   ought to observe the particle l kn (gnal ken) "therefore;" for he draws
   the conclusion that we ought not to blame God, as if he acted unjustly
   towards his people, since in so many ways they had insulted his
   majesty.

   Of the same import is what he adds, that while they look for light,
   continual darkness sits down upon them; for the metaphor shows that
   they were almost consumed by their calamities, and that, when they
   promised to themselves any alleviation, they were disappointed of their
   hope. Light is a word very frequently employed to denote prosperity,
   and darkness to denote adversity. He means, therefore, that it will be
   vain to expect that their condition shall be changed for the better;
   and his object is, that the people may learn to ascribe their
   calamities to themselves, and may not imagine that those calamities
   happen by chance, or that the Lord is excessively severe; for he always
   endeavors to bring his people to the doctrine of repentance.

   10. We grope for the wall like the blind. He explains the same thing by
   different forms of expression; for, in consequence of the grievous
   complaints which were heard among the people, he determined to omit
   nothing that was fitted to describe their calamities. It is perhaps by
   way of concession [139] that he mentions those things; as if he had
   said, "Our affairs are reduced to the deepest misery, but we ought
   chiefly to consider the cause, for we have deserved all this and far
   worse." But it is not a probable interpretation, that stupid persons
   are aroused to think of their evil actions; for, although they are
   abundantly disposed to complain, yet the devil stupifies them, so that
   the tokens of God's anger do not awaken them to repentance, he alludes
   to that metaphor which he employed in the preceding verse, when he said
   that the people were in darkness and obscurity, and found no escape;
   and. his meaning is, that they are destitute of counsel, and
   overwhelmed by so deep anguish that they have no solace or refuge. When
   a lighter evil presses upon us, we look around and hope to find some
   means of escape; but when we are overpowered by heavier distresses,
   despair takes from us all ability to see or to judge. For this reason
   the Prophet says that they have been thrown into a labyrinth, and are
   "groping."

   We stumble. The same thing is expressed, and even in a still more
   aggravated form, by this mode of expression, that, if they stir a foot,
   various stumbling blocks meet them on every hand, and, indeed, that
   there is no alleviation to their distresses, as if day had been changed
   into night.

   In solitary places as dead men. By "solitary places" I understand
   either gulfs or ruinous and barren regions; for in this passage I
   willingly follow the version of Jerome, who derives the word 'smnym
   (ashmannim) from 'sm (asham,)"to be desolate." The Jews, who choose to
   derive it from smn (shaman,) to be fat, appear to me to argue idly, and
   to have no solid ground for their opinion. They think that it denotes
   men, because smn (shemen) denotes "ointment," and say that this word is
   used for describing the Gentiles. But the true meaning of the Prophet
   is, that the Jews have been reduced to a wilderness, so that, shut out
   from the society of men, they resemble the dead, and have no hope of
   escape.

   11. We all roar like bears. He describes two classes of those who
   cannot silently endure their afflictions without making them known by
   external signs; for some howl fiercely, and others moan like doves.
   This latter metaphor was employed by him in describing the groans of
   Hezekiah, (Isaiah 38:14;) and this happens when we endeavor to restrain
   our grief, and yet cannot prevent the outward signs of grief from
   breaking out in spite of us. The meaning is, that sometimes the
   violence of their grief constrained them to utter loud cries, and
   sometimes they complained in low and murmuring sounds, but in both
   cases without avail, because their condition was not changed for the
   better.

   We looked for judgment. He again repeats that in vain they "looked for
   judgment and salvation," meaning that the people were deprived of the
   assistance of God, which he desired above all things; and he makes use
   of the word salvation, in order to describe more fully and completely
   what he formerly denoted by the word "justice," and now again by the
   word "judgment." Thence infer that it is by our own fault that we are
   wretched, and grow old and waste away in our wretchedness, till we are
   converted to God. We may indeed moan and howl, but can obtain no
   alleviation of our grief without repentance. There can be no end of our
   afflictions, so long as we provoke the Lord's wrath, and do not desire
   with the whole heart to be reconciled to him.

   12. For our iniquities are multiplied before thee. He confirms what he
   formerly said, namely, that the people act unjustly in accusing God of
   cruelty, and in not understanding that they are justly punished for
   their iniquities, the huge mass of which towers up to heaven; and in
   this sense the Prophet says that they "are multiplied." There is also
   much weight in the phrase "before thee;" for the Prophet descends into
   himself, and acknowledges the righteous judgment of God, which was
   hidden from men. Thus he intended to point out an implied contrast
   between the judgment of God and the judgment of men, who flatter
   themselves, and do not consider their sins; but God, who is a just
   judge, does not the less on that account reprove them, or pay any
   attention to the frivolous excuses under which they endeavor to shelter
   themselves. For this reason he does not reckon it enough simply to
   condemn the people, but says that they have "multiplied" their sins,
   that is, in many respects they are guilty before God. He acknowledges,
   therefore, that the Lord is righteous, and performs the part of an
   excellent judge; since nothing good or right is found among men; and
   therefore he adds, --

   Our sins have testified against us, (or, answer [140] to us.) Witnesses
   are not summoned, or brought from heaven; but the Jews are rebuked and
   condemned by the testimony of conscience. That mode of expression ought
   to be carefully observed; for it shows that God does not need many
   proofs, since our sins hold us to be sufficiently convicted. We must
   not, therefore, strive with God, as if he punished us unjustly, or
   chastised us too severely; for our sins openly proclaim what we are,
   and God does not need additional proofs.

   For our iniquities are with us. Instead of "with us," some render 'tnv
   (ittanu) "upon us;" but I choose rather to adhere to the strict meaning
   of the word. [141] Men practice evasions, and assume various shapes, in
   order to appear righteous; but in vain, for they carry with them their
   iniquities, from which they cannot extricate themselves; as God, in
   condemning Cain, (Genesis 4:7) declares that "sin keepeth watch before
   the door;" so that any one who despises the judgment of God shall in
   vain attempt to escape by his rebellion.

   And we know our sins. When he says that the Jews "know their sins," he
   does not mean that their hearts are truly affected by them, for in that
   case repentance follows; but he declares that, although they desire to
   escape the judgment of God, the testimony of their own conscience binds
   and holds them fast, so that it is vain for them to cavil or seek an
   excuse. He speaks in the first person, as if he were one of the great
   body of the people. This is very customary; but at the same time he
   shows that this evil prevails through the whole body to such an extent
   that not one member is whole or sound; and, although he may plead his
   own cause before God, yet, because iniquity is diffused through every
   part of the body, he acknowledges that he is one of the diseased
   members and is infected by the general contagion. Nor is there any
   contradiction in having formerly spoken of himself as not sharing the
   general guilt, and now laying aside all distinction, and including
   himself along with others.

   13. We have done wickedly. Here he enumerates certain classes of sins,
   in order to arouse the people more keenly to an acknowledgment of their
   sin. It must be regarded as monstrous, that men, who have been
   chastised and almost crushed by the hand of God, are still proud, and
   so obstinate that they cannot bend or be humbled by a conviction of
   their sin. The Lord endeavors to soften our obduracy by stripes and
   wounds; but when chastisements do us no good, our case must be given up
   as hopeless. Isaiah therefore labors to show how wretched is the
   condition of the people, who, while they endured severe hardships, yet
   murmured against God, and did not suffer themselves to be brought into
   a state of obedience. And therefore he frequently repeats this warning,
   and reproves sharply, in order to subdue this obstinacy of the people.

   And we have lied to Jehovah. By a variety of terms he rebukes their
   vices, and enumerates classes of them, after having pointed out in a
   general manner that corruption which everywhere prevailed.: Nor does he
   mention only slight faults, or those of a small number of persons, but
   a universal revolt. By these words he pronounces them to have been so
   deeply corrupted, that no sincerity, uprightness, fear, or conscience
   remained in them. For what is meant by "lying to God," but to revolt
   treacherously from him, as if all obedience were refused? Thus he does
   not reproach them with one or a few transgressions of the Law, but says
   that, like fugitives, they have forsaken God, so that they do not
   follow him when he calls.

   Conceiving and uttering from the heart. He now adds that they were
   devoted to the invention of mischief, and thoroughly imbued with
   falsehood; for "to utter a lie from the heart," is far worse than to
   tell lies thoughtlessly, or even to deceive when an occasion presents
   itself. [142] Nor is there any room to doubt that those reproofs
   grievously offended the Jews, who, puffed up with pride, imagined that
   they were exceedingly holy. But it was proper to treat their hypocrisy
   in this manner, because mere doctrine produced little effect upon them.
   Taught by this example, pastors, when they see the Church of God
   corrupt, and men pleasing themselves and flattering their vices, ought
   to make strenuous opposition, accompanied by loud and sharp reproof.

   14. And judgment is driven back. It is a mistake to suppose that the
   Prophet returns to his earliest subject, (Isaiah 1:5) and speaks of the
   punishments which the people had suffered at the hand of God; for he
   still proceeds with the preceding narrative, and explains the diseases
   under which the people labored, that they may see clearly that they are
   justly punished. But we must distinguish this verse from the ninth, in
   which he said that "judgment had gone back;" for there he declared that
   they were deprived of God's assistance, because they did not deserve to
   have him as the defender of their cause; but here he says that
   "judgment is driven back" in a different sense, that is, because they
   have overthrown all justice and equity among themselves. They have
   therefore received a just reward, because no justice of God has shone
   forth to render assistance, when they have banished far from them
   justice and equity; for in vain do we expect from God what we have
   refused to others and cast away from ourselves.

   In the street. That is, in a public place. He describes those places in
   which judicial sentences were pronounced. When he says that "truth is
   fallen in the street," he means that not only some private individuals
   have been corrupted, but the whole condition of the people is so
   thoroughly depraved as to leave no part sound; for, if some vices reign
   among the common people, some remedy may be obtained, so long as there
   is room for judgment; but if judgments are overthrown or corrupted, it
   follows that all things are infected by a universal contagion. He
   describes also their unbridled licentiousness, in not being ashamed of
   conduct openly wicked, and in not shrinking from the light and from the
   eyes of men.

   15. Truth faileth. Hence it clearly appears that Isaiah, in the
   preceding verse, did not speak of punishments; for, without
   interrupting the stream of his discourse, he proceeds to show that the
   people ought not to complain of the severity of chastisements, since
   they have so grievously offended and provoked God. He therefore
   confirms what he formerly said, that "truth hath fallen, that there is
   no place for equity;" and he enlarges this statement the more, by
   adding that he who hath withdrawn from evil hath become a prey. [143]
   Almost all the Jewish expositors, reading the two clauses
   consecutively, explain them thus: -- "Truth hath failed, and, by
   departing from evil, hath been made a prey." Why they adopt that
   meaning, I do not see.

   Jerome's exposition, which I follow, is much more correct; and
   appropriate; and a similar mode of expression is frequently employed in
   the Scriptures. Job is said to have been

   "an upright and perfect man, fearing
   God, and departing from evil." (Job 1:1)

   Solomon also says,

   "The fool is confident, but the righteous man looketh well to himself,
   and departeth from evil." (Proverbs 14:16)

   The Prophet means that all uprightness was so greatly abhorred, that
   the true worshippers of God, if any remained, were not permitted to be
   safe. As if he had said, "Whoever wishes to live among men must vie
   with them in wickedness," [144] according to the common proverb, "Among
   wolves we must howl; but he who wishes to live innocently shall be torn
   in pieces, as a sheep is torn by wolves." Finally, he describes the
   utmost pitch of wickedness; for he shows that "truth hath failed," so
   that no good man is allowed to remain among them; because every one
   that abstains front acts of injustice "lays himself open to be a prey."

   And Jehovah saw. This relates to the consolation of the people; for he
   declares that, although they have grievously offended, so that it may
   appear as if there were no room for pardon, still the Lord will have
   regard to his people, and, although he has inflicted very severe
   chastisements, will at length remember his covenant, so as to bring
   incredible relief by healing their wounds. He speaks here of a future
   period, and promises that one day, after calamities so numerous and
   diversified, the Lord will aid the people that are left; for the Jews
   would have lost heart, and would have been altogether discouraged, if
   the Lord had not brought that consolation.

   Thus men commonly rush forward, and throw themselves headlong into
   opposite vices; for, when they are reproved, they either grow obstinate
   and harden themselves, or are terrified and fall into despair. We must
   therefore observe carefully this order which the Prophet followed.
   First, it was necessary to reprove the Jews, that, being affected and
   laid low by repentance, they might cease to find fault with God; and,
   secondly, a mitigation of punishments, accompanied by salvation, is
   promised, that they might not be discouraged, but expect assistance
   from the Lord, who is unwilling that his Church should perish, and
   punishes his people for a time, in order that he may not suffer them to
   be ruined and destroyed.

   Yet if any one prefer to limit this dislike or displeasure of God to
   the "judgment," because he had good reason for abhorring a wicked
   people, I have no objection; as if he had said that God saw nothing in
   that people but what was ground of hatred. Hence it follows, that there
   was no other motive that prompted him to yield assistance, than because
   their affairs were utterly desperate.

   16. He saw that there was no man. Isaiah continues the same subject,
   but expresses more, and relates more fully what he had briefly noticed;
   for what he said in the preceding verse, that "it displeased the Lord
   that there was no judgment," might have been obscure. In this passage
   he repeats that the Lord saw that "there was no man" [145] to render
   assistance to the Church, and that he wondered. He makes use of the
   verb ystvmm (yishtomem) in the Hithpahel conjugation, [146] for the
   purpose of denoting that the Lord was the cause of his own
   astonishment; as if he had said, "He made himself astonished."

   He wondered that none came forward. Some think that mphgy (maphgiang)
   means an intercessor; but I think that the meaning is this, that there
   was none who endeavored to relieve their affliction, that there was no
   physician who applied his hand to this wound, and that for this reason
   God "wondered." The reason why he attributes to God this astonishment
   may be easily understood. By this rebuke he intended to put the Jews to
   shame, that they might not, according to their custom, resort to
   hypocritical pretenses for concealing their sins; and, because it was
   incredible and monstrous that there was not found in a holy and elect
   people any one that opposed injustice, he represents God as astonished
   at such a novelty, that the Jews may at length be ashamed and repent.
   Was it possible that there could be greater obstinacy of which they
   ought to be ashamed, since by their wickedness they moved God to
   astonishment?

   At the same time he rebukes their hypocrisy, if they pretend to have
   eminent piety and holiness, when God, after a diligent search, did not
   find even one upright man. He likewise praises and magnifies the
   unspeakable mercy of God, in condescending to rescue, as if from the
   depths of hell, a people whose condition was so desperate; for the Jews
   were undoubtedly reminded by these words in what manner they ought to
   hope for redemption; namely, because God is pleased to rise up
   miraculously to save what was lost. Besides, by the word "wonder" he
   describes also God's fatherly care. It is certain that God is not
   liable to those passions, so as to wonder at anything as new or
   uncommon; but he accommodates himself to us, in order that, being
   deeply moved by a conviction of our evils, we may view our condition
   with horror. Thus, when he says that "the Lord saw," he means that
   there is no help in our own industry; when he says that the Lord
   "wonders," he means that we are excessively dull and stupid, because we
   neither perceive nor care for the evils of our condition; and yet that
   our indifference does not prevent the Lord from rendering assistance to
   his Church.

   Therefore his arm brought (or, made) salvation to him. By these words
   he means that we ought not to despair, although we receive no
   assistance from men. Yet, reducing to nothing every other assistance,
   he pronounces the salvation of his own nation, and consequently of all
   mankind, to be owing, from first to last, to God's undeserved goodness
   and absolute power. Thus, in like manner as, by asserting that God is
   abundantly sufficient for himself, and has power and strength
   sufficient to redeem the Jews, he stretches out his hand to the feeble;
   so, by saying that men can do nothing to promote their salvation, he
   abases all pride, that, being stripped of confidence in their works,
   they may approach to God. And we must observe this design of the
   Prophet; for, in reading the Prophets and Apostles, we must not merely
   consider what they say, but for what purpose, and with what design.
   Here, therefore, we ought chiefly to observe the design of the Prophet,
   that in God alone is there sufficient power for accomplishing our
   salvation, that we may not look hither and thither; for we are too much
   disposed to lean on external aids; but that we ought to place the hope
   of salvation nowhere else than on the arm of God, and that the true
   foundation of the Church is in his righteousness, and that they do
   wrong who depend on anything else; since God has borrowed nothing from
   any but himself.

   The usefulness of this doctrine is still more extensive; for, although
   all remedies often fail us, yet the Lord will find sufficient
   assistance in his own arm. Whenever, therefore, we are destitute of
   men's assistance, and are overwhelmed by calamities of every kind, and
   see nothing before us but ruin, let us betake ourselves to this
   doctrine, and let us rest assured that God is sufficiently powerful to
   defend us; and, since he has no need of the assistance of others, let
   us learn to rely firmly and confidently on his aid.

   Yet we must keep in remembrance the universal doctrine, namely, that
   the redemption of the Church is a wonderful blessing bestowed by God
   alone, that we may not ascribe anything to the strength or industry of
   men. With abhorrence we ought to regard the pride of those who claim
   for themselves any part of that praise which belongs to God, since in
   him alone is found both the cause and the effect of our salvation.

   And his righteousness, it upheld him. Here arm denotes power and
   strength, and righteousness denotes the integrity which he displays in
   procuring the salvation of his people, when he is their protector, and
   delivers them from destruction. [147] When he says that "the arm of God
   brought to him salvation," this must not be limited to God, and ought
   not to be taken passively, as if God saved himself, but, actively; so
   that this salvation refers to the Church, which he has delivered from
   the bands of enemies.

   17. And he put on righteousness as a coat of mail. Here he equips God
   with his armor, for the purpose both of confirming more and more the
   confidence of believers, and of stripping all men of all confidence in
   their own strength. The meaning of the verse amounts to this, that God
   is in want of nothing for discomfiting his enemies and gaining the
   victory; because from his righteousness, power, and grace, and from his
   ardent love of his people, he will make for himself panoplian complete
   armor. And this is again worthy of remark; for, although we acknowledge
   that God is sufficiently powerful, yet we are not satisfied with it,
   but at. the same time seek other help. Thus our minds are always
   inclined to unbelief, so that they fasten on inferior means, and are
   greatly entangled by them.

   In order to correct this vice, Isaiah presents this lively description;
   as if he had said, "Know ye that God has in his hand all the safeguards
   of your salvation, and will be in want of nothing to deliver you in
   spite of enemies and bring you back to your native country; and
   therefore there is no reason why you should tremble." Besides, there is
   nothing to which we are more prone than to imagine that we bestow
   something on God, and thus to claim for ourselves some part of the
   praise which ought to remain undivided with him.

   When he clothes God with vengeance, and with indignation as a cloak,
   this relates to enemies, against whom God is said to be enraged for the
   sake of his people; and thus, the more that Satan labors and makes
   every effort against us, so much the more does God kindle with zeal,
   and so much the more powerfully does he rise up, to render assistance
   to us. Although, therefore, Satan and all the reprobate do not rest,
   but raise up obstacles of every kind to prevent our salvation, and even
   exert themselves furiously to destroy us, yet, by his power alone, God
   will defeat all their efforts.

   18. As if on account of recompenses. He confirms the statement of the
   preceding verse; for he shows what will be the nature of that vengeance
   with which he had clothed the Lord; namely, that he is prepared to
   render recompense to his enemies. We must attend to the reason why the
   Prophet describes the Lord as thus armed, indignant, and ready for
   vengeance. It is, because the salvation of the Church is connected with
   the destruction of the wicked; and therefore God must be armed against
   the enemies who wish to destroy us.

   Hence we see God's infinite love toward us, who loves us so ardently
   that he bears hostility to our enemies, and declares that he will
   render recompense to them. So strong is his affection to his little
   flock, that he sets a higher value on them than on the whole world.
   This is the reason why he says that he will render recompense to the
   islands, that is, to countries beyond the sea and far off; for, in
   order to deliver his people, he overthrew monarchies that were
   powerful, and that appeared to be invincible. But, although here he
   mentions none but mortal men, still we must begin with Satan, who is
   their head.

   19. Therefore they shall fear the name of Jehovah. He now testifies
   that this work of redemption shall be so splendid and illustrious, that
   the whole world shall wonder, behold, praise, and celebrate, and,
   struck with fear, shall render glory to God. It is uncertain whether he
   means the conversion of the Gentiles, or the terror with which God
   dismays his enemies. For my own part, I am more inclined to the former
   opinion, that, even to the utmost boundaries of the earth, the name of
   God shall be revered and honored, so that the Gentiles shall not only
   tremble, but shall serve and adore him with true repentance.

   For [148] the enemy shall come as a river. As to the reason now
   assigned, commentators differ. But the true meaning, in my opinion, is,
   that the attack of the enemy shall be so furious that, like a rapid and
   impetuous torrent, it shall appear to sweep away and destroy
   everything, but that the Lord shall cause it instantly to subside and
   disappear. It is therefore intended to heighten the description of the
   divine power, by which the vast strength and dreadful fury of the
   enemies are repelled, receive a different direction, and fall to
   pieces.

   A question now arises, "What redemption does the Prophet mean?" I
   reply, as I have already suggested on another passage, that these
   promises ought not to be limited, as is commonly done, to a single
   redemption; for the Jews refer it, exclusively to the deliverance from
   Babylon, while Christians refer it to Christ alone. For my part, I join
   both, so as to include the whole period after the return of the people
   along with that which followed down to the coming of Christ; for this
   prophecy was not fulfilled but in Christ, and what is said here cannot
   apply to any other. Never was the glory of God revealed to the whole
   world, nor were his enemies put to flight so as not to recover their
   strength, till Christ achieved a conquest and illustrious triumph over
   Satan, sin, and death.

   20. And a Redeemer shall come to Zion. He again confirms what he
   formerly said, that the people shall be delivered, and that God will be
   the author of this blessing. He bids the people, therefore, be of good
   cheer in their captivity, which shall not be perpetual; and next, he
   exhorts them to place the hope of redemption in God alone, that they
   may fix their minds solely on his promises. By the name Zion he denotes
   here, as in other passages, captives and exiles; for however far they
   had been banished from their country, still they must have carried the
   temple in their hearts.

   And to them who have turned away from iniquity. That the bastard
   children of Abraham may not apply indiscriminately to themselves what
   he has just now said, he proceeds to show to whom the redemption shall
   come, namely, to those only who have been truly consecrated to the
   Lord. It is certain that many returned from Babylon, who were not moved
   by any feeling of repentance, and yet who became partakers of the same
   blessing. But the Prophet speaks of the complete redemption which the
   elect alone enjoy; for, although the fruit of external redemption
   extends also to hypocrites, yet they have not embraced the blessing of
   God for salvation. The design of the Prophet is, to show that the
   punishment; of banishment will be advantageous, that God may gather his
   Church, after having purified it from filth and pollution; for we must
   always bear in remembrance what we saw elsewhere as to the diminution
   of the people.

   In this way the Prophet exhorts the elect to the fear of God, that they
   may profit by his chastisements. Hence infer, that we cannot be
   reconciled to God through the blood of Christ, unless we first repent
   of our sins; not that salvation, which is founded on the pardon of
   sins, depends on our repentance; but repentance is joined to it in such
   a manner that it cannot be separated. They whom the Lord receives into
   favor are renewed by his Spirit in such a manner as to abhor their
   vices and change their manner of life.

   Papists overturn the whole doctrine of salvation, by mingling and
   confounding pardon of sin with repentance; and not only they, but
   others also who wish to be thought more acute. [149] They acknowledge
   that a man is justified by free grace through Christ, but add, that it
   is because we are renewed by him. Thus they make our justification to
   depend partly on the pardon of sins and partly on repentance. But in
   this way our consciences will never be pacified; for we are very far
   from being perfectly renewed. These things must, therefore, be
   distinguished, so as to be neither separated nor confounded; and thus
   our salvation will rest; on a solid foundation.

   Paul quotes this passage, (Romans 11:26) in order to show that there is
   still some remaining hope among the Jews; although from their
   unconquerable obstinacy it might be inferred that they were altogether
   cast off and doomed to eternal death. But because God is continually
   mindful of his covenant, and "his gifts and calling are without
   repentance," (Romans 11:29) Paul justly concludes that it is impossible
   that there shall not at length be some remnant that come to Christ, and
   obtain that salvation which he has procured. Thus the Jews must at
   length be collected along with the Gentiles, that out of both "there
   may be one fold" under Christ. (John 10:16) It is of the deliverance
   from Babylon, however, that the Prophet treats. This is undoubtedly
   true; but we have said that he likewise includes the kingdom of Christ,
   and spiritual redemption, to which this prediction relates. Hence we
   have said that Paul infers that he could not be the redeemer of the
   world, without belonging to some Jews, whose fathers he had chosen, and
   to whom this promise was directly addressed.

   Saith Jehovah. By these words, in the conclusion of the verse, he sets
   a seal to the excellent sentiment which he has expressed.

   21. And I make this my covenant with them. Because it was difficult to
   believe what the Prophet has hitherto declared, therefore he endeavors,
   in various ways, to confirm the Jews, that they may rely with unshaken
   confidence on this promise of salvation, and may ascribe to God so much
   honor as to trust in his word. And we ought carefully to observe the
   word covenant, by which the Prophet points out the greatness and
   excellence of this promise; for the promises are more extensive, and
   may be regarded as the stones of the building, while the foundation of
   it is the covenant, which upholds the whole mass. He makes use of this
   word, therefore, that they might not think that it contained some
   matter of ordinary occurrence, and adds these confirmations, that,
   although the Lord did not immediately perform this, they might
   nevertheless expect it with firm and unshaken hope; and there appears
   to be an implied contrast, that believers may cheerfully look forward
   to the new covenant, which was to be established in the hand of Christ.

   My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words. What is now added may be
   thought to be feeble and trivial, when he enjoins the Church to be
   satisfied with the "word" and "Spirit;" as if this were a great
   happiness, to hang in suspense on nothing but God's promises. Yet
   although the Prophet commends the value and excellence of doctrine, I
   have no doubt that still it is not separated from its effect. But
   because God regulates and dispenses his grace in such a manner, that,
   as long as believers remain in this world, he always trains them to
   patience, and does not in every instance answer their prayers,
   therefore he brings them back to doctrine; as if he had said, "Thou
   wilt indeed find that I am kind to thee in various ways; but. there is
   no happiness which will be of greater importance to thee, or which thou
   oughtest to desire more earnestly, than to feel that I am present by
   the word' and the Spirit.'" Hence we infer that this is a most valuable
   treasure of the Church, that he has chosen for himself a habitation in
   it, to dwell in the hearts of believers by his Spirit, and next to
   preserve among them the doctrine of his gospel.

   Shall not depart out of thy mouth. Finally, he foretells that the Lord
   will never forsake his people, but will always be present with them by
   "his Spirit" and by "the word." The "Spirit" is joined with the word,
   because, without the efficacy of the Spirit, the preaching of the
   gospel would avail nothing, but would remain unfruitful. In like
   manner, "the word" must not be separated from "the Spirit," as fanatics
   imagine, who, despising the word, glory in the name of the Spirit, and
   swell with vain confidence in their own imaginations. It is the spirit
   of Satan that is separated from the word, to which the Spirit of God is
   continually joined. Now, when he quickens outward doctrine, so that it
   strikes root in our hearts, our condition is happy even amidst many
   afflictions; and I have no doubt that the Prophet expressly declares
   that, although God deals kindly with his Church, still its life and
   salvation shall be laid up in faith. Thus the new people is
   distinguished from the ancient people; for, as the kingdom of Christ is
   spiritual, so, since he has risen from the dead, believing souls must
   be raised up along with him. But now he promises that the Church will
   never be deprived of this invaluable blessing, but will be guided by
   the Holy Spirit and sustained by heavenly doctrine; for it would be of
   little avail that the gospel should once be offered to us, and that the
   Spirit should be given to us, if he did not dwell with us.

   Which I have put in thy mouth. The Prophet shows that God addresses us
   in such a manner that he chooses to employ the ministry and agency of
   men. He might indeed speak from heaven or send angels; but he has
   consulted our advantage the more by addressing and exhorting us through
   men like ourselves, that, by their voice and word, he may more gently
   draw us to himself. This order has therefore been established by him in
   the Church, that it is vain for those who reject his ministers to boast
   that they are willing to obey God; and therefore he commands us to seek
   the word and doctrine from the mouth of prophets and teachers, who
   teach in his name and by his authority, that we may not foolishly hunt
   after new revelations.

   My words shall not depart. The phrase, "shall not depart," is rendered
   by some in the imperative mood, for which it is well known that the
   future tense is sometimes used. But here a command or exhortation is
   not appropriate; for the Prophet promises that which God intends to
   fulfill. An exhortation may indeed be drawn from it, but the priority
   is due to the promise, which is to this effect, that the Lord will
   assist his Church, and will take care of it, so as never to allow it to
   be deprived of doctrine. To this, therefore, we ought always to look,
   when we are tempted by adversity, and when everything does not succeed
   according to our wish; for we must be supported and upheld by the word
   and the Spirit, of which the Lord declares that we shall never be left
   destitute.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [129] "Il n'a point change de nature." "He has not changed his nature."

   [130] "Que la moindre partie de leur corps est souillee d'extorsion."
   "That the smallest part of their body is tainted with extortion."

   [131] "Pour debatre." "To debate."

   [132] "De desloyaute et traison." "For disloyalty and treason"

   [133] "These are (paroimiode) proverbial expressions, and mean that bad
   men have taken destructive counsels, as if the eggs of serpents, which
   ought to be crushed by those who meet with them, were purposely hatched
   by some person, in order that poisonous animals might, in due time, be
   produced by them for the destruction of men." -- Rosenmuller

   [134] "Having introduced the spider's web, in connection with the
   serpent's egg, as an emblem of malignant and treacherous designs, he
   here repeats the first, but for another purpose, namely, to suggest the
   idea of futility and worthlessness. This application may have been
   suggested by the frequent reference to webs and weaving as conducive to
   the comfort and emolument of men; but spiders' webs can answer no such
   purpose. The idea that it is not fit or cannot be applied to this end,
   although not exclusively expressed, is really included in the general
   declaration that they shall not be so used  Alexander.

   [135] "Maistres passez." "Acknowledged masters."

   [136] "Mais c'est sans parler." "But it is without speaking.

   [137] "Pour piller et brigander." "For thieving and higbwayrobbery."

   [138] "J. D. Michaelis and Umbreit go to opposite extremes in their
   interpretation of the first clause. The former makes the way of peace
   denote the way to happiness; the latter understands the clause to mean
   that they refuse all overtures of reconciliation. The obvious and
   simple meaning is, that their lives are not pacific but contentious."
   Alexander.

   [139] "Comme s'il accordoit qu'elles fassent vrayes." "As if he
   admitted that they were true."

   [140] "A witness interrogated by a judge, or even speaking of his own
   accord, is said, nh, (gnanah,) to answer.' The same forIn of expression
   occurs in Isaiah 3:9; Jeremiah 14:7; Hosea 7:10." -- Rosenmuller

   [141] "Lowth translates 'tnv, (ittanu,) cleave fast unto us; but
   interpreters generally prefer the sense expressed in the English
   Version, (they are with us, that is, in our sight, or present to our
   memory.)"  Alexander.
   "Our sins are well known to us."  Doederlein

   [142] "What they think in their heart, and utter from the thought to
   speech and to action, that is, their thoughts, and words, and actions,
   are falsehoods."  Kimchi.

   [143] "If you render the Hebrew words thus, Withdrawing from evil, he
   maketh himself a prey,' that is, Whosoever shuns vices, exposes himself
   as a prey to the wicked,' you will have a meaning which leaves nothing
   to desire."  Rosenmuller.

   [144] "Doit neeessairement estre aussi mechant qu'eux." "Must
   unavoidably be as wicked as they are."

   [145] "And now, when God repents on account of the evil which he has
   brought on the people, he sees that there is not a righteous man to
   stand in the gap. (Ezekiel 22:30)"  Jarchi.
   "Rosenmuller, Umbrett, and others, follow Jarchi in supposing 'ys (ish)
   to be emphatic and to signify a man of the right sort, a man equal to
   the occasion. This explanation derives some color from the analogy of
   Jeremiah 5:1; but even there, and still more here, the strength of the
   expression is increased rather than diminished by taking this phrase in
   the simple sense of nobody. What was wanted was not merely a qualified
   man, but any man whatever, to maintain the cause of Israel and
   Jehovah."  Alexander

   [146] The verb 'stvmm (yishtomem) denotes a man who stands, and
   wonders, and remains silent through his wonder."  Jarchi

   [147] "De mort." "From death."

   [148] "Whether ky (ki) be rendered when or for, the sense remains
   essentially the same, because the one implies the other. The only
   weighty reasons for preferring the latter are, first, its natural
   priority as being the usual and proper sense, and then the simplicity
   of structure which results from it as being more accordant with the
   genius and usage of the language."  Alexander

   [149] "Et ce ne sont pas les ignorans seulement qui font cela, ains
   ceux qui veulent estre estimez les plus subtils entre eux." "And it is
   not ignorant persons only who do this, but those who wish to be
   reckoned the most ingenious among them."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 60.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 60:1-22

   1. Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the LORD is
   risen upon thee.

   1. Surge, splendida esto; quia venit splendor tuus, et gloria Iehovae
   super to orta est.

   2. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness
   the people: but the LORD shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
   seen upon thee.

   2. Quia ecce tenebrae operient terrain, et caligo populos; super to
   autem orietur Iehova, et gloria ejus super to videbitur.

   3. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the
   brightness of thy rising.

   3. Et ambulabunt gentes ad splendorem tuum, et reges ad fulgorem ortus
   tui.

   4. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves
   together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy
   daughters shall be nursed at thy side.

   4. Leva in circuitu oculos tuos, et vide. Omnes isti congregati sunt ut
   veniant ad to; filii tui longe venient, filiae tuae ad latus
   nutrientur.

   5. Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear,
   and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be converted
   unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.

   5. Tunc videbis, st splendesces, (vel, difflues,) expavesces ac
   dilatabitur cor tuum; quia ad to conversa fuerit copia maris, (vel,
   multitudo maris) opes gentium (vel, robur gentium) ad to venerint.

   6. The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian
   and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: they shall bring gold and
   incense; and they shall shew forth the praises of the LORD.

   6. Copia camelorum operiet to, pullorum Midian et Epha. Omnes e Saba
   venient, aurum et thus afferent, et laudes Iehovae annuntiabunt.

   7. All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the
   rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with
   acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.

   7. Omnes oyes Cedar congregabuntur tibi; arietes Nabaioth ministrabunt
   tibi; ascendent ad beneplacitum altaris mei; et domum gloriae meae
   glorificabo.

   8. Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their
   windows?

   8. Qui sunt isti qui instar nubis volant, et quasi columbae ad
   fenestras suas?

   9. Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first,
   to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto
   the name of the LORD thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he
   hath glorified thee.

   9. Me certe insulae expectabunt, et naves Tharsis, ut filios tuos
   abducant a longe; argentum eorum et aurum cum ipsis, nomini Iehovae Dei
   tui, et sancto Israel; quia glorificavit to.

   10. And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings
   shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my
   favour have I had mercy on thee.

   10. Et extruent filii alienigenae muros tuos, et reges eorum
   ministrabunt tibi; quoniam in ira mea percussi to, et in clementia mea
   misertus sum tui.

   11. Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be
   shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
   Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.

   11. Et aperientur portae tuae jugiter; die et nocte non claudentur, ut
   advehantur tibi opes (vel, robur) gentium, et reges eorum ducti.

   12. For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish;
   yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.

   12. Quoniam gens et regnum quod non servierit tibi peribunt; gentes,
   inquam, penitus abolebuntur.

   13. The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine
   tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and
   I will make the place of my feet glorious.

   13. Gloria Libani ad to veniet, abies, pinus, et buxus pariter, ad
   decus loci sanctitatis meae; nam locum pedum meorum glorificabo.

   14. The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto
   thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the
   soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of the LORD, The
   Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

   14. Et venient ad to humiles filii affligentium to, et incurvabunt se
   ad plantas pedum tuorum omnes qui to spernebant; et vocabunt to
   Civitatem Iehovae, Sion Sancti Israel.

   15. Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man went
   through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many
   generations.

   15. Pro eo quod fuisti derelicta ct exosa, ut nemo per to transiret,
   ponam to in magnificentiam perpetuam, gaudium generationis et
   generationis.

   16. Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the
   breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the LORD am thy Saviour and
   thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.

   16. Et suges lac Gentium, mammillam regum suges; et cognosces quod ego
   Iehova, servator tuus, et redemptor tuus fortis Iacob.

   17. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and
   for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers
   peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

   17. Pro aere adducam aurum, et pro ferro adducam argentum, et pro ligno
   ae, et pro lapidibus ferrum; et ponam praefecturam tuam, pacem; et
   exactores tuos, justitiam.

   18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
   destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls
   Salvation, and thy gates Praise.

   18. Non audietur amplius oppressio in terra tua, vastitas et contritio
   in terminis tuis; et vocabis Salutem muros tuos, et portas tuas Laudem.

   19. The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness
   shall the moon give light unto thee: but the LORD shall be unto thee an
   everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

   19. Nec erit tibi amplius sol in lucem dierum, nec splendor lunae
   lucebit tibi; quia erit tibi Iehova in lucem perpetuam, et Deus tuus in
   gloriam tuam.

   20. Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw
   itself: for the LORD shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of
   thy mourning shall be ended.

   20. Non occidet amplius sol tuus, nec luna tua occultabitur; quoniam
   Iehova erit tibi in lucem perpetuam, et finientur dies luctus tui.

   21. Thy people also shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the land
   for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may
   be glorified.

   21. Populus quoque tuus omnes justi, perpetuo haereditabunt terram,
   germen plantationis ejus, opus manuum mearum, ut glorificer.

   22. A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
   nation: I the LORD will hasten it in his time.

   22. Parvus erit in mille, exiguus in gentem robustam. Ego Iehova
   tempore ejus accelerabo hoc.


   1. Arise, be bright. He now shows what is the efficacy of that word of
   which he formerly [150] spoke; for he raises up a prostrate and
   afflicted Church, and restores her to her brightness; and, because he
   represents the person of God, he now declares his authority. For this
   reason he employs the form of command, that the word spoken might be
   more efficacious; as if, in the exercise of absolute power, he put the
   Church in possession of that happier condition which he had promised.
   The amount of what is said is, that believers may know that he does not
   scatter his words in the air, but speaks with effect.

   He bids her "arise," because he formerly told her to "lie down;" and
   these two words stand in contrast with each other. Of Babylon he
   formerly said, "Come down, sit in the dust." (Isaiah 47:1) Of the Jews
   themselves he said, "My people shall sit in the dust." On the other
   hand, he says, "Arise, arise, put on the garments of thy beauty."
   (Isaiah 52:1) Thus, by what may be called the stretching out of his
   hand, he lifts up the Church again, that she who had formerly been
   prostrated, and covered all over with filth and pollution, may regain
   her seat of honor.

   For thy brightness is come. That the darkness of afflictions may not
   overwhelm the Jews with despair, he says that the light which had been
   hidden would soon afterwards arise, alluding to the alternation of day
   and night. As if he had said, "The Lord, having compassion upon thee,
   will rescue thee out of this darkness in which thou liest; thou hast
   been sufficiently punished; it is time that thy condition should begin
   to be improved." By the word brightness, therefore, he metaphorically
   denotes salvation and prosperity, as by "darkness" he formerly denoted
   a calamitous state of the Church.

   The glory of Jehovah. He mentions at the same that this light will
   arise from no other quarter than from God's smiling countenance, when
   he shall be pleased to display his grace; for everything goes well when
   the Lord shines upon us by his light; and, when he turns away from us,
   nothing that can befall us is more wretched and unhappy.

   2. For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth. He now exhibits in a
   stronger light, by means of comparison, that grace which he formerly
   mentioned; that we may form some idea how much God loves his elect, and
   how extraordinary is the privilege which he bestows upon them. The
   amount of what he says is, that, while we are weighed down by
   innumerable afflictions, and while the whole world, as it were, sinks
   under them, God will take care of his people., in order to enrich them
   with various benefits. He shows, therefore, that the light of grace and
   favor, which he mentioned, will not be indiscriminately enjoyed by all,
   but will be peculiar to the people of God.

   We have said that the word "brightness" denotes a prosperous condition
   of the Church; but let us not judge of this condition from outward
   appearance; for the Prophet rises higher, and I have no doubt that his
   discourse relates to spiritual light and brightness. Otherwise that
   mode of expression which he afterwards employs, "The Gentiles shall
   walk to thy brightness," (verse 3) would not be appropriate. Besides,
   this is clearly demonstrated by the connection between this chapter and
   the preceding; for he says that this covenant is continued in the word
   and Spirit. Finally, from the contrast it may easily be inferred that
   the happiness promised to the Church is different from that which
   consists in meat and drink, or tranquillity and peace, and other
   conveniences; and indeed never afterwards was there any period in which
   the darkness of afflictions overwhelmed all the Gentiles, while the
   Jews enjoyed peace and prosperity. Since, therefore, the condition of
   the Church is separated from the whole world, that benefit which Isaiah
   puts into the possession of the Church is spiritual, and the brightness
   which he promises is spiritual; and consequently, these things relate
   to the spiritual kingdom of Christ, when the light of the Gospel shone
   in every part of the world, and foreign nations were enlightened by it.
   To this also relates what follows, --

   The Lord will arise upon thee; for although he shows that the favor of
   God will be visible by manifest tokens and effects, yet he does not
   leave out that which is of the greatest importance, that believers will
   truly feel that he is their Father, so as to expect salvation from him.
   Hence infer that we are overwhelmed by darkness till God shine upon us
   with the testimony of adoption by free grace. I speak of all mankind;
   for Isaiah informs us that this life-giving light proceeds from God
   alone, in order to declare that it is a special gift of God.

   Secondly, it ought to be observed that the Church alone, that is, the
   elect of God, are partakers of this brightness. Hence it follows, that
   it is not a common or natural gift, but a gift by which the Lord
   relieves us from an ordinary defect of human nature. Thus also we
   perceive that there is no light or brightness but in the Church; for
   the rest of men, though they think that they enjoy light and
   brightness, are overwhelmed by darkness, from which they cannot be
   extricated in any other way than by the light of the Gospel.

   And his glory shall be seen upon thee. He adds the word "glory,"
   because, after having embraced us by his favor, the Lord continues more
   and more to increase his acts of kindness toward us.

   3. And the Gentiles shall walk. He confirms what we have already said,
   that there is no other light of men but when the Lord shines on them by
   his word. All indeed acknowledge this; but they do not set so high a
   value as they ought on this benefit, and imagine it to be something of
   an ordinary kind, which naturally belongs to all men. But he shows that
   this grace is supernatural, and therefore it ought to be distinguished
   from nature; which is clearly shown by the repetition of the words upon
   thee, in the preceding verse.

   First, then, we ought to believe that this benefit comes from God
   alone; and secondly, that all are not indiscriminately partakers of it,
   but only the elect, on whom the Lord shines by undeserved favor, so as
   to take them out of the ordinary rank of men. This is done by Christ,
   who is called "the Sun of Righteousness," because we are enlightened as
   if by his rays. (Malachi 4:2) Besides, the Prophet declares that this
   favor shall be spread far and wide by the Jews; which is also intimated
   by the words of the covenant,

   "In thy seed shall all nations be blessed." (Genesis 22:18)

   To thy brightness. If one nation only had enjoyed the light, it would
   have been of no advantage to the rest; but, so far as the doctrine of
   the Gospel has been spread throughout the whole world, Judea has held
   out the light to the Gentiles formerly blinded, in order to point out
   the way. By making the brightness peculiar to a single nation, he shows
   that in no other way could the world be enlightened, or come to share
   in this benefit, than by seeking light from that word which proceeded
   from the Jews, and was heard at Jerusalem, where the lamp of the Lord
   was kindled, and where the Sun of Righteousness arose, that from it he
   might diffuse his light to all the ends of the earth, as we have
   formerly seen, "Out of Zion shall go forth the Law." (Isaiah 2:3) There
   is, therefore, no light but from the doctrine of the prophets; so that
   they who withdraw from it falsely boast of walking in the light.

   And kings to the brightness of thy rising. He alludes to the dawn; for,
   as the morningstar begins the day in one quarter only of heaven, and
   immediately the sun enlightens the whole world, so the daybreak was
   first in Judea, from which the light arose and was afterwards diffused
   throughout the whole world; for there is no corner of the earth which
   the Lord has not enlightened by this light. He mentions "kings," that
   they might not imagine that none but the common people would come to
   this light, but princes and nobles, who in other respects are greatly
   delighted with their high rank. But now he confers on the Church the
   very highest honor, that she shines with such brightness as to attract
   to herself nations and princes. He calls it "the light" of the Church;
   not that she has any light from herself, but borrows it from Christ, as
   the moon borrows from the sun.

   4. Lift up thine eyes round about. By a variety of expressions he
   confirms that promise of the restoration of the Church which appeared
   to be altogether incredible. Nor was it easy to convince the Jews of
   this, while the state of their affairs was so wretched and confused. At
   that time the kingdom of Judah alone remained, and grew less every day,
   till it was utterly ruined; but when the people were led into captivity
   amidst that frightful dispersion and melancholy ruin, everything was so
   desperate that it appeared as if the Church were entirely ruined. It
   was therefore proper to confirm this doctrine by a variety of
   expressions, that hearts naturally prone to distrust might no longer
   doubt. For this reason he leads the Jews to look at the event as
   actually at hand, though it was at a great distance; that they might
   not hesitate any more than if it were already placed before their eyes.

   He bids believers lift, up their eyes on high, that is, above human
   thought; for, so long as we fix them on the outward condition, we
   cannot obtain the fruit of these promises. He adds, "round about," that
   they may fully believe that the nations will come, not from one quarter
   only, but from every direction, that they may be united in one body.
   And not only does he promise a remedy and an end of the dispersion
   which was yet to take place, as it is said elsewhere, "He will gather
   the dispersed of Israel," (Psalm 147:2; Isaiah 56:8) but this gathering
   is more extensive; for it means that there will be a wonderful
   revolution in the world, so that they who formerly were strangers and
   dispersed shall be united in one body. Finally, it denotes the
   extension of the Church to the farthest boundaries of the earth. There
   is also an implied contrast, by which he points out the wretched and
   afflicted condition in which the world was, before it was gathered
   together under the direction of Christ.

   Thy sons shall come from far. Some think that by "sons" are meant those
   who are stronger and more steadfast in faith, and by daughters those
   who are weaker. But I do not think that the Prophet intended to convey
   such ingenious distinctions; [151] and therefore I consider the plain
   meaning to be, that both sons and daughters shall run together to the
   Church; that is, that the Church shall have sons and daughters, not
   only at home but abroad, and in the most distant parts of the world;
   that the womb of the Church shall not be limited to any corner of the
   world, but shall be extended as far and wide as there shall be space
   throughout the whole world.

   5. Then shalt thou see. These things appear, at first sight, to be
   somewhat inconsistent with each other, that formerly he spoke of the
   fact as present, and now foretells it as future. But formerly he spoke
   of the eyes of faith, which beholds those things which do not fall
   under the senses of men, and now he speaks of the actual event; or, at
   least, he intended by the present tense to point out the certainty; but
   now, in order that believers may continue to exercise patience, he
   limits the same statement. Besides, although those things which the
   Lord promises are concealed, for a time, from the eyes of men, yet
   believers perceive them by faith; so that they have a firm belief and
   expectation of the accomplishment of them, however incredible they may
   appear to others.

   Thou shalt shine, or, thou shalt overflow. As the verb nhr (nahar)
   signifies both "to shine" and "to overflow," so it may be rendered
   either way. [152] We may refer it to that joy with which the Church is
   filled and overflows, when it is enlarged in this manner, or to the
   ornament with which it shines and dazzles. [153]

   Thou shalt tremble. He now mentions "trembling," and connects it with
   splendor or joy; and this may appear to be inconsistent with the
   meaning assigned to the former clause. But I have no doubt that he
   intended, by this word, to express the astonishment and even amazement
   with which the Church shall be seized, when she shall perceive that
   this strange and unexpected honor has been obtained by her, and that
   she has been elevated to so high a rank of honor. As if he had said,
   "The extent of the work will be so great as to exceed thy expectation."
   It is not, therefore, the "trembling"' which is produced by some danger
   or some melancholy event, but such as commonly arises in matters of
   great importance, which exceed the capacity of our understanding, when
   we are struck with amazement, and almost think that we dream, and this
   "trembling" agrees very well with joy.

   6. A multitude of camels shall cover thee. The Prophet describes
   figuratively the glory of the Church, and accommodates his discourse to
   the time, and to the persons with whom he had to do. We must keep in
   remembrance what we have often said, that the prophets took into
   account the people whom they taught, and therefore mentioned customary
   transactions and wellknown ceremonies, that, under the figures of them,
   they might describe the spiritual worship of God. The Jews must be
   first instructed, and afterwards the Gentiles, to whom the truth of
   those things has come; as if he had said, that nations far distant
   shall come, with their wealth, into the power of God; for, when he
   foretells that the Church shall be enriched, this must not be
   understood as referring to the persons of men; but, on account of the
   unity of the Head and the members, what belongs to God and to Christ is
   transferred to the Church. Foolishly, therefore, do the Jews, under the
   pretense of this prophecy, devour with their insatiable avarice all the
   riches of the earth; and not less absurdly do the Papists torture these
   words to support their luxuries, wealth, and magnificence.

   He mentions "camels, frankincense, gold., and sheep," because he has in
   his eye what each country produces, in order to show that all will
   consecrate to God whatever they shall have in their power, and will
   offer themselves and all that they have as a sacrifice. Hence it ought
   to be inferred, that we cannot be truly converted to the Lord, without
   offering to him all our faculties; for these are "spiritual
   sacrifices," (1 Peter 2:5) which he demands, and which cannot be
   refused to him, if our hearts be dedicated and consecrated to him in
   sincerity. (Romans 12:1) Wicked men abuse the gifts of God for luxury
   and intemperance, and corrupt them, as far as lies in their power, by
   unworthy profanation; but good men, by using them with a pure
   conscience, dedicate them to the Lord. No one, therefore, can belong to
   God without dedicating and devoting to him all that he has.

   7. Kedar, Nebaioth. So far as relates to the countries which the
   Prophet here enumerates, it is unnecessary to explain in what place
   each of them is situated; but it ought to be observed, in passing, that
   he mentions here those countries which lay toward the East, and chiefly
   Arabia and neighboring places, which he describes under the names of
   "Kedar" and "Nebaioth." The Papists have also abused this passage, in
   order to prove that kings came from the East to offer gifts to Christ;
   and, in so doing, they make themselves exceedingly ridiculous, seeing
   that the Prophet speaks of all ranks of men. But they heap up, without
   judgment, all passages of this kind, in which mention is made of "gold"
   or "frankincense," as if the prophets meant those gifts which the magi
   offered. (Matthew 2:11) But in this passage there is no obscurity; for
   it means that everywhere men shall call upon God, and all foreigners
   shall assemble to worship him.

   They shall ascend to the good pleasure of my altar. Others render the
   words, "They shall ascend with good pleasure on my altar," and think
   (not altogether without reason, in my opinion) that it is a figure of
   speech by which words interchange their cases with each other, and
   that. the Prophet means that those sacrifices which shall be offered by
   the Gentiles will be acceptable to God. Others interpret rtsvn (ratzon)
   as if it were an adjective, which does not agree with the correct use
   of the language; for rtsvn (ratzon) signifies benevolence or favor. For
   this reason I consider the rendering which I have given to be
   preferable; namely, that "sacrifices shall ascend to the good pleasure
   of the altar;" and the meaning may be brought out in this manner, "They
   shall ascend to appease God; as it is for this purpose that an altar
   has been appointed, and sacrifices are offered, that God may be
   reconciled and favorable to men; and God also, according to his
   promise, accepts the sacrifices that have been offered on his altar;"
   for at that time the "altar" was the approach to obtain God's favor.

   Here the Prophet plainly expresses three things. First, when he says
   that "the sacrifices ascend," he alludes to the ancient ceremony, which
   was formerly observed by them in sacrifices; for they lifted up the
   slain beasts; by which they meant that all men ought to raise their
   hearts on high, that they might not keep their eyes fixed on the earth
   or look only at the sacrifice which was offered. Secondly, the Prophet
   says that those sacrifices are acceptable to God, that they may be
   distinguished from the profane offerings of the Gentiles, which were
   unaccompanied by faith. Thirdly, he says, "On the altar," which alone
   can "sanctify the offerings," (Matthew 23:19;) for all that was offered
   anywhere else was unholy and detestable. Besides, this figure ought to
   lead us to the truth; for Christ is the altar of God, and on him we
   must offer, if we wish that God should accept our sacrifices.

   And I will glorify the house of my glory. Under the glorification of
   the temple he declares the true restoration of the people; for the
   chief part of their happiness was, that the temple should stand, in
   which men called on God in a right manner; and we must begin with this,
   that God reigns amongst us, by which we are made truly happy. For this
   reason, when the Lord declares that the Church shall be restored, he
   mentions the temple, the glory of which he will restore; as if he had
   said, "My house is now exposed to the mockery of the Gentiles, but I
   will at length restore to it that glory of which it has now been
   deprived." It is evident from Zechariah, Haggai, and Malachi, that this
   was not completed immediately after the return of the people. We must
   not imagine that its true dignity consisted in that splendid building
   by which Herod cunningly endeavored to gain favor; and therefore the
   dignity or honor, which is here mentioned, was not manifested till God
   opened the gate of heaven to Jerusalem, and then openly called all the
   Gentiles to the hope of eternal salvation.

   8. Who are those? As the Prophet cannot satisfy himself in describing
   this gift of God, he breaks out into admiration, and exclaims, "Who are
   those?" This is far more forcible than if he had simply said that an
   inconceivable multitude was flying, and had even made use of the same
   metaphors. He intended, therefore, to describe how splendid this
   multiplication would be, when he could not find words sufficient to
   express it.

   That fly as a cloud. [154] It is generally thought that this denotes
   the Apostles, who, with incredible swiftness, made their way to the
   farthest boundaries of the world; and there is some plausibility in
   that interpretation. (Mark 16:15) But the Prophet speaks of a universal
   assemblage of the Church; for from every quarter men shall run to it
   readily and cheerfully.

   And as doves to their windows [155] The metaphor of "doves," which he
   employs, is highly appropriate to this subject; for, when they are
   dispersed through the fields, they appear not to differ at all from
   untamed birds; and yet they are domesticated, and have their
   pigeonhouse, to which they betake themselves, and in which they build
   their nests. Thus believers, enlightened by faith, begin to perceive
   their assembly, to which they fly from frightful dispersion. How
   necessary this warning was, will be readily perceived by all who shall
   take into account their wretched and alarming condition at that time;
   for, if the prophets, after having carefully instructed the Jews for
   many years, could gain very little or hardly any success, what was to
   be expected from the Gentiles, who were altogether alienated from God?
   Was it not paradoxon beyond all reasonable expectation, that the
   Gentiles would one day come into the Church? Yet the Prophet does not
   speak extravagantly, but is filled with such amazement that he leads us
   to admire it in the same manner.

   9. Surely the islands shall wait for me. After having employed every
   eulogium that he could find for extolling that wonderful benefit of
   restoration, Isaiah introduces God himself as speaking, that the
   discourse may carry greater weight. This "waiting" is supposed by some
   to denote desire; as if he had said that this is done, because nations
   beyond the seas shall, as it were, hunger after him; because they shall
   feel that they are destitute of life and salvation. Others view it as
   simply denoting hope. But sometimes it likewise means "to observe," in
   which sense David employs it. "Wicked men wait for my soul;" that is,
   "they lay snares for my life." (Psalm 56:6) In that sense it may be
   understood in this passage. "They shall wait for," that is, they shall
   observe my will; as servants are wont to comply with the will of their
   masters. Do not wonder, therefore, that so many shall flow into the
   Church; for "the islands," which at present sometimes despise and
   sometimes fight against me, shall be so attentive to me as to execute
   whatever I shall command. And indeed from the remainder of the verse it
   is manifest that he now speaks of that kind of obedience.

   And the ships of Tarshish. If it be thought preferable, the particle k
   (caph,) as, may be here supplied in this manner: "As the ships of
   Tarshish formerly traded with Judea, and brought what was necessary for
   building the temple and for the use of men, so they shall again renew
   their traffic, and that navigation which had been broken off shall
   bring them back to their former course. By "Tarshish," that is,
   Cilicia, he means, sunekdochikos by a figure of speech in which a part
   is taken for the whole, all the naval intercourse and all the traffic
   which they carried on with foreign nations. It may also be supposed
   simply to mean, "The ships of Tarshish, which now proudly despise my
   Church, shall be subjected to my authority, and shall bring sons to her
   from distant countries."

   Their silver and gold with them. He again repeats what he had formerly
   said, that the Gentiles shall yield obedience to God in such a manner
   as to offer themselves and all that they have. The Popish doctors, as I
   remarked a little before, display consummate impudence in abusing these
   proofs for defending that tyrannical and theatrical [156] display by
   which Roman antichrist, and his attendants, wish to attain fame and
   distinction. Abounding in luxury, adorning themselves with gold and
   jewels, and indeed with the attire of a harlot, they are not ashamed of
   representing the Holy Spirit as the author of this wickedness; so that,
   whenever gold and silver are mentioned in Scripture, they apply it to
   their luxury. In. this respect they certainly are very like the Jews,
   who rise to ecstatic delight at the mention of gold and silver, and
   hope to wallow in them, when Messiah comes. Thus the Papists think of
   nothing else than gold and silver, and their understandings are so much
   dazzled by that empty display that they cannot raise them to heaven.
   But such stupidity does not need a lengthened refutation.

   To the name of Jehovah thy God. The general meaning is, that God
   intends to elevate his Church to the highest honor, and to adorn her
   with necessary ornaments. And that believers may not have their minds
   disturbed by any doubt of so illustrious a promise, or ascribe anything
   to their own merits, God himself promises that he will be the author of
   this event, for he will glorify thee. Besides, the Prophet declares
   that the riches of the Gentiles, which he appeared to represent, a
   little before, as the prey of the Church or the prize of victory, shall
   be a sacred offering to God; and thus he states more clearly what I
   have said, that there is nothing which we ought to desire more
   earnestly than that the whole world should bow to the authority of God.

   10. And the sons of the stranger shall build thy walls. He continues
   the same subject. As he formerly said that foreigners shall submit to
   his authority, in order to build the temple; so he now says that "the
   sons of the stranger" shall bestow their labor in building the walls.
   Various are the comparisons by which he promises the restoration of the
   Church. It is customary in Scripture, when the Church is spoken of, to
   exhibit sometimes the temple, and sometimes Jerusalem. He promises that
   foreigners and strangers shall assist in rearing this building, that
   the Jews may not be terrified by their poverty or their small number,
   and consequently lose heart; for they might be tempted to distrust
   during the captivity, so that, though they hoped to return to their
   native country, still they might think that this could not be
   accomplished by them.

   Now, Cyrus accomplished it, when he supplied them with a large amount
   of gold and silver. But in him these things were merely shadowed out.
   They were actually fulfilled in Christ, to whose reign they must
   entirely relate; for, first, Christ employed a few apostles, (Matthew
   10:1) who could not be sufficient for so great a work; but afterwards
   he raised up strangers, from among whom he chose pastors, and wished
   that their foreign princes should be nursingfathers of the Church.

   With aggravated wickedness do the Papists pervert and corrupt this
   passage, by torturing it to uphold the tyranny of the Pope, whom they
   wish to possess supreme power over kings and princes. They speak
   impudent falsehood when they say that he is Christ's deputy; for
   Christ's "kingdom" is not of this world. (John 18:36) The Pope rules
   barbarously and tyrannically, and claims the power of changing and
   disposing of kingdoms. But kings submit to Christ in such a manner that
   they do not cease to be kings, but exercise all their power for
   preserving the worship of God and administering righteous government.

   Hence we see how much those persons are opposed to the kingdom of
   Christ who wish to snatch authority and power from kings, that they
   themselves may possess it. Hence also the Anabaptists may be refuted,
   who overturn political order so far as to imagine that kings cannot be
   Christians in any other way than by renouncing their own authority,
   since even in the royal rank God shows that he wishes to hold the
   highest place.

   For in my wrath I smote thee. Lest any one should object that it would
   have been easier to preserve the Church uninjured than to raise her
   from hell, God anticipates the objection, and shows that the Jews were
   justly afflicted in this manner, because he had been exceedingly
   provoked by their offenses; but he gives them good ground of hope,
   because he does not choose to demand the punishment which they had
   deserved, but will be satisfied, provided that a temporary chastisement
   shall humble them.

   In my kindness have I had compassion on thee. He reminds the Jews what
   is the cause of this change, that they may not judge of it according to
   their own apprehension. When kingdoms are changed, and frequently rise
   and fall, men think that these events happen by chance, and that it is
   the common lot of the world. The Jews might think the same thing, when,
   in consequence of the kingdom of the Babylonians having been
   overturned, they were restored to liberty. For this reason the Lord
   testifies that all these things are governed by his providence; that
   is, that they may not shut their eyes after the manner of heathens. It
   is as if he had said, "If thou inquire why thou hast endured so many
   afflictions, the reason is this, that I was angry with thee and
   punished thy transgressions. But if thou ask the cause of thy
   deliverance, my undeserved kindness, and not thy worthiness, or an
   accidental occurrence, was the cause." Accordingly, calamities do not
   happen by chance, nor is God angry without cause; and he is not angry
   to such a degree as not to leave room for his compassion. (Habakkuk
   3:2)

   11. And thy gates shall be open continually. The ordinary exposition of
   this verse is incorrect. The Prophet is generally supposed to mean that
   the Church will be perfectly safe under the Lord's protection and
   guardianship; for "open gates" indicate that danger is far off. But I
   think that the Prophet himself explains it; namely, that the gates
   shall be open, that riches may be brought into the city from every
   quarter. And as burdens are usually carried in the daytime, "The day,"
   he says, "will not be enough, so vast shall be the crowd of those who
   bring into it precious treasures, and therefore the carrying will be so
   constant that it will be necessary to keep the gates open night and
   day." [157]

   When he says that the riches of the Gentiles shall belong to the
   Church, let us not view this as referring to carnal luxury, but to
   obedience, which the whole world shall render to God in the Church; for
   he says that what is offered to God belongs to the Church, because here
   God has nothing separate from it.

   That their kings may be led. I prefer retaining the participial form
   which the Prophet employs, instead of following those who change it
   into a verb. Such commentators corrupt the Prophet's meaning, who
   expressly added this, because so great is the haughtiness of kings that
   they can scarcely endure to be led, but. rather, relying on their
   power, give free scope to their inclinations, and not only are driven
   along so as to be the sport of their passions, but., like violent
   torrents, drag others along with them. He shows, therefore, that these
   kings, though naturally haughty and ungovernable, shall submit to the
   authority of God and of the Church.

   12. For the nation and kingdom. The Prophet dwells largely on
   confirming the hearts of believers, that they may not doubt that the
   restoration shall be such as he has described. Those events were
   altogether incredible; and we ourselves, though we have obtained
   abundant confirmation of them from the actual event, (for they have
   been made manifest to the eyes of all,) yet, unless we are guided by
   the Spirit of the Lord, could hardly conceive of them in our mind. He
   shows, therefore, that there is no reason why the Jews should doubt as
   to the restoration of the temple, because the Gentiles will aid them to
   the utmost of their power But here Isaiah looks at something higher
   than the building of the visible temple; for he intends to speak of
   that obedience which kings and nobles and the common people render to
   the Church when they promote, as far as they are able, pure doctrine.

   Shall perish. He goes still farther, and confirms his statement the
   more by declaring that "the kingdoms and nations which will not serve
   the Church shall be destroyed." And if so dreadful a punishment was
   pronounced against those who did not aid the Church, what shall we say
   of the tyrants who rush upon her with furious attack, and labor with
   all their might to destroy her? If careless and slothful men do not
   pass unpunished, does not a fearful vengeance await the ungodly, who
   disturb and overturn the work of the Lord?

   The nations, I say, shall be utterly destroyed. What he had said in the
   singular number he immediately repeats in the plural, in order to show
   that even the whole world, if it be involved in the same guilt, shall
   likewise perish; for their multitude will not be able to prevent all
   who are estranged from God from perishing, and ungodly men will have no
   excuse for throwing obstacles in each other's way, or for encouraging
   each other to impiety and wickedness. Kings and nations are said, as we
   have already seen, to "serve the Church;" not that she exercises any
   dominion over them, but because God has committed to her the scepter of
   his word by which he rules.

   13. The glory of Lebanon. Isaiah again employs the metaphor which he
   formerly used, when he compared the Church of God to a building or a
   city. He enumerates those things which were necessary for building,
   such as "the fir-tree, the pine, and the box-tree," which grew in
   Lebanon, a forest abounding, as we know, in excellent trees.

   For the beauty of the place of my holiness. He means that all that is
   excellent and beautiful in Lebanon shall be carried into the Church.
   But it must be believed that these figures contain an emblematical
   reference to the spiritual worship of God; for the Lord adorns his
   Church with the title of a sanctuary, because he dwells in the midst of
   it. Yet he always alludes to the temple, so as to accommodate himself
   to the time and to ordinary custom. Thus he holds out to us the pattern
   of the temple which stood at Jerusalem, that under the image of it we
   may contemplate the "spiritual temple," (Ephesians 2:21) of which we
   are the "living stones" and the living substance. (1 Peter 2:5)

   For I will glorify the place of my feet. By "the place of his feet," he
   means that he dwells in the temple in such a manner that his majesty is
   not confined within it, (for he is not limited to so narrow a place;)
   and therefore his feet only, what may be called the smallest part, is
   there, that we may ascend to heaven, and not fix our whole attention on
   those outward signs by which we are instructed according to our
   capacity. Thus also in the Psalm,

   "Worship the footstool of his feet, for it is holy."
   (Psalm 99:5)

   And again,

   "We will worship in the place where his feet stood."
   (Psalm 132:7)

   Not that God's essence is divided into parts above and below, [158] but
   because by such means he lifts up his servants, as it were, from the
   feet to the head.

   14. And the sons of them that afflict thee shall come. He continues the
   same subject, for he shows how splendid will be this work of
   redemption; that is, that they who persecuted or despised the Church
   "shall come," so as to bow down humbly before her, and submit to her
   with their whole heart. By "the sons of them that afflict her," he
   means the persecutors and enemies who oppressed her. This was indeed
   partly fulfilled, when the Jews returned to their native country; but
   that return was nothing more than a dark shadow of the deliverance
   which we have obtained through Christ. These things were actually
   accomplished under the reign of Christ, yet so that the full
   accomplishment of them may be expected at; his second coming, as we
   have already said under a different passage.

   Some one will ask, "Is not this honor, of which the Prophet speaks,
   excessive and greater than ought to be given to the Church? for to bow
   down and prostrate ourselves are tokens of honor which no human being
   ought to receive." I reply, this honor is rendered, not to the members,
   but to the Head; that is, to Christ, who is worshipped in the Church;
   and this worship is rendered by those who formerly hated and persecuted
   him. Now we say that Christ is worshipped in the Church, not as the
   Papists do, who think that the honor which they bestow on that Roman
   idol is rendered to Christ. [159] They for whose sake these things are
   said reject and despise doctrine; for Christ is honored by those who
   obey his doctrine. And this is what the Prophet means, that they who
   were formerly alienated from it shall heartily submit, so as to obey
   Christ; for if Christ; has any majesty, it shines forth in the doctrine
   which he administers by the agency of men.

   They shall call thee the city of Jehovah. The Church had formerly been
   adorned with that title; but it was nearly obliterated when the city
   was destroyed, the temple thrown down, and the people carried into
   captivity. Jerusalem was no more, and nothing was to be seen in it but
   frightful desolation; and therefore he means that it shall be restored
   in such a manner that all shall acknowledge it to be the city of God.

   The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. He next speaks of the temple, that
   all may know that this high rank is ascribed to Jerusalem on account of
   the temple; that is, on account of the worship of God which the Lord
   established there.

   15. Instead of [160] thy having been forsaken and hated. The Prophet
   has in his eye that intermediate period which was already at hand; for,
   soon after his death, the people were deprived of their heritage and
   led into captivity, so that all thought that there was no remaining
   hope of their safety. Lest this thought should come into the minds of
   believers, by which they might be reduced to despair, "We are undone,
   there can be no remedy for affairs so desperate, and we ought not to
   hope for a better condition," he shows that those grievous calamities
   cannot prevent God from restoring them; for, although for a time, when
   the Lord chastised them, they appeared to be forsaken, yet it was easy
   for him to raise them again to prosperity and to a better condition
   than before.

   If any one object that this splendor of the Church was not of long
   duration, the reply is short. Although the people were afflicted in
   various ways after their return, and although even the Christian Church
   did not long retain its glory, yet those things which the Prophet
   foretold were fulfilled; for under the cross the glory of Christ shines
   forth, so that the name of God remains, and there is a people that
   calls upon him by faith. It ought also to be observed, that in
   consequence of our ingratitude, we do not obtain the fruit of those
   promises; for we interrupt the course of God's works, and deprive
   ourselves of the fruit of them by our malice. Besides, we ought always
   to keep in remembrance what I have so often said, that the Prophet does
   not speak of a few years or a short period, but embraces the whole
   course of redemption, from the end of the captivity to the preaching of
   the Gospel, and, finally, down to the end of the reign of Christ.

   16. And thou shalt suck the milk of the Gentiles. He speaks of the
   extension of the Church which he had formerly mentioned; but it was of
   great importance that the same things should be frequently repeated,
   because it appeared to be incredible that the Church, which had been
   reduced to calamities so great and so numerous, would be restored and
   spread throughout the whole world. Her condition was desperate; but at
   length, out of that slender remnant which had been, as it were,
   snatched from the burning, to the great astonishment of all she was
   restored, and her seed was spread far and wide through every part of
   the world. And therefore it is as if he had said, "Although thou art
   confined within narrow limits, and thou hast had no intercourse with
   the Gentiles, yet thou wilt obtain very abundant fruit from them."

   Thou shalt suck the breast of kings. [161] By "milk" and "breasts" he
   means nothing else than service and obedience, which the Gentiles shall
   render to the Church for supporting her offspring; for, having formerly
   said that at one birth she would bring forth innumerable children, he
   now gives them milk for nourishment till they grow up. And he speaks
   expressly of "kings," because it was more difficult to be believed.
   Here, too, in passing, "kings" are reminded of their duty; and if they
   wish to discharge it in a proper manner, they must be the servants of
   the Church; otherwise the Lord will call them to account. We see also
   what David says of them,

   "And now, O ye kings, be wise; and ye judges of the earth, be
   instructed. Serve Jehovah with fear, and rejoice with trembling."
   (Psalm 2:10,11)

   But we ought carefully to observe in what manner the Church sucks "the
   milk" and "the breasts" of the Gentiles; for she is not at liberty to
   exhaust the wealth of the whole world, but to preserve her own
   condition safe and sound. What is more inconsistent with the nature of
   a Church than to be an insatiable gulf, and to draw the wealth of all
   to herself? Those things, therefore, must relate to her spiritual
   condition, that God may be purely worshipped in her, that the ministry
   of the word may prosper and flourish, and that some discipline may be
   maintained, which shall serve as a bridle to restrain all. Yet let
   believers remember that (Acts 20:35) "it is more blessed to give than
   to receive," and that they ought to bear poverty so patiently as to
   enrich others abundantly with spiritual benefits.

   And thou shalt know that I Jehovah am thy Redeemer. At length he adds
   that what had been concealed for a time shall be made manifest, that
   the Jews were not elected in vain, because they shall know by undoubted
   experience that God takes care of their salvation. It may be asked, Did
   they not know this even before they were led into captivity? I answer,
   that captivity was like the thick darkness to which also the Prophet
   compared it in the beginning of this chapter. Since, therefore, during
   that harsh tyranny, they could not behold God's majesty and power, the
   Lord led them out into open day, not that faith gives way amidst
   afflictions, but that the feeling of faith is different from that of
   experience. When we appear to be ruined, faith raises itself above the
   present condition and the thick darkness in which we are involved; and
   if God restore us perfectly, then we see it, not by the eyes of faith,
   but by actual experience. And this is the clear knowledge of which he
   speaks; as if he had said, "When I shall have acted so kindly towards
   you, then you shall actually know that I am your Redeemer."

   The mighty one of Jacob. He expressly claims the title of "the mighty
   one of Jacob," because he had often shown that he was so; and not only
   had Jacob experience in various ways of the power of God, but Jacob's
   posterity had also known that in the power of God there was abundant
   protection. He therefore calls himself the "mighty one," that they may
   know that God will henceforth be to them what he formerly was to their
   fathers.

   17. For brass I will bring gold. He alludes to the building of the
   ancient temple, and compares it with the heavenly and spiritual temple;
   as if he had said, "When you shall be led into captivity, you will
   deplore the ruin of the temple, but I will cause you to build one far
   more excellent." Thus, "for brass I will bring gold, for iron silver,
   for wood brass, for stones iron;" that is, everything shall be full of
   magnificence and splendor in that temple which shall come in place of
   the former.

   We know that this prediction was never accomplished ill that external
   restoration of the people, or during the commencement of it, and even
   that the temple which was afterwards erected was far inferior to the
   former. It follows, therefore, that the Prophet, to whom a full
   redemption was exhibited in spirit, not only relates what shall happen
   immediately after the return of the people, but discourses concerning
   the excellence of the spiritual temple; that is, of the Church of
   Christ. We must, therefore, come down in uninterrupted succession to
   Christ, if we wish to understand this prophecy. In his reign these
   things were abundantly fulfilled, and the glory of the former temple
   was greatly surpassed; for the Lord poured out gifts of the Holy
   Spirit, which are more excellent than gold, silver, and jewels. We may
   therefore see the temple now built with precious stones, as was
   formerly said. (Isaiah 54:11, 12)

   I will make thy magistracy peace. [162] Instead of "magistracy" some
   render the word "tribute." I have no doubt that the Prophet intended
   indirectly to compare the wretched bondage of the people under which
   they were to be kept, with that preeminently high rank which they
   afterwards obtained. With "peace" and "righteousness" he contrasts the
   "magistrates" who exercised unjust rule, while they were harassed by
   the avarice and cruelty of the Babylonians.

   And thy exactors righteousness. He now shows that when their "exactors"
   shall have been exterminated, there will be no "magistracy" but that of
   "peace" and "righteousness." "They who shall have power over thee will
   observe righteousness and peace." This was more fully accomplished
   when, through Christ, we were delivered from the tyranny of the devil;
   for by the Gospel he set up a kingdom of righteousness which he has not
   yet completed; but we must look for his last coming so as to have our
   eyes eagerly fixed on it, and, in the meantime, must; be satisfied with
   those firstfruits.

   18. Oppression shall no longer be heard in thy land. Here he states
   more clearly what we have already said, namely, that, while the Prophet
   discourses concerning the prosperous condition of the Church, he
   indirectly contrasts the miseries and calamities by which they had been
   afflicted in various ways. He promises, therefore, that they shall
   never afterwards be subjected to such afflictions. Yet nevertheless
   various afflictions afterwards befell them. This is undoubtedly true;
   but the people were never scattered in such a manner as not to have
   some remaining form of the Church, and thus to enjoy peace, and to feel
   that they were protected and kept by the hand of God. These words did
   not contain a promise of exemption from every annoyance and distress;
   but by comparison they held out this solace for future evils, that God
   spares his Church, and consequently the Church shall be safe under his
   protection; and during the very course of the deliverance there was
   exhibited a striking proof of this peace, which the Prophet extols.
   Finally, we must always keep in remembrance what we have so often said,
   that; it is only in part that all these things are experienced by us;
   for the kingdom of Christ has not yet been completed.

   And thy gates Praise. He alludes, as we have often said already, to the
   building of the temple or the city, and shows that the Church shall be
   safe, not by means of walls, or towers, or any enclosures, but that,
   although there are no earthly defenses, there shall be abundance of
   safety and peaceful joy in God alone. Now he connects the safety of the
   Church with "peace" or "joy;" because she rejoices at being safe and
   sound, whereas formerly she lay silently in affliction and despair.

   19. and 20. And thou shalt no longer have the sun for the light of
   days. He teaches that the prosperity of the Church shall not be
   temporary, but permanent; for he distinguishes it from the ordinary
   condition of men, among whom there is nothing steadfast or permanent;
   because there is nothing under the sun, however well regulated, that is
   not subject to various changes. But we ought not to judge of the Church
   from the dangers of the present life; for she is preserved in the midst
   of the billows; as if he had said, "Do not judge of thy safety from the
   present appearance of things, but know that it is laid up in God. God
   will be thy sun, so that thou hast no need of borrowing light from the
   sun or the moon. Do not, therefore, dread any change or revolution of
   affairs; for thou shalt have a perpetual and unchangeable light."

   By these words the Prophet does not mean that the children of God shall
   be deprived of the ordinary advantages of life; for, since the Lord
   bestows them indiscriminately on all men, he certainly has appointed
   them also for his children, for whose sake, indeed, God created all
   things, since he exercises a peculiar care over them. But the Prophet
   intended to express a still greater blessing, which the children of God
   alone enjoy, namely, the heavenly Light, which ungodly men hate, and
   therefore cannot receive; for, although they enjoy the sun and other
   blessings, yet their happiness cannot be firm and enduring; because,
   being void of taste, they do not relish that which was of the greatest
   importance, that they have God for their Father.

   Thus he distinguishes the condition of the Church and of believers from
   the ordinary lot of men, that we may not judge of it from the
   revolution and change of events, and next that we may know that, amidst
   the thickest darkness, the fatherly kindness of God shines on
   believers, in order to cheer them. And, indeed, although all the
   elements either cease to discharge their duty, or threaten us with a
   melancholy aspect, yet it ought to be enough that God is reconciled to
   us. By a figure of speech, in which a part is taken for the whole, he
   includes, under the terms "Sun" and "Moon," the whole condition of man,
   which is continually undergoing change.

   21. Thy people also are all righteous. Here he shows what is the true
   establishment of the Church; namely, when she is purged of the ungodly,
   and none but righteous men have a place in her. Yet we know that, in
   the Church, hypocrites have always been mingled with the true children
   of God. We have said that this is a description of the whole reign of
   Christ, not such as it shall be at any one moment, but in its
   perfection. Christ began to do this at his coming, when he purged the
   Church. Hence also he calls the Church "a sieve," (Matthew 3:12)
   because by means of it the chaff is separated from the wheat; but he
   goes on from day to day in purifying it, and will go on till the day of
   harvest. Yet there must be much rubbish mixed with the wheat, which
   shall at length be removed on that day. Besides, there is an implied
   contrast between this people and that irreligious and unholy multitude
   which, by its defilement, had polluted the sanctuary of God. The use of
   the plural number appears to denote an assemblage of nations, when he
   says that all the peoples shall be righteous.

   They shall inherit the land for ever. I have no doubt that, in these
   words, the Prophet had his eye on Judea, and indirectly contrasted the
   time of restoration with the time of the captivity which was
   immediately at hand; as if he had said, "Though I drive out my people
   from their inheritance, yet after seventy years I will restore them,
   that they may possess it for ever." Besides, it ought to be observed
   that, when he limits to the "righteous" that promise which related to
   the people of Zion, there is implied a sort of correction, in order to
   exclude hypocrites, who falsely and unwarrantably are wont to
   appropriate to themselves what is said about the true children of God.

   This sentiment, therefore, agrees with these words, "How good is God to
   Israel, to those who are of an upright heart!" in which the Psalmist
   claims the name of "Israel," which all without exception had in their
   mouth, as belonging to none but God's sincere worshippers. (Psalm 73:1)
   Such is the import, in this passage, of the phrase, "Thy people," that
   is, the remaining portion which shall have been purged from its
   defilement. This was not, in every respect, fulfilled in the Jews; but
   a beginning was made with them, when they were restored to their native
   country, that, by their agency, the possession of the whole earth might
   afterwards be given to them, that is, to the children of God. For as he
   formerly spoke of the restoration of the temple, which was not complete
   at Jerusalem, but must be extended throughout the whole world, so the
   possession of this land must not be limited to Judea, since it is more
   extensive, and all men are called to it, that by faith they may be
   children of Abraham, and may thus become heirs of it. (Galatians 4:28)

   We must therefore observe carefully those modes of expression which are
   customary among the prophets, that we, nay understand their meaning,
   and not break off sentences, or torture them to meanings different from
   what was intended. Exceedingly unnatural and inconsistent with the
   style of the prophets is the interpretation of those who explain "the
   land" to mean heaven and the blessed life; for the land of Canaan was
   given to the children of God with this intention, that, being separated
   from the whole world, and having become God's heritage, they might
   worship him there in a right manner; and consequently, to dwell in the
   land by right of inheritance means nothing else than to remain in the
   family of God.

   The branch of his planting. When God declares that a new "branch,"
   which shall come forth, shall be the work of his hands, this tends to
   confirm the hope; [163] for it was impossible, to human view, that the
   Church should spring up again, which all perceived to be dead,
   especially while the root was hidden. Thus, in order that it may spring
   up, he says that God will be like a husbandman, who plants anew that
   which had been torn up and was withered. In a word, he declares that it
   will be a wonderful work of God, and not of men, that the Church shall
   be rescued from a wretched and harsh captivity; for she shall be raised
   up as from the dead. And indeed all that relates to the heavenly life
   was neither produced in us by nature nor obtained by our own strength,
   but flows and proceeds from God alone. What is here said universally
   concerning the whole body every person ought to apply to himself in
   particular; for we are God's "planting" before the world was made,
   (Ephesians 1:4,) and were afterwards ingrafted into Christ, and called,
   that we might have the testimony of our election and planting. Wicked
   men are not God's planting; and therefore Christ declares that "they
   whom his heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up." (Matthew
   15:13)

   That I may be glorified. At length he adds the end of the "planting,"
   that we may celebrate the perfections of God, (1 Peter 2:9) and may
   show forth his glory, as Paul beautifully explains. (Ephesians 1:12)

   22. A little one shall become a thousand. He again confirms what he
   formerly said, that, although they were few in number, yet the Church
   of God would be populous. When the Prophet foretold these things, there
   was still a vast multitude of people; but afterwards it was so greatly
   diminished that not more than a feeble remnant was left, as we have
   formerly seen. (Isaiah 1:9; 10:22) he declares that the small number
   shall be so much enlarged, that it shall afterwards be a vast body of
   people, and shall possess great strength. Let us consider that what was
   said to the Jews is now said also to us; that is, though we are few in
   number and inconsiderable, and appear to be very near destruction,
   still the Church cannot perish, but will be enlarged and multiplied
   till it become very numerous; for it is God's planting, and therefore
   we must not judge of it from the multitude or strength of men.

   I Jehovah. He now shows the reason why he said all those things which
   we have formerly seen; namely, that we may not suppose him to be like
   men, whose labors and efforts quickly pass away. Although they wish to
   change the condition of any kingdom or of the world, they will
   accomplish nothing; but the Lord changes everything in an instant. He
   does not speak, therefore, of an ordinary government, but of a
   wonderful work by which the Lord delivers and multiplies his Church.

   Will hasten it in her time. He says that "he will hasten this," so as
   to complete it. But he employs a little word which deserves notice as
   to the time of the Church; for the relative is in the feminine gender,
   and is improperly interpreted by some as relating to God. [164] The
   Prophet means that there is a fixed time when the Church shall be
   delivered; and in this way he exhorts believers to patience, that they
   may not plunge headlong, but depend on God's eternal purpose, who knows
   how to arrange every moment in an appropriate manner.

   First, then, he describes the seasonableness and the time when it is
   advantageous that. the Church shall be delivered. We do not indeed
   perceive this, for we would wish to obtain instantly God's promises,
   and are impatient of delay; but the Lord delays for our benefit, and
   because the time is not yet come. Next, he speaks of haste; for the
   Lord appears to us to be idle and inactive, when he prolongs the time;
   although he hastens to accomplish everything at the proper season,
   which he knows.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [150] "Au chapitre precedent." "In the preceding chapter."

   [151] "There is more probability in Knobel's suggestion, that the
   Prophet made his picture true to nature by describing the sons as
   walking, and the daughters as being carried."  Alexander.

   [152] "As to nhr, (nahar,) the difficulty is in choosing between its
   two admitted senses of flowing,' (Isaiah 2:2) and of shining,' (Psalm
   34:5) The former is preferred by Jerome, who translates it afflues; by
   Junius and Tremellius, who have conflues; and by the English and Dutch
   versions, the latter of which refers it to the confluence of crowds
   produced by any strange occurrence. Vitringa makes it mean to flow out,
   and Lowth to overflow with joy. But all the latest writers of authority
   give the word the same sense as in Psalm 34:5, which is well expressed
   by Henderson in strong though homely English, thou shalt look and
   brighten up." -- Alexander

   [153] "Qui la fait reluire." "Which causes it to shine."

   [154] "It is a fine conception of Vitringa, that the ships expressly
   mentioned in the next verse are here described, on their first
   appearance at a distance, resembling with their outspread sails and
   rapid course a fleecy cloud driven by the wind, and a flight of doves
   returning to their young."  Alexander.

   [155] "The ideas conveyed by the images here employed are those of
   number and velocity. The reference to the doves is beautifully
   illustrated by a passage in Morier's Second Journey in Persia. Speaking
   of the pigeonhouses near Ispahan, he says: They are large round towers,
   rather broader at the bottom than the top, crowned by conical
   spiracles, through which the pigeons descend. Their interior resembles
   a honey-comb, pierced with a thousand holes, each of which forms a snug
   retreat for a nest. The extraordinary flights of pigeons which I have
   seen upon one of these buildings, afford perhaps a good illustration of
   Isaiah 60:8. Their great numbers, and the compactness of their mass,
   literally looked like a cloud at a distance, and obscured the sun in
   their passage.' The persons referred to are the Jews, who now flock in
   immense numbers from all quarters to the land of their fathers, and
   Jerusalem, the summit of their earthly joy."  Henderson.

   [156] "Et Persiques." "And Persian."
   The reference is to that love of display which has always prevailed in
   Asiatic countrics.  Ed.

   [157] "The idea conveyed by the gates never being shut is that of the
   continual arrival of the multitudes referred to. Modern travelers
   greatly complain of the inconvenience to which they are put, when they
   do not reach Jerusalem before the gates are closed. The Apostle John
   borrows the language in his description of the New Jerusalem.
   (Revelation 21:25) The ideas of security and peace are implied."
   Henderson.

   [158] "L'une au ciel, l'autre en terre." "One in heaven, another on
   earth."

   [159] "Qui pensent bien honnorer Christ en s'agenouillant derant cette
   idole de Rome pour baiser sa pantoufle." "Who think that they greatly
   honor Christ by kneeling before that idol of Rome to kiss his slipper."

   [160] tcht (tachath) merely expresses in exchange for:' though, from
   the circumstances of the case, the idea of compensation is necessarily
   implied."  Henderson. "The tcht (tachath) may express either simply a
   change of condition, (whereas,) or the reason of the change, (because,)
   or the further idea of equitable compensation."  Alexander

   [161] "Sucking the breast of kings is unusual, and by fastidious
   critics may be deemed unnatural: but the phrase is merely employed for
   the purpose of carrying out more efficiently the idea taught in the
   preceding clause; namely, that abundant contributions would be made by
   the inhabitants of the different nations to the sustenance of Zion."
   Henderson

   [162] "And I will make thy magistracy peace;' that is, I will make thy
   rulers peaceful. phqdh, (pekudah,) which evidently corresponds to the
   Greek word episkope, is here used by metonymy for, 'nsy phqdh, (anshe
   pekudah,) or vly phqdh, (begnale pekudah,) those who discharge the
   office of magistracy, as in 2 Kings 11:18, Ezekiel 44:11. The
   Septuagint renders it archontas, thy rulers,' and the Chaldee phrnsk,
   (parnasach,) thy governors.'"  Rosenmuller

   [163] "Pour conformer l'esperance des fideles." "To confirm the hope of
   believers."

   [164] Our author adds that he prefers "ejus tempore" to "suo tempore,"
   for the sake of avoiding ambiguity; but unfortunately neither the Latin
   language nor his own vernacular could distinguish between the English
   pronouns his, her, and its.  Ed.
   "The pronouns in the last clause are correctly explained by Knobel as
   neuters, referring to the whole preceding series of prophecies.
   (Compare Isaiah 43:13; 46:11) The his in the common version is
   equivalent to its in modern English, a possessive form apparently
   unknown to the translators of the Bible."  Alexander.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 61.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 61:1-11

   1. The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because the LORD hath
   anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to
   bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the
   opening of the prison to them that are bound;

   1. Spiritus Domini Iehovae super me; ob id unxit me Iehova; ad
   praedicandum afflictis misit me; ad obligandum contritos corde, ad
   publicandam captivis libertatem, vinctis apertionem careeris.

   2. To proclaim the acceptable year of the LORD, and the day of
   vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;

   2. Ad publicandum annum beneplaciti Iehovae, et diem ultionis Deo
   nostro, ad consolandum onmes lugentes.

   3. To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty
   for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the
   spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness,
   the planting of the LORD, that he might be glorified.

   3. Ad constituendum lugentibus in Sion, ut dem illis decorem pro
   cinere, oleum gaudii pro luctu, pallium laetitiae pro spiritu angusto,
   ad vocandum eos arbores justitiae, plantationem Iehovae ad
   glorificandum.

   4. And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former
   desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of
   many generations.

   4. Et aedificabunt deserta seculi, priscas solitudines erigent; et
   instaurabunt urbes vastitatis, solitudines multarum aetatum.

   5. And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the
   alien shall be your ploughmen and your vinedressers.

   5. Et stabunt alieni, et pascent oves vestras; et filii alieni erunt
   agricolae et vinitores vestri.

   6. But ye shall be named the Priests of the LORD: men shall call you
   the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and
   in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.

   6. Vos autem sacerdotes Iehovae vocabimini; ministri Dei nostri dicetur
   vobis; substantiam Gentium comedetis, et in gloria eorum vos
   elevabitis.

   7. For your shame ye shall have double, and for confusion they shall
   rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess
   the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them.

   7. Pro pudore vestro erit duplex praemium, et pro ignominia exultabunt
   de portione eorum; quia in terra eorum duplicia possidebunt, et gaudium
   perpetuum illis erit.

   8. For I the LORD love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering; and
   I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting
   covenant with them.

   8. Quia ego Iehova diligens judicium, odio habens rapinam in
   holocausto, et constituam opus eorum in veritate, et foedus perpetuum
   feriam eum ipsis.

   9. And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their
   offspring among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them,
   that they are the seed which the LORD hath blessed.

   9. Et cognoscetur in Gentibus semen eorum, et germina eorum in medio
   populorum. Omnes qui viderint eos cognoscent eos quod semen sint
   benedictum Iehovae..

   10. I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall be joyful in my
   God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath
   covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh
   himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her
   jewels.

   10. Gaudens gaudebo in Iehova; exultabit anima mea in Deo meo; quoniam
   induit me vestibus salutis, indumento justitiae circumdedit me: quasi
   sponsum ornavit me, et quasi sponsam ornatam monilibus suis.

   11. For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth
   the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord GOD will
   cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.

   11. Quoniam sicut terra profert germen suum, et sicut hortus germinare
   facit semen suum; ita Dominus Iehova germinare faciet justitiam et
   laudem coram omnibus gentibus.


   1. The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah. As Christ explains this passage with
   reference to himself, (Luke 4:18) so commentators limit it to him
   without hesitation, and lay down this principle, that Christ is
   introduced as speaking, as if the whole passage related to him alone.
   The Jews laugh at this, as an illadvised application to Christ of that
   which is equally applicable to other prophets. My opinion is, that this
   chapter is added as a seal to the former, to confirm what had hitherto
   been said about restoring the Church of Christ; and that for this
   purpose Christ testifies that he has been anointed by God, in
   consequence of which he justly applies this prophecy to himself; for he
   has exhibited clearly and openly what others have laid down ill an
   obscure manner.

   But this is not inconsistent with the application of this statement to
   other prophets, whom the Lord has anointed; for they did not speak in
   their own name as individuals, or claim this authority for themselves,
   but were chiefly employed in pointing out the office of Christ, to whom
   belongs not only the publication of these things, but likewise the
   accomplishment of them. This chapter ought, therefore, to be understood
   in such a sense, that Christ, who is the Head of the prophets, holds
   the chief place, and alone makes all those revelations; but that
   Isaiah, and the other prophets, and the apostles, contribute their
   services to Christ, and each performs his part in making known Christ's
   benefits. And thus we see that those things which Isaiah said would be
   accomplished by Christ, have now been actually accomplished.

   On that account Jehovah hath anointed me. This second clause is added
   in the room of exposition; for the first would have been somewhat
   obscure, if he had said nothing as to the purpose for which he was
   endued with the Spirit of God; but now it is made far more clear by
   pointing out the use, when he declares that. he discharges a public
   office, that he may not be regarded as a private individual. Whenever
   Scripture mentions the Spirit, and says that he "dwelleth in us,"
   (Romans 8:11; 1 Corinthians 3:16) let us not look upon it as something
   empty or unmeaning, but let us contemplate his power and efficacy.
   Thus, after having spoken of the Spirit of God, the Prophet next
   mentions the "anointing," by which he means the faculties which flow
   from him, as Paul teaches that the gifts are indeed various, but the
   Spirit is one. (1 Corinthians 12:4)

   This passage ought to be carefully observed, for no man can claim right
   or authority to teach unless he show that he has been prompted to it by
   the Spirit of God, as Paul also affirms that "no man can call Jesus
   Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." (1 Corinthians 12:3) But, it will be
   said, we see that almost all men boast of having the Spirit of God; for
   the Pope, and the Anabaptists, and other heretics and fanatics, have
   his name continually in their mouth, as if they were governed by him.
   How, then, shall we judge that any man has been sent by God, and is
   guided by his Spirit? By "anointing;" that is, if he is endued with the
   gifts which are necessary for that orate. If therefore, having been
   appointed by the Lord, he abound in the graces of the Spirit and the
   ability which the calling demands, he actually has the Spirit. And if
   he wish to make profession of enjoying that teacher, and if he have no
   doctrine, [165] let him be held as an impostor.

   He hath sent me to preach. The Prophet does not claim for himself right
   and authority to teach, before he has shown that the Lord "hath sent
   him" The authority is founded on his having been "anointed," that is,
   furnished by God with necessary gifts. We ought not to hear him,
   therefore, as a private individual, but as a public minister who has
   come from heaven.

   To the afflicted. Some render it, "To the meek;" and both ideas are
   conveyed by the word nvym (gnanavim). But I preferred to adhere to the
   former signification, because the Prophet is speaking of captives and
   prisoners. Yet I think that he includes both; for he means those who,
   while they are altogether forsaken and abandoned, are also wretched in
   themselves. Christ is promised to none but those who have been humbled
   and overwhelmed by a conviction of their distresses, who have no lofty
   pretensions, but keep themselves in humility and modesty. And hence we
   infer that Isaiah speaks literally of the Gospel; for the Law was given
   for the purpose of abasing proud hearts which swelled with vain
   confidence, but the Gospel is intended for "the afflicted," that is,
   for those who know that they are destitute of everything good, that
   they may gather courage and support. For what purpose were prophets,
   and apostles, and other ministers, anointed and sent, but to cheer and
   comfort the afflicted by the doctrine of grace?

   To bind up the broken in heart. Numerous are the metaphors which the
   Prophet employs for explaining more clearly the same thing. By "binding
   up," he means nothing else than "healing," but now he expresses
   something more than in the preceding clause; for he shows that. the
   preaching of the word is not an empty sound, but a powerful medicine,
   the effect of which is felt, not by obdurate and hardhearted men, but
   by wounded consciences.

   To proclaim liberty to the captives. This also is the end of the
   Gospel, that they who are captives may be set at liberty. We are
   prisoners and captives, therefore, till we are set free (John 8:36)
   through the grace of Christ; and when Christ wishes to break asunder
   our chains, let us not refuse the grace that is offered to us. It ought
   to be observed in general, that the blessings which are here enumerated
   are bestowed upon us by heavenly doctrine, and that none are fit for
   the enjoyment of them but those who, conscious of their poverty,
   eagerly desire the assistance of Christ, as he himself says,

   "Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
   and I will relieve you." (Matthew 11:28)

   2. To proclaim the year of the good-pleasure of Jehovah. Here he
   expressly mentions the time of bestowing such distinguished grace, in
   order to remove the doubts which might arise. We know by daily
   experience how numerous and diversified are the anxious cares which
   distract the heart,. He affirms that he is the herald of future grace,
   the time of which he fixes from the "goodpleasure" of God; for, as he
   was to be the Redeemer of the Church by free grace, so it was in his
   power, and justly, to select the time.

   Perhaps he alludes to the Jubilee, (Leviticus 25:10) but undoubtedly he
   affirms that we must wait calmly and gently till it please God to
   stretch out his hand. Paul calls this year "the time of fullness."
   (Galatians 4:4) We have likewise seen that the Prophet says, "Behold,
   now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation." (Isaiah
   49:8) Paul applies this to his own preaching; for, while the Lord
   addresses us by the Gospel, the door of heaven is thrown open to us,
   that we may now, as it were, enter into the possession of God's
   benefits. (2 Corinthians 6:2) We must not delay, therefore, but must
   eagerly avail ourselves of the time and the occasion when such
   distinguished blessings are offered to us.

   And the day of vengeance to our God. But those expressions appear to be
   inconsistent with each other, namely, "The day of goodpleasure," and
   "The day of vengeance." Why did Isaiah join together things so
   opposite? Because God cannot deliver his Church without showing that he
   is a just judge, and without taking vengeance on the wicked. He
   therefore employs the term "goodpleasure," with reference to the elect,
   and the term "day of vengeance," with reference to the wicked, who
   cease not to persecute the Church, and consequently must be punished
   when the Church is delivered. In like manner Paul also says, that "It
   is righteous with God to grant relief to the afflicted, (2
   Thessalonians 1:6) and to reward the enemies of believers who unjustly
   afflict them;" and the Jews could not expect a termination of their
   distresses till their enemies had been destroyed.

   Yet we ought to observe the cause of our deliverance; for to his mercy
   alone, and not to our merits, or excellence, or industry, must it be
   ascribed, he appears, indeed, as I briefly remarked a little before, to
   allude to the Jubilee; but above all things we should attend to this,
   that our salvation lies entirely in the gracious will of God.

   To comfort all that mourn. We ought to keep in remembrance what we
   formerly remarked, that the end of the Gospel is, that we may be
   rescued from all evils, and that, having been restored to our former
   freedom, and all tears having been wiped from our eyes, we may partake
   of spiritual joy. And if we are not partakers of so great a benefit, it
   must be ascribed to our unbelief and ingratitude, by which we refuse
   and drive away God, who freely offers himself to us.

   3. To appoint to the mourners in Zion. He proceeds with the same
   subject; for he means that the punishment which was to be inflicted on
   the people shall be such as still to leave room for forgiveness. And,
   in order more fully to convince them of it, he says that the Lord has
   charged him with this office, that he may proclaim this deliverance;
   and not to himself only, but also to others, till the chief messenger
   arrive, namely, Christ, who actually bestows and exhibits what God at
   that time commanded to be made known for a future period. Yet he means
   that the "mourning" shall not hinder God from giving ground of joy,
   when he shall think proper; for "to appoint" has the same meaning as
   "to fix the time," that the tediousness of delay may not discourage
   them.

   That I may give to them beauty for ashes. By the word, give he speaks
   with commendation of the efficacy of the prediction, that they may be
   fully convinced of the event. The allusion is to the ancient customs of
   the Jews, who, when any calamity pressed hard upon them, sprinkled
   ashes on their heads, and wore sackcloth. (Esther 4:3) By these he
   denotes the filth and mourning which necessarily attend the wretched
   condition of the people, and contrasts them with the joy and gladness
   which they shall have when they are restored to liberty. I think that
   we ought not to pass by the allusion contained in the words ph'r (peer)
   and 'phr (epher;) for, by the mere transposition of letters, he
   intended to denote very different things, and, by an elegant inversion,
   a change of condition.

   Trees of righteousness. By these words he points out the restoration of
   the people; as if he had said, "Whereas they had formerly been rooted
   out and resembled a dry stock, they shall be planted and settled." Thus
   he reminds them that they ought to contemplate the divine power, so
   that, though they are slain and dead, still they may confidently hope
   that they shall be restored so as to take root and to receive strength
   and increase. From this ought to be drawn a universal doctrine, namely,
   that there is no other way in which we are restored to life than when
   we are planted by the Lord. We are indeed called his "planting,"
   because he elected us from the beginning. (Ephesians 1:4) But there is
   also another kind of "planting" which follows the former, namely, the
   Calling, by which we are ingrafted through faith into Christ's body.
   The Lord does this by the agency and ministry of the Gospel; but it
   must be wholly ascribed to him, for "it is he alone that giveth the
   increase." (1 Corinthians 3:7) We must always bear in mind the
   emblematical meaning of the first deliverance as illustrating the
   spiritual kingdom of Christ,.

   He gives the appellation of "trees of righteousness" to those in whom
   the justice of God or good order shines forth. Yet let us know that the
   Lord adopts us on this condition, that we shall become new creatures,
   and that true righteousness shall reign in us. And hence it follows
   that we are by nature depraved and corrupted, and cannot yield fruit in
   any other way than by being changed and planted by the Lord. This sets
   aside the vain and haughty opinion of the Papists, who, by contriving
   either preparations or the aids of free will, claim what belongs to God
   alone; for if we are planted by the Lord, it follows that we are by
   nature dry and unfruitful.

   To glorify him. This is the design of our "planting;" but we have
   already spoken of these things in expounding the twenty-first verse of
   the preceding chapter.

   4. And they shall build the deserts of the age. He goes on to describe
   more largely that restoration of the Church; and chiefly with this
   view, that the Jews may entertain confident hope of deliverance,
   because those promises appeared to be altogether incredible. And this
   is the reason why he adorns with extensive and magnificent terms that
   benefit of redemption. It is a mistake to suppose that these words,
   "the age" and "many ages, relate to a future period; as if he had said
   that the building of which he speaks shall be firm and permanent. The
   Prophet's meaning was widely different; for he shows (as I have
   explained at another passage) that the longcontinued ruins of the city
   shall not prevent it from rising anew. When the inhabitants of any
   city, scattered in all directions, have been absent for a very long
   time, there can be no hope of rebuilding it; just as no person in the
   present day takes any concern about rebuilding Athens. Thus, when the
   Jews had been banished into a distant country, and Jerusalem had been
   forsaken for seventy years, who would have hoped that it would be built
   by the citizens themselves?

   For this reason Isaiah employs the designations of "deserts of the age,
   ancient wildernesses, cities of desolation, wildernesses of many ages,"
   in order to show that all this cannot prevent the Lord from restoring
   the city to be inhabited by his elect at the proper time. Yet these
   statements ought also to be accommodated to our time, so that, although
   the Lord permits his Church, when it has fallen down, to lie long in
   ruins, and though there is no remaining hope of rebuilding it, yet we
   may strengthen our heart by these promises; for it is God's peculiar
   office to raise up and renew what had formerly been destroyed, and
   devoted as it were to eternal rottenness. But we have formerly treated
   of these matters at the fiftyeighth chapter.

   5. And strangers shall stand. He means that foreigners and strangers
   shall be ready to yield obedience to them; for, in consequence of their
   being at that time separated from the rest of the nations, none was
   willing to assist them, and therefore he says that "strangers stand;"
   that is, are ready to meet and assist them. As to what follows, about
   "feeding sheep" and "cultivating fields and vines," these are
   metaphorical expressions; for the Prophet treats of the kingdom of
   Christ, which is spiritual, but by means of these figures describes its
   perfect happiness, that we may understand it better from examples drawn
   from those things which are known to us. Let us therefore understand
   that we shall be truly happy when Christ shall exercise his dominion
   over us; for in this way shall we likewise obtain, beyond expectation,
   many advantages of which the children of Adam are justly deprived.

   6. But ye shall be called the priests of Jehovah. This verse sheds
   somewhat more light on the preceding; for in the second part of it the
   Prophet foretells that believers shall enjoy the riches of the
   Gentiles, and shall be raised to glory as their successors. The Jews,
   indeed, seize eagerly on such declarations, and already devour by
   covetousness the wealth of all the nations, as if they would one day
   possess it, and vaunt as if the glory of the whole world would become
   their own.

   But there are chiefly two things that ought to be observed in these
   words, that we may more fully understand them. First, the prophets,
   when they wish to describe the glory and happiness of the Kingdom of
   Christ, borrow comparisons from human affairs. Secondly, when they
   speak of the Church, they connect the Head with the members in such a
   manner that sometimes they look more at the Head than at the members.
   We must not understand the enjoyment of the wealth of others to mean
   that they who are converted to Christ shall seize on the wealth, or
   glory, or rank of others, which is most inconsistent with true
   religion; but because all things shall be brought under the dominion of
   Christ, so that he alone shall hold authority and rule. And that is
   what I have already said, that he looks both at the members and the
   Head. But when they come into the power of Christ, they are called
   ours, because Christ possesses nothing separate from his Church.

   In the same manner it is said elsewhere, (Isaiah 45:14) that the
   enemies of Christ "shall kiss his feet and supplicate pardon," although
   this is done in the Church, in which they acknowledge Christ and yield
   to his doctrine. Thus Isaiah shows what the Father will give to the
   Son, who has lawful authority over the whole world, (Matthew 28:18) and
   to whom

   "all things must be made subject." (Hebrews 2:8)

   Yet we must not omit what I mentioned a little before, that God gives
   large and kind support to his elect in the world, in order that they
   may feel that their condition is far better than that of unbelievers;
   for, though they are in want of many things, yet, being content with a
   little, they cheerfully give thanks to God, so that their hunger is
   better than all the abundance of unbelievers.

   Priests of Jehovah. By this term he shows that the condition of the
   people shall be far more excellent than formerly; as if he had said,
   "Hitherto the Lord had chosen you to be his heritage; but he will adorn
   you with gifts much more excellent, for he will elevate you to the
   honor of the priesthood." Although the whole people was "a kingdom of
   priests," (Exodus 19:6; Deuteronomy 33:10) yet we know that the tribe
   of Levi only discharged this office; but the Prophet declares that in
   future it shall be common to all. This was not manifested but under the
   reign of Christ. The restoration of the Church, indeed, began at the
   time when the people returned from Babylon; but at the coming of Christ
   believers were at length adorned and honored by this dignity; for all
   the saints have been consecrated to Christ, and discharge that office.
   To this belong the words of Peter,

   "Ye are a holy nation, a royal priesthood." (1 Peter 2:9)

   What is the nature of this kind of priesthood ought to be carefully
   observed; for we must no longer offer to God earthly sacrifices, [166]
   but men must be offered and slain in obedience to Christ, as Paul
   declares that he slew the Gentiles by the sword of the Gospel, that
   thenceforth they might obey the Lord. [167] (Romans 15:16)

   Hence infer how childish is the folly of the Papists, who abuse this
   passage to prove their priesthood; for the Pope and his lackeys ordain
   priests to sacrifice Christ, not to teach the people. But Christ
   offered himself "by eternal redemption," (Hebrews 9:12) and he alone
   has once exercised this priesthood, and commands that the priest of the
   sacrifice shall be offered to us by the doctrine of the Gospel. Those
   persons, therefore, who usurp this office, and wish to repeat what he
   has completed, are guilty of sacrilege.

   But every person ought to offer himself, (Romans 12:1) and all that he
   has, in sacrifice to God, that he may exercise this lawful priesthood;
   and next, ministers, who have been specially called to this office of
   teaching, ought to make use of the sword of the word to slay men and
   consecrate them to God. Lastly, those are lawful ministers who do not
   of themselves attempt or undertake anything, but faithfully and
   diligently execute the commands which they have received from God.

   7. Instead of your shame. He confirms the former statement, in which he
   said that believers who, clothed with sackcloth and covered with ashes,
   mourned, shall be sprinkled with the oil of gladness. This change of
   mourning into joy is again promised.

   There shall be a double reward. Some interpret the word double as
   meaning that they who have been redeemed by God shall be happy both
   before God and before men. But I do not know that there are solid
   grounds for that interpretation. I choose rather to adopt a more simple
   view; as if the Prophet had said, "The prosperity of the Church shall
   be so great as togo far beyond all the calamities and afflictions by
   which she is now oppressed." If, therefore, she is now weary of her
   condition, she ought to look to that day when she shall be most happy,
   as Paul contrasts "an eternal weight of glory" with "the momentary
   lightness of afflictions." (2 Corinthians 4:17)

   And instead of disgrace they shall rejoice in their portion. Wicked men
   vaunt over us and indulge in wantonness, because they think that they
   have the superiority; but the Lord promises that ere long he will cause
   good men, rescued from their tyranny, to obtain their portion. This
   began to be done, indeed, when the people returned from captivity; but
   a clearer proof has been exhibited in Christ, and is exhibited every
   day, and will at length be completed at his last coming, when all
   things shall be fully renewed, and the wicked shall be thrown down,
   that we may obtain the inheritance of the world. This is the reason why
   he says, by way of acknowledgment, that the earth is the portion of
   those wicked men; for they now boast that they are the lords of the
   world, but they shall at length feel that it belongs peculiarly and
   specially to the children of God.

   And they shall have everlasting joy. This may relate to the outward
   condition of the Church; ibr he daily supplies his people with ground
   of thanksgiving; but as they must also devour many griefs, and are
   surrounded by manifold sorrow, this prediction is not fulfilled but
   when joy of spirit reigns and holds the pre-eminence in our hearts,
   accompanied by that "peace which (as Paul says) surpasses all
   understanding," (Philippians 4:7,) which the children of God alone
   enjoy when they have the testimony of adoption, He calls it
   everlasting, in order to shew how greatly it differs from the joy of
   wicked men, which is momentary and quickly passes away, and is even
   changed into "gnashing of teeth." (Matthew 8:12.)

   8. For I Jehovah love judgment. He not only confirms what he promised
   in the name of the Lord, but likewise exhorts the Jews to repent, and
   shews whence they ought to expect salvation, and what and how great is
   the Judge with whom we have to do; for lie reasons from the nature of
   God in what manner they ought to regulate their life, that they may not
   by their wickedness reject the grace that is offered to them.

   Under the word judgment he includes all that is just and equitable; for
   he contrasts this word with the useless inventions of the Jews, by
   which they thought that they satisfied God, and at the same time
   concealed their malice. The Lord cares not, as we have often seen, for
   such masks and vain pretences, but demands true cleanness of heart and
   hands pure from all unrighteousness. He who wishes to obtain the
   approbation of God for himself and for all that he does must have an
   upright heart and an unblemished life.

   And hate robbery in the burnt-offering. By a single part he
   figuratively denotes all hypocritical worship of God; and under
   "burnt-offering" is included every kind of sacrifice. Nothing is more
   abominable than when men, from cheating and robbery, sacrifice to God,
   or when they mingle their lies, hypocrisy, and impurity of heart, with
   their sacrifices, or corrupt the worship of God by basely defrauding
   him. This vice abounds not only in a single age, but at all times; for
   all men pretend to worship God, and even the wicked are ashamed of not
   having an appearance of religion, the impression of a Divine Ruler
   being so deeply engraven on the hearts of all that it cannot be erased.
   Yet the greater park of men sport with God, and endeavor to satisfy him
   by childish trifles.

   Isaiah therefore condemns and abhors this hypocrisy, and teaches that
   the Lord demands from us "mercy rather than sacrifice." (Hosea 6:6;
   Matthew 9:13; 12:7.) We cannot worship God in a right manner, if we do
   not observe the Second Table, and abstain from all dishonesty and
   violence; for he who defrauds or injures his neighbors does violence
   also to God. In a word, the design of the Prophet is to teach what is
   the true character of repentance; namely, when, laying aside hypocrisy,
   and dismissing all inventions, the worshippers of God cherish natural
   kindness to one another.

   And I will establish their work in truth. Some explain it to mean the
   "reward." of work. But I rather think that it denotes all the
   undertakings of life, to which the Lord promises a prosperous issue.
   The undertakings of men succeed very ill; because they do not choose to
   ask counsel of God, or attempt anything under his guidance. Thus they
   are justly punished for their rashness; because they trust in their own
   counsels, or depend on a blind stroke of fortune, in which there is no
   reality whatever, but only a deceitful shadow. But that they who are
   guided by the Spirit of God, and who commit themselves wholly to his
   protection, should succeed prosperously and to their wish, is not at
   all wonderful; for all prosperity flows from his blessing alone.

   By the word truth is meant a uniform course; for even unbelievers are
   often puffed up with transitory joy, but it speedily vanishes away.

   And will make an everlasting covenant with them. In the conclusion of
   the verse he assigns the cause of the stability. It is because God is
   pleased not once only to stretch out his hand to them, but to be the
   continual guide of the journey. And the true support of our
   perseverance is, that he deigns to enter into an everlasting covenant
   with us, in which he voluntarily makes himself our debtor, and freely
   bestows upon us all things, though he owes us nothing whatever.

   9. And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles. Here the Prophet
   treats more clearly of the extension of the Church, which at that time
   might be said to be confined within a narrow corner of the earth, and
   afterwards, as we have already seen, was exceedingly diminished and
   impaired. (Isaiah 1:9; 10:22.) Isaiah therefore discourses concerning
   the Church, which, after having suffered so great a diminution, would
   be spread throughout the whole world, so as to be visible to all the
   nations. And yet this did not happen even in the reign of Solomon, when
   the Jews flourished most in wealth and splendor. (1 Kings 10:21, 27.)
   Now this appeared to be altogether incredible; and that is the reason
   why the prophets take such pains to convince men of it, and repeat it
   very frequently, that the Jews may not measure this restoration by
   their own understanding or by the present appearance of things.

   A question now arises, When did these things happen? I reply (as I have
   often done before) that they began when the people returned to their
   native country; for at that time, and in uninterrupted succession, they
   experienced the manifold kindness of God towards them. But as nothing
   more than feeble sparks appeared, the full brightness shone forth in
   Christ, in whose reign those things are entirely accomplished; for
   where there was the utmost barrenness of godliness, the offspring of
   Abraham sprouted, because foreigners were ingrafted by faith into the
   elect people. Thus foreign and barbarous nations acknowledged that the
   Jews were the blessed seed of God, (Genesis 22:18,) when they united
   with them in the same confession of faith; nor was this fulfilled but
   once only, but is in course of being fulfilled every day.

   As to the Jews going before, and holding the first rank in God's
   covenant, this ought to be ascribed to the mercy of God, and not to
   their own excellence, as Paul (Romans 3:2) teaches; for, after having
   shown that by nature they differ nothing at all from the Gentiles, and
   after having subjected them to the same condemnation, he likewise
   teaches that they hold this privilege of pre-eminence, because they
   were the very first that received the word of God and the promises. But
   this proceeded from God's undeserved kindness, and not from their
   merits or excellence.

   10. Rejoicing I shall rejoice in Jehovah. He represents the Church as
   giving thanks to God, in order to convince them more fully of the truth
   of what he formerly said. It may be regarded as (hupotutosis) a lively
   description, by which the thing is, as it were, painted and laid before
   the eyes of men, so as to remove all doubt; for by nature we are prone
   to distrust, and so fickle, that we place confidence rather in the
   inventions of men than in the word of God. As to this form of
   confirmation, we have spoken at chapter [10]12:1; [11]26:1, and at
   other passages.

   For he hath clothed me. These things were still, indeed, at a great
   distance, but must have been seen and understood by the eyes of faith;
   as the eyes should undoubtedly be raised to heaven, when the Prophet
   discourses concerning salvation and righteousness. Nothing is visible
   here, and much less could so great happiness have been perceived by the
   senses, while everything tended to destruction. But because even now we
   do not see any such beauty of the Church, which is even contemptible in
   the eyes of the world under the revolting dress of the cross, we need
   faith, which comprehends heavenly and invisible things.

   With the garments of salvation. He connects "righteousness" with
   "salvation," because the one cannot be separated from the other.
   "Garments" and "mantles" are well-known metaphors. It is as if he had
   said, that righteousness and salvation had been bestowed upon them.
   Since the Lord bestows these benefits, it follows that from him alone
   we should seek and expect them.

   He hath adorned me. The metaphor is supposed to be drawn from priestly
   ornament; and accordingly there are some who speculate here about the
   priesthood of Christ. But I do not think that the Prophet spoke so
   ingeniously; for he brings forward the comparison of the bridegroom and
   the bride [168] Formerly the Church lay in filth and rags, and was
   universally despised, as a forsaken woman; but now, having been
   received into favor with her husband, she shines with amazing lustre. A
   parallel passage occurs in Hosea 2:20. This was accomplished at the
   coming of Christ; but it is also bestowed upon us daily, when the Lord
   adorns his people with righteousness and salvation. But all these
   things, as we have often said already, shall be accomplished at
   Christ's last coming.

   11. For as the earth putteth forth. By a beautiful comparison the
   Prophet confirms the former promises; for he reminds the Jews of the
   ordinary power of God, which shines brightly in the creatures
   themselves. The earth every year puts forth her bud, the gardens grow
   green after the sowing time, and, in short, herbs and plants, which
   appear to be dead during the winter, revive in the spring and resume
   their vigor. Now these are proofs and very clear illustrations of the
   divine power and kindness toward us; and since it is so, ought men to
   doubt of it? Will not he who gave this power and strength to the earth
   display it still more in delivering his people? And will he not cause
   to bud the elect seed, of which he promised that it should remain in
   the world for ever?

   Before all the nations. He again shews that the boundaries of the
   Church shall no longer be as narrow as they formerly were, for the Lord
   will cause her to fill the whole world.

   Will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth, He mentions
   "righteousness," which was fully displayed when the Lord redeemed his
   people; but the righteousness of God was chiefly seen, when Christ was
   manifested to the world; not that God kept his righteousness concealed
   till that time, but that men did not know it. It is, as if he had said,
   "God will deliver and restore his people in such a manner that all
   shall acknowledge him to be righteous." For redemption is a striking
   proof of the justice of God.

   He next mentions praise; because such a benefit ought to be accompanied
   by thanksgiving. The end of "righteousness" is, that glory may be given
   to God; and therefore he exhorts us to gratitude; for it is exceedingly
   base to be dumb after having received God's benefits.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [165] "S'il veut contrefaire le docteur, et n'a doctrine ni savoir."
   "If he wishes to counterfeit the teacher, and has not any doctrine or
   knowledge."

   [166] "Il ne faut plus offrir a Dieu des bestes brutes." "We must no
   longer offer to God brute beasts."

   [167] See our author's exposition of that remarkable passage.  Ed.

   [168] "As a bridegroom halloweth himself with ornament,' that is,
   maketh himself respectable, as a priest in his secret vestments." --
   Stock.
   "The reference is, no doubt, to the sacerdotal mitre, which was
   probably regarded as a model of ornamental head-dress, and to which
   ph'r (peer) is explicitly applied." -- Alexander.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 62.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 62:1-12

   1. For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I
   will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness,
   and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.

   1. Propter Sion non tacebo, et propter Ierusalem non quiescam, donec
   egrediatur ut splendor justitia ejus, et salus ejus sicat lampas
   ardeat.

   2. And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy
   glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the
   LORD shall name.

   2. Et videbunt gentes justitiam tuam, et omnes reges terrae gloriam
   tuam; et vocabitur tibi nomen novum, quod os Iehovae nuncupabit.

   3. Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the LORD, and a
   royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

   3. Et eris corona gloriae in manu Iehovae, et diadema regni in manu Dei
   tui.

   4. Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any
   more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy
   land Beulah: for the LORD delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be
   married.

   4. Non dicetur tibi amplius Derelicta; nec terra tua dicetur amplius
   Desolata; quia vocabunt to Beneplacitum meum in ea, et terram tuam
   Maritatam. Quia beneplacitum Iehovae in to, et terra tua maritabitur.

   5. For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee:
   and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God
   rejoice over thee.

   5. Quoniam sicut adoleseens maritat sibi virginem, ita maritabunt to
   sibi filii tui; et gaudio sponsi super sponsa gaudebit super to Deus
   tuus.

   6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never
   hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the LORD, keep
   not silence,

   6. Super muros tuos, Ierusalem, ordinavi custodes, qui tota die et tota
   nocte jugiter non tacebunt. Qui memores estis (vel, memoriam
   celebrabitis) Iehovae, ne silentium sit vobis.

   7. And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem
   a praise in the earth.

   7. Et ne detis silentlum illi donec reparet, et donec ponat Ierusalem
   laudem in terra.

   8. The LORD hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his
   strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine
   enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, for the
   which thou hast laboured:

   8. Juravit Iehova per dexteram suam, et per brachium roboris sui: Si
   dedero frumentum tuum amplius cibum inimicis tuis, et si biberint filii
   alienigenae vinum tuum pro quo laborasti.

   9. But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the LORD;
   and they that have brought it together shall drink it in the courts of
   my holiness.

   9. Nam qui congregaverunt illud comedent, et laudabunt Iehovam; et
   collectores ejus bibent vinum in atriis meis sanctis.

   10. Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people;
   cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard
   for the people.

   10. Transite, transite per portas; repurgate viam populo; complanate,
   complanate iter; sternite lapidibus, levate signum ad populos.

   11. Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say ye
   to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his
   reward is with him, and his work before him.

   11. Ecce Iehova publicavit usque ad extremum terrae; dicite filiae
   Sion, Ecce servator tuus venit, Ecce merces ejus cum eo, et effectus
   ejus coram ipso.

   12. And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the
   LORD: and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken.

   12. Et vocabunt vos Populum sanctum, redemptos Iehovae; et to vocabunt
   Quaesitam urbem, non relictam.


   1. On account of Zion I will not be silent. That sad captivity being at
   hand, which was almost to blot out the name of the whole nation, it was
   necessary to confirm and encourage believers by many words, that with
   strong and assured confidence they might rely on these promises under
   the burden of the cross. Here, therefore, the Prophet, discharging that
   office which had been entrusted to him, openly declares that he will
   not be slack in the performance of his duty, and will not cease to
   speak, till he encourage the hearts of believers by the hope of future
   salvation, that they may know and be fully convinced that God will be
   the deliverer of his Church. He too might have been dismayed by the
   unbelief of that people, and might have lost courage when he saw that
   matters were every day growing worse, and when he foresaw that terrible
   vengeance. But, notwithstanding so great difficulties, he will still
   persist in his duty, that all may know that neither the massacre of the
   people nor their unbelief can prevent God from executing his promises
   at the proper time.

   And on account of Jerusalem I will not rest. It was necessary that
   these things should be frequently repeated, because such is the
   depravity of our mind that we speedily forget God's promises. When he
   says that he will not cease to speak, he likewise reminds others of
   their duty, that they may take courage, and expect with assured
   confidence their restoration, though it be long delayed, and even that
   their unwearied attention may answer to the voice of God which
   constantly addresses them. We know by experience every day how
   necessary this is, while Satan endeavors by every method to turn us
   aside from the right course.

   At the same time he shews what ought to be the aim of godly teachers,
   namely, to spend and devote themselves entirely for the advantage of
   the Church; for when he says "on account of Zion," he means that our
   chief care ought to be that the Church may be preserved, and that none
   are good and faithful teachers but they who hold the salvation of the
   Church so dear as to spare no labors. Some explain this as relating to
   prayer, but I choose rather to refer it to doctrine; and it is more
   natural to view it as meaning' that no inconvenience or annoyance shall
   wear out his patience, and no opposition shall retard him from
   proceeding in the office of teaching which God has enjoined on him
   concerning the redemption of the Church. For if he had survived that
   very sad calamity, the unbelieving multitude would undoubtedly have
   persecuted him, as well as the other Prophets, by many reproaches; but
   whatever may happen, he says that he is fortified by unshaken firmness,
   never to be dumb through shame, but to proceed with unremitting
   eagerness in his course. Besides, by this form of expression he
   procures credit to his predictions, and maintains their authority, so
   that, even when he is dead, they do not cease to resound in the ears of
   believers.

   Till her righteousness go forth as brightness. By "righteousness" he
   means the rights of the Church; for during the period of calamity, she
   appeared to be condemned. Her "righteousness," therefore, "goes forth"
   when she is perfectly restored, and regains her former condition; for
   that righteousness lay concealed during the captivity.

   And her salvation. To "righteousness" he adds "salvation," because they
   whom God justifies, or to whom he re-restores their rights, do likewise
   regain their "salvation." Hence we infer that we are wretched and
   without assistance, so long as God withholds his grace from us on
   account of our sins; and therefore in other passages he frequently gave
   the appellation of "the righteousness of God" to that which he here
   affirms to be the righteousness of the Church. Thus we are undone while
   we are destitute of the righteousness of God; that is, while we slumber
   in our sins, and God shews himself to be a severe judge by punishing us
   for them.

   The phrase "go forth" means that the righteousness of the Church was
   hidden and, as it were, buried for a time: she deserved in the sight of
   God no favor; but, on the contrary, her unspeakable iniquities
   prevailed to such an extent that there remained nothing but God's
   righteous vengeance. But here the Prophet has his eye on men who
   already looked upon the afflicted Church as lost, and by their pride
   and reproaches almost cast her down to hell.

   May burn like a lamp. Finally, he compares her to the world, and says,
   that with respect to the world she shall be righteous, when God shall
   have purged away her sins and undertaken her cause. By these words the
   Prophet teaches that we ought always to entertain favorable hopes of
   the restoration of the Church, though she be plunged under thick
   darkness and in the grave; for although for a time she is overwhelmed
   and hidden, yet she has God for her avenger in heaven, who, after
   having chastised her moderately, will at length shew that she was the
   object of his care. And indeed his righteousness must be illustrious
   and manifest, and that for the salvation of those whom he hath chosen
   to be his people and heritage.

   2. And the Gentiles shall see. He now states more plainly the reason
   why he formerly said that he would not be silent, namely, that
   believers may be fully convinced that salvation is not promised to them
   in vain.

   And all the kings of the earth thy glory. Here he employs the word
   "glory" as meaning "salvation." We see here the argument by which
   prophets must fortify themselves for perseverance, namely, that the
   Lord is faithful, and will at length fulfill what he has once promised,
   though he delay for a time. The word kings serves for amplification; as
   if he had said that not only mean persons and those of the lowest rank
   shall behold and admire the glory of God, but even "kings" themselves,
   who commonly look down with contempt on all that was worthy in other
   respects of being esteemed and honored; for they are blinded by their
   splendor, and maddened by their high rank, so that they do not
   willingly behold any rank but their own.

   And thou shalt be called by a new name. By a "new name" he means "a
   crowded assemblage;" for the people were so completely scattered, that
   there was no visible body, and they appeared to be altogether ruined.
   Although a vast multitude of persons were led into captivity, yet,
   having been scattered among the Babylonians, they were driven about
   like the members of a body broken in pieces, and scarcely retained the
   name of a people; which had also been foretold to them. After having
   been brought back from captivity, they began again to be united in one
   body, and thus regained the "name" of which they had been deprived. Yet
   "new" denotes what is uncommon; as if the Prophet had said that the
   glory of the people shall be extraordinary and such as was never before
   heard of. We know that this took place in the progress of time; for
   that small band of people, while they dwelt by sufferance in their
   native country, could not by any extraordinary distinction arrive at so
   great renown; but at length, when the doctrine of the Gospel had been
   preached, the Jewish name became known and renowned.

   Which the mouth of Jehovah shall name. He confirms what would otherwise
   have been hard to be believed, by promising that God will be the author
   of this glory; for it was not in the power of men thus to raise a
   Church which had sunk low and was covered with dishonor, but to God,
   who "lifteth up the poor from the dunghill," (Psalm 113:7,) it was not
   difficult to adorn his Church by new celebrity. As there was no face of
   a Church for forty years, and, although the Lord had some seed, yet it
   was in a state so disordered and so ruinous that there was no visible
   people of God, he now restores to the Church its name, when he has
   assembled it by the word of the Gospel. This majestic work of God,
   therefore, ought to confirm us on this point, that we may know that he
   will never forsake his Church; and although wicked men tear us by their
   slanders, and beat and spit upon us, and in every way endeavor to make
   us universally loathed, let us remember that God is not deprived of his
   right to vindicate us in the world, whose names he has deigned to write
   in heaven.

   Others expound the passage in a more ingenious manner, namely, that
   instead of Israelites they shall be called Christians. But I think that
   the former meaning is more agreeable to the context and to the
   Prophet's ordinary language; and we ought carefully to observe those
   forms of expression which are peculiar to the prophets, that we may
   become familiar with their style. In a word, the people shall be
   restored, though it appears to be exterminated, and shall obtain, not
   from men but from God, a new name.

   3. And thou shalt be a crown of glory. Isaiah proceeds with the same
   subject, and we need not wonder at this; for no man, by judging from
   the flesh, could have formed such vast conceptions and expectations.
   Besides, he intended to fix the hearts of believers on the kingdom of
   Christ, which it was the more necessary to adorn and magnify by these
   illustrious titles, because hitherto it was not only obscure but at a
   great distance. It was needful to provide against a twofold danger,
   that the Jews, when they saw that they were still at a very great
   distance from their former honor, might not, on the one hand, despise
   the grace of God, or, on the other hand, rest satisfied with the mere
   beginnings, and thus, by disregarding Christ, devote their whole
   attention to earthly advantages. The Prophet therefore reminds them,
   that the return to their native country was but the forerunner of that
   exalted rank which was to be expected at the manifestation of Christ.

   So far as relates to the former clause, exiles and slaves could
   perceive nothing but ground for despair, when they beheld the outward
   condition of things, since, after having returned and been restored to
   their country, they made very little progress in building the temple.
   Accordingly, he bids them look to God, that they may expect from him
   the glory which is concealed from the eyes of flesh, and, knowing that
   they are dear and precious in his sight, may be fully satisfied with
   this, till he adorn them more bountifully by the hand of Christ.

   And the diadem of the kingdom. He calls the Church God's crown, because
   God wishes that his glory should shine in us; and in this it is proper
   that we should behold and admire the inconceivable goodness of God,
   since, notwithstanding that we are by nature filthy and corrupted, and
   more abominable than the mire of the streets, yet he adorns us in such
   a manner that he wishes us to be "the diadem of his kingdom." Let us
   therefore be aroused by this goodness of God to the desire of leading a
   holy life, that his image may more and more be formed anew in us.

   4. Thou shalt no more be called forsaken. He meets a difficulty which
   might occur to the minds of believers, seeing that they were forsaken
   and abandoned, while at the same time they were called a "diadem" and a
   "crown." Seeing that they were hated and abhorred by all nations, and
   sometimes even lay prostrate at the feet of their enemies, and no
   assistance of any kind was seen, it might appear ridiculous that they
   should receive these names, and thus be elevated to heaven and placed
   in the hand of God. He therefore means that the people, though for a
   time they resemble a divorced and forsaken woman, shall yet be restored
   so as to change their condition and name; as if he had said, "This
   divorce shall not be perpetual; God will at length receive thee to
   himself." Thus, although the Church seems to be "forsaken," and has the
   appearance of a divorced woman, yet the Lord will put an end to her
   afflictions and miseries.

   For they shall call thee, My good-pleasure in her. He teaches that this
   proceeds from the "good-pleasure of God;" that is, from his undeserved
   favor, that nothing may be ascribed to the merits or excellence of men;
   as he says in Hosea,

   "I will espouse thee to me in mercy and compassions."
   (Hosea 2:19.)

   And thus he shews that they shall be prosperous for no other reason
   than because God, out of his infinite goodness, will graciously
   condescend to receive into favor those whom he had abandoned. Although
   this relates strictly to the Church, yet let us learn in general that
   it is by the favor and bounty of God that cities and kingdoms are
   restored to their former condition, which, while he was angry and
   offended, appeared to be ruined. The Prophet, therefore, holds out to
   the consideration of the Jews the source of all the calamities which
   they had suffered, when he testifies that when God is reconciled to
   them, they will be happy; for we may gather from it that formerly God
   was angry with them, when their condition was wretched and miserable.

   And thy land shall be married. This metaphor, by which he denotes the
   restoration of the people, is highly beautiful, and conveys twofold
   instruction. He shews that the state of variance between God and the
   Church shall be terminated; first, because she shall be received as a
   wife by her appeased husband; and secondly, because the multitude of
   people will take away the reproach of widowhood. The earth is, in some
   sense, married to its inhabitants, as trees to vines; and, on the other
   hand, when it is stripped of its inhabitants, it is said to be a widow.

   For the good-pleasure of Jehovah is in thee. He again repeats and
   confirms what has been already said, that it is owing to the undeserved
   kindness of God that the Church is restored, that she remains in her
   condition, that the earth receives its inhabitants; for when God turns
   away his face and is angry with us, nothing can be looked for but
   destruction, and nothing can be expected from the aid or strength of
   men.

   5. For as a young man marrieth a virgin. This verse contains nothing
   more than an explanation and confirmation of the preceding verse. Now
   there appears to be a sort of contradiction in this respect, that in
   the latter clause he makes God the only Husband of the Church, while in
   the former clause he assigns to her many husbands. But the solution is
   easy; for, when this marriage of the Church is spoken of, there is but
   one Husband, that is, God, who always claims for himself that title;
   and that is fulfilled in Christ, to whom, as Paul says, the pastors
   "espouse the Church as a chaste virgin." (2 Corinthians 11:2.) Yet this
   does not prevent the metaphor of marriage from being employed to
   describe that unity of faith which all the children of God have with
   their mother, the Church. Nay more, it is consistent with God being the
   Husband of his Church, that he marries to his Church all the nations
   that are assembled to her; for, when she is without children, she may
   be said to be widowed and solitary. This is said, therefore, even with
   respect to God, who, by ratifying with his guidance the sacred amity
   between the members of his Church, extends the effect of marriage to
   the whole body.

   And hence it ought to be inferred, that the Church of God shall be
   truly populous, that is, shall have many children, when she is united
   to God her Husband; for we must begin with God, that he may preside
   over his Church, and that under his guidance we may be gathered into
   her bosom; for then shall the marriage be truly sacred. But for this a
   vast multitude of people will not constitute a church, but rather an
   abominable brothel; as we see that in Popery there is boasting of the
   name of God, and yet the majesty of God is dishonored in it by
   frightful sacrilege.

   6. On thy walls. As the Prophet intended to describe the perfect
   happiness of the kingdom of Christ, so he makes an assemblage of all
   that belongs to the prosperous condition of any country or city. To
   other advantages he adds guards and a garrison; because the greatest
   abundance of all good things would be of little avail, if we were not
   safe from enemies; and therefore he declares that the Lord will not
   only supply the Church with all that is necessary, but will also
   appoint faithful guards to ward off enemies and robbers, that he may
   thus be recognised, both within and without, as the author of a happy
   life.

   Who shall not be, silent. By "being silent," he means "being at rest;"
   as if he had said, "They will be continually on the watch, so as to
   foresee at a great distance the dangers that threaten them."

   Ye who are mindful of Jehovah. He next explains who these guards are,
   namely, those who "shall be mindful of the Lord," that is, shall
   celebrate the memory of his name. Although among the guards we might,
   without impropriety, reckon the angels, (Psalm 91:11; Hebrews 1:14,) to
   whom we know that this office is assigned, yet because they willingly
   and cheerfully watch over the safety of the Church, and do not need to
   be spurred on by exhortations, the Prophet addresses his discourse to
   other watchmen.

   The word which he employs is of doubtful meaning. [169] Sometimes it
   signifies "to remember," and sometimes "to bring to remembrance;" and
   neither of those significations will be inappropriate. But I think that
   he simply means that these guards will be God's ministers to celebrate
   his name. Some render it "Making known the Lord;" but that is
   unnatural, and suddenly breaks off the Prophet's meaning; and such
   commentators do not attend to the comparison of the guards of a city,
   which the Prophet employs.

   Although the Prophet intends simply to teach that the Church will be
   safe from all dangers, because she has God to watch over her safety,
   yet we ought always to consider what is the nature of Christ's kingdom;
   for it is not defended by the weapons of war or by arms, but, being
   spiritual, is protected by spiritual arms and guards. The Lord will
   therefore have his ministers, whose agency he will employ for defending
   the Church by the sword of the word, that she may be kept safe; not by
   earthly guards, but by God's secret and spiritual power; and the
   Prophet explains himself by saying, "Ye who are mindful of the Lord."
   Although this statement relates to all the godly, who are commanded to
   celebrate the name of God in all places, as far as lies in their power,
   yet it is chiefly addressed to the priests, who, discharging a public
   office, should hold out an example to others, and devote themselves
   with all their heart to the praises of God.

   During the whole day and the whole night. Here pastors are reminded of
   their duty; for it is not enough to feed the Lord's flock, if they do
   not likewise defend it from the attacks of robbers and wolves. "Night
   and day," therefore, they must guard and keep watch, if they wish to
   perform their duty in a proper manner.

   Keep not silence. The Lord forbids them to be silent; for he wishes
   them to be diligent and attentive; and in this he shews how great is
   the care which he takes about the safety of the Church. This passage
   testifies that it is a remarkable kindness of God, when we have
   faithful pastors who take care of us; for we are exposed to dangers of
   every kind, and lie open to the snares of Satan, if the Lord do not
   protect us by his guards; and therefore we ought always to pray that he
   would surround us with those guards which he sees that we need.

   7. And do not give him silence. Hitherto the Prophet has spoken of the
   office and duty of teaching; but as this would not be enough if prayer
   were not likewise added, he exhorts the ministers of the word to
   prayer; for I think that lv, (lo,) "to him," refers to God. We ought,
   therefore, to plead with God, and to entreat by earnest prayer, that he
   will give some success to our labors, which would otherwise be
   unprofitable. And since we devote ourselves entirely to preaching
   doctrine, and vigorously oppose all the machinations of Satan, let us
   learn, at the same time, to turn our minds to God, that he may not
   permit our labors to be unsuccessful. In the same manner as he applied
   the word "silence" to doctrine in the beginning of the chapter, when he
   said, "I will not be silent," so in this passage he applies it to
   prayer, by which we obtain from God some fruit of doctrine. Even the
   angels move us by their example to this earnestness of prayer, as we
   read in Zechariah that the angel prays ardently for the restoration of
   the Church. (Zechariah 1:12.)

   Till he restore. Hence infer that there are two distinct benefits:
   first, to have faithful pastors who shall watch over the safety of the
   Church; secondly, that the Church be upheld and preserved in her
   condition by their agency. But God, who speaks here, claims these
   benefits as his own; which he also does in many other passages. "How
   shall they preach," says Paul, "unless they be sent?" (Romans 10:15.)
   It belongs to God alone, therefore, to appoint pastors; for no man
   could otherwise have been "sufficient" (2 Corinthians 2:16) for an
   office so important and so difficult; and it is he alone who promotes
   by their agency the restoration of the Church; for their efforts would
   be altogether vain and fruitless, if the Lord did not grant them
   prosperous success. And here we see that the external agency of men is
   joined with the efficacy of the Holy Spirit; for, although the Lord
   alone is the author and finisher of the work, yet he brings forward
   instruments which he employs for rearing the building of the Church.
   This reminds us that we ought not to lose courage, even when we see
   nothing but ruin and wretchedness and desolation; but it is our duty to
   pray that the Lord will restore her, which he also promises that he
   will do.

   And till he place Jerusalem a praise. This means to render the Church
   glorious, that ground of joy may shine forth from it; for when we feel
   nothing but God's severity, we become dumb, and are overwhelmed with
   shame; but when he frees us from our afflictions, and causes us to
   recover, he at the same time opens our mouth; for he supplies us with
   ground of praise and thanksgiving.

   8. Jehovah hath sworn. He proceeds with the metaphors which he formerly
   used; for since, owing to the corruption of our nature, the kingdom of
   Christ cannot be described so as to be level to our capacity; it was
   necessary to represent it under figures. In the same manner as he
   promised, first, an abundance of all things, and next, faithful
   guardianship, that the condition of believers may be safe; so here he
   promises tranquillity and repose, that they may peacefully enjoy their
   blessings, and may not in future be defrauded of them. As if he had
   said, "Whatever thou hadst formerly in thy hands was exposed to plunder
   and robbery; but now thou shalt have everything well secured, and shall
   freely partake of thy corn and thy wine; and, in a word, thou shalt
   enjoy thy prosperity in peace."

   But since the depravity of our nature is such that we do not place
   trust in God, though he promise largely and bountifully, for this
   reason the Prophet represents him as swearing; for the Lord condescends
   to us so far as to make use of an oath, in order to correct still more
   our unbelief and obstinacy. Now, the Lord "sweareth by himself,
   because" (as an Apostle says) "he hath none greater than himself."
   (Hebrews 6:13.)

   By his right hand and by the arm of his strength. He mentions his
   "right arm," that is, the power of God; because that was appropriate to
   the present discourse. As if he had said, "If I have any power, I will
   display it in your salvation; and lest, in an arduous affair, your
   minds should slumber, I swear by my hand, which is invincible and
   victorious over all, that, whatever difficulties may arise, you shall
   be safe under my protection." Whenever therefore he promises salvation,
   let us think of his strength and power.

   If I shall give. This is an elliptical form of expression; and we are
   taught by it the sacredness and solemnity of an oath. The import of
   this declaration is, as if he had said, that he wishes that henceforth
   he may not be believed, if these promises be not justified by the
   event. When he promises the peaceful enjoyment of wheat and wine, he
   means that it proceeded from his righteous judgment, and did not happen
   by chance, that the Church was deprived of corn and wine; for whenever
   enemies ravage and plunder, this is unquestionably done by God's
   permission; as he threatens in the Law. (Deuteronomy 28:33.) On the
   other hand, it is his special blessing, that every one eats in safety

   "under his vine, and under his fig-tree." (1 Kings 4:25.)

   9. For they who have gathered it shall eat it. This is an explanation
   and confirmation of the preceding statement; for, after having
   testified that he will no longer permit that which the Church possesses
   to be laid open as a prey, he adds that she shall enjoy her
   possessions. Yet he shews that "corn and wine" are justly called our
   own, when we have obtained them by honest industry; for they who
   violently seize the bread of others, or obtain it by unlawful means,
   have it not from the Lord, and cannot attribute it to his blessing, as
   if they possessed it lawfully; and to this corresponds what is said in
   the Psalm,

   "Thou shalt eat the labor of thy hands, thou shalt be happy, and it
   shall be well with thee." (Psalm 128:2.)

   And shall praise Jehovah. But when he promises that they who cultivate
   the soil shall have food, why does he say that they will give thanks to
   God? And why do men praise God, if by their own labor they gather the
   corn and procure the wine? It appears to be but a pretended
   thanksgiving, if those things are ascribed to the toil and industry of
   men; and God deserves no praise, if men procure food by their own
   labor. But it ought to be observed, that the Prophet, after having
   shewn what is the lawful method of seeking food, at the same time adds
   that our labor will be fruitless, if the Lord do not supply us with
   food; for all that we have belongs to God, and to him alone all that we
   obtain ought to be ascribed.

   Shall drink wine in my holy courts. He alludes to the solemn act of
   offering sacrifices; for they might drink in other places, and every
   one might eat in his own dwelling. But the allusion is to that ceremony
   which was observed in consecration, when the law required that the
   first-fruits should be an oblation, (Leviticus 2:12; 23:10,) in order
   that the produce of the year might be dedicated to God; and in the
   writings of Moses we frequently meet with these words,

   "Thou shalt feast, and rejoice in presence of thy God." (Deuteronomy
   12:18.)

   10. Pass through, pass through the gates. From the preceding statement
   he draws the conclusion, that there shall be a free passage through the
   gates of the city, which formerly were shut or in a ruinous state; shut
   when it was besieged by enemies; in a ruinous state, when the city was
   thrown down and levelled with the ground. He means that there shall be
   such a restoration of the city, that its inhabitants shall be numerous,
   and there shall be frequent passing to and from it.

   Some think that these words are addressed to the pastors, that they may
   enter in at the gates, and go before others as their conductors. But it
   is a general and figurative statement, by which he compares the Church
   to a populous city, though for a time it was ruinous and desolate, as
   Jerusalem had been. Others pursue more ingenious speculations, and say
   that the gates of a Church are opened, when pardon of sins is
   proclaimed in it, and by that message God invites all to come to him.
   But if we wish to get at the Prophet's meaning, we must believe that
   all these things are spoken figuratively, as we have already mentioned.

   Clear the way for the people. This is, strictly speaking, the duty of
   teachers; but the Prophet speaks in general terms, and addresses all
   whose agency the Lord employed for preparing the way for the people. At
   that time, indeed, he spoke to Medes and Persians, by means of whom he
   opened up the way for the Jews, that they might return to their native
   country; but next he includes all others by whom the Lord restored his
   Church.

   Level, level the road. He authoritatively commands all men to "clear
   and level the roads;" that the Jews might know that every obstacle
   shall easily be removed, and that all men, however inveterate their
   hostility, shall immediately obey the command of God. In this way he
   enjoins believers to gird themselves manfully for the work, as if many
   workmen were ready to give assistance, and the emphatic repetition of
   the word ("Level, level") deserves notice as intended to express
   certainty.

   Pave it with stones. sql (sikkel) sometimes means to remove stones, and
   sometimes to pave with stones; and I think that it ought rather to be
   understood here in this latter signification, though commentators are
   generally of a different opinion. [170]

   Lift up a standard to the peoples. This is of the same import with the
   former clause; for the Prophet means that the peoples shall obey the
   command of God, in the same manner as subjects are wont to obey
   princes; for they shall assemble and run together when "the standard is
   lifted up," and shall lend their aid to bring back the people; and thus
   he extols in lofty terms the power of God, that the Jews might be fully
   persuaded that they would one day be restored. [171]

   11. Behold, Jehovah hath, proclaimed. He means that the Lord, by acting
   miraculously and beyond the judgment or expectation of the flesh, will
   cause all the nations to know that this is done by his command. It
   might be objected, How shall it be brought about that the peoples, who
   now make fierce resistance to God, shall become obedient to him? He
   assigns the reason, "Because the Lord will proclaim your return, so
   that they shall acknowledge that at his command you are restored."

   Say ye to the daughter of Zion. Undoubtedly this refers literally to
   the ministers of the word and to the prophets, whom the Lord invests
   with this office of promising deliverance and salvation to the Church.
   And hence we conclude that these promises are not merely limited to a
   single age, but must be extended to the end of the world; for,
   beginning at the return from Babylon into Judea, we must advance as far
   as the coming of Christ, by which this prophecy was at length
   accomplished, and redemption was brought to a conclusion; for the
   Savior came, when the grace of God was proclaimed by the Gospel. In a
   word, he foretells that the voice of God shall one day resound from the
   rising to the setting of the sun, and shall be heard, not by a single
   nation only, but by all nations.

   Behold, the Savior cometh. This is a word which, we know, belongs
   peculiarly to the Gospel; and therefore he bids the teachers of the
   Church encourage the hearts of believers, by confirmed expectation of
   the coming of the Lord, though he appeared to be at a great distance
   from his people. But this promise relates chiefly to the reign of
   Christ, by which these things were fully and perfectly accomplished;
   for he actually exhibited himself as the "Savior" of his Church, as we
   have seen before in the fortieth chapter.

   Behold, his reward is with him, and the effect of his work is before
   him. That they may no longer be distressed by any doubt, when God the
   Savior shall appear, he invests him with power, as in Isaiah 40:10; for
   he repeats the same words which we found in that passage. As if he had
   said, "As soon as it shall please God to display his hand, the effect
   will be rapid and sudden; for so long as he stops or delays, the
   judgment of the flesh pronounces him to be idle;" and we see how very
   many fanatics imagine some deity that has no existence, as if they were
   painting a dead image. Justly, therefore, does the Prophet declare that
   God's "work and reward are before him," that he may make it evident,
   whenever it shall be necessary, that he is the righteous Judge of the
   world.

   12. And they shall call you a holy people. He describes the benefit of
   the coming of the Lord; that is, because, by shewing that he takes care
   of his elect as his heritage, he will make it evident to the whole
   world that the covenant of adoption, which he made with Abraham, was
   not deceptive. He therefore calls them "a holy people," because the
   Lord hath separated and consecrated them to himself; for, although he
   governs all nations, he has deigned to choose the seed of Abraham, that
   he might make them the object of his peculiar care. (Exodus 19:6.)

   The redeemed of Jehovah. In the sense now stated, God declares that
   they shall be a holy people, when he shall appear as their Savior and
   Redeemer; for, as the people are said to be "profaned" when they lie
   amidst filth, being afflicted and distressed by the reproaches of the
   wicked, so they are said to be "sanctified," when the Lord actually
   shews that he presides over their salvation. This was accomplished by a
   wonderful redemption; and at that time God also testified that he
   remembered his heritage, which, in the eyes of men, he appeared to have
   forsaken and disregarded; for in these words, Sought out, [172] not
   forsaken, is denoted a contrast between the time when God made a
   divorce from his people, and the time when he again reconciled to
   himself those whom he had cast off.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [169] "hmzkyrym (hammazkirim) admits of three interpretations, all
   consistent with Isaiah's usage. In chapter 36:3, 22, it seems to mean
   an official recorder or historiographer. In chapter 66:3, it means one
   burning incense as a memorial oblation. Hence 'zkrh, (uzkarah,) the
   name used in the Law of Moses to denote such an offering. (See
   Leviticus 2:2; 5:12; 24:7; Numbers 5:26.) In chapter 43:26, the verb
   means to remind God of something which he seems to have forgotten; and
   as this is an appropriate description of importunate intercession, it
   is here entitled to the preference." -- Alexander.

   [170] "The words sqlv m'vn (sakkelu meeben) are used elliptically for
   sqlv hdrk m'vn, (sakkelu hadderek meeben,) remove the stones from the
   road;' for sql, (sikkel,) which.in general means to stone, or to throw
   stones,' as vysql v'vnym 't dvd, (vayesakkel baabanim eth David,) (2
   Samuel 16:6, 13,) here means to take away many stones, as in Isaiah
   5:2; and m'vn (meeben,) as Jarchi remarks, is equivalent to mhyvt sm
   'vn, (mihyoth sham eben,) that there may be no stones there,' at which
   travellers might stumble. Thus, I will make them m'dm, (meadam) from a
   man;' that is, that not a man shall be left. (Hosea 9:12.)" --
   Rosenmuller.

   [171] "Here the style of the Prophet is very Pindarical. First, he
   speaks to the captives, as if he saw them near the gates of Babylon,
   and bids them go through them, that is, pass out of the place of their
   captivity; then, as if he saw workmen in the road, he bids them level
   the ground, and make it plain, that they may not be tired by ascending
   and descending steep precipices, nor hurt their feet with sharp stones;
   then, as if they had not yet received notice of their deliverance, or
   were not informed of the place where they were to rendezvous, in order
   to return altogether, he commands a standard to be erected for the
   people, that is, over their heads, so high that it might he seen by
   those at the greatest distance." -- White.

   [172] "The word drvsh, (derushah,) the name that shall be given to
   Jerusalem, is rendered by some sought after, that is, a city to which,
   as being very highly celebrated and visited by crowds of strangers, all
   shall resort and shall desire to be enrolled among her citizens. Others
   render it cared for, that is, by Jehovah, who appeared to have
   abandoned and given her up to forgetfulness, as her citizens
   complained. (Isaiah 49:14.) Both agree with what is here added, A city
   not forsaken.' (See Jeremiah 30:14-17.)" -- Rosenmuller.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 63.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 63:1-19

   1. Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah?
   this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of
   his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.

   1. Quis est iste qui venit ab Edom, rubicundus in vestibus, a Bosra;
   iste decorus in vestitu suo, gradiens in multitudine virtutis suae? Ego
   qui loquor in justitia (vel, validus), multus ad servandum.

   2. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him
   that treadeth in the winefat?

   2. Quare ruber est vestitus tuns, et indumenta tun sicut prementis in
   torculari?

   3. I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none
   with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my
   fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will
   stain all my raiment.

   3. Torcular pressi solus; neque ex populis quisquam fuit mecum. Calcabo
   enim cos in ira mea, et conculcabo cos in furore meo; et spargetur
   sanguis eorum super vestes mens, et omnia indumenta mea inquinabo.

   4. For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my
   redeemed is come.

   4. Quia dies ultionis in corde meo, et annus redemptorum meorum venit.

   5. And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there
   was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me;
   and my fury, it upheld me.

   5. Itaque aspexi, nec erat auxiliator; et admiratus sum, nec erat qui
   fulciret; itaque salutem mihi fecit brachium meum, et ira mea fulsit
   me.

   6. And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk
   in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.

   6. Et conculcabo populos in ira mea, et inebriabo cos furore meo, et
   prosternam fortitudinem eorum in terram.

   7. I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the LORD, and the praises of
   the LORD, according to all that the LORD hath bestowed on us, and the
   great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on
   them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his
   lovingkindnesses.

   7. Misericordias Iehovae memoria repetam; laudes Iehovae tanquam super
   omnibus quae contulit nobis Iehova, et multitudine beneficentiae erga
   domum Israel, quam contulit illis secundum misericordias suas, et
   secundum multitudinem miserationum suarum.

   8. For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie:
   so he was their Saviour.

   8. Nam dixit, Certe populus meus sunt, filii qui non mentiuntur; itaque
   factus est illis servator.

   9. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his
   presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and
   he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.

   9. In omni angustia eorum illi fuit (vel, Non fuit); et Angelus faciei
   ejus servavit eos; in dilectione sua et clementia sua ipse redemit eos;
   portavit eos et extulit, omnibus diebus seculi.

   10. But they rebelled, and vexed his Holy Spirit: therefore he was
   turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.

   10. Verum illi rebelles fuerunt, et irritaverunt Spiritum Sanctum ejus.
   Ideo conversus illis in hostem pugnavit ipse contra eos.

   11. Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people, saying,
   Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of
   his flock? where is he that put his Holy Spirit within him?

   11. Et recordatus est dierum priscorum, quibus Moses fuit cum populo
   ejus. Ubi est qui ascendere fecit eos e mari, cure pastore gregis sui?
   Ubi est qui posuit in medio ejus Spiritum suum Sanctum?

   12. That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm,
   dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name?

   12. Qui duxit ad dexteram Mosis brachio magnificentiae suae, qui
   divisit aquas coram ipsis, ad comparandum sibi nomen perpetuum?

   13. That led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that
   they should not stumble?

   13. Qui fecit eos ingredi per abyssos, tanquam equum in deserto, ut non
   impegerint.

   14. As a beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the LORD
   caused him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, to make, thyself a
   glorious name.

   14. Tanquam jumentum in planitiem descendit, Spiritus Iehovae requiem
   illi praestitit; sic duxisti populum tuum, ut faceres tibi nomen
   gloriosum.

   15. Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy
   holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the
   sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they
   restrained?

   15. Aspice e coelo; vide ex habitaculo sanctitatis et gloriae tuae. Ubi
   zelus tuus, et fortitudo tua? Multitudo viscerum tuorum et
   misericordiarum tuarum erga me cohibuerunt se.

   16. Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us,
   and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O LORD, art our Father, our
   Redeemer; thy name is from everlasting.

   16. Certe tu pater noster es, etiam si Abraham nesciat nos, et Israel
   nos non agnoscat; tu tamen pater noster es, redemptor noster; a seculo
   nomen tuum.

   17. O LORD, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
   our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of
   thine inheritance.

   17. Quare fecisti nos errare, Iehova, a viis tuis? Recedere fecisti cor
   nostrum a timore tuo? Convertere propter servos tuos, ad tribus
   haereditatis tuae.

   18. The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while:
   our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

   18. Ad exiguum tempus possederunt populus sanctitatis tuae; adversarii
   nostri conculcarunt sanctuarium tuum.

   19. We are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not
   called by thy name.

   19. Fuimus a seculo, quibus tu non dominatus es, super quos non est
   invocatum nomen tuum.


   1. Who is this that cometh from Edom? This chapter has been violently
   distorted by Christians, as if what is said here related to Christ,
   whereas the Prophet speaks simply of God himself; and they have
   imagined that here Christ is red, because he was wet with his own blood
   which he shed on the cross. But the Prophet meant nothing of that sort.
   The obvious meaning is, that the Lord comes forth with red garments in
   the view of his people, that all may know that he is their protector
   and avenger; for when the people were weighed down by innumerable
   evils, and at the same time the Edomites and other enemies, as if they
   had been placed beyond the reach of all danger, freely indulged in
   wickedness, which remained unpunished, a dangerous temptation might
   arise, as if these things happened by chance, or as if God did not care
   for his people, or chastised them too severely. If the Jews were
   punished for despising God, much more the Edomites, and other avowed
   enemies of the name of God, ought to have been punished.

   The Prophet meets this very serious temptation by representing God the
   avenger as returning from the slaughter of the Edomites, as if he were
   drenched with their blood. There is great liveliness and energy in a
   description of this sort, Who is this? for that question raises the
   hearts of the hearers into a state of astonishment, and strikes them
   more forcibly than a plain narrative. On this account the Prophet
   employed it, in order to arouse the hearts of the Jews from their
   slumbering and stupefaction.

   We know that the Edomites were somewhat related to the Jews by blood;
   for they were descended from the same ancestors, and derived their name
   from Esau, who was also called Edom. (Genesis 36:1, 8, 9.) Having
   corrupted the pure worship of God, though they bore the same mark of
   circumcision, they persecuted the Jews with deadly hatred. They
   likewise inflamed the rage of other enemies against the Jews, and
   shewed that they took great pleasure in the ruin of that people, as is
   evident; from the encouraging words addressed by them to its
   destroyers.

   "Remember, O Lord, (says the Psalmist,) the children of Edom, who, in
   the day of the destruction of Jerusalem, said, Raze, raze it even to
   the foundations." (Psalm 137:7.)

   The Prophet, therefore, threatens that judgment shall be passed on the
   Edomites, that none may imagine that they shall escape punishment for
   that savage cruelty with which they burned towards their brethren; for
   God will punish all wicked men and enemies of the Church in such a
   manner as to shew that the Church is the object of his care.

   Beautiful in his raiment. Because spots of blood pollute and stain the
   conquerors, Isaiah affirms that God will nevertheless be "beautiful in
   his raiment," after having taken vengeance on the enemies. In like
   manner, we have seen in other passages (Isaiah 34:6) that the slaughter
   of the wicked is compared to sacrifices, because the glory of God
   shines brightly in them; for can we conceive of any ornament more
   lovely than judgment? Thus, in order to impress men with reverence for
   God's righteous vengeance, he pronounces the blood with which he was
   sprinkled, by slaying and destroying the wicked, to be highly beautiful
   and ornamental. As if he had said, "Think not that God will resemble a
   person of mean rank. Though he be drenched with blood, yet this will
   not prevent his glory and majesty from shining brightly."

   Marching in the greatness of his strength. Various expositions of the
   word tsh (tzogneh) are given by the Jews. Some view it in a transitive
   sense, as referring to the people whom the Lord brought back from
   captivity. Others refer it to the nations whom the Lord will remove to
   another country, though they appear to have a settled habitation. But I
   consider it to he more agreeable to the context to give to it an
   absolute sense as a noun. The Prophet, therefore, describes God's
   majestic march and heroic firmness, by which he displays vast power.

   I who speak. The Lord himself replies; and this carries much more
   authority than if the Prophet spoke in his own person. Believers are
   reminded by him of former predictions, that they may know that in the
   judgments of God not only his justice and goodness, but likewise his
   faithfulness is manifested. As if he had said, "Behold, ye now see
   fulfilled what I have already and frequently testified to you by my
   servants. This effect of my promises clearly shews that I am true, and
   that I speak justly and sincerely, and not for the purpose of deceiving
   you." The vision would have been little fitted to strike their minds,
   if the Jews had not remembered those promises which they formerly
   heard; but since the design of it was, that they should rely on God's
   salvation, he at the same time claims for himself no ordinary power to
   save.

   2. Wherefore is thy raiment red? He proceeds with the same subject;
   but, as it would have impaired the force of the narrative, he does not
   immediately explain whence came the red color of God's garments, but
   continues to put questions, that he may arouse their minds to the
   consideration of what is strange and uncommon. He means that this
   sprinkling of blood is something remarkable and extraordinary. The
   comparison drawn from a "wine-press" is highly appropriate; for the
   town Bozrah, which he mentioned a little before, lay in a vine-bearing
   district. As if he had said, "There will be other vintages than those
   which are customary; for blood shall be shed instead of the juice of
   the grapes."

   3. Alone have I pressed the wine-press. The Prophet now explains the
   vision, and the reason why the Lord was stained with blood. It is
   because he will take vengeance on the Edomites and other enemies who
   treated his people cruelly. It would be absurd to say that these things
   relate to Christ, because he alone and without human aid redeemed us;
   for it means that God will punish the Edomites in such a manner that he
   will have no need of the assistance of men, because he will be
   sufficiently able to destroy them. The Jews might have objected that
   the Edomites are powerful, and are not harassed by any wars, but are in
   a flourishing and tranquil condition. The Prophet shews that this does
   not prevent the Lord from inflicting punishment on them whenever he
   shall think proper. Human means were, indeed, employed by him when he
   took vengeance on the Edomites, but in such a manner that it was made
   evident to all that it was entirely directed by his hand, and that no
   part of it could be ascribed to human forces or counsels. They were
   overwhelmed by sudden and unlooked-for destruction, of which the people
   ought not to have doubted that God, who had so often warned them of it,
   was the author.

   And of the peoples there was none with me. [173] This is added in order
   to intimate that, although "peoples" will arise out of the earth in
   order to destroy the nation of Edom, yet the work of God shall be
   separate from them, because nothing was farther from the design of
   heathen nations than to inflict punishment on the Edomites for their
   unjust cruelty. For this reason the Lord wishes his judgment to be
   known and to be illustriously displayed amidst the din of arms and
   tempestuous commotions.

   For I will tread them. I willingly retain the future tense; for the
   Prophet speaks of events that are future and not yet accomplished; and
   although the Edomites were living in prosperity and at their ease, yet
   God would severely punish them on account of their cruelty. Why the
   Prophet makes use of the metaphor of a bloody wine-press, which is a
   shocking and melancholy sight, we have already in part explained; but
   it ought likewise to be added, that the punishments and vengeance which
   God inflicts on enemies are appropriately called his vintage, as if he
   gathered them when he ruins or destroys them. In like manner, such
   punishment is called in another passage (Isaiah 34:6) a solemn
   sacrifice; that we may learn that glory ought to be ascribed to God,
   not less when he executes his judgments than when he exhibits tokens of
   compassion. [174]

   And I will stain all my raiment. He nevertheless describes his amazing
   love toward the Jews, in deigning to sprinkle himself with the blood of
   enemies on their account; and that is the reason why he makes use of
   the word stain.

   In my wrath. He shews that this is of itself sufficient for destroying
   the Edomites, that the Lord is angry with them; as if he had said that
   there will be none to rescue them, when the Lord shall be pleased to
   chastise, Hence we may infer that the destruction of men proceeds from
   nothing else than the wrath of God; as, on the other hand, on his graco
   alone depends our salvation. In a word, God intended here to testify
   that the Edomites shall not remain unpunished for having persecuted the
   Church of God.

   4. For the day of vengeance is in my heart. In the former clause of
   this verse Isaiah intimates that God does not cease to discharge his
   office, though he does not instantly execute his judgments, but, on the
   contrary, delays till a seasonable time, which he knows well; and that
   it does not belong to us to prescribe to him when or how he ought to do
   this or that, but we ought to bow submissively to his decree, that he
   may administer all things according to his pleasure. Let us not,
   therefore, imagine that he is asleep, or that he is idle, when he
   delays.

   And the year of my redeemed is come. In this latter clause he shews
   that all these things are done for the sake of believers. "Day" and
   "year" are here used by him in the same sense; but by the word "year"
   is denoted the long duration of the captivity, that the Jews may not
   despair or grow faint and weary, if the redemption be long delayed. The
   Lord therefore punishes and destroys wicked men for the purpose of
   delivering the godly and of redeeming his Church, for which he has a
   special regard.

   Finally, by the slaughter and destruction of them he opens up a way for
   his grace. And this tends to our consolation, that whenever we see
   tokens of God's wrath toward the wicked, we may know that the fruit of
   the punishment which they endure will come to us; for in this way it is
   clearly seen that our groans are heard, and that God, when he wishes to
   relieve the afflicted, is armed with strength to put to flight all the
   enemies of his Church. Wherefore, although the cross be heavy to us,
   yet by hearing patiently let us learn to lift up our minds by hope to
   that "year" which God hath appointed for executing his vengeance.

   5. I looked, and there was none to help. Although the Jews were
   destitute of all assistance, and no one aided them by word or deed, yet
   he shews that the arm of the Lord is alone sufficient to punish
   enemies, and to set his people at liberty. He shews, therefore, that
   from God alone they ought to expect salvation, that they may not gaze
   around in every direction, but may have their eyes wholly fixed on God,
   who has no need of the assistance of others.

   And I wondered. He represents God as amazed that there is none to
   stretch out a hand to him, when he wishes to execute his judgments,
   that he may impress more deeply on the minds of believers this
   doctrine, that God has no need of human aid, and that he is sufficient
   of himself for procuring salvation to his people. By this circumstance
   he magnifies still more the assistance which he had determined to
   render to his people, partly to correct their distrust, and partly to
   exhort them to gratitude in future; for God assumes a different
   character, when he says that he stood like one astonished; because this
   stupidity belonged literally to the Jews, who scarcely believed what
   could not be done by the power of men. With every assistance,
   therefore, he contrasts his own arm, with the invincible power of which
   he says that he will be satisfied, both that he may be seen to be their
   Savior, and that he may scatter and lay low all the wicked.

   6. And I will tread down the peoples. From the preceding statement he
   draws the conclusion, that God's wrath is sufficiently powerful to
   destroy the wicked, without calling for the assistance of others; and
   he does so in order that the Jews may not be deterred from cherishing
   favorable hopes by the strength that is arrayed against them.

   And will make them drunk. The expression, "make drunk," must here be
   taken in a different sense from what it formerly had in some passages.
   We have seen that sometimes we are made drunk, when God strikes us with
   fury or madness, (Isaiah 29:9,) or with a spirit of giddiness, (Isaiah
   19:14,) or, in a word, "gives us up to a reprobate mind." (Romans
   1:28.) But here it means nothing else than "to fill," and to strike
   even to satiety, or, as we commonly say, (tout leur saoul,) "to their
   heart's content;" a metaphor which the prophets frequently employ.

   And will cast down their strength to the earth. That is, though they
   think that they are invincible, yet I will cast down and destroy them.
   The meaning may be thus summed up. "The Jews, when they are afflicted,
   must not call in question their salvation, as if God hated them, and
   must not be amazed at the chastisements which they endure, as if they
   happened by chance; for other nations, by whom they are now oppressed,
   shall be punished, there shall be a revolution of affairs, and they
   shall not escape who chant a triumph before the time. He produces as an
   example the Edomites, because they were nearer and better known than
   others, and were also the most injurious.

   7. I will keep in remembrance the compassions of Jehovah. Isaiah brings
   consolation to his people in distressed and calamitous circumstances,
   and by his example bids the Jews, when they were oppressed by
   afflictions, call to remembrance God's ancient benefits, and betake
   themselves to prayer; that they may not be like hypocrites, who only in
   prosperity feel the goodness of God, and are so much cast down by
   adversity as to remember no benefit. But when the Lord chastises us, we
   ought to mention and celebrate his benefits, and to cherish better
   hopes for the future; for the Lord is always the same, and does not
   change his purpose or his inclination; and therefore if we leave room
   for his compassion, we shall never be left destitute.

   Such appears to me to be the scope of the context, though others view
   it in a different light, namely, that the Prophet, having hitherto
   spoken of the destruction of the people, comforts himself by this
   confident hope of compassion, that God wishes to save some of them. But
   they are mistaken in supposing that Isaiah has hitherto spoken of the
   Jews, as if God punished them only, whereas he testified that he would
   likewise punish other nations, that they might not think that they
   alone were hated by God; and accordingly, he now exhorts them to
   celebrate the remembrance of those benefits which God had formerly
   bestowed on the fathers, that by their example they may know better the
   love of God toward them. From the context it will also appear clearly,
   that the Jews are joined with their fathers, that the covenant which
   belongs to them in common with their fathers, may encourage them to
   hope well.

   As upon all that Jehovah hath bestowed on us. He employs the particle
   of comparison, As, in order to shew that in adversity we ought
   instantly to remember those benefits which the Lord bestowed on his
   people, as if they were placed before our eyes, though they appear to
   be buried by extreme old age; for if they do not belong to us, the
   remembrance of them would be idle and unprofitable.

   He confirms this also by saying on us. Because the Jews were members of
   the same body, he justly reckons them the descendants of their
   grandfathers and other ancestors. Isaiah did not, indeed, experience
   those benefits which he mentions; but because they had been bestowed on
   the Church, the fruit of them came partly to himself, because he was a
   member of the Church. And undoubtedly that communion of saints which we
   profess to believe, ought to be so highly valued by us, as to lead us
   to think that what the Church has received from the hand of God has
   been given to us; for the Church of God is one, and that which now is
   has nothing separate from that which formerly was. [175]

   In the multitude of kindness toward the house of Israel. By these words
   Isaiah more fully explains his meaning. Since therefore the Lord shewed
   himself to be kind and bountiful toward his people, we ought to hope
   for the same thing in the present day, because we are
   "fellow-citizens," and members of the very same Church. (Ephesians
   2:19.) Although we feel that God is angry with us on account of our
   sins, yet our hearts ought to be encouraged by hope and armed by
   confidence; because he cannot forsake his Church. Yet it ought to be
   carefully observed, that the Prophet extols and magnifies in lofty
   terms the mercy of God, that we may know that the foundation of our
   salvation and of all blessings is laid on it; for this excludes the
   merits of men, that nothing may in any way be ascribed to them.

   That this doctrine may be better understood, we must take into account
   the time of which Isaiah speaks. At that time righteousness and
   godliness chiefly flourished; for although the people were exceedingly
   corrupted, yet Moses, Aaron, and other good men, gave illustrious
   examples of unblamable and holy lives. Yet the Prophet shews that all
   the blessings which the Lord. bestowed on Moses and others ought to be
   ascribed, not to their merits, but to the mercy of God. But what are we
   in comparison of Moses, that we should deserve anything from God? This
   repetition, therefore, of kindness, mercies, and compassions, as it
   raises feeble minds on high, that they may rise above stupendous and
   formidable temptations, ought also to remove and swallow up all thought
   of human merits.

   8. For he said, Surely they are my people. He mentions the election of
   the people, and represents God as speaking of it, that we may keep in
   view the end of our calling., that he wished to have a peculiar people,
   who should call upon him. And yet he accuses the people of ingratitude,
   in having disappointed God of his expectation; not that the Lord can be
   deceived, for he dearly foresaw what they would become, and also
   declared it (Deuteronomy 32:15) by Moses; but Scripture speaks in this
   manner, when it is altogether owing to the ingratitude of men that
   they, disappoint God, as we formerly saw,

   "I looked that it should yield grapes, and it hath yielded wild
   grapes." (Isaiah 5:4.)

   Nor does he treat of God's secret decree, but speaks after the manner
   of men about the mutual consent between God and believers, that all to
   whom he deigns to offer himself as their Father, may answer to God when
   he calls; "for the foundation standeth sure, that none of the elect
   shall perish, because the Lord knoweth who are truly his. (2 Timothy
   2:19.)

   Children that do not lie. We know that the end of our calling is, that
   we may lead a holy and blameless life, as the whole of Scripture
   testifies, and as we have often stated at former passages. (Isaiah
   43:21; 55:5.) Justly, therefore, does the Lord say that he elected the
   people, that they might be holy and true, that he might have children
   who were averse to falsehood and vanity. But the people did not keep
   their promise, and were far removed from that simplicity which they
   ought to have followed; for everything was full of deceit and
   hypocrisy. Yet nevertheless he holds out the hope of pardon, provided
   that they fly to God and humble themselves by sincere repentance.

   Therefore he became their Savior. The Prophet shews what is the chief
   part of the service of God; namely, to have a pure and upright heart.
   Hence it follows that God forsakes us, because we are treacherous and
   are covenant-breakers. Seeing therefore that this people took pleasure
   in their vices, it was proper first to convict them of their unbelief,
   that being afterwards converted to God, they might find him to be their
   Savior.

   9. In all their affliction he was afflicted. He enlarges on the
   goodness of God toward his people, and shews that he was kind to the
   fathers, so long as they permitted themselves to be governed by him,
   and was so careful about them that he himself bore their distresses and
   afflictions. By speaking in this mainner, he declares the incomparable
   love which God bears toward his people. In order to move us more
   powerfully and draw us to himself, the Lord accommodates himself to the
   manner of men, by attributing to himself all the affection, love, and
   (sumpatheia) compassion which a father can have. And yet in human
   affairs it is impossible to conceive of any sort of kindness or
   benevolence which he does not immeasurably surpass.

   I acknowledge that l'(lo) with ' (aleph) literally signifies not; and
   therefore I do not altogether reject a different interpretation, that
   the people in their afflictions were not afflicted, because God always
   applied some remedy to alleviate their sorrows. But since ', (aleph,)in
   many passages, is manifestly changed into v, (vau,) learned
   commentators justly, in my opinion, view it as equivalent to the
   pronoun lv, (lo,) to him. In this sense the Prophet testifies that God,
   in order to alleviate the distresses and afflictions of his people,
   himself bore their burdens; not that he can in any way endure anguish,
   but, by a very customary figure of speech, he assumes and applies to
   himself human passions. [176]

   And the angel of his face saved them. Of the care which he took of them
   he next explains the effect, by saying that he always delivered them by
   the hand of his angel, whom he calls "the angel of his face," because
   he was the witness of the presence of God, and, as it were, his herald
   to execute his commands; that we may not think that angels come forth
   of their own accord, or move at their own suggestion, to render
   assistance to us; for the Lord makes use of their agency, and makes
   known to us his presence by means of them. Angels can do nothing of
   themselves, and give no assistance, except so far as the Lord
   commissions them

   "to be ministers of our salvation." (Hebrews 1:14.)

   Let us not, therefore, fix our whole attention on them, for they lead
   us straight to God.

   If it be thought preferable to interpret this phrase as describing the
   lively image of God, because that angel, being the leader and guardian
   of the people, shewed the face of God as in a mirror, that meaning will
   be highly appropriate. And indeed I have no doubt that the office of
   Savior is ascribed to Christ, as we know that he was the angel of
   highest rank, by whose guidance, safeguard, and protection, the Church
   has been preserved and upheld.

   In his love. He shews what was the cause of so great benefits; namely,
   his love and undeserved kindness, as Moses also teaches. "How came it
   that God adopted thy fathers, but because he loved them, and because
   his heart clave to them?" (Deuteronomy 4:37; 7:7, 8.) Moses wishes to
   set aside entirely the lofty opinion which they might entertain of
   themselves, because they were proud and haughty, and claimed more for
   themselves than they had a right to claim; and therefore he shews that
   there was no other cause for so great benefits than the absolute and
   undeserved goodness of God.

   He bore them and carried them. He next makes use of the same metaphor
   which Moses employs in his song, when he says that God

   "carried his people in the same manner as an eagle bears her young on
   her wings." (Deuteronomy 32:11.)

   Or perhaps some may choose to refer it to sheep, as we have seen
   elsewhere, "He will lead those that are with young." (Isaiah 40:11.)
   Yet it is more natural to view this as a comparison to a mother, who
   not only carries the child in the womb, but rears it till it arrive at
   full strength. The meaning may be thus summed up. "The people
   experienced the grace of God, not only once, when they were redeemed,
   but during the whole course of their life, so that to him alone ought
   to be ascribed all the benefits which they have received." And
   therefore he adds --

   All the days of the age; that is, in an uninterrupted succession of
   many years; for God is not wearied in doing good, nor is it only to a
   single age that he shews his kindness; for he has never ceased to adorn
   and enrich his Church with various gifts.

   10. But they were rebellious. The Prophet now comes down to the second
   clause, in which he states that the Lord ceased to shew kindness to his
   people, because they revolted, and turned aside from him. The question
   turns on this point: "God exercised his kindness towards our fathers
   for a long time; why do not we experience the same kindness? Is he
   unlike himself?" By no means; but we ourselves, by our rebellion,
   refuse and even drive away his goodness. Yet the Prophet not only
   accuses the men of his own age, but likewise condemns former ages. We
   see how, even when they had Moses for their leader, they murmured
   against God and rebelled. (Exodus 17:5; Numbers 11:1; 20:3.)

   Therefore he became an enemy to them. He shews that the effect of their
   rebellion was, that God, who had loved them tenderly, yet, in
   consequence of their obstinacy, "became an enemy to them." Let them
   accuse themselves, therefore, for suffering the punishment of their
   transgressions; for God is by nature disposed to shew kindness, and
   nothing is more agreeable to him than to bestow his favors.

   And they provoked his Holy Spirit. We are said to irritate "the Holy
   Spirit" by our wickedness; and this form of expression, after the
   manner of men, is intended to produce in us stronger abhorrence against
   sin, which provokes God's wrath and hatred. Now, since it is the same
   Spirit that performs the work of our salvation, the Prophet suggests
   that God is alienated from us by our sins, which break asunder the bond
   of union. To this belongs the exhortation of Paul,

   "Grieve not; the Spirit of God, by whom ye have been sealed to the day
   of redemption." (Ephesians 4:30.)

   It ought also to be observed here, that we have no reason for blaming
   men, who hate and persecute us, seeing that the Lord makes war with us,
   and punishes our transgressions by their hand. We ought therefore to
   accuse and condemn our transgressions; for they are the cause of all
   the evils which we endure.

   11. And he remembered the days of old. This is the design of the
   chastisement, that the people may be roused from their lethargy, and
   may call to remembrance those things which they had formerly forgotten;
   for we are so intoxicated by prosperity that we altogether forget God.
   And therefore chastisements bring back this thought, which had been
   defaced in us, "Where is God who bestowed so many benefits on our
   fathers?" For I refer these things to the past time; and therefore I
   have translated vlm (gnolam) "of old." and not "of the age," which
   would be unsuitable to this passage, seeing that he mentions those
   times in which Moses governed the people of God. Wherefore, the true
   meaning is, that the Jews, being wretchedly oppressed, thought of "the
   times of old," in which the Lord displayed his power for defending his
   people. As to the opinion of some commentators, who refer it to God, as
   if he contended with the wickedness of the people, because he chose
   rather to bestow his favors improperly on ungrateful persons, than not
   to complete what he had begun, it appears to be too harsh and
   unnatural; and therefore the Prophet rather utters the groans and
   complaints of a wretched people, when they have learned from
   chastisements how miserable it is to lose God's protection.

   With the shepherd of his flock. By "the shepherd" he means Moses, and I
   see no good reason for translating it in the plural rather than the
   singular number. [177]

   That put his Holy Spirit in the midst of him. He describes also the
   manner; namely, that he endowed him with a remarkable grace of the Holy
   Spirit; for "to put the Spirit in the midst of him" means nothing else
   than to display the power of his Spirit. Others prefer to view it as
   referring to the people; and I do not object to that opinion. But when
   the Lord chose Moses, and appointed him to be the leader of the whole
   people, in him especially the Lord is said to have "put his Spirit."
   Now, he gave his Spirit to him for the benefit of the whole people,
   that he might be a distinguished minister of his grace, and might
   restore them to liberty. At the same time, the power of the Spirit of
   God was seen in the midst of the whole people.

   12. Who led them. Here he goes on to describe the miraculous
   deliverance of the people, who were led out of Egypt under the guidance
   of Moses; and he goes on to relate the complaints which might occur to
   the minds of the afflicted Jews. Here we see two things connected;
   namely, the right hand of Moses and the arm of God's majesty. The Lord
   employs the labors and ministry of men in such a manner that his praise
   and glory must not be in any degree diminished or obscured; for, while
   these things are transacted under Moses as the leader, everything is
   ascribed to God. Just as, when the ministers of the Gospel are said to
   "forgive sins," (John 20:23,) which nevertheless belongs to God alone,
   does this detract from his authority and majesty? Not at all; for they
   are only his instruments, and lend their labor to God, to whom the
   undivided praise ought to be rendered. And indeed, what could the hand
   of a single man have accomplished, if it had not been wielded by the
   arm of God?

   Accordingly, he expressly adds the design, that God performed miracles
   at that time, in order that he might gain for himself an everlasting
   name; and if we are not at liberty to deprive him of this, it will not
   be lawful to transfer to man even the smallest portion of praise.

   13. Who made them walk through the depths. These things are added for
   the purpose of setting that benefit in a stronger light. He likewise
   brings forward comparisons, in order to describe that extraordinary
   power of God: "As a horse in the desert, As a beast into a plain;" that
   is, he led out his people as gently as if one were leading a horse into
   a plain. By the word "desert" is not meant the wilderness of Paran in
   which the people dwelt forty years; but, in accordance with the
   ordinary usage of the Hebrew tongue, it denotes pasture, in which herds
   and flocks wander at large. This is still more evident from the
   following verse, --

   14. As a beast into a plain. Here, instead of "desert," he makes use of
   the word "plain;" and the same meaning is drawn from what he says, that
   "the people walked through the depths without stumbling, as horses are
   wont to do in the desert." In a word, he informs them that the Red Sea
   was no obstacle to the people marching through the midst of the depths,
   as if they were walking on level ground. [178]

   A glorious name. This is in the same sense that he called it a little
   before "an everlasting name." The people now argue with God, that if he
   once wished to obtain "a glorious name," he must not now throw away all
   care about it; otherwise the remembrance of the benefits which he
   formerly bestowed on the fathers will be entirely blotted out.

   15. Look down from heaven. After having, in the name of the whole
   people, related the benefits of former times, he now applies this to
   the present subject, and entreats the Lord to pay regard to his people.

   Behold from the habitation of thy holiness. By these words he means
   that the power of God is not diminished, though this does not always
   appear; for we must supply a contrast, that God at that time might be
   said to be concealed, and did not shew himself to them as he had shewn
   himself to the fathers. "Although, therefore, we do not see thee, O
   Lord, and although thou hast withdrawn from us as if thou wert shut up
   in heaven, so that thou mayest seem to have altogether ceased to care
   about us, yet look down from heaven, and from thy habitation' behold
   our distresses." Believers must differ from unbelievers in
   acknowledging a powerful and kind God, even when they perceive no
   tokens of his power or kindness; and thus, even when he is at a great
   distance, they nevertheless call on him; for God never ceases to care
   about his people, (1 Peter 5:7,) since he governs unceasingly every
   part of the world.

   Where is thy zeal? By these questions believers appear in some measure
   to reproach God, as if he were not now moved by any affection toward
   them, or as if his power were diminished; but the Prophet's meaning is
   different; for in thus extolling those benefits, his object is, as I
   have already remarked, to confirm the hope of believers for the future,
   that they may know that God is always like himself, and will never lay
   aside his care about his people. This will appear more clearly from
   what follows.

   The multitude of bowels and of compassions denotes God's vast goodness;
   for God displays and opens up his bowels, so to speak, when he
   exercises toward us bounty and kindness, which truly is so great that
   we cannot praise it in adequate language. Nor is it a new thing that
   believers, when oppressed by grief, expostulated familiarly with God
   for shutting up his bowels. They do indeed hold by this principle, that
   God is always compassionate, because he does not change his nature; and
   though they impute it to their sins that they do not experience him to
   be compassionate, yet, that they may not sink into despair, they ask
   how it is possible that God should treat them with severity, and, as if
   he had forgotten his natural disposition, should shew nothing but
   tokens of absolute displeasure? [179]

   16. Surely thou art our Father. God permits us to reveal our hearts
   familiarly before him; for prayer is nothing else than the opening up
   of our heart before God; as the greatest alleviation is, to pour our
   cares, distresses, and anxieties into his bosom. "Roll thy cares on the
   Lord," says David. (Psalm 37:5.) After having enumerated God's
   benefits, from which his goodness and power are clearly seen, so that
   it is evident that it is nothing else than the sins of men that hinder
   them from feeling it as formerly, he returns to this consideration,
   that the goodness of God is nevertheless so great as to exceed the
   wickedness of men. He calls God a Father in the name of the Church; for
   all cannot call him thus, but it is the peculiar privilege of the
   Church to address him by a father's name. Hence it ought to be inferred
   that Christ, as the first-born, or rather the only-begotten Son of God,
   always governed his Church; for in no other way than through him can
   God be called Father. And here we again see that believers do not
   contend with God, but draw an argument from his nature, that, by
   conquering temptation, they may strive to cherish good hope.

   Though Abraham do not know us. Here a question arises, Why does he say
   that the patriarch does not know the people? Jerome thinks that this is
   done because they were degenerated, and therefore were unworthy of so
   high an honor; but that interpretation appears to me to be exceedingly
   unnatural. The true meaning is, "Though our fathers deny us, yet God
   will reckon us as children, and will act toward us as a Father."

   They who say that Abraham and other believers care no more about the
   affairs of men, torture by excessive ingenuity the words of the
   Prophet. I do not speak of the fact itself, but I say that those words
   do not prove that the saints have no care about us. The natural and
   true meaning is, "O Lord, that thou art our Father will be so sure and
   so firmly established, that even though all parentage and all
   relationship should cease among men, yet thou wilt not fail to be our
   Father. Sooner shall the rights of nature perish than thou shalt not
   act toward us as a Father, or the sacred adoption shall be infringed,
   which was founded on thy unchangeable decree, and ratified by the death
   of thine only-begotten Son." [180]

   Yet we may infer from this that holy men present themselves before God,
   and pray to him, in such a manner as not to look at any intercessions
   of others; for they are commanded to pray so as to rely on God's
   fatherly kindness, and to lay aside every other confidence. And if the
   Prophet did not instruct the Jews, in order that God might listen to
   them, to turn their mind to Abraham and Jacob, to whom promises so
   numerous and so great had been given, assuredly much less ought we to
   resort, to Peter, and Paul, and others; for this is not a private
   prayer offered by a single individual or by a few persons, but the
   public and universal prayer of the whole Church, as if the Prophet laid
   down a general form. Besides, our confidence ought to be founded on
   God's favor and kindness as a Father, so as to shut our eyes on all the
   intercessions of men, whether living or dead. In a word, believers
   profess that they do not gaze around in all directions, but rely on God
   alone.

   It comes now to a question, Why did he pass by Isaac and mention in a
   special manner Abraham and Jacob? The reason is, that with those two
   persons the covenant was more solemnly ratified. Isaac was, indeed, a
   partaker of the covenant, but did not receive promises so large and so
   numerous.

   Our Redeemer. Redemption is here described as a testimony of that
   adoption; for by this proof God manifested himself to be the Father of
   the people; and therefore boldly and confidently do believers call on
   God as their Father, because he gave a remarkable testimony of his
   fatherly kindness toward them, which encouraged them to confidence. But
   redemption alone would, not have been enough, if a promise had not
   likewise been added; and therefore, as he once redeemed them, he
   promised that he would always be their Father.

   From everlasting is thy name. By the word "everlasting" [181] is
   pointed out the stability and continuance of his fatherly name, for we
   did not deserve the name of children; but his will, by which he once
   adopted us to be children, is unchangeable. Since, therefore, the Lord
   has an eternal name, it follows that the title and favor which are
   connected with that eternity and flow from it, shall be durable and
   eternal. [182]

   17. Why didst thou cause as to wander, O Jehovah, from thy ways?
   Because these modes of expression appear to be rough and harsh, some
   think that unbelievers are here introduced as murmuring against God and
   uttering blasphemies, with the rage and obstinacy of men who are in a
   state of despair. But the connection in which these words occur does
   not at all admit of that interpretation; for the Prophet points out the
   fruit that would result from the calamities and afflictions of the
   Jews, because, having been subdued and tamed, they no longer are fierce
   or indulge in their vices. They are therefore ashamed that in time past
   they departed so far from the right way, and they acknowledge their own
   fault.

   And indeed when they trace their sins to the wrath of God, they do not
   intend to free themselves from blame, or to set aside their guilt. But
   the Prophet employs a mode of expression which is of frequent
   occurrence; for in the Scriptures it is frequently said that God drives
   men into error, (2 Thessalonians 2:11;) "gives them up to a reprobate
   mind," (Romans 1:28;) and "hardens them." (Romans 9:18.) When believers
   speak in this manner, they do not intend to make God the author of
   error or of sin, as if they were innocent, or to free themselves from
   blame; but they look higher, and rather acknowledge that it is by their
   own fault that they are estranged from God and deprived of his Spirit,
   and that this is the reason why they are plunged into every kind of
   evils.

   Those who say that God leads us into error by privation, that is, by
   depriving us of his Spirit, do not perceive the actual design; for God
   himself is said to harden and to blind, when he gives up men to be
   blinded by Satan, who is the minister and executioner of his wrath.
   Without this we would be exposed to the rage of Satan; but, since he
   can do nothing without the command of God, to whose dominion he is
   subject, there will be no impropriety in saying that God is the author
   of blinding and hardening, as Scripture also affirms in many passages.
   (Romans 9:18.) And yet it cannot be said or declared that God is the
   author of sin, because he punishes the ingratitude of men by blinding
   them in this manner.

   Thus believers here acknowledge that God has forsaken them, but that it
   is by their own fault; [183] and they acknowledge God's righteous
   vengeance against them. In like manner, when Moses says that "God hath
   not hitherto given to the people eyes to see and a heart to
   understand," (Deuteronomy 29:4,) he does not lay the blame on God, but
   reminds the Jews whence they should seek to obtain a remedy for that
   stupidity of which they had been convicted. Yet it may appear as if
   here they aimed at something else, by inquiring into the cause and
   remonstrating with God, that he ought to have acted differently towards
   them and treated them less harshly. But I reply, that believers always
   look at the goodness of God, even when they acknowledge that they
   suffer justly on account of their sins.

   Some refer these words to the captivity; as if believers complained
   that God permitted them to languish so long in captivity. As if he had
   said, "The chief cause of their obstinacy is, that the Lord does not
   permit them to partake of his grace." Believers are troubled by a
   dangerous temptation, when they see wicked men pursuing their career
   without being punished, and are almost driven by it to despair; as it
   is beautifiully expressed by David. (Psalm 115:3.) But I think that the
   Prophet's meaning is more general; for believers acknowledge that they
   "wandered," because they were not governed by the Spirit of God; and
   they do not; expostulate with God, but desire to have that Spirit, by
   whom their fathers were guided, and from whom they obtained all
   prosperity.

   And hast caused our heart to depart from thy fear. tqsych, (takshiach,)
   is rendered by some, hast hardened; but as that would not agree with
   the words, "in thy fear," I have preferred to translate it, "Hast
   caused to depart;" for qsch, (kashach,) also signifies "to remove and
   place at a distance."

   Return on account of thy servants. Some think that these words relate
   to the whole people, as Scripture frequently gives the appellation of
   "servants of God" to all the citizens of the Church. But I think that
   they relate literally to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and that is much
   more probable; not that the people relied on their intercession, but
   because the Lord had made a covenant with them, which they should
   transmit from hand to hand to their posterity. Thus they do not hold
   out these patriarchs as men, but as ministers and depositaries or
   messengers of the covenant which was the foundation of their
   confidence. In the same manner, in that psalm,

   "Lord, remember David," (Psalm 132:1,)

   the name of the dead patriarch is mentioned to God, not because the
   saints thought that he would be their intercessor, but that the promise
   given to a single individual, as to establishing the kingdom in his
   family for ever, belongs to the body of the people.

   The Papists eagerly seize on these words, as if they were a proof of
   the intercessions of the saints. But how easy it is to reply may be
   easily seen from the true interpretation; for the fathers are
   mentioned, not because they had a right to obtain anything for them, or
   because they now intercede, but because with them was formed a gracious
   covenant, which belongs not only to themselves, but to all their
   posterity.

   To the tribes of thine inheritance. I have added the preposition To,
   which was understood, in order that the meaning might be more easy and
   obvious. It is a customary form of expression among the Hebrews,
   "Return the tribes," instead of "Return to the tribes;" as if he had
   said, "Return to a state of friendship with thy people." Hence it is
   evident that what was formerly said had no other object than that the
   people urged God to the exercise of mercy by representing to God their
   distresses and calamities. And in this manner we must come to God; that
   is, by recounting former benefits and laying before him our
   afflictions, if we desire to be delivered from them.

   He employs the word Inheritance, because God hath chosen that people to
   be his heritage; as if he had said, "Where shall thy people be, if we
   perish?" Not that the Lord was bound to that people, but that he had
   given his promise to them. [184] Accordingly, the people venture to
   remind God of his promise and to offer earnest prayer, because he had
   laid himself under a voluntary obligation both to the fathers and to
   posterity. Now, since all the promises are ratified and confirmed in
   Christ, (2 Corinthians 1:20,) and since we possess the reality of all
   things, we ought to be fortified by stronger confidence; for not only
   was the covenant made in his hand, but it was ratified and sealed by
   his blood. To the ancient fathers also he was indeed the Mediator, but
   we have everything clearer and plainer; because they were still kept
   amidst the darker shadows.

   18. For a little time. It is wonderful that the people should call it
   "a little time;" for fourteen hundred years had elapsed since the
   people began to possess that land. But we must take into account the
   promise by which he said that the seed of Abraham should have it as an
   everlasting inheritance; and therefore that was a short time, when
   compared with eternity. (Genesis 17:8; 48:4.) Believers, therefore,
   represent to God the shortness of that time; not that they accuse him
   of insincerity, but that he may remember the promise and covenant, and
   may have more regard to his own goodness than to the chastisements
   which they justly deserved. Thus the ancient Church complains that

   "her strength was weakened in the journey, that her days were
   shortened, and prays that she may not be cut off in the middle of her
   course," (Psalm 102:23, 24,)

   that is, because the fullness of age depended on the coming of Christ.

   Our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary. This was a much
   heavier complaint, that wicked men had profaned the land which the Lord
   had consecrated to himself. Undoubtedly this was far more distressing
   to the people than the rest of their calamities, and justly; for we
   ought not to care so much about ourselves as about religion and the
   worship of God. And this is also the end of redemption, that there may
   be a people that praises the name of the Lord and worships him in a
   right manner.

   19. We have been of old. The words of the Prophet admit of two
   meanings. Some view this passage in such a light as if the people
   argued with God on this ground, that they were elected at that time
   when the rest of the nations were rejected, and that this covenant was
   ratified "from of old," that is, for a long period. Another meaning,
   which I prefer, is this, that the people argue with God, and complain
   that they seem as if they did not differ at all from unbelievers; that
   is, because they receive from him no assistance or relief in adversity,
   which is unreasonable and improper. This statement is remarkable and
   worthy of notice; for, whenever we are oppressed beyond measure with
   adversity, we are permitted to complain to God, and to represent to him
   our calling, that he may render assistance, and shew how wide a
   difference there is between us and strangers.

   On whom thy name hath not been called. This is of the same import with
   what goes before; for it means that the calling of God must not be made
   void. And indeed the Lord does not wish that we should call upon him in
   vain; for prayers would be unprofitable and useless, if the Lord took
   no care of us. Now, the Church is distinguished by this mark, that "his
   name is called upon her." Unbelievers cannot call upon him; for there
   is no access to him but through the word, of which they have no
   knowledge; and therefore, wherever there is faith, there is also
   calling on him; and if there be no faith, it is certain that there is
   no hope or confidence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [173] "Yet he punished the Moabites by means of the Assyrians. How,
   then, was there none with him? I reply, -- 1. God distinguishes his
   work from the work of instruments. He says that he had quite a
   different end in view from what the instruments had, and therefore that
   he alone righteously executed this chastisement. 2. He means that this
   chastisement was of such a nature, so sudden and distressing, that all
   might see that it did not proceed merely from human counsels and
   secondary causes, but chiefly from God himself; and consequently that
   he is the first cause, and the Assyrians are the instrumental cause of
   the chastisement." -- Pareus.

   [174] "The treading of the wine-press alone is an expression often
   applied in sermons, and in religious books and conversation, to our
   Savior's sufferings. This application is described as customary in his
   own time by Vitringa, who considers it as having led to the forced
   exposition of the whole passage by the fathers and Cocceius as a
   description of Christ's passion. While the impossibility of such a
   sense in the original passage cannot be too strongly stated, there is
   no need of denying that the figure may be happily accommodated in the
   way suggested; as many expressions of the Old Testament may be applied
   to different objects with good effect, provided we are careful to avoid
   confounding such accommodations with the strict and primary import of
   the passage." -- Alexander.
   It may be proper to add that "the exposition of the whole passage" is
   still the subject of much controversy, and that a full and candid
   discussion of it by some person of competent learning and ability would
   do incalculable good. -- Ed.

   [175] "Here the Prophet, in the person of a captive Jew, makes a
   grateful acknowledgment of the manifold mercies bestowed on their
   nation from the time that he first took them into favor, the thoughts
   of which served to keep up their spirits, and made them hope that some
   time or other he would be mindful of them, and redeem them, as he did
   their forefathers." -- White.

   [176] "In all their distress there was distress to him, or, as the
   English Version renders it, In all their affliction he was afflicted.'
   This explanation, with the text on which it is founded, and which is
   exhibited by a number of manuscripts and editions, is approved by
   Luther, Vitringa, Clericus, Hitzig, Ewald, Umbreit, Hendewerk, and
   Knobel. It is favored, not only by the strong and affecting sense which
   it yields but by the analogy of Judges 10:16; 11:7, in one of which
   places the same phrase is used to denote human suffering, and in the
   other God is represented as sympathizing with it. The objections to it
   are, that it gratuitously renders necessary another anthropopathic
   explanation; that the natural collocation of the words, if this were
   the meaning, would be tsr lv, (tzar lo) as in 2 Samuel 1:26; that the
   negative is expressed by all the ancient versions; and that the
   critical presumption: is in favor of the Kethib, or textual reading, as
   the more ancient, which the Massorites merely corrected in the margin,
   without venturing to change it, and which ought not to be now
   abandoned, if a coherent sense can be put on it, as it can in this
   case." -- Alexander.

   [177] Our author refers to a different reading, ry, (rogne,) the
   construct plural, instead of rh, (rogneh,) the construct singular of
   rh, (rogneh.) -- Ed.
   "Nearly sixty manuscripts and forty editions read, ry (rogne) in the
   plural, which may then be understood as including Aaron, (Psalm 77:20,)
   and, as Vitringa thinks, Miriam, (Micah 6:4,) or perhaps the seventy
   elders, who are probably referred to in the last clause as under a
   special divine influence. (See Numbers 11:17. Compare Exodus 31:3;
   35:31" -- Alexander.

   [178] "In these three verses the Prophet sets forth the care he had of
   his people, leading them as it were by his hand, that they might not
   fall and hurt themselves, dividing the Red Sea before them, and
   conducting them as safely through the dangerous passage, as a horse
   which treads on plain even ground is in no danger of falling, or as a
   beast heavy laden goes down a steep precipice warily, with a great deal
   of caution every step it takes; so the Lord led his people gently
   through the wilderness, and caused them at last to rest in the pleasant
   valleys of Canaan." -- White.

   [179] Luther's version runs thus, Deine grofe herliche Barmherzigfeit
   halt eich hart gegen mich. "Thy great compassionate loving-kindness
   deals hardly with me." -- Ed.

   [180] "The meaning cannot be that Abraham and Israel are ashamed of us
   as unworthy and degenerate descendants, as Piscator understands it; or
   that Abraham and Israel cannot save us by their merits, as Cocceius
   understands it; or that Abraham and Israel did not deliver us from
   Egypt, as the Targum understands it; or that Abraham and Israel, being
   now dead, can do nothing for us, as Vitringa and the later writers
   understand it. The true sense of the verse, as it appears to me, is
   that the Church or chosen people, although once, for temporary reasons,
   co-extensive and coincident with a single race, is not essentially a
   national organization but a spiritual body. Its father is not Abraham
   or Israel, but Jehovah, who is and always has been its Redeemer, who
   has borne that name from everlasting." -- Alexander.

   [181] "De tout temps." "Of all time."

   [182] "Dureront a jamais." "Shall endure for ever."

   [183] "Mais leur peche en est cause." "But their sin is the cause of
   it."

   [184] "Mais d'autant qu'il leur avoit jure fidelite." "But because he
   had sworn to be faithful to them."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 64.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 64:1-12

   1. Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come
   down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence,

   1. O si (vel, Si forte) disrumpas coelos; descendas, et a facie tua
   montes diffluant!

   2. As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to
   boil; to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may
   tremble at thy presence!

   2. Tanquam incendio ignis liquefactionum, ignis aquas ebullire fecit,
   ad manifestandum nomen tuum hostibus tuis; a fade tua gentes tremebant.

   3. When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for, thou camest
   down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence.

   3. Cum faceres terribilia, quae non expectavimus, descendisti; a fade
   tua montes defluxerunt.

   4. For since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor
   perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, besides thee,
   what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.

   4. A seculo non audirerunt, neque auribus perceperunt; oculus non vidit
   Deum praeter to, qui faciat (vel, Dens quae facit) expectanti se.

   5. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness; those
   that remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have
   sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.

   5. Occurristi laetanti et facienti justitiam. In viis tuis
   recordabantur tui.; ecce tu iratus es, et nos peecavimus; in ipsis
   seculum, et salvabimur (vel, saluti sumus).

   6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are
   as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like
   the wind, have taken us away.

   6. Et fuimus quasi immundus nos omnes, et tanquam vestimentum
   inquinatum omnes justitiae nostrae. Et decidimus instar folii onmes
   nos; et iniquitates nostrae, quasi ventus, abstulerunt nos.

   7. And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up
   himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us, and
   hast consumed us, because of our iniquities.

   7. Non est qui invocet nomen tuum, nee qui se excitet ut to
   apprehendat; quia abscondisti faciem tuam a nobis, et tabescere nos
   fecisti in manu iniquitatis nostrum.

   8. But now, O LORD, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our
   potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.

   8. Et nune, Iehova, tu es pater noster; nos lutum, et tu figulus
   noster; opus, inquam, manuum tuarum sumus omnes.

   9. Be not wroth very sore, O LORD, neither remember iniquity for ever:
   behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

   9. Ne irascaris, Iehova, ultra modum; ne in seculum memineris
   iniquitatis. Ecce respice, quaeso; nos omnes populus tuus sumus.

   10. Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a
   desolation.

   10. Urbes sanctitatis tuae fuerunt desertum; Sion desertum fuit,
   Ierusalem solitudo.

   11. Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee,
   is burned up with fire: and all our pleasant things are laid waste.

   11. Doritos sanctuarii nostri, et gloriae nostrae, in qua to
   celebrarunt patres nostri, fuit in combustionem ignis; et omnia nostra
   desiderabilia in vastationem.

   12. Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O LORD? wilt thou hold
   thy peace, and afflict us very sore?

   12. An super his to continebis, Iehova? Tacebis, et affliges nos ultra
   modum?


   1. O that thou wouldest rend the heavens! The particle lv' (lu) appears
   to me, in this passage, to denote a wish; for, although it has many
   significations, yet the context shews that this signification is more
   appropriate to this passage than any other. Here believers burst forth
   into earnest prayer, as usually happens, when in sore adversity we do
   not find plain terms to be sufficiently forcible for our purpose.

   God is said to "rend the heavens," when he unexpectedly gives some
   uncommon and striking proof of his power; and the reason of this mode
   of expression is, not only that men, when they are hard pressed,
   commonly look up to heaven, from which they expect assistance, but that
   miracles, by interrupting the order of nature, open up for themselves
   an unusual path. Now, when God renders no assistance, he appears to be
   shut up in heaven, and to disregard what is taking place on earth. For
   this reason he is said to open and "rend the heavens," when he holds
   out to us some testimony of his presence; because otherwise we think
   that he is at a great distance from us.

   That thou wouldest come down. This expression, like the former, is
   adapted to the estimation of our flesh; for God does not need to move
   from one place to another, but accommodates himself to us, that we may
   understand those subjects better. [185] (Genesis 11:5; 18:21.)

   Let the mountains flow down. That is,

   "Let thy majesty be openly displayed, and let the elements, struck by
   the perception of it, yield and obey." (Psalm 18:11.)

   This will appear more plainly from what immediately follows.

   2. As by the burning of a melting fire, [186] the fire hath made the
   water to boil. All this might be read either in the future or in the
   subjunctive; as if he had said, "O Lord, if thou camest down, the
   nations would tremble at thy presence; thine enemies would instantly be
   melted away." But I think that the translation which I have given is
   more simple; for it is very certain that the Prophet here alludes to
   Mount Sinai, where the Lord openly revealed himself to the people.
   Hence we see also the gross absurdity of the division of this chapter;
   [187] since those events are related in support of that prayer which
   ought rather to have been placed at the beginning of the chapter. [188]

   We have formerly seen that the prophets, when they relate that God
   assisted his people, bring forward an instance in the history of
   redemption. [189] Whenever therefore the prophets mention this history,
   they include all the benefits that were ever bestowed by God on his
   people; not only when he delivered them from the tyranny of Pharaoh,
   when he appeared to them in Mount Sinai, but also when, during forty
   years, he supplied them with all that was necessary in the wilderness,
   when he drove out their enemies, and led them into the possession of
   the land of Canaan. In a word, they include all the testimonies by
   which he formerly proved himself to be gracious to his people and
   formidable to his enemies.

   He says that "the melting fire made the waters boil," because, contrary
   to custom, fire and lightning were mingled with violent showers; as if
   he had said that the fire of God melted the hardest bodies, and that
   the waters were consumed by its heat. To the same purpose is what he
   adds, that "the mountains flowed at his presence;" for he opened up a
   passage for his people through the most dreadful obstacles.

   3. Terrible things which we did not look for. He says that the
   Israelites saw what they did not at all expect; for, although God had
   forewarned them, and had given them experience of his power in many
   ways, yet that alarming spectacle of which he speaks goes far beyond
   our senses and the capacity of the human mind.

   4. From of old they have not heard. This verse confirms what has been
   already said, that believers do not here ask anything strange or
   uncommon, but only that God may shew himself to be to them what he
   formerly shewed himself to be to the fathers, and that he may continue
   to exercise his kindness, and that, since he has been wont to assist
   his people, and to give them undoubted tokens of his presence, he may
   not cease in future to cause his strength and power to shine forth more
   and more brightly. He represents believers as praying to God in such a
   manner that they strengthen themselves by the remembrance of the past,
   and betake themselves; with greater courage to God's assistance.

   Eye hath not seen a God besides thee. The Prophet's design
   unquestionably is, to celebrate God's immense goodness, by relating the
   numerous benefits which he bestowed upon his people in ancient times;
   and this kind of praise is highly magnificent, when, rising to
   rapturous admiration, of them, he exclaims that there is no God besides
   him, and that those things which the Lord has carried into effect for
   the sake of his people are unheard-of and uncommon. But there are two
   ways in which these words may be read, for 'lhym (elohim) may either be
   in the accusative or in the vocative case. "O Lord, no one hath seen
   besides thee what thou doest for them that wait for thee." But another
   reading is more generally approved, "No one hath ever seen or ever
   heard of such a God." Yet in this reading we must supply the particle
   of comparison, as; for otherwise the sentence would be incomplete. The
   verb ysh (yagnaseh) is put absolutely, "No ear hath heard, and no eye
   hath seen, such a God as doeth such things." And thus God is
   distinguished from idols, from which superstitious men imagine that
   they obtain all good things; for they are the mere inventions of men,
   and can do neither good nor harm, seeing that God bestows on his
   worshippers benefits of every kind.

   Paul appears to explain this passage differently, and to torture it to
   a different purpose, and even quotes it in different words, that is,
   because he followed the Greek version. (1 Corinthians 2:9.) In this
   respect the Apostles were not squeamish; for they paid more attention
   to the matter than to the words, and reckoned it enough to draw the
   attention of the reader to a passage of Scripture, from which might be
   obtained what they taught. As to the addition which Paul appears to
   have made of his own accord, "Nor hath entered into the heart of man
   what God hath prepared for them that love him," he did so for the
   purpose of explanation; for he added nothing that does not fully agree
   with the Prophet's doctrine.

   That we may understand better how thoroughly he agrees with the
   Prophet, we must understand his design. In that passage he treats of
   the doctrine of the Gospel, which he demonstrates to surpass the
   capacity of the human understanding; for it contains knowledge that is
   widely different and far removed from the perception of our flesh, and,
   in short, is "hidden wisdom," so that Paul is justly led to view it
   with astonishment. And as the Prophet, when he takes into consideration
   the wonderful acts of God's kindness, exclaims, like one who is lost in
   amazement, that nothing like this was ever heard of; so, in the most
   excellent of all benefits, namely, that in which Christ is offered to
   us by the Gospel, we may exclaim in the same manner, "O Lord, what thou
   bestowest on thy people exceeds all the capacity of the human mind: no
   eye, no ear, no senses, no mind can reach such loftiness." Thus Paul
   applies this passage admirably to his reasoning, and does not make an
   improper use of the statement made by the Prophet when he elevates
   above the world that peculiar grace which God bestows on his Church.

   There remains but one difficulty, namely, that Paul applies to
   spiritual blessings what the Prophet here says about blessings of a
   temporal nature. But we may say that Isaiah here looks merely at the
   cause of God's benefits, though he has in his eye the condition of the
   present life; for all the benefits that we receive from God, for the
   sake of food and nourishment, are proofs of his fatherly kindness
   toward us; and it is the peculiar excellence of faith, to rise from
   visible favors to those which are invisible. Although therefore the
   Prophet appears to speak of external deliverance and other benefits of
   this life, yet he rises higher, and looks chiefly at those things which
   belonged especially to the people of God. What stupidity would it be,
   if, while we enjoy God's benefits, we did not consider the fountain
   itself, that is, his fatherly kindness! Ordinary favors are enjoyed
   indiscriminately by the good and the bad; but that favor with which he
   embraces us belongs especially to citizens. The consequence is, that we
   do not merely observe those things which fall under the senses of men,
   but contemplate the cause itself. Although therefore neither eyes nor
   ears reach so far as to comprehend the grace of adoption, by which the
   Lord testifies that he is our Father, yet he reveals it by the
   testimony of his Spirit.

   It is even probable that the Prophet, when he spoke of a particular
   instance of God's kindness, was elevated, by means of it, to a general
   reflection; for, in considering God's works, it was frequent and
   customary for good men to pass from a single instance to the whole
   class. In that way might this single but remarkable instance of the
   divine goodness raise the mind of the Prophet to so high a pitch as to
   meditate on that infinite abundance of blessings which is laid up for
   believers in heaven. We even see clearly that this commendation
   includes the gracious covenant by which God adopted the children of
   Abraham into the hope of eternal life. (Genesis 17:7.) What has been
   said amounts to this: "Seeing that the goodness and power of God are so
   great, we have no reason to distrust him; but we ought to place our
   confidence in him, so as to hope that he will assuredly assist us." And
   such is the design of those excellent benefits which are here mentioned
   by the Prophet.

   5. Thou hast met. He proceeds with the same subject; for the people
   deplore their hard lot, that they feel no alleviation in their
   adversity, although formerly God was wont to stretch out the hand to
   the fathers. Believers, therefore, speak in this manner: "Thou wast
   wont to meet our fathers; now thy face is turned away from us; and thou
   appearest to be irreconcilable:, because we gain nothing by calling on
   thee. Whence comes this diversity, as if thy nature had been changed,
   and thou wert now different from what thou hast been?" They next add,
   and make an acknowledgment, that they are punished justly, because
   "they have sinned." I have formerly stated that nothing is better in
   adversity than to remember God's benefits, and not only those which we
   have ourselves experienced, but likewise those which are related in
   Scripture; for we cannot be armed by a stronger shield against
   temptations of every kind.

   This verse, in my opinion, is inaccurately explained by those who think
   that we ought to read those words as closely connected, Him that
   rejoiceth and doeth righteousness, as if he had said, "Thou hast met
   them that willingly serve thee, and whose highest pleasure is to do
   what is right." I think that rejoicing denotes here those who were glad
   in prosperity; for at that time the people were in sadness and
   mourning. There is an implied contrast. "Formerly thou wast wont to
   meet the fathers, before they were distressed by any affliction, and to
   cheer them by thy approach; now thou art far distant, and permittest us
   to languish in mourning and grief."

   In thy ways they remembered thee. In accordance with what he has now
   said, he adds that they "remembered God," because they enjoyed his
   present grace, and felt that he was the author and director of their
   salvation; and so by "the ways of God," he means prosperity; either
   that in this way he was near to them, when he treated them softly and
   gently as his children, or because God is by nature inclined to acts of
   kindness. But since he said that God was wont to "meet him that doeth
   righteousness," the "remembrance" may relate to the practice of piety,
   that is, that they devoted themselves earnestly to the worship of God;
   and so it will be an explanation of the former clause, for the prophets
   frequently confirm by a variety of expressions what they have formerly
   said. To "remember" God, is to be captivated by the pleasant
   remembrance of him, so that we shall desire nothing more, and to place
   all our happiness in him. There is nothing that delights us more than
   the remembrance of the mercy of God; and, on the other hand, if we feel
   that God is angry, the mention of him fills us with alarm.

   And we have sinned. The reason is assigned; for, when they find that
   God is so unlike what he formerly was, they do not murmur against him,
   but throw all the blame on themselves. Let us learn from this, that we
   ought never to think of the chastisements which the Lord inflicts,
   without at the same time calling to mind our sins, that we may confess
   that we are justly punished, and may acknowledge our guilt.

   In them is perpetuity. In this passage vlm (gnolam) denotes nothing
   else than "long duration;" but it may refer either to "sins" or to "the
   ways of the Lord." To sins it may refer in this way, "Though we
   obstinately persisted in our sins, and deserved that thou shouldst
   destroy us a thousand times, yet hitherto we have been saved by thy
   mercy." If we understand it to relate to "the ways of the Lord," it
   will assign the reason why the people did not perish, because "the ways
   of the Lord" are steadfast and perpetual, and his mercy never comes to
   an end; and that meaning appears to me to agree best with this passage.
   Some supply the words, that "the age," or "perpetuity," is founded on
   the ways of the Lord. But I prefer to take the words in their literal
   acceptation, as when David says that the Lord "is not angry but for a
   moment," (Psalm 30:5,) that he is easy to be reconciled, and always
   compassionate; for his anger is not suddenly kindled, or with
   immoderate rage, after the manner of men, but he is unchangeable in
   benevolence and favor.

   And we shall be saved, or, we have been saved We have not yet got at
   the whole of the Prophet's statement; for he says that the people "are
   saved," although they had been led into captivity, as into a grave, and
   deplored their calamity. On that account I consider the preterite to be
   put for the future, for it is rather a wish or a prayer than an
   affirmation. Nor do the saints boast that they have obtained salvation,
   but, deploring their misery, they betake themselves to God's
   everlasting mercy; and consequently, they praise that which they wish,
   and not that which they have already obtained.

   6. We have all been as the unclean. The believers go on in their
   complaint; for they deplore their condition, because God appears to
   take no account of them. Hebrew writers are not agreed as to the
   meaning of the words vgd dym (beged gniddim.) [190] Yet it is certain
   that it denotes something which is vile and worthless, and which, on
   account of its filthiness, stinks in the noses of men. But here two
   things ought to be observed; first, that believers confess their guilt,
   and are justly punished for it; and, secondly, that they nevertheless
   complain of the severity of the punishments which they endure, not to
   blame God, but to move him to compassion; just as a culprit, when he
   endeavors to mitigate the severity of a judge, lays before him his own
   distresses and calamities. Some commentators torture this passage, by
   alleging that the Prophet, when he speaks of the pollutions of sins,
   describes all Jews without exception, though there still remained some
   of them who were sincere worshippers of God. But there are no good
   grounds for this; for the Prophet does not speak of individuals, but of
   the whole body, which, being trodden under foot by all men, and
   subjected to the utmost indignity, he compares to a filthy garment.

   There are some who frequently quote this passage, in order to prove
   that so far are our works from having any merit in them, that they are
   rotten and loathsome in the sight of God. But this appears to me to be
   at variance with the Prophet's meaning, who does not speak of the whole
   human race, but describes the complaint of those who, having been led
   into captivity, experienced the wrath of the Lord against them, and
   therefore, acknowledged that they and their righteousnesses were like a
   filthy garment. And first, he exhorts them to a confession of their
   sin, that they may acknowledge their guilt; and next, that they should
   nevertheless ask pardon from God, the manner of obtaining which is,
   that, while we complain that we are wretched and distressed, we at the
   same time acknowledge that we are justly punished for our sins.

   And we all fade as a leaf. This is a very beautiful comparison, which
   shews that men utterly fade and decay when they feel that God is angry
   with them; as is admirably described in Psalm 90:6; 103:16 [191]
   Justly, therefore, are we compared to leaves; for "our iniquities, like
   the wind, carry us away."

   7. There is none that calleth on thy name. He confirms what was
   formerly said; for he exhorts believers, even though God's punishment
   of them appears to be severe, still to believe that they deserve such a
   punishment. Heinous sins are mentioned by him; and though it would be
   tedious to go over all of them in detail, he points out the fountain
   itself, and says that the worship of God is neglected. Under the word
   "calleth on," he includes, as is customary in Scripture, the whole
   worship of God; for the most important part of God's worship is to
   "call upon" him, and to testify our confidence in him. Prayers and
   supplications, undoubtedly, were always practiced among them; but,
   because the heart was far removed, he reckons all pretended ceremonies
   as of no value.

   Or that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee. He now explains more
   clearly the former clause, by saying that no one earnestly applies his
   mind, or gives his endeavor to seek God, but that all are consumed and
   wasted away through their own slothfulness. And first, he shews that
   nothing is more desirable than to be perfectly joined to God; for, when
   we are alienated from him, everything must go ill with us. We are
   indolent and sluggish by nature; and therefore we need to have spurs
   applied to us. Seeing that by nature we indulge our slothfulness, we
   must listen to the advice of the Prophet so as not to become utterly
   stupid; for, otherwise he in his turn will reject us, or contemptuously
   drive us away. The Prophet describes the miserable condition of the
   people, in which there was no desire to seek God, and no means were
   used to stir up the heart to godliness.

   Thou hast made us to languish. They again complain that they are
   overwhelmed by the severity of distress, and obtain from God no
   alleviation; for Isaiah asserts these things in the name of the whole
   people, and prays to God not to permit them any longer to languish
   amidst so great miseries.

   8. And now, O Jehovah. After having complained of their miseries, by
   which they were almost overwhelmed, they now more openly ask pardon
   from God and a mitigation of their distresses, and with greater
   boldness plead with God that still they are his children. Adoption
   alone could encourage them to cherish favorable hopes, that they might
   not cease to rely on their Father, though overwhelmed by the load of
   afflictions. And this order should be carefully observed; for, in order
   that we may be truly humbled in our hearts, we need to be cast down,
   and laid low, and almost crushed. But when despair seizes us, we must
   lay hold on this altar of consolation, that, "since God has been
   pleased to elect us to be his children, we ought to expect salvation
   from him, even when matters are at the worst." Thus, with a view to the
   gracious covenant, the Israelites affirm that they are the children of
   God, in order that they may experience his fatherly kindness, and that
   his promise may not be made void.

   We are the clay, and thou our potter. By means of a comparison they
   magnify the grace of God, and acknowledge that they were formed of
   despicable clay; for they do not seek the ground of superiority in
   themselves, but in their origin celebrate the mercy of God, who out of
   mean and filthy clay determined to create children to himself.

   We all are the work of thy hands. Of the same import as the former is
   this second clause, in which God is called the Creator, and his people
   are called the work of his hands; because to God alone they ascribe all
   that they are and all that they have. This is true gratitude; for, so
   long as men advance the smallest claim to anything as their own, God is
   defrauded of his right. Now, Isaiah speaks not of the ordinary creation
   of men, but of regeneration, on account of which believers are
   especially called "the work of God;" as we have frequently stated in
   the exposition of other passages: [192] Here they acknowledge a
   remarkable act of God's kindness, in having elected them to be his
   people, and adorned them with benefits so numerous and so great.

   9. Be not angry, O Jehovah, beyond measure. [193] The people pray that
   the severity of punishment and the fierceness of the wrath of God may
   be abated; not that God goes beyond measure, but because they would be
   altogether overwhelmed, if he should choose to act toward them with the
   utmost strictness of justice. They therefore ask a mitigation of
   punishment; as Jeremiah also says, "Chasten me, O Lord, but in
   judgment," (Jeremiah 10:24,) that is, moderately; for he draws a
   contrast between "judgment" and "wrath;" as it is elsewhere said that
   God chastises us "by the hand of man," (2 Samuel 7:14,) because he does
   not put forth the power of his hand to punish us, lest we should be
   utterly destroyed.

   Neither remember iniquity for ever. It deserves notice that they do not
   absolutely shrink from the judgment of God, or pray that they may
   wholly escape from it, but present themselves to be corrected, so as
   not to faint under the strokes. And this is the reason why they desire
   to have the remembrance of their iniquities blotted out; for, if God do
   not mercifully pardon them, there will be no end of the chastisements.

   We all are thy people. The Prophet repeats what he said a little
   before, that God elected the family of Abraham; because the best ground
   for the confident expectation of obtaining pardon was, that God, who is
   true to his promises, cannot east away those whom he had once elected.
   By employing the word all, he does not speak of each individual, as I
   formerly remarked, but includes the whole body of the Church. Although
   the greater part had withdrawn through wicked revolt, yet still it was
   true that the Jews were God's peculiar people; and this prayer was
   offered, not for every one of them without distinction, but only for
   the children of God who were still left. [194] The people do not plead
   their own merits before God, but betake themselves to the covenant of
   free grace, by which they had been adopted. This is the sure and only
   refuge of believers, this is the remedy for all evils; and that is the
   reason why Moses and the other prophets repeat it so frequently.
   (Exodus 32:13.)

   10. The cities of thy holiness. The Church again recounts her miseries,
   that she may move God to mercy and obtain pardon. She says that the
   cities have been reduced to "a wilderness;" and, for the sake of
   amplification, adds that "Zion is a desert;" because it was the royal
   residence, in which God wished that men should call upon him. She adds
   also Jerusalem, in which Zion was; for it appeared to be shameful that
   a city, which God had consecrated to himself, should be ruined and
   destroyed by enemies.

   She calls them "cities of holiness," because, as the Lord had
   sanctified a people, so he also wished that the cities, and even the
   whole country, should be consecrated to himself. Seeing, therefore,
   that the cities were dedicated to God, they are justly called "cities
   of his holiness;" for in them God reigned, and men called upon him. In
   the same manner we may at the present day give the appellation of
   "cities of God's holiness" to those which, laying aside superstitions,
   worship him in a sincere and right manner.

   11. The house of our sanctuary and of our glory. [195] It is called
   "the sanctuary of the people" in a different sense from that in which
   it is called "the sanctuary of God;" for, being the testimony of a
   sacred union between God and the people, it is often called "God's holy
   house;" that is, because it corresponds to his holiness. But now, in a
   passive sense, believers call it "their sanctuary," because from it
   they must seek their sanctification.

   This is more plainly confirmed by the words, "of our glory." They
   acknowledge that they have nothing in which they ought to glory, except
   the temple, in which God wished to be adored and worshipped. And yet we
   see that this glorying was often without foundation, and for that
   reason was reproved by Jeremiah,

   "Trust not in words of falsehood, saying, The temple of the Lord, The
   temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, are we." (Jeremiah 7:4.)

   But while the glorying of those who were proud and insolent on account
   of empty titles was without foundation, yet true and well-grounded was
   the glorying of those who embraced with the heart the Lord's ordinance,
   and, relying on the testimony of his word, knew that they dwelt under
   the shadow of him who had reared for himself a constant dwelling-place
   in the midst of them; for the temple was built by the command of the
   Lord, so that the Jews might justly glory in having God for the
   protector of their salvation.

   In which our fathers praised thee. Because the worship of God was at
   that time corrupted and adulterated, and almost all had revolted to
   superstition and ungodliness, for this reason he mentions not the
   present but the former age. As if he had said, "Though we have not
   rendered to thee such worship as we ought to have rendered, yet this is
   the temple in which our fathers worshipped thee in purity; wilt thou
   permit it to be profaned and destroyed? Will not this disgrace recoil
   on thyself, since it relates to the worship of thy name?" Here the Jews
   say nothing about their life, and bring forward no excuses, and rather
   confess their guilt, but offer their worship to God, that he may be
   mindful of his covenant, and not allow his promises to be made void.
   This example ought to be imitated by all believers. The word "praise"
   denotes thanksgiving; as if he had said, "In that temple, the
   melancholy ruins of which draw forth mourning and tears from all
   believers, the praises of God at one time resounded, when he treated
   his people with kindness and gentleness. [196]

   12. Wilt thou restrain thyself for these things, O Jehovah? The people
   strengthen themselves by assured confidence, that God will not permit
   his glory to be trampled under foot, though men provoke him by
   innumerable transgressions. This can yield no consolation of any kind
   to hypocrites, but relates solely to those who are moved by a true
   sense of the mercy of God. Such persons believe and are fully
   persuaded, though death threaten them, that God will nevertheless have
   regard to his own glow, and will at least be gracious to the remnant,
   that the seed may not perish.

   And wilt thou afflict us beyond measure? [197] He shews that it is
   impossible for God not to be mindful of his mercy; for "he cannot deny
   himself." (2 Timothy 2:13.) But our salvation is connected with his
   glory. This ought to be carefully observed; for, after having spoken of
   the glory of God, he adds, "Thou wilt not afflict us beyond measure."
   The Lord will therefore restrain his chastisements; for his glory,
   which he cannot disregard, is deeply involved in our deliverance from
   death. To this prayer, therefore, let us betake ourselves whenever we
   are attacked by our enemies; not in the manner of hypocrites, (who
   haughtily boast of the glory of God, of which they have no experience
   whatever,) but with repentance and faith, that we may actually obtain
   the fruit of that glory.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [185] "Afin que nous comprenions mieux ce qui nons est dit de luy."
   "That we may understand better what is said to us about him."

   [186] "Comme par feu ardent qui fait fondre." "As by a burning fire
   that melteth."

   [187] Calvin alludes to the fact, that, in the Hebrew Bible, the last
   verse of chapter 63 corresponds to what usually is the first verse of
   chapter 64. For the convenience of the reader, I have exchanged the
   author's arrangement for that which is followed in the English version.
   -- Ed.

   [188] "I have followed our common version, the LXX., Vulgate, and
   Syriac, in departing from the Masoretic division of the chapters,
   according to which the words (O that thou wouldst,' etc.) are very
   improperly made to conclude chapter 63." -- Henderson.

   [189] "En l'histoire de la deliverance d'Egypte." "In the history of
   the deliverance from Egypt."

   [190] "Vitringa and Gessenius dwell with great zest and fullness on the
   strict sense of vgr dym (beged gniddim.) Some understand the comparison
   with withered leaves as a part of the description of their sin, while
   others apply it to their punishment. The first hypothesis is favored by
   the difference of the tenses; the last by the parallelism of the
   clauses. It is probable, however, that here, as in chap. 1:4, the two
   things run together in the writer's mind, and that no refined
   distinction as to this point was intended." -- Alexander.

   [191] Commentary on Isaiah, [12]vol. 3, p. 210.

   [192] Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2, pp. [13]26, [14]83, [15]121,
   [16]264; vol. 3, pp. [17]132, [18]318, [19]338.

   [193] "Be not angry, oh Jehovah, to extremity.' The common version of d
   m'd (gnad meod) (very sore) fails to reproduce the form of the original
   expression, as consisting of a preposition and a noun. This is
   faithfully conveyed in Lowth's version, (to the uttermost,) and still
   more in Henderson's, (to excess;) although the latter is objectionable
   as suggesting the idea of injustice or moral wrong, which is avoided in
   the version above given." -- Alexander.

   [194] "Mais seulement pour la petite troupe des fideles." "But only for
   the small company of believers."

   [195] "Our holy and our beautiful house." -- (Eng. Ver.)
   "Our house of holiness and beauty." -- Alexander.

   [196] "They press him closer still, and make use of an argument which
   was most likely to affect him. The temple wherein our pious fathers
   praised thee, the beautiful sanctuary in which thy honor used to dwell,
   is burnt with fire; the precious materials it was made of are nothing
   but rubbish and dust." -- White.

   [197] "That is, Canst thou hold out against so many moving
   considerations? Is it possible that thou canst behold thy children in
   chains, thy city in ruins, thy temple a heap of stones, and not be
   prevailed on to pity and put an end to our great afflictions?" --
   White.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 65.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 65:1-25

   1. I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that
   sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not
   called by my name.

   1. Patefeci me iis qui non interrogabant, inventus sum ab ils qui non
   quaerebant me; dixi, Ecce ego, ecce ego, ad gentem quae non invocabat
   nomen meum.

   2. I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people,
   which walketh in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts;

   2. Expandi quotidie manus meas ad populum rebellem, gradientes via non
   bona post cogitationes suas.

   3. A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face; that
   sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick;

   3. Populus qui me irritat semper in faciem meam, qui sacrificat in
   hortis, et suffitum facit super lateres.

   4. Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which eat
   swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels;

   4. Qui manent in sepulchris, in desertis pernoctant, qui comedunt
   carnem suillam, et jus pollutorum in vasis eorum.

   5. Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier
   than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the
   day.

   5. Qui dicunt, Mane apud to, ne accedas ad me, quia sanctificarem to,
   (vel, sanctior sum quam tu;) isti fumus in furore meo, ignis ardens
   tota die.

   6. Behold, it is written before me: I will not keep silence, but will
   recompense, even recompense into their bosom,

   6. Ecce scriptum est coram me; non tacebo, quin reddam et rependam in
   sinum eorum.

   7. Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith
   the LORD, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed
   me upon the hills: therefore will I measure their former work into
   their bosom.

   7. Iniquitates vestrae et iniquitates patrum vestrorum simul, dicit
   Iehova. Quia suffitum fecerunt in montibus, et super comes probro me
   affecerunt, ideo remetiar opus eorum vetustum in sinum eorum.

   8. Thus saith the LORD, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and
   one saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my
   servants' sakes, that I may not destroy them all.

   8. Sic dicit Iehova, Quemadmodum si quis inveniat mustum in botro, et
   dieat, Ne perdas illud, quoniam est benedictio in eo; ita faciam
   propter servos meos, ut non perdam totum.

   9. And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an
   inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my
   servants shall dwell there.

   9. Et educam ex Iaeob semen, et ex Iuda haeredem montium meorum; et
   haereditate obtinebunt eam eleeti mei, et servi mei illic habitabunt.

   10. And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a
   place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me.

   10. Et erit Saron habitaeulum pecudum, et vallis Achor ad accubitum
   armenti, populo meo qui quaesiverunt me.

   11. But ye are they that forsake the LORD, that forget my holy
   mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the
   drink offering unto that number.

   11. At vos desertores Iehovae, qui obliviseimini montes sanctitatis
   meae; qui paratis exereitui mensam, et impletis numero libamen.

   12. Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down
   to the slaughter: because when I called, ye did not answer; when I
   spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose
   that wherein I delighted not.

   12. Itaque numerabo vos ad gladium, et omnes in caedem corruetis; eo
   quod vocavi, nec respondistis; loquutus sum, nec audivistis;
   fecistisque malum in oculis meis; et in quibus voluptatem non cepi,
   elegistis.

   13. Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, my servants shall eat,
   but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall
   be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed:

   13. Propterea sic dicit Dominus Iehova, Ecce servi mei comedent, et vos
   esurietis. Ecce servi mei bibent, et vos sitietis. Ecce servi mei
   laetabuntur, et vos erubeseetis.

   14. Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shalt cry
   for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

   14. Ecce servi mei jubilabunt prae hilaritate cordis, et vos clamabitis
   prae dolore cordis, et prae angustia spiritus ululabitis.

   15. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the
   Lord GOD shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name:

   15. Et relinquetis nomen vesstrum in execrationem electis meis;
   interficiet to Dominus Iehova, et servos suos vocabit nomine alio.

   16. That he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in
   the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the
   God of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because
   they are hid from mine eyes.

   16. Qui benedixerit sibi in terra, benedicet se in Deo veraci; et qui
   juraverit in terra, jurabit in Deo veraei; quia oblivioni traditae sunt
   afflictiones priores, et absconditae ab oculis meis.

   17. For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former
   shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

   17. Quia ecce ego creabo eralos novos, et terrain novato; prior um non
   erit memoria, neque in cor ascendent.

   18. But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for,
   behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

   18. Sed gaudete et exultate in perpetuum iis quae ego creo. Nam ecce
   ego creo Ierusalem exultationem, et populum ejus gaudium.

   19. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the
   voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
   crying.

   19. Et exultabo in Ierusalem, et gaudebo in populo meo; nec audietur in
   ea amplius vox fletus et vox clamoris.

   20. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man
   that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years
   old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.

   20. Non erit illic amplius infans dierum nec senex qui non impleat dies
   suos. Quoniam filius centum annorum morietur adolescens, et qui peccat
   filius centum annorum maledicetur.

   21. And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant
   vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

   21. dificabunt domos, et inhabitabunt; plantabunt vites, et comedent
   fructum earum.

   22. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant,
   and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people,
   and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.

   22. Non dificabunt ut alius inhabitet; non plantabunt ut alius
   comedat; quoniam secundum dies arboris, dies populi mei; et opus manuum
   suarum perpetuabunt electi mei.

   23. They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for
   they are the seed of the blessed of the LORD, and their offspring with
   them.

   23. Non laborabunt frustra, nec parient in terrore; quoniam semen
   benedictorum Iehovae erunt et soboles eorum cure ipsis.

   24. And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer;
   and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

   24. Et erit, antequam clament ego exaudiam; adhuc illis loquentibus ego
   audiam.

   25. The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat
   straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent's meat. They
   shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the LORD.

   25. Lupus et agnus pascentur simul; et leo sicut bos comedet paleam; et
   serpenti pulvis erit panis suus. Non affligent, neque nocebunt in
   universo monte sancto meo, dicit Iehova.


   1. I have manifested myself. The Prophet now passes on to another
   doctrine; for he shews that God has good reason for rejecting and
   casting off the Jews. It is because they have profited nothing by
   either warnings or threatenings to be brought back from their errors
   into the right way. But that they might not think that the Lord's
   covenant would on that account be made void, he adds that he will have
   another people which formerly was no people, and that where he was
   formerly unknown, his name Shall be well known and highly celebrated.
   The Jews looked on this as monstrous, and reckoned it to be altogether
   inconsistent with the covenant which the Lord made with Abraham,
   (Genesis 17:7,) if such a benefit were extended to any others than his
   posterity. But the Prophet intended to strip them of the foolish
   confidence of imagining that God was bound to the posterity of Abraham;
   for the Lord had not restricted himself to them but on an absolute
   condition, and if this were violated by them, they would be deprived,
   like covenant-breakers and traitors, of all the advantage derived from
   the covenant. Nor was this promise made to Abraham alone, and to those
   who were descended from him, but to all who should be ingrafted by
   faith into his family. But it will be more convenient to begin with the
   second verse, in which he explains the cause of the rejection, that we
   may more fully understand the Prophet's design. [198]

   2. I have stretched out my hands. He accuses the Jews, and complains of
   their ingratitude and rebellion; and in this manner he proves that
   there is no reason why they should say that the Lord does them wrong if
   he bestow his grace on others. The Jews conducted themselves proudly
   and insolently toward God, as if they had been elected through their
   own merit. On account of their ingratitude and insolence the Lord
   rejects them as unworthy, and complains that to no purpose did he
   "stretch out his hands" to draw and bring them back to him.

   By "the stretching out of the hands" he means the daily invitation.
   There are various ways in which the Lord "stretches out his hands to
   us;" for he draws us to him, either effectually or by the word. In this
   passage it must relate chiefly to the word. The Lord never speaks to us
   without at the same time "stretching out his hand" to join us to
   himself, or without causing us to feel, on the other hand, that he is
   near to us. He even embraces us, and shews the anxiety of a father, so
   that, if we do not comply with his invitation, it must be owing
   entirely to our own fault. The heinousness of the guilt is greatly
   aggravated by long continuance, that, during a long succession of ages,
   God did not cease to send one Prophet after another, and even, as he
   says elsewhere, to rise early in the morning and continue the same care
   till the evening. (Jeremiah 7:13; 11:7; 35:14.)

   To a rebellious people. First, he calls them "rebellious" or
   disobedient, but immediately afterwards he declares what is the nature
   of that rebellion, namely, that the people walk after their own
   thoughts. Nothing is more displeasing to God than for men to be
   authadeis "self-willed," (2 Peter 2:10;) that is, devoted to their own
   inclinations; for he commands us to surrender our own judgment, that we
   may be capable of receiving the true doctrine. The Lord therefore
   testifies that it was not owing to him that he did not retain and
   continue to exercise towards them his wonted favor, but that they
   alienated themselves through their own madness, because they chose to
   abide by their own natural inclinations rather than to follow God as
   their leader.

   Having pointed out the cause of this rejection, we must come to the
   calling of the Gentiles, who succeeded in the room of the Jews; for
   that is undoubtedly the subject treated in the first verse. The Lord
   had long ago foretold it by Moses, so that they ought not to have
   thought that there was anything new in this prediction.

   "They have provoked me by that which is not God; they have moved me to
   anger by their vanities; and I also will provoke them by that which is
   not a people, by a foolish nation I will enrage them." (Deuteronomy
   32:21.)

   Finally, the Prophet now threatens the same thing which was afterwards
   foretold by Christ when that blinding was at hand.

   "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a
   nation which shall bring forth fruit." (Matthew 21:43.)

   1. To them that asked not. [199] When he says that God manifested
   himself "to them that asked not," he shews that the Gentiles were
   anticipated by the grace of God, and that they brought no merit or
   excellence as an inducement to God to give it to them. This obviously
   agrees with that passage which we quoted, in which Moses calls them "a
   foolish nation." (Deuteronomy 32:21.) Thus, under a universal type, he
   describes what is the nature of men before the Lord anticipates them by
   his mercy; for they neither call on the Lord, nor seek him, nor think
   about him. And this passage ought to be carefully observed, in order to
   establish the certainty of our calling, which may be said to be the key
   that opens to us the kingdom of heaven; for by means of it peace and
   repose are given to our consciences, which would always be in doubt and
   uncertainty if they did not rest on such testimonies. We see,
   therefore, that it did not happen accidentally or suddenly that we were
   called by God and reckoned to be his people; for it had been predicted
   long before in many passages. From this passage Paul earnestly contends
   for the calling of the Gentiles, and says that Isaiah boldly exclaims
   and affirms that the Gentiles have been called by God, because he spoke
   more clearly and loudly than the circumstances of Ms own time required.
   Here we see, therefore, that we were called by an eternal purpose of
   God long before the event happened.

   Behold I, behold I. By repeating these words twice, he confirms still
   more the declaration that God hath manifested himself in so friendly a
   manner to foreign and heathen nations, that they do not doubt that he
   dwells in the midst of them. And, indeed, that sudden change needed to
   be confirmed, because it was difficult to be believed; although by that
   very novelty the Prophet intended to magnify the unexpected grace of
   God. The meaning may be thus summed up: "When the Lord shall have
   offered himself to the Gentiles, and they shall have been joined to the
   holy family of Abraham, there will be some Church in the world, after
   the Jews have been driven out." Now we see that all that is here
   predicted by the Prophet was fulfilled by the Gospel, by which the Lord
   actually offered and manifested himself to foreign nations. Whenever,
   therefore, this voice of the Gospel is sounded in our ears, or when we
   record the word of the Lord, let us know that the Lord is present, and
   offers himself, that we may know him familiarly, and may call on him
   boldly and with assured confidence.

   3. A people that provoketh me. Here he describes and illustrates more
   largely in what respects the Jews were rebellious against God. It was
   because they had forsaken the command of God, and had polluted
   themselves by various superstitions. He had said a little before,
   (Isaiah 63:17,) that the Jews had estranged themselves from God,
   because they wandered after their inventions; and now he points out the
   fruit of that licentiousness, that, by giving a loose rein to their
   thoughts, they overturned the pure worship of God. And undoubtedly this
   is the origin of all superstitions, that men are delighted with their
   own inventions, and choose to be wise in their own eyes rather than
   restrain their senses in obedience to God. In vain do men bring forward
   their devotions, as they call them, and their good intentions, which
   God holds in such abhorrence and detestation that they who have
   followed them are guilty of breaking the covenant and deserting from
   their allegiance; for there is nothing which we ought to undertake of
   our own accord, but we ought to obey God when he commands. In a word,
   the beginning and perfection of lawful worship is a readiness to obey.

   By the word "provoke" he describes the impudence of the people, who
   deliberately, as it were, provoked God, and had no reverence for his
   majesty so as to submit to his authority. And he heightens the
   description by saying, To my face; for since God may be said to be
   present and actually beheld by those whom he warns by his word, they
   sin more heinously, and are guilty of greater impudence and rebellion,
   than those who never heard the word.

   That sacrificeth in gardens, and offereth incense on bricks. He
   mentions the "gardens" which they had consecrated to their idols, and
   says that they provoked him by them. Some think that "bricks" are
   mentioned by way of contempt, and are indirectly contrasted with the
   altar on which alone God wished that they should sacrifice; and
   accordingly they think that here he mentions the roofs on which
   superstitious persons were wont to offer sacrifices; for they were made
   of "bricks." But I think that it means simply the altars which they had
   built for idols; for, although they were not without the plausible
   pretense of wishing to imitate that form of altar which God had
   prescribed, yet God abhorred it, because it was contrary to his word.

   4. Who dwell in the graves. He enumerates other kinds of superstitions;
   and although, in consequence of its brevity, the description is
   obscure, yet we may easily learn from other passages what was the
   nature of them. For as necromancy was generally practiced among heathen
   nations, the Jews also consulted demons "in graves and deserts,"
   instead of consulting God alone, which they ought to have done; and, as
   if they were seeking answers from the dead, they took pleasure in being
   deceived by the illusions of demons. [200] How solemnly the Lord had
   forbidden it, appears very clearly from Deuteronomy 18:10, 11, and
   other passages; and we have seen something of this kind in a former
   part of this book, (Isaiah 8:19.) In general we are taught that God
   demands nothing more than obedience, which he prefers to slain beasts
   and sacrifices. (1 Samuel 15:22.)

   Who eat swine's flesh. Formerly he complained that the worship of God
   was polluted by strange inventions; and now he adds that they set aside
   every distinction, so that they do not distinguish between the clean
   and the unclean; and he brings forward a single instance, that they do
   not abstain from "swine's flesh." But it may be thought that this was a
   small matter. Very far from it; for we ought not to judge from our own
   opinion, but from that of the legislator, how heinous a sin it is; and
   nothing which the Lord has forbidden ought to be reckoned trivial.
   (Leviticus 11:7; Deuteronomy 14:8.) This related to the external
   profession of. faith, by which the Jews were in duty bound to testify
   how widely they differed from the pollution of the Gentiles. From that
   rule, therefore, which the Lord enjoins upon us, we must not swerve
   even a hair's breadth. [201]

   5. Remain by thyself. [202] He points out extreme impiety in the Jews,
   who obstinately and rebelliously opposed God's worshippers, and refused
   to listen to any warnings. There is some hope of repentance, so long as
   we lend an ear to warnings and reproofs; but if we reject them, our
   case is undoubtedly hopeless.

   Though the words are apparently obscure, their meaning amounts to this,
   that hypocrites disdainfully and fiercely repel faithful advisers,
   because they either make false claims to holiness, or, on account of
   pride, do not suffer themselves to be reproved; for hypocrisy is never
   free from supercilious disdain and haughtiness. Let us not wonder,
   therefore, that those who are infected by this vice swell with insolent
   pretensions, and boast of their virtue and holiness, and value
   themselves more highly than all others; for Satan has blinded them to
   make an idle and ostentatious boast of what they call their devotions,
   and to despise the word of God.

   Commentators think that this is a general statement; which reproves the
   Jews for refusing to submit to the prophets. But it appears to me that
   we ought to take into account a circumstance to which they do not
   attach sufficient weight, that this verse is in close and immediate
   connection with the preceding verses, and contains a sharp reproof of
   the Jews, for not only revolting from the true worship, but likewise
   following obstinately their own inventions, so as to turn with disdain
   from every one that did not flatter them; for that phrase, "Remain with
   thyself," means nothing else than "Away with thee!" as if they declared
   that they would have nothing to do with honest instructors. [203]

   6. Lo, it is written before me. He alludes to the ordinary custom of
   judges, who keep before them in writing the processes of investigation
   regarding any matter, together with the testimonies, acts, and
   everything of that nature, in order that, when it shall be found
   necessary to make use of them, the guilt of the culprit may be easily
   proved; for we write those things which we wish to be remembered by
   posterity The Lord therefore testifies that these things can never fade
   into oblivion, because they have been written; for, although for a time
   he pass them over in silence, yet the wicked shall not escape
   unpunished, but shall at length feel that he is a righteous judge.

   Hence we ought to learn that we must not abuse God's patience, because
   he bears with us long, and does not all at once stretch out his hand to
   punish us; for all our faults are nevertheless written before him, for
   which we must at length suffer punishment, if we do not repent. [204]
   True, indeed, the Lord has no need of writing as an aid to memory; but
   he makes use of this form of expression, that we may not think that he
   has forgotten anything, when he is slow in executing his judgments.
   Jeremiah even says expressly, that

   "the sin of Judah is written with an iron pen and with the nail of a
   diamond."
   (Jeremiah 17:1.)

   To recompense into the bosom is a phrase frequently employed in
   Scripture; for men think either that their sins are concealed, or that
   they will not be called to account for them; but, hurried along by
   unbridled lust, or laying the blame on some other person, they drive
   fear to a distance from them. (Psalm 79:12; Jeremiah 32:18.) On this
   account the Lord threatens that he will "recompense into their bosom,"
   that they may consider who is the judge with whom they have to do.

   7. Your iniquities and the iniquities of your fathers together. Isaiah
   enlarges on that, which he had expressed briefly in the preceding
   verse; for he shews that the Jews are not now, for the first time,
   guilty of this treason, but that there is the ancient example of the
   fathers, in whose footsteps they closely follow. In like manner the
   Lord formerly complained that he had borne long with that people, and
   was at length wearied with them. He therefore describes the aggravated
   heinousness of the offense, by saying that the Jews follow the example
   of their fathers; as if he had said, "They are very bad eggs of bad
   crows;" for the more frequently and the more earnestly that men have
   been warned, so much the more must they be condemned for obstinacy, if
   they do not repent. Thus he shews that they disregarded warnings and
   threatenings, and persevered for many years in their baseness and
   impiety; that they may no longer bring forward any excuse or pretense,
   but, on the contrary, may know that they deserve severe punishment.

   Here we see that the corruption which has flowed from the fathers is so
   far from being an excuse to the children, (as is alleged by ignorant
   persons, who commonly make use of this shield,) that, on the contrary,
   they draw down on themselves severer judgment. He adds ychdv,
   (yachdcav,) together. As if the Lord had said, that he gathers
   together, and, as it were, forms into a bundle, the crimes of the
   fathers and of the children, that he may at length punish them. Not
   that

   "the son bears the iniquity of the father," (Ezekiel 18:20,)

   and endures the punishment which the father deserved, but that, since
   they carry on the crimes of their fathers, they must be included and
   condemned in the same judgment, while obstinacy shews that their
   diseases are incurable.

   Because they have offered incense on the mountains. He glances at one
   kind of sin, under which, by a figure of speech in which a part is
   taken for the whole, he describes also the rest of their sins; for he
   means by it the whole of the revolt by which the people withdrew from
   the true worship, and devoted and gave themselves up to strange gods.
   This is the utmost verge of iniquities; for, when the fear of God has
   been taken away, we can have nothing sound or healthy in us. Thus he
   points out the source of all evils, which ought to be the more
   diligently observed, because men are highly pleased with themselves,
   and think that they deserve great praise, when they worship God
   according to their own fancy, and do not understand that nothing is
   more abominable in the sight of God than pretended worship, which
   proceeds from human contrivance. Beyond all doubt, the people desired
   to be acceptable to God by "offering incense on the mountains;" but it
   is not from the purpose of their mind, and from their intention, as
   they call it, that we must judge of their work. In preference to all
   men, we must listen to the voice of the Lord, who testifies that he is
   greatly dishonored, that we may not endeavor to defend ourselves by
   pleading our intention, which will render us doubly guilty before God.

   Therefore I will measure back their ancient work. The word r'snh
   (rishonah) may be explained in various ways, either "I will measure
   back with their antiquity," or, "in the first place," or "formerly,"
   or, "from the beginning." But we must take into account the connection
   of the passage, from which the Prophet's meaning will be clearly seen.
   Having spoken a little before about the works of the fathers, he
   undoubtedly ridicules those who made them a bulwark. It is a slight and
   useless defense, and indeed it is idle to plead before God the
   practices of the fathers, that is, their long-continued corruption; for
   in this way we bring down on ourselves a heavier judgment. And yet many
   men are so intoxicated by this pretense, that they think that no
   objection can be brought against it, and even refuse to listen to
   anything else. [205] Antiquity, indeed, is highly venerable; but no man
   ought to value it so highly as to make the smallest diminution of the
   honor of God. This is a remarkable passage for convincing those who
   uphold superstitions by length of years, as if old established error
   ought to be accounted a law.

   8. Thus saith Jehovah. Here the Prophet softens the preceding
   statement; for otherwise it would have been very hard to say that the
   iniquities of the fathers would be brought to remembrance in such a
   manner, that the Lord would destroy the fathers and the children along
   with them; and these things might strike believers with such horror as
   to lead them to think that their salvation was past all hope. We must
   therefore be carefully on our guard, and observe the reason why the
   Lord is angry with us; for he wishes to terrify us, so as to lead us to
   himself, and not so as to throw us into despair. For this reason he
   holds out hope to believers, that they may not lose courage; and, by
   exhibiting consolation, he encourages them to repentance. He confirms
   it by a comparison.

   As if one found a grape in a cluster. As if a person who has determined
   to root out a vine that is inconvenient or injurious to him, and finds
   a fruit-bearing branch, shall spare it; so the Lord will refrain from
   tearing up those in which he shall find no strength or flavor. Formerly
   he complained that the people were useless, and even that they yielded
   bitter fruits. (Isaiah 5:2, 4, 7.) Isaiah retains the same comparison,
   but applies it in a different manner. "Though the people may be said to
   be an unfruitful and degenerate vine, yet there are still left some
   fruit-bearing branches which the Lord will not suffer to perish.

   But this may be understood in two ways; either that the Lord will
   preserve his people for the sake of the elect, or that, when the
   reprobate are destroyed, he will rescue believers from destruction.
   There is a wide difference between these two interpretations. As to the
   first, we know that the wicked are sometimes spared on account of good
   men, whom God does not wish to destroy or to involve in the same
   judgment, as various examples of Scripture sufficiently shew. The Lord
   would have spared Sodom, if he had found but ten good men in it.
   (Genesis 18:32.) All who sailed along with Paul, to the number of "two
   hundred and seventy-six," (Acts 27:37,) were "given to him" and rescued
   from shipwreck, that the power which He manifested in his servant might
   be more illustriously displayed. (Acts 27:24.) The Lord blessed the
   house of Potiphar, and made it to prosper in all things, for the sake
   of Joseph who was in his family. (Genesis 39:5.) There are other
   examples of the same kind, which every one will easily collect for
   himself.

   But I approve more highly of the other interpretation, that the Lord
   will punish the sins of his people in such a manner as to have regard
   nevertheless to his own, and not to involve all universally in the same
   destruction. Nor does he mean only that believers shall be saved, but
   that a people shall be left amongst whom men shall call on his name.
   And the comparison ought to be carefully observed; for he shews that
   the remnant will be small, as compared with the multitude which was at
   that time, as has been already explained. (Isaiah 1:9.)

   Now, as to believers being often punished along with the reprobate, let
   us not think that it is wrong; for the Lord will often find in each of
   us enough of blame to afflict and punish us. Besides, he wishes to
   instruct and arouse us by his chastisements; and seeing that we have
   been joined to a certain people, and, as it were, ingrafted into their
   body, we undoubtedly ought not to think it strange if we, who may be
   said to be diseased members, shall share in the same strokes and pains.
   Yet the Lord moderates the punishment, so as not to tear up by the
   roots the elect plants.

   9. And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob. He explains the
   preceding verse by other words, and shews that the Lord wishes to
   reserve for himself some "seed" that shall call upon him; for the Lord
   is wont to chastise his people in such a manner as to determine that
   the Church shall exist, in which his truth and the pure religion may be
   preserved, and which Paul for that very reason calls "the pillar and
   foundation of truth." (1 Timothy 3:15.) We must not, therefore, judge
   of the Church from the present condition of things, (for nothing in
   this world can be permanent,) but from the purpose of God, which will
   not suffer it to be overturned or destroyed. This ought to be carefully
   remembered by us, that we may not be terrified by any calamities or
   ruins, or by any hideous desolation of the Church.

   And out of Judah the heir of my mountains. He gives the appellation of
   "heirs of the mountains" to those who, having returned from captivity,
   shall again inhabit their native land. Judea, as is well known, was a
   mountainous country. He again explains what might have appeared to be
   somewhat obscure.

   And my elect shall possess it by inheritance. He means that the Jews
   shall return to their original condition, that they may enjoy that
   country as their own inheritance, from which they had been driven out.
   Judea was soon afterwards reduced to the utmost desolation. The Lord
   testifies that this shall not be of long duration; and, in order to
   confirm it the more, he mentions in a compendious manner the covenant
   by which that land was destined for them, that they might possess it by
   the right of inheritance. Thus, although they were long in captivity,
   yet this word "inheritance" ought to arouse them to cherish the
   confident hope that they would at length regain the possession of it.
   But it ought to be observed that this grace is confined to the elect
   and true worshippers of God, that every one may not apply it to himself
   without distinction. [206]

   10. And Sharon shall be an abode of flocks. By these figures he means
   nothing else than that the land, which was a desert, shall be again
   inhabited; for there is an implied comparison. "Although, in
   consequence of the banishment of her inhabitants into a distant
   country, she shall be forsaken and desolate, yet she shall at length be
   inhabited, so as to abound in flocks and herds, and have lands that are
   fertile and that are fit for pasture, and supply abundantly everything
   that is necessary for the food and support of men." Sharon was a place
   adapted to pasture, and so was Achor; but the former was adapted to
   flocks, and the latter to herds.

   Here we see that the promises of God contain blessings not only of the
   future but also of the present life, that we may taste more and more
   his bounty and kindness; for by the latter [207] we are invited to the
   greater and more excellent blessings of the heavenly life. When the
   Lord extends his bounty to flocks and herds, this ought to confirm us
   the more and make us more certain of his fatherly care and anxiety
   about us; for if he pays attention to flocks which were created for our
   sake, much more will he supply us with all that is necessary

   "for the life that now is, and for that which is to come."
   (1 Timothy 4:8.)

   Yet we must likewise keep in view the spiritual meaning (of which we
   have spoken formerly) that leads us from God's earthly blessing to
   Christ's spiritual kingdom, which the prophets shadow out under that
   image.

   For my people. Here also he excludes the reprobate, who were not
   ashamed of glorying vainly and falsely of the name of God. Although
   they confidently boast of promises and sacraments, yet they have
   nothing in common with the children, and, having been shut out from all
   hope of God's favors, they receive the reward of their iniquity. By
   adding, Who have sought me, he describes more plainly who are they that
   shall be partakers of these benefits, in order that, as has been
   already said, he may entirely cut off reprobates and hypocrites. The
   sure mark by which lambs are distinguished from kids, and lawful
   children from bastards, is to "seek" the Lord; for it is not enough to
   shelter ourselves under a name and title, but we must seek the Lord
   with a pure conscience, that we may cleave to him with the whole heart.
   (Deuteronomy 6:5.)

   11. But ye forsakers of Jehovah, who forget the mountain of my
   holiness. That hypocrites may not abuse these promises, or think that
   what is said about the restoration of the people relates to them, he
   again addresses them by these words, and calls them "forsakers," [208]
   because they "have forgotten" Mount Zion; that is, have revolted from
   the true worship of God. By "the mountain of holiness" he denotes
   figuratively the rule of a holy life which had been laid down in the
   word of the Lord; for the temple had been built by the command of the
   Lord, that these men might call upon him; and likewise the altar on
   which the Lord wished that sacrifices should be offered. Thus those
   sacrifices and oblations were impure which were offered in other
   places, or to other gods, or in any way different from the strict
   observance of the ceremonies of the Law. It is not lawful for men to
   undertake anything at their own suggestion; for the Lord demands
   nothing but obedience, (1 Samuel 15:22,) and there is no obedience
   without faith; and there is no faith without the word, (Romans 10:17,)
   by which alone we are at liberty to inquire or think concerning God.

   Who prepare a table for the army [209] He enumerates their
   superstitions. The word gd (Gad) is variously explained. Some think
   that it denotes Jupiter, or the star of Jupiter; and others that it
   denotes Fortune. Jerome translates the words, "Ye who spread a table
   for fortune;" for he thinks that it means prosperity. But I think it
   more probable that gd (Gad) means "a band," or "a troop," or even "an
   army;" and this agrees well with the etymology of the word and the
   context. One passage is especially worthy of notice, (Genesis 30:11,)
   in which Leah rejoices on account of the addition of children; for I
   think that the word which he employs, vgd (begad), ought to be
   understood as if she had said, "Now, I have plenty of children;" for
   she had many children before that time, and hence she gave the name gd
   (Gad) to her fifth son. Accordingly, I think that gd (Gad) ought to be
   interpreted, in this passage, as meaning "a troop," or "an army;"
   because their false gods were so numerous, that they could scarcely be
   numbered for multitude.

   And fill an oblation to the number. To fill may here be taken in two
   senses; either that they supplied everything largely and bountifully
   for the worship of idols; (for superstition has no limit or measure,
   and they who are niggardly in the worship of God very cheerfully spend
   all that they have for the sake of idols;) or that they passed by no
   idol to which they did not render their worship. I prefer the latter
   meaning; for idolaters do not think that they have done enough, if they
   do not give honor to each of the saints; and the more numerous the
   saints whom they have honored, they think that they will have better
   success. We have too great experience of this every day in the Papists.

   By "number" he means the same thing as he formerly meant by "army;" for
   it is a repetition which is very customary among Hebrew writers. He
   means, therefore, that "a table is prepared," that is, sacrifice is
   offered, not to a single idol, but to a great number of idols; in order
   to shew clearly how grievous are the punishments which they have
   deserved.

   12. Therefore I will number you to the sword. He alludes to the number
   of the gods; and the Lord declares that he will easily ascertain how
   numerous they are, for he "will number them to the sword." And hence we
   see that the Prophet, in the preceding verse, does not speak of the two
   planets, Jupiter and Mercury, as some think, but means that they were
   not satisfied with one God, and collected for themselves various idols.
   It is an idle conjecture that the word mny (meni) denotes Mercury,
   because mnh (manah) signifies "to number," and Mercury presided over
   numbers and merchants. [210] The design of the Prophet is manifest, who
   declares that the people "shall be numbered to the sword," because they
   delighted in a vast number of gods, and did not choose to rely on one
   God.

   Because I called, and ye did not answer. He heightens the extent and
   heinousness of that treason, by saying that the Jews sinned through
   deliberate malice, and on purpose, rather than through ignorance. They
   had been often instructed and warned, but had disdainfully rejected all
   warnings, and consequently were far less excusable than others, to whom
   no prophets were sent; for although ignorance cannot be pleaded as an
   excuse by any man, yet much less can it be pleaded by the Jews and
   those to whom the word of God is proclaimed, and who, on that account,
   will be condemned and punished more severely than others.

   I spake, and ye did not hear. He describes the manner of calling,
   namely, that he exhorted the people by the prophets; for by the word
   "speak" he twice repeats the same thing, as we have already stated to
   be the custom of Hebrew writers. To "hear" the Lord is to obey his
   word; for it would be a trivial matter to lend our ears, if we did not
   submit to the word; and it would then be with us as the proverb says,
   "They listen with the ears of an ass." [211] God wishes to be heard
   sincerely, and does not approve of a pretended hearing; and he shews
   how it came that they rejected the calling. It was because they shut
   their ears to the doctrine of the prophets; for the beginning of
   obedience is to bring a desire to learn.

   And ye did evil before mine eyes. The phrase, "before mine eyes," is of
   the same import as "to my face;" a mode of expression which he made use
   of a little before. (Verse 3.) All men, indeed, sin "before the eyes"
   of the Lord, and none can withdraw from his presence. But in a peculiar
   sense we are said to sin "before his eyes," when, having been called by
   him, we do not dread his presence; for he approaches nearer to those
   whom he calls by the prophets, and, so to speak, exhibits himself as
   present to them. Far more detestable, therefore, and worthy of severe
   chastisements, is the impiety of those who, laying aside all shame,
   despise and scorn God when he draws near to call and invite them.

   And chose the things in which I took no pleasure. From this concluding
   clause of the verse it is evident that they are condemned, not for
   gross crimes, but for foolish devotions, by which they corrupted the
   worship of God. Although they zealously devoted themselves to
   sacrifices contrived by themselves, because they thought that in this
   way they would become entitled to the favor of God; yet he declares
   that he abhors their wicked practices. It is not permitted that any
   person shall have a free choice to follow whatever he thinks fit, but
   all must observe what God approves, and must not turn aside from it in
   any way whatever. Now we see that it was not a fault peculiar to a
   single age that men should follow their own caprice in the worship of
   God, and should adore their own inventions instead of God; but whatever
   "pleasure" men "take in these things," the Lord solemnly declares that
   he condemns and abhors them.

   13. and 14. Behold, my servants shall eat. Here also the Prophet more
   deafly distinguishes between hypocrites, who held a place in the
   Church, and the true and lawful children; for, although all without
   distinction were called children, yet he skews that many shall be
   disowned as not belonging to the family, and that they who proudly and
   haughtily exalted themselves, under the name of the people of God,
   shall be disappointed of their hope, which is vain and false. We must
   carefully observe the highly emphatic contrast between "the servants of
   God," and those who falsely pretend to his name; for he shews that
   empty titles, and false boasting, or vain confidence, shall avail them
   nothing.

   Shall eat, shall drink. By these words he denotes happiness and a
   prosperous condition of life; as if he had said, that he will take care
   that believers shall not be in want of anything. But the Lord promises
   to his servants something different from what he actually bestows; for
   they often "are hungry and thirsty," (1 Corinthians 4:11,) while the
   wicked abound in enjoyments of every kind, and abuse them for luxury
   and intemperance. But it ought to be observed, that the kingdom of
   Christ is here described under figures; for otherwise we could not
   understand it. Accordingly, the Prophet draws comparisons from earthly
   kingdoms, in which, when the people abound in wealth and enjoy comforts
   of every kind, there is a visible display of the blessing of God from
   which we may judge of his fatherly love.

   But since it is not proper that good men should have their minds
   engrossed by earthly advantages, it is enough that some taste of those
   advantages should support their faith. And if they are sometimes
   oppressed by hunger, yet, being satisfied with a moderate portion of
   good, they nevertheless acknowledge that God is their Father, and that
   he is kind to them, and in their poverty have greater riches than kings
   and nobles. On the other hand, the wicked, whatever may be their
   abundance of good things, cannot enjoy them with a good conscience, and
   therefore are the most wretched of all men. The Prophet, therefore, has
   in his eye the right use of the gifts of God; for they who serve God in
   a right manner receive, as children from the hand of a father, all that
   is necessary for this life, while others, like thieves and profane
   persons, take violent possession of it. Wicked men are never satisfied
   with any amount of wealth, however great; they have continual fear and
   trembling, and their conscience can never be at ease.

   The Lord, therefore, does not promise here what he does not actually
   bestow; and this happiness must not be estimated by the outward
   condition of things. This is still more evident from what follows,
   where he speaks of joy and thanksgiving. The Prophet undoubtedly
   intends to state in a few words, that contentment does not lie in
   abundance of earthly enjoyments, but in calm peace of mind and
   spiritual joy; for unbelievers have no relish for such things, but to
   believers a persuasion of God's fatherly love is more delightful than
   all earthly enjoyments. Yet let us observe that we ought to look for
   all prosperity from God alone, who will not permit his people to be in
   want of anything that belongs to a happy life.

   15. And ye shall leave your name for a curse [212] to my elect. He
   continues the same doctrine, and teaches that God will at length
   separate hypocrites from the true servants. And indeed we need not
   wonder that the Prophet dwells so much on this point; for there is
   nothing of which it is harder to convince hypocrites, who, puffed up
   with pride, deceive and blind themselves. He affirms that "their name"
   shall be "accursed," because they thought that they were the holy seed,
   and that nothing else under heaven was worthy of being remembered. Such
   is also the import of the word "Leave;" as if he had said that false
   boasting, to which they were so strongly attached, shall be shaken off
   by violence; and therefore, that they may not flatter themselves with a
   glory that is temporal, and that shall speedily pass away, the Lord
   rebukes that haughtiness, and declares that he will have other
   servants, to whom they shall be a curse, so that even in solemn cursing
   this shall be taken as an example, "May God curse thee as he has cursed
   the Jews!"

   And shall call his servants by another name. He shews how ill-founded
   is the confidence of that nation, which thought that God would have no
   people, if he had not the posterity of Abraham; for he solemnly
   declares that he will adopt a new people, and that he is not confined
   to the Jews, so as not easily to find others whom he shall adorn with
   the "name" of his people. The opinion entertained by some, that by
   "another name" is meant the Christian name, is exceedingly unnatural;
   and even from the context it is evident that the Prophet had quite a
   different object in view; for, in consequence of the Jews boasting
   proudly of the antiquity of their name, and growing insolent at having
   been elected by God long ago, as if God could not do without them, he
   shews that he will elect and adopt another people, and yet that he
   cannot be accused of capriciousness or fickleness, as if he had changed
   his mind. He will execute his purpose and his righteous judgments
   against those who, under a false pretense of his name, obscure his
   glory and corrupt all godliness.

   16. He who blesseth himself in the earth. Here the whole world is
   contrasted with a corner of Judea, in which the worship of God might be
   said to be shut up. Since the time when God has been manifested
   everywhere, he is not now worshipped in one particular district, but in
   all places without distinction; as Christ also teacheth, (John 4:21,)
   "The hour cometh, when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem,
   shall ye worship the Father;" and Paul also saith,

   "I wish that men in every place may lift up clean hands, without wrath
   and disputing."
   (1 Timothy 2:8.)

   Thus the word "earth," by which he denotes, in this passage, the whole
   world, is employed by him in an indirect contrast with Judea.

   Shall bless himself in the true God. Shall swear by the true God. By
   "blessing" and "swearing" he denotes the whole of the worship of God.
   "Swearing," as we have formerly seen, [213] is a kind of worship of
   God; for by it we declare that all judgment belongs to God, and
   acknowledge that he is perfectly acquainted with all that we do. We
   "bless," when we wish to obtain from him all prosperity, and render
   thanksgiving to him alone; and, in short, when we acknowledge that our
   prosperity comes from no other source than from his undeserved
   kindness. By "the true God" is meant that he is faithful to his
   promises and steadfast to his purpose; though perhaps there is an
   implied and indirect contrast between "the true God" and the false gods
   of the Gentiles.

   For the former afflictions are surrendered to forgetfulness. This
   promise relates to believers only. God declares that he will put an end
   to their afflictions and distresses, that the calamity of the Church
   may not be perpetual. This began to be accomplished when the people
   were brought out of Babylon; for, although they were afflicted in
   various ways both during the journey and at home, yet the severity of
   the punishments was mitigated; because the return to their native
   country, the rebuilding of the temple, the restoration of regular
   government, soothed their griefs, and supported their hearts by good
   hope till the coming of Christ.

   17. For, lo, I will create new heavens and a new earth. By these
   metaphors he promises a remarkable change of affairs; as if God had
   said that he has both the inclination and the power not only to restore
   his Church, but to restore it in such a manner that it shall appear to
   gain new life and to dwell in a new world. These are exaggerated modes
   of expression; but the greatness of such a blessing, which was to be
   manifested at the coming of Christ, could not be described in any other
   way. Nor does he mean only the first coming, but the whole reign, which
   must be extended as far as to the last coming, as we have already said
   in expounding other passages.

   Thus the world is (so to speak) renewed by Christ; and hence also the
   Apostle (Hebrews 2:5) calls it "a new age," and undoubtedly alludes to
   this statement of the Prophet. Yet the Prophet speaks of the
   restoration of the Church after the return from Babylon. This is
   undoubtedly true; but that restoration is imperfect, if it be not
   extended as far as to Christ; and even now we are in the progress and
   accomplishment of it, and those things will not be fulfilled till the
   last resurrection, which has been prescribed to be our limit.

   The former things shall not be remembered. Some refer these words to
   heaven and earth; as if he had said that henceforth they shall have no
   celebrity and no name. But I choose rather to refer them to the former
   times; for he means that the joy at being restored shall be so great
   that they shall no longer remember their miseries. Or perhaps it will
   be thought preferable to view them as relating to benefits which,
   though they were worthy of being recorded, lost their name when God's
   amazing- grace shone forth. In this sense the Prophet said elsewhere,
   "Remember ye not the former things." (Isaiah 43:18.) Not that God
   wished the first deliverance to be set aside or blotted out of the
   hearts of believers; but because by comparison the one brought a kind
   of forgetfulness over the other, just as the sun, when he rises,
   deprives the stars of their brightness.

   Let us remember that these things take place in us so far as we are
   renewed. But we are only in part renewed, and therefore we do not yet
   see a new heaven and a new earth. We need not wonder, therefore, that
   we continue to mourn and weep, since we have not entirely laid aside
   the old man, but many remains are still left. It is with us also that
   the renovation ought to begin; because we hold the first rank, and it
   is through our sin that "the creatures groan, and are subject to
   vanity," as Paul shews. (Romans 8:20.) But when we shall be perfectly
   renewed, heaven and earth shall also be fully renewed, and shall regain
   their former state. And hence it ought to be inferred, as we have
   frequently remarked, that the Prophet has in his eye the whole reign of
   Christ, down to its final close, which is also called

   "the day of renovation and restoration." (Acts 3:21.)

   18. But rejoice ye and be glad for ever. He exhorts believers to
   rejoice, in such a manner as they ought, on account of such a benefit
   bestowed by God. And this was added for the sake of amplification;
   because men do not adequately consider God's other benefits, and
   especially that which is the highest and most excellent of all; for
   either they disregard them altogether, or value them less than they
   ought to do. On this account believers must be aroused and urged by
   such exhortations as these, that they may not chew themselves to be
   unthankful or unmindful, or think that it ought to be lightly passed
   by, that, having been redeemed by the hand of Christ, they carry in
   their hearts the pledge of eternal and heavenly life. That is the
   reason why Isaiah chews that believers do not give due praise for
   redemption in any other way than by continuing their joy through the
   whole course of their life, and employing themselves in celebrating the
   praises of God.

   For, lo, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. At first
   sight this might be thought harsh; but an excellent meaning is
   obtained, that the ground of joy in the deliverance of the Church shall
   be so great as to remove every cloud of sadness. And, indeed, since
   even afflictions aid our salvation, (Romans 8:28,) we have good reason
   for rejoicing in them.

   19. And I will be glad in Jerusalem. He expresses more than in the
   preceding verse; for by these words he means that he not only will give
   to men ground for rejoicing, but even will be a partaker with them in
   that joy. So great is his love toward us, that he delights in our
   prosperity not less than if he enjoyed it along with us. And hence we
   obtain no small confirmation of our faith, when we learn that God is
   moved, and so powerfully moved, by such an affection toward us. If we
   are in painful and distressed circumstances, he says that he is
   affected by grief and sorrow; and, on the other hand, if our condition
   is pleasant and comfortable, he says that he takes great pleasure in
   our prosperity. Hence also we have formerly seen that "the Spirit of
   the Lord is sad and vexed," (Isaiah 63:10,) when that order which he
   demands and approves is overturned and confounded; and in another
   passage he takes upon himself the character of a husband who is
   satisfied with the love of his wife. (Isaiah 62:5.)

   20. There shall be no more thence an infant of days. Some think that
   this points out the difference between the Law and the Gospel; because
   "the Law, as a schoolmaster," (Galatians 3:24,) kept scholars in the
   first elements, but the Gospel leads us on to mature age. Others
   suppose it to mean that there will no longer be any distinction of age;
   because, where life is eternal, no line is drawn between the child and
   the old man. But I interpret the words of the Prophet in this manner,
   "Whether they are children or old men, they shall arrive at mature age
   so as to be always vigorous, like persons in the prime of life; and, in
   short, they shall always be healthful and robust;" for it is on account
   of our sins that we grow old and lose our strength. "All our days,"
   saith Moses, "pass away when thou art angry: we close our years quicker
   than a word. The days of our years in which we live are seventy years,
   or, at the utmost, eighty: what goeth beyond this in the strongest is
   toil and vexation; our strength passeth swiftly, and we fly away."
   (Psalm 90:9, 10.) But Christ comes to repair our strength, and to
   restore and preserve our original condition.

   For the son of a hundred years shall die young. It is proper to
   distinguish between the two clauses; for, after having said that the
   citizens of the Church shall be long-lived, so that no one shall be
   taken out of the world till he has reached mature age and fully
   completed his course, he likewise adds that, even in old age, they
   shall be robust. Although the greater part of believers hardly support
   themselves through weakness, and the strength of others decays even
   before the time, yet that promise is not made void; for, if Christ
   reigned truly and perfectly in us, his strength would undoubtedly
   flourish in us, and would invigorate both body and soul. To our sins,
   therefore, it ought to be imputed, that we are liable to diseases,
   pains, old age, and other inconveniences; for we do not permit Christ
   to possess us fully, and have not advanced so far in newness of life as
   to lay aside all that is old. [214]

   Here it ought also to be observed, that blessings either of soul or
   body are found only in the kingdom of Christ, that is, in the Church,
   apart from which there is nothing but cursing. Hence it follows that
   all who have no share in that kingdom are wretched and unhappy; and,
   however fresh and vigorous they may appear to be, they are,
   nevertheless, in the sight of God, rotten and stinking corpses.

   21 and 22. They shall build houses and inhabit them. In these verses he
   mentions what is written in the Law; for these are the blessings of the
   Law, that they who have obeyed God shall dwell in the houses which they
   have built, and shall gather fruit from the trees which they have
   planted. (Leviticus 26:10.) On the other hand, the disobedient shall be
   expelled from the houses which they built, and shall give place to
   foreigners, and shall be deprived of the fruits of the trees which they
   planted. "The Lord," saith Isaiah, "shall protect you from that curse,
   so as to enjoy your property." Now the Prophets hold out those things
   which relate to the present life, and borrow metaphors from them; but
   it is in order that they may teach us to rise higher and to embrace
   eternal and blessed life. We must not fix our whole attention on these
   transitory blessings, but must make use of them as ladders, that, being
   raised to heaven, we may enjoy eternal and immortal blessings. To the
   Church, which has been renewed, and which rests on nothing but God's
   good pleasure and undeserved favor, is justly promised the enjoyment of
   those blessings of which unbelievers had deprived themselves.

   According to the days of a tree. Some think that this is a promise of
   eternal life; as if men had the tree of life; but that is forged
   ingenuity, and far removed from the Prophet's meaning. And I do wonder
   that commentators give themselves so much trouble in explaining this
   passage; for the Prophet speaks, not only of life, but of a peaceful
   condition of life; as if he had said, "Ye shall plant vineyards, and
   shall eat the fruit of them; and ye shall not be removed from this life
   before receiving the fruit, which shall be enjoyed, not only by
   yourselves, but by your children and posterity. He employs the metaphor
   of a tree, because he had formerly spoken of planting vineyards; and
   accordingly he promises that the people shall peacefully enjoy both
   their houses and their vineyards, and shall not be molested by enemies
   or robbers, and this peaceful condition shall last as long as the life
   of a tree.

   And my elect shall perpetually enjoy [215] the work of their hands. A
   work is said to be continued or perpetuated when the result of it is
   prosperous; for otherwise men would subject themselves to long and
   severe toil, and all to no purpose, if God did not grant success.
   Enemies will either take away or destroy what we have begun, and the
   completion of it will be out of our power; and therefore it is strictly
   said to be continued, not when merely some progress is made, but when
   it is brought to a close. Here it ought to be observed, that we cannot
   possess our wealth and have the peaceful and lawful enjoyment of it in
   any other way than by dwelling in the kingdom of Christ, who is the
   only heir of the world, and without being ingrafted into his body.
   Wicked men may indeed enjoy, for many years, the good things of this
   life; but they will continually be uneasy, and will wretchedly devour
   themselves, so that even possession shall be destructive and deadly;
   for it is only by faith that we obtain all that belongs to a blessed
   life, and they who have not faith cannot be members of Christ.

   23. They shall not toil in vain. He enumerates other kinds of blessings
   which God promises to the kingdom of Christ; for, although God always
   blessed his people, yet the blessings were in some measure suspended
   till the coming of Christ, in whom was displayed full and complete
   happiness. In a word, both Jews and Gentiles shall be happy, in all
   respects, under the reign of Christ. Now, as it is a token of God's
   wrath and curse when we obtain no advantage front our labor, so, on the
   other hand, it is a token of blessing when we clearly see the fruit of
   our labor. For this reason he says that they who shall have returned
   from captivity, in order that they may obtain a true and complete
   deliverance, shall not spend their labor in vain or lose their pains.
   The Law threatens the death of relatives, destructive wars, losses of
   property, and terror in their hearts. (Leviticus 26:22; Deuteronomy
   28:48.) Here, on the contrary, are promised fertility, peace, the fruit
   of labor, and repose. And blessings of this kind ought to be carefully
   observed; for there are few who, amidst their labors, think of the
   blessing of God, so as to ascribe everything to him alone, and to be
   fully convinced that they will accomplish nothing whatever unless the
   Lord grant to them a prosperous result. Wherefore, as every blessing
   should be sought from God, so, when it has been received, thanksgiving
   should be rendered for it to God alone.

   And they shall not bring forth in terror. When it is said that women
   "shall not bring forth in terror," some explain it to mean, that they
   shall have no uneasiness or dread of childbirth, because they shall be
   free from pain. We know that this punishment was inflicted on the woman
   on account of sin, to bring forth with difficulty, and to be in danger
   of death. Children are brought into the world with fear and trembling,
   when there is any expectation of war; and it is probable that the
   Prophet rather looks to this, that there shall be such settled peace
   that neither women nor men shall have any reason to fear; for this must
   be viewed as relating to both parents, who will have no dread about
   their children, as commonly happens when any danger is threatened.

   For they shall be the seed of the blessed of Jehovah. This reason is
   highly appropriate; for whence come fears and terrors, whence come
   alarms, but from the curse of God? When the curse has been removed, the
   Prophet therefore says justly that parents, together with their
   offspring, shall be free from dread and anxious solicitude; because
   they shall be convinced that they shall always be safe and sound
   through the favor of God.

   And their offspring with them. This is contrasted with childlessness,
   which is reckoned in the number of the curses of God; and therefore it
   is the same as if he had said, "I will no longer deprive them of their
   children, but will cause them to enjoy them, along with the rest of the
   blessings which I shall bestow upon them."

   24. Before they cry, I will listen. A remarkable promise; for nothing
   is more desirable than to have God reconciled to us, and to have it in
   our power to draw near to him with freedom and boldness; for, although
   we are surrounded by innumerable distresses and calamities, yet we
   cannot be miserable so long as we are at liberty to betake ourselves to
   the Lord. Here therefore the Lord promises that we shall not pray in
   vain. Yet this was also promised to the fathers under the Law. It is
   certain that, since the beginning of the world, God listened to the
   fathers, to all that called upon him; for this is the most valuable
   fruit of faith. But he confirms this more and more. Because the Jews
   would be exiles for a long time, the Lord solemnly declares that he
   will not permit them any longer to languish in banishment, and will no
   longer delay his assistance, but will "listen to them even before they
   cry."

   This relates chiefly to the kingdom of Christ, through whom we are
   heard and have access to God the Father, as Paul admirably explains.
   (Ephesians 2:18; 3:12.) The fathers indeed enjoyed the same access, and
   there was no other way in which they could be heard but through Christ;
   but the door was still narrow and might be said to be shut, whereas now
   it has been most widely and perfectly thrown open. Under the law the
   people were wont to stand at a distance in the porch; but now nothing
   hinders us from entering into the sanctuary itself, because

   "the veil of the temple hath been rent." (Matthew 27:51.)

   Thus we have admission into heaven through Christ,

   "that we may approach with freedom and boldness to the throne of grace,
   to obtain mercy and find needful assistance."
   (Hebrews 4:16.)

   A question will be put. "Are there no believers in the world, and is
   there no kingdom of Christ, in the present day? For it does not appear
   that God is so ready to render assistance, and there is no visible
   fruit of our prayers." I reply. Though it becomes fully evident that we
   have been heard when the event actually proves it, yet God does not in
   the meantime overlook us; for he does not permit us to faint, but
   supports us by the power of his Spirit, that we may wait for him
   patiently. Nor does he delay, as men do, because he has need of time,
   but because he wishes to exercise and try our patience. In a word,
   there are two ways in which God listens to us; first, when he renders
   assistance openly; and secondly, when he aids us by the power of his
   Spirit, that we may not sink under the weight of afflictions. And if
   this doctrine were deeply fixed in the hearts of men, they would fly to
   God more readily and boldly, and would not dispute so eagerly about
   calling on saints. For how comes it that men contrive for themselves
   such a variety of intercessors, to whom they betake themselves rather
   than to Christ, but because they do not receive that doctrine, and
   because they reject such large and bountiful promises?

   25. The wolf and the lamb shall feed together. He means that everything
   shall be fully restored, when Christ shall reign. And here it appears
   as if there were an implied comparison between Adam and Christ. We know
   that all the afflictions of the present life flowed from the sin of the
   first man; for at that time we were deprived of the dominion and
   sovereignty which God had given to man (Genesis 1:28) over animals of
   every kind, all of which at first undoubtedly bowed cheerfully to the
   dominion of man, and were obedient to his will; but now the most of
   them rise up against man, and even carly on mutual war against each
   other. Thus, when wolves, bears, lions, and other savage animals of
   that kind, are hurtful to man and to other beasts from which we obtain
   some advantage, and when even animals which ought to have been useful
   to man are hostile to him, this ought to be imputed to his sin, because
   his disobedience overthrew the order of things. But since it is the
   office of Christ to bring back everything to its condition and order,
   that is the reason why he declares that the confusion or ruin that now
   exists in human affairs shall be removed by the coming of Christ;
   because at that time, corruptions having been taken away, the world
   shall return to its first origin.

   And the lion shall eat straw like the ox. "The lion" shall eat
   harmlessly, and shall no longer seek his prey. The serpent, satisfied
   with his dust, shall wrap himself in it, and shall no longer hurt by
   his envenomed bite. In a word, all that is disordered or confused shall
   be restored to its proper order. Yet beyond all controversy the Prophet
   speaks allegorically of bloody and violent men, whose cruel and savage
   nature shall be subdued, when they submit to the yoke of Christ. But
   first we must carefully consider that confusion which befell all the
   creatures in consequence of the fall of man; for if this were not taken
   into view, it would be impossible for us to have sufficiently just and
   correct views of this blessing of restoration. At the same time, we
   must keep in remembrance what we said in expounding a similar allegory
   in the eleventh chapter. [216] Here we are taught what is the nature of
   men before the Lord convert them and receive them into his fold; for
   they are cruel and untamed beasts, and only begin to abstain from doing
   any injury, when the Lord subdues their wicked inclination and their
   furious desire to do harm.

   In all my holy mountain. This is added because, when rubbish and filth
   have been taken out of the way, the Lord will gather to himself a
   Church without spot. By the word all he means cleansing. Yet we ought
   not to think it strange that still so many are ferocious; for there are
   few that are the true inhabitants of God's mountain, few that are
   upright and faithful, even among those who profess to be Christians.
   Seeing that the old man still reigns and is vigorous in them,
   contentions and wars must also exist and prevail amongst them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [198] The remainder of our author's exposition of the first verse will
   be found at commentary on [20]verse 1. -- Ed.

   [199] Calvin, having found it "convenient to begin with the second
   verse," now returns to the exposition of the first verse. -- Ed.

   [200] "Des esprits malins." "Of wicked spirits."

   [201] "Non pas mesmes de l'espesseur d'une ongle." "Not even the
   thickness of a nail."

   [202] "The literal translation is Approach to thyself;' and as this
   implies removal from the speaker, the essential meaning is correctly
   expressed, though in a very different form from the original, both by
   the Septuagint (por'rho ap ' emou) and by the Vulgate (Recede a me).
   The common English Version (Stand by thyself), and Henderson's
   improvement of it (Keep by thyself), both suggest an idea not contained
   in the original, namely, that of standing alone; whereas all that is
   expressed by the Hebrew phrase is the act of standing away from the
   speaker, for which Lowth has found the idiomatic equivalent (Keep to
   thyself.)" -- Alexander.

   [203] "Avec ceux qui leur remonstrent choses pour leur salut." "With
   those whose serious warnings are intended for their salvation."

   [204] "Si nous ne changeons de vie." "If we do not change our life."

   [205] "Et ne veulent ouir autre chanson." "And do not wish to hear any
   other song."

   [206] "If it should please God to call the natural descendants of the
   patriarch in that land, and convert them in a body to the true faith,
   there would be an additional coincidence between the prophecy and the
   event, even in minor circumstances, such as we often find in the
   history of Christ. But if no such national restoration of the Jews to
   Palestine should ever happen, the extension of the true religion over
   that benighted region, which both prophecy and Providence encourage us
   to look for, would abundantly redeem the pledge which God has given to
   his people in this and other parts of Scripture." -- Alexander.

   [207] "Par les biens terriens." "By earthly blessings."

   [208] "Et les appelle apostats." "And calls them apostates."

   [209] "That prepare a table for that troop, (or, Gad.)" -- Eng. Ver. "A
   table. A lectisternium the Romans called it. Gad and Meni were heathen
   deities, or perhaps two appellations of the same idol, according to the
   scriptural manner of expressing the same thing, in the same sentence,
   by its different names; so in Jeremiah 32:35, Baal and Moloch mean one
   false god. Gad, in Arabic, is Goodness. Meni denoted the Moon, from mnh
   (manah), to number; whence men, a month, and mene, the ancient Greek
   name for the moon." -- Stock, who quotes Rosenmuller as his authority.

   [210] "Et que Mercure estoit le dieu des marchans qui out leurs livres
   de contes." "And because Mercury was the god of merchants, who have
   their account-books."

   [211] "Comme aux asnes qui font signe d'oreilles." "As with asses that
   make a show of ears."
   Greek proverbs of the same kind are still more abundant. 'Ono tis elege
   muthon; ho de ta ota ekinei "One told a story to an ass, and he pricked
   up his ears." 'Onos luras akouon kinei ta ota "An ass, listening to a
   lyre, pricks up his ears." -- Ed.

   [212] "Oath is here put for curse, as it is added to it in Daniel 9:11,
   and the two are combined in Numbers 5:21, where the oath of cursing may
   be regarded as the complete expression, of which oath is here an
   ellipsis. To leave one's name for a curse, according to Old Testament
   usage, is something more than to leave it to be cursed. The sense is,
   that the name shall be used as a formula of cursing, so that men shall
   be able to wish nothing worse to others, than a like character and
   fate. This is clear from Jeremiah 29:22, compared with Zechariah 3:2,
   as well as from the converse or correlative promise to the patriarchs
   and their children, that a like use should be made of their names as a
   formula of blessing. (Genesis 22:18; 48:20.)" -- Alexander.

   [213] Commentary on Isaiah, [21]Vol. 2, p. 70; [22]Vol. 3, p. 467.

   [214] "Tout le vieil homme." "All the old man."

   [215] "Ou, jouiront en vieil aage de l'oeuvre de leurs mains." "Or,
   shall enjoy in old age the work of their hands."

   [216] Commentary on Isaiah, [23]vol. 1, p. 383.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 66.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah 66:1-24

   1. Thus saith the LORD, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
   footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the
   place of my rest?

   1. Sic dicit Iehova, Coelum sedes mea, et terra scabellum pedum meorum.
   Ubi ista domus quam aedificabitis mihi? et ubi hic locus quietis meae?

   2. For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have
   been, saith the LORD: but to this man will I look, even to him that is
   poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.

   2. Atqui manus mea haec omnia fecit, et coeperunt ease haec omnia,
   dicit Iehova. Et ad hunc respicio qui humilis eat ac contritus spiritu,
   tremitque ad sermonem meum.

   3. He that killeth an ox, is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a
   lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that offereth an oblation, as
   if he offered swine's blood; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed
   an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul
   delighteth in their abominations.

   3. Qui mactat bovem, acsi hominem occidat; qui sacrificat pecudem, acsi
   canem jugulet. Qui offert Minha, acsi offeret sanguinem suillum; qui
   recordatur thuris, acsi benedicat idolo (Hebrews iniquitati). Et sane
   elegerunt vias suas, et abominationes eorum anima ipsorum desideravit.

   4. I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon
   them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did
   not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I
   delighted not.

   4. Ego quoque eligam illusiones eorum, et terrorem ipsorum inducam
   illis; quia vocavi, et nemo respondit; loquutus sum, et non audierunt;
   et fecerunt malum in oculis meis, et ea in quibus non oblector
   elegerunt.

   5. Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word; Your
   brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said,
   Let the LORD be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they
   shall be ashamed.

   5. Audite verbum Iehovae, qui tremitis ad verbum ejus. Dixerunt fratres
   vestri odio vos habentes, rejicientes vos propter nomen meum.
   Glorificetur (vel, gravis eat; vel, onerosus; vel, glorificabitur)
   Iehova. Atqui videbitur cum laetitia vestra; illi autem pudefient.

   6. A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of
   the LORD that rendereth recompence to his enemies.

   6. Vox tumultus ex urbe, vox e templo; vox Iehovae reddentis mercedem
   hostibus suis.

   7. Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she
   was delivered of a man-child.

   7. Antequam parturiret, peperit; antequam veniret illi dolor, enixa est
   masculum.

   8. Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the
   earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at
   once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.

   8. Quis audivit huic simile? Quis simile huic vidit? An parietur terra
   die uno? An nascetur gens vice una? Quoniam simul doluit ad partum,
   simul peperit Sion illlos suos.

   9. Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith the
   LORD: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy God.

   9. An ego foetus emitto, et non pariam? dicit Iehova. An ego parere
   facio, et cohibebor? dicit Deus tuns.

   10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love
   her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her:

   10. Laetamini cum Ierusalem, et exultate in ea, omnes qui diligitis
   eam; gaudete cum ea gaudio, omnes qui lugetis super eam.

   11. That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her
   consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance
   of her glory.

   11. Ut sugatis et saturemini ab ubere consolationum ejus, ut mulgeatis
   et delectemini splendore gloria ejus.

   12. For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a
   river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall
   ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her
   knees.

   12. Quoniam sic dicit Iehova, Ecce ego derivo super earn, quasi
   fluvium, pacem; et quasi torrentera inundantem gloriam Gentium. Sugetis
   itaque, super latus portabimini, et super genua delectabimini.

   13. As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye
   shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

   13. Sicuti virum quem consolatur mater sua, ita ego consolabor vos, et
   super Ierusalem erit vobis consolatio.

   14. And when ye see this, your heart shall reioice, and your bones
   shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the LORD shall be known
   toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.

   14. Et videbitis, et hetabitur cot vestrum, et ossa vestra quasi herba
   florebunt; et cognoscetur manus Iehovae erga servos suos, et
   indignabitur hostibus suis.

   15. For, behold, the LORD will come with fire, and with his chariots
   like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with
   flames of fire.

   15. Quoniam ecce Iehova in igne veniet, et quasi turbo quadrigae ejus,
   ut reddat in furore iram suam, et increpationem suam in flamma ignis.

   16. For by fire, and by his sword, will the LORD plead with all flesh:
   and the slain of the LORD shall be many.

   16. Quoniam in igne lehova judicabit, et in gladio suo omnem carnem; et
   multi erunt interfecti Iehovae.

   17. They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens
   behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the
   abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the LORD.

   17. Qui sanctificant se, et qui se purificant in hortis post unam in
   medio; qui comednut carnem suillam, et abominationem et murem, simul
   tollentur, dicit Iehova.

   18. For I know their works and their thoughts: it shall come, that I
   will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my
   glory.

   18. Nam ego opera eorum et cogitationes eorum. Quia venit tempus ut
   congregem omnes gentes et linguas; et venient, et videbunt gloriam
   meam.

   19. And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape
   of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow,
   to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my
   fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among
   the Gentiles.

   19. Et ponam in illis signum, et mittam quosdam ex illis servatos ad
   gentes Tharsis, Pul, et Lud, qui trahunt arcu, Thubal et Javan, insulas
   remotas; quae non audierunt nomen meum, et non viderunt gloriam meam;
   et annuntiabunt gloriam meam in Gentibus.

   20. And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the
   LORD out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters,
   and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem,
   saith the LORD, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean
   vessel into the house of the LORD.

   20. Et adducent omnes fratres vestros ex omnibus gentibus oblationem
   Iehovae in equis et quadrigis, in vehiculis, et mulis, et celeribus
   animalibus, ad montem sanctum meum Ierusalem, dicit Iehova; quemadmodum
   adferunt filii Israel in vase mundo in domum Iehovae.

   21. And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the
   LORD.

   21. Adeoque assurmam ex illis aliquos in sacerdotes et Levitas, dicit
   Iehova.

   22. For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall
   remain before me, saith the LORD, so shall your seed and your name
   remain.

   22. Nam sicut coeli novi, et terra nova, quae ego facio, stant coram
   me, dicit Iehova; ira stabunt semen vestrum et nomen vestrum.

   23. And it shall come to pass, that from one new-moon to another, and
   from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me,
   saith the LORD.

   23. Et accidet, ut e mense in mensem ejus, et ex Sabbatho in Sabbathum
   ejus, veniat omnis caro, ut adoret coram me, dicit Jehova.

   24. And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that
   have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither
   shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all
   flesh.

   24. Et egredientur, et videbunt cadavera hominum qui praevarieati sunt
   in me; quia vermis eorum non morietur, et ignis eorum non extinguetur,
   et erunt nausea onmi carni.


   1. This saith Jehovah. This discourse is different from the preceding
   one; for here the Prophet exclaims against the Jews, who, puffed up
   with vain confidence in the sacrifices and the temple, indulged freely
   in their pleasures, and flattered themselves in their sins under this
   pretense. He shews that this confidence is not only foolish and
   groundless, but diabolical and accursed; for they grossly mock God who
   endeavor to serve and appease him by outward ceremonies. Accordingly,
   he reproaches them with endeavoring to frame an idol in place of God,
   when they shut him up in the temple. Next, he speaks of the renovation
   of the Church, and of the extension of it throughout the whole world.

   Heaven is my throne. His aim being to shake off the self-complancency
   of the pretended or hypocritical worshippers of God, he begins with his
   nature. By assigning "heaven" for his habitation, he means that the
   majesty of God fills all things, and is everywhere diffused; and that
   he is so far from being shut up in the temple, that he is not shut up
   or confined within any place whatever. The Scripture often teaches that
   God is in heaven; not that he is shut up in it, but in order that we
   may raise our minds above the world, and may not entertain any low, or
   carnal, or earthly conceptions of him; for the mere sight of heaven
   ought to carry us higher, and transport us into admiration. And yet, in
   innumerable passages, he protests that he is with us, that his power is
   everywhere diffused, in order that we may not imagine that he is shut
   up in heaven.

   It may be thought that this is beyond all controversy, and was at that
   time acknowledged by all; for who did not know that heaven and earth
   are filled by the majesty of God? They might therefore object that
   there is no man who wishes to thrust God out of heaven, and that the
   Prophet has no good reason for waxing wroth and breaking out into such
   violent invective. And undoubtedly they rejected with great haughtiness
   this doctrine of the Prophet, and were highly irritated and enraged, as
   if great injury had been done to them. But it is easy to reply that,
   when men endeavor to appease God according to their own fancy, they
   frame an idol that is altogether contrary to his majesty, Relying on
   their useless ceremonies, they thought that they had performed their
   duty well when they went frequently to the temple, and offered in it
   prayers and sacrifices. The Prophet shews that the majesty of God must
   not be measured by this standard, and that all that they bring forward,
   unaccompanied by purity of heart, are absolute trifles; for since it is
   evident from his dwelling-place being in heaven that the nature of God
   is spiritual, if the worship do not correspond to that nature, it is
   undoubtedly wicked and corrupted.

   Where is that house which ye will build for me? Under the word house or
   temple he includes all the ceremonies in which they thought that the
   worship of God consisted; and because they measured God and his worship
   by the temple as a standard, the Prophet shews that it is unworthy of
   God's majesty to view his presence as confined to a visible and frail
   building. He does not argue merely about God's essence, but at the same
   time discourses concerning his true worship, which he shews to be
   spiritual, in order that it may correspond to the nature of God, who
   "is a Spirit." (John 4:24.) And if men diligently considered what is
   the nature of God, they would not contrive foreign and new modes of
   worship for him, or measure him by themselves. [217] This common and
   often expressed sentiment is more weighty and energetic than if the
   Prophet had brought forward something new; for he shews that they are
   so stupid and dull as to be ignorant of that which was well known to
   the merest idiot, and that they resemble dumb beasts in imagining that
   God dwells and reposes in the temple. He therefore asks contemptuously,
   "Where is that house?" For it was absurd to think either that God
   dwells on the earth, or that he is concealed and shut up in a prison.
   Besides, the temple was built on a small mountain, and could not
   contain the glory of God within its limited dimensions.

   And where is this place of my rest? And yet the Lord had said of the
   temple, "This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have chosen
   it,." (Psalm 132:14.) In another passage it was said, "Enter, O Lord,
   into thy rest." (2 Chronicles 6:41.) Besides, we have seen, in a former
   part of this book, that "the Lord's rest shall be glorious in it."
   (Isaiah 11:10.) Finally, this was the ordinary designation of the
   temple, and yet the Prophet now finds fault with it. I reply, the
   temple is called God's rest, because he gave the token of his presence
   in the temple; for he had chosen it as the place where men should call
   upon him, and from which he would give a display of his strength and
   power. But he did not command it to be built in order that men might
   conceive of his majesty according to their own fancy, [218] but rather
   that, reminded by the outward signs of God's presence, they might raise
   their minds higher and rise to heaven, and acknowledge that God is
   greater and more excellent than the whole world. Yet, as the minds of
   men are prone to superstition, the Jews converted into obstacles to
   themselves those things which were intended to be aids; and when they
   ought to have risen by faith to heaven, they believed that God was
   bound to them, and worshipped him only in a careless, manner, or rather
   made sport of worshipping him at their own pleasure.

   This passage is very appropriately quoted by Stephen, (Acts 7:49,) and
   is indirectly accommodated by Paul to the sense which we have now
   stated; for they shew that those persons are grievously deceived and
   far astray who bring to God carnal ceremonies, as if pure worship and
   religion consisted of them, or who wickedly and profanely disfigure his
   worship by statues and images. Stephen addresses the Jews, who, being
   attached to the figures of the Law, disregarded true godliness; while
   Paul, speaking to the Gentiles, affirms that "God dwelleth not in
   temples made with hands." (Acts 17:24.)

   2. Yet my hand hath made all these things. The Prophet refutes the
   false opinion which men form about the worship of God, by thinking that
   sacrifices and outward ceremonies are of great value in themselves; for
   the state of the question is this. God cares nothing about ceremonies,
   but they are empty and useless masks, when men think that they satisfy
   God by means of them. When he says that he made all these things, this
   must not be understood as referring solely to the temple, but to all
   that was there offered to God. Now he says that he "made all these
   things," in order that men may know that God has no need of this
   external worship, as he declares (Psalm 50:10) that all the animals
   were created by him, and are his own, though by sacrifices of them the
   Jews hoped to obtain his favor. But foolish mortals have this disease
   deeply seated in them, that they transform God according to their
   inclination, though he appointed external worship not for his sake, but
   for our advantage; that is, that we may be trained by it according to
   the capacity of our flesh.

   And all these things began to be. It is the same as if he had said that
   he must not be compared to these things, which at one time began to be;
   for he is eternal and had no beginning. "I could dispense with your
   sacrifices," saith the Lord, "for, before they began to be, I was, and
   therefore they can be of no service to me." In short, he maintains that
   ceremonies are of no avail in themselves, but aim at a different
   object. Isaiah takes for granted that it is impossible that God could
   receive any addition; and hence it follows that he is satisfied with
   himself alone; for he could do without the world from all eternity.

   And I look to him who is humble and contrite in spirit. Next, a
   definition of lawful worship is added; for, when he says that God
   "looketh to the humble," I have no doubt that he who is "humble and
   contrite in spirit" is indirectly contrasted by him with the array, and
   splendor, and elegance of ceremonies, by which the eyes of men are
   commonly dazzled, so as to be carried away in admiration. On the other
   hand, the Lord testifies that he demands humble and downcast minds, and
   that tremble at his commandments. By these words he describes inward
   purity of heart and sincere desire of godliness, and at the same time
   shews in what way we ought to be prepared to please God.

   And trembleth at my word. So far as relates to "trembling," it might be
   thought strange at first sight that he demands it in believers, since
   nothing is more sweet or gentle than the word of the Lord, and nothing
   is more opposite to it than to excite terror. I reply, there are two
   kinds of trembling; one by which they are terrified who hate and flee
   from God, and another which affects the heart, and promotes the
   obedience, of those who reverence and fear God. This clause, I am
   aware, is viewed by others as relating to the Law, which threatens and
   terrifies, and proclaims the dreadful judgment of God. But I take it in
   a more general acceptation; for even believers tremble at the promises
   when they embrace them with reverence. Hence infer that true godliness
   consists in having our senses brought into a state of obedience to God,
   and in making no boastful or wicked claims for ourselves. The nature of
   faith is to yield obedience to God, and to listen to him attentively
   and patiently when he speaks. But when we are puffed up and carried
   away by a vain confidence in ourselves, we have no piety or fear of
   God; for we cannot make even the smallest claim for ourselves without
   despising God.

   We ought carefully to mark the expression which he employs, "Trembling
   at the word of God." Many boast that they reverence and fear God; but,
   by disregarding his word, they at the same time shew that they are
   despisers of God. All the reverence that we owe to God must be paid to
   his word, in which he wishes to be fully recognised as in a lively
   image. The amount of what is said is, that God prefers this sacrifice
   to all others, when believers, by true self-denial, lie low in such
   abasement as to have no lofty opinion about themselves, but to permit
   themselves to be reduced to nothing. Thus also the Psalmist says, "The
   sacrifice acceptable to God is a contrite spirit; an afflicted heart, O
   God, thou wilt not despise." (Psalm 51:17.) Because this modesty of
   faith produces obedience, this pious feeling is likewise added, that,
   laying aside all obstinacy, they tremble at the word of God.

   From these words we ought to draw a remarkable consolation, "Though we
   appear to be wretched in our abasement and humility, and though we
   appear to be unworthy of being beheld by men, yet we are truly happy;
   because the Lord looks upon us, and bestows on us his favor." When we
   are tempted to despair, let us think that in this way the Lord exalts
   his servants to heaven, though they have been cast down to hell, and
   almost sink under the burden.

   3. He that killeth an ox, as if he slew a man. There are two clauses in
   this verse. In the former, Isaiah plainly declares that all the
   sacrifices of his nation are of no value in the sight of God, but are
   held by him in abomination; in the latter, he describes the dreadful
   corruption by which they mingled the ceremonies of the Gentiles with
   the sacrifices of the Law, and in this way corrupted and perverted
   everything. The greater part of commentators think that these words
   repeal the sacrifices of the Law, but this is a mistake; for Isaiah, in
   this passage, treats of the same subject of which he had formerly
   treated in the first and fifty-eighth chapters, and does not absolutely
   condemn sacrifices, but rather the blemishes and corruptions of them,
   because the Jews thought that God was satisfied with a deceitful and
   empty appearance, and at the same time cared not about the true fear of
   God and a pure conscience. He does not speak, therefore, of the thing
   itself, but censures men who abused sacrifices; because this was as
   much as to offer to God the shell of an empty nut. In a word, no
   sacrifices are acceptable to God but those which proceed from a pure
   heart and an upright will.

   Yet it is probable that the Prophet alludes to the sacrifices of the
   Gentiles, which were shocking and monstrous; for they killed men, or
   buried them alive. Neither the Romans, (who reckoned themselves to be
   more religious than other nations,) nor even the Jews, abstained from
   this crime. Nay more, (kakozeloi) wicked imitators polluted themselves
   by many child-murders, thinking that they followed their father
   Abraham. Isaiah says that, "when they kill an ox, they do the same
   thing as if they slew a man;" [219] and thus he shews that the Jews,
   though they had a religion which was peculiar and which God had
   appointed, yet were in no respect better than the Gentiles, among whom
   everything was polluted and profane, and were not more highly approved
   by God; because the name of God is profaned by hypocrisy of religion
   not less than by corrupted and false worship. How necessary this
   admonition was, we have formerly seen; for, while the Jews were
   convicted of all crimes, yet, so long as they concealed themselves
   under this shadow, they thought that they were safe. Justly therefore
   does the Prophet meet them by saying, that they gain nothing more by
   their attempts to appease God than if they sought to offer sacrifices
   from the abominable sacrileges of the Gentiles.

   And truly they have chosen their own ways. There are two
   interpretations of this passage; for the antecedent to the pronoun may
   either be the Gentiles or the Jews; that is, either that the Jews
   mingled and entangled themselves with the wicked ceremonies of the
   Gentiles, or that they followed their own inventions. The former
   exposition would not be inappropriate, were it not that it is
   unnatural, because the word "Gentiles" has not been formerly expressed.
   It was the most aggravated part of the wickedness of the Jews, that
   they not only abused the pure worship of God, but likewise, through
   their contempt of the Law, defiled the temple and every other place by
   wicked and abominable superstitions. They built altars on high places,
   planted and reared groves, took delight in games and public
   entertainments, and copied everything else that was appointed by public
   authority for the purpose of corrupting the hearts of men. Thus there
   was produced among them a confused medley of superstitions, such as we
   now behold in Popery, in which we see various patches sewed together,
   taken out of every kind of superstitions, not only heathen and Jewish,
   but likewise such as have been recently contrived by Satan, that he
   might more easily, and with greater plausibility, impose on the world.
   These and similar practices the Prophet would justly pronounce to be
   doubly worthy of condemnation, because, while they boast of the name of
   God, and make profession of his worship, still they are not ashamed to
   stain and pollute that worship by the sacrileges of idolatrous nations.

   The other interpretation is not obscure, and is equally appropriate,
   that the Jews were devoted to their own inventions, and followed their
   own abominations, He affirms that they do not worship God sincerely,
   who despise him according to their own caprice, not only because they
   are full of avarice, hatred, ambition, dishonesty, cruelty, and
   extortion, but because they corrupt the worship of God by their own
   contrivances. Although the pronoun refers to the Jews, yet the Prophet
   condemns all superstitions which they had borrowed from the heathen
   nations. Consequently, there is little difference between the two
   interpretations; for he merely teaches that, because they have
   insolently and rebelliously shaken off the yoke of God, because
   wickedness openly prevails among them, everything that proceeds from
   them is polluted and detestable. Streams that bring down dirty and
   offensive matter from a muddy and polluted fountain cannot be clean or
   pure. Choice and desire reveal their obstinacy more clearly; that is,
   because, knowingly and willingly, they despised God's commandments, and
   devoted their heart to everything that was opposed to them, as if they
   wished intentionally to disdain everything that proceeded from God,
   that they might obey their depraved lust.

   4. I also will choose their delusions. [220] The Prophet means that the
   Jews gain nothing by holding out various and plausible pretences and by
   searching for excuses; because God does not care for the cunning or
   fine speeches of men. And indeed it is not proper to measure God by our
   own capacity, and we ought not to depend on human judgment; but it is
   our duty to judge of the works of God from his word. I will choose;
   that is, "I will scatter the clouds which they endeavor to spread over
   themselves, so that their delusions shall be manifest and visible to
   all; for now they appear to be hidden, but one day they shall be
   dragged forth to public view." The meaning may be thus summed up.
   "Because the Jews have indulged so freely in sinning that everything
   which they chose was preferred by them to the command ments of God, so
   also, in his turn, God will lay open their delusions at his pleasure."

   And will bring upon them their terror. [221] Under the word "terror" he
   repeats the same thing, according to the custom of Hebrew writers. "I
   will cause them to know that they have fallen into a mistake, and that
   the terrors which they indulged shall fall on their own heads. [222]
   Thus their excuses or hypocritical pretences will be of no avail for
   confounding truth and falsehood and veiling superstitions; because the
   Lord will clearly distinguish between them.

   Because I called. The Prophet again condemns the Jews for obstinacy, in
   not having suffered the Lord to correct them. This is the only remedy
   that remains for correcting our vices, that we hear the Lord speaking,
   when he endeavors to bring us back into the right way; but when we sear
   and harden our hearts, it is the worst of all evils. Whenever therefore
   men prefer their own inventions to the ordinances and commandments of
   God, they openly despise God, to whose will they ought to have yielded.
   This is especially the case when there is added such obstinate hardness
   of heart as shuts the door against holy warnings, and it is vain for
   them to allege that they cannot displease God by doing that which they
   undertake for the purpose of worshipping him; for all that men, by
   neglecting the word, choose and follow, the Lord rejects and abhors.

   Before mine eyes. He repeats what he had formerly said, that the Jews
   sinned in the sight of God, as if they had resolved to provoke him to
   anger. At length he adds their manner of doing so, that, with perverse
   desire, they sought what God had forbidden; nor is it without good
   reason that he so frequently censures the wicked insolence of men, in
   defrauding God of his right, by treating contemptuously what he
   approves.

   5. Hear the word of Jehovah. He directs his discourse to the true
   worshippers of God, and promises to them what they could scarcely have
   expected during those terrible calamities; and he expressly addresses
   them, because at that time there were many who falsely boasted of the
   name of God. Nay more, leaving the undistinguished multitude, he
   directs his discourse separately to a small number, as he formerly
   said,

   "Seal the law, bind the testimony among my disciples."
   (Isaiah 8:16.)

   Ye who tremble at my word. He points out the true and sincere children
   of God, by this mark, that they "tremble at the word of the Lord." This
   indeed is an uncommon virtue; and therefore he contrasts it with the
   false profession of those who, by bearing the outward mark of
   circumcision, wished to be reckoned among the people of God, and made a
   great profession and show of holiness; that we may know that they alone
   reverence and fear God who reverence and fear his holy word; that is,
   who, in consequence of being powerfully impressed by hearing the voice
   of God, constrain all their senses to obey; for this is a remarkable
   proof of godliness.

   Your brethren said. Because it is customary with hypocritical
   worshippers of God to make loud boasting of their pompous ritual, the
   design of the Prophet is, to arm and fortify believers for enduring
   their attacks, that they may not give way when they are mocked and
   insulted. As if he had said, "You have to contend not only with foreign
   nations, but with domestic foes, who hold a place in the Church, and
   who are bound by the tie of brotherhood on account of the covenant of
   God which is common to you all. If they mock at your simplicity in the
   same manner as they haughtily despise God himself, you must boldly and
   fearlessly resist that temptation." He therefore calls them "brethren,"
   although they were enemies of believers and of the word of God, for it
   is by way of concession that he gives to them that name which they
   falsely usurped. Hence we infer that this is not a new evil, that
   enemies, who bear the name of brethren, are nourished in the bosom of
   the Church. This internal war must be incessantly carried on with
   hypocrites, who cannot patiently endure that we shall worship God with
   an honest and upright conscience.

   Casting you out for the sake of my name. Literally, "bidding you
   begone." As we see the Pope thundering dreadfully against us, as if we
   had been base and worthless persons; so hypocrites were casting out the
   small number of believers; for, being superior in number, authority,
   and wealth, they likewise exercise that tyranny in such a manner that
   they approve or disapprove of everything according to their own
   caprice, and cause that believers may be reckoned as of no value, whom
   they not only overwhelm by their vast numbers, as the chaff does the
   wheat, but also trample proudly under their feet.

   Let Jehovah be glorified. Or, in the future tense, "Jehovah will be
   glorified." Others translate it, "Jehovah is severe;" but let us see
   which is the preferable meaning. They who translate it, "Jehovah is
   severe," think that wicked men complain of God's excessive severity, in
   not sparing his people and in acting severely toward them; and they
   think that by this word the people were tempted to despair; for, when
   wicked men endeavor to turn us aside from God, they take away all hope
   and confidence of salvation. But I give the preference to either of the
   other two expositions. That which is most generally approved is the
   following. Wicked men laughed at the prophecies and promises, because
   that glory which the Prophets had so frequently mentioned was nowhere
   to be seen; as if they had said, "Let the Lord display some testimony
   of his glory, that we may safely rely on it;" and therefore the Prophet
   wishes to arm believers against such blasphemy, that they may not allow
   their faith to be overturned by the sneers of wicked men. But this
   passage might be appropriately and perhaps more correctly interpreted
   to mean, that wicked men have promised very great things for
   themselves, as if by their good deeds they had deserved God's favor, as
   Amos 5:18 also reproaches them, that, while they fearlessly provoke
   God, they confidently trust that he will be gracious to them. Since,
   therefore, relying on their sacrifices, they scorned all threatenings,
   and boasted that God would assist them, he replies that they shall see
   the glory of God in a very different manner. [223]

   But he will be seen to your joy. As if he had said, "God, by his
   coming, will cause believers to know that they have not hoped in vain;
   for he will appear for the advantage of believers, and for the
   destruction of those who maintain that he will appear as the defender
   of wickedness, of which he will be the severe avenger. The former shall
   enjoy gladness and consolation, while the latter shall be ashamed and
   shall blush, for they shall quickly feel that the judgment of God,
   which they now laugh at, is at hand."

   6. A voice of tumult from the city, a voice from the temple. He
   confirms the preceding statement; namely, that God hath not threatened
   in vain, that he will speedily come to take vengeance on hypocrites, in
   order that what has been promised concerning gladness may be more
   eagerly expected by believers. It is uncertain what are the enemies
   whom he describes; for this passage may be explained as relating to the
   Babylonians, whose destruction was the deliverance of his Church. It
   may also be explained as relating to other enemies, who were nourished
   in the bosom of the Church; and I am more favorable to this opinion,
   though I do not deny that it may be viewed in reference to any kind of
   enemies. But he has in his eye domestic foes, of whom he had formerly
   spoken, who disdained the voice of God continually addressing them by
   the mouth of the prophets. He therefore threatens that they shall
   speedily hear another and more terrible voice; but there is immediately
   added a mitigation, that the same terror may not discourage the
   believing servants of God.

   The meaning may be thus summed up. "In vain do wicked men boast and set
   their own obstinacy in opposition to the judgments of God, for they
   shall not escape his hand, and even from the temple,' which was their
   lurking-place of false confidence, his voice shall come forth, and
   believers will then receive the fruit of their patience." Would that we
   did not at the present day experience similar contempt in hypocrites,
   who set at nought all remonstrances and threatenings, and have no
   respect for the word of God! To them, therefore, instead of the mild
   and gentle voice which they now hear, we are compelled to threaten "a
   tumultuous voice," which they shall one day hear from other and very
   different masters; for since the world, with irreligious scorn,
   disdains the word of God, it shall be constrained not only to hear, but
   likewise to experience, an armed voice, that is, fire and sword.

   7. Before she travailed, she brought forth. Having formerly comforted
   believers, that they might not be discouraged by the insolence and
   contempt of brethren, whom he would at length punish, and having thus
   commanded them to wait for the coming of the Lord with a steady and
   resolute heart, the Lord at the same time adds, that he will punish
   them in such a manner that, by their destruction, he will provide for
   the safety of believers. Nor does he speak of one or two men, but of
   the whole Church, which he compares to a woman. The same metaphor has
   already been sometimes employed by him; for God chiefly aims at
   gathering us into one body, that we may have in it a testimony of our
   adoption, and may acknowledge him to be a father, and may be nourished
   in the womb of the Church as our mother. This metaphor of a mother is
   therefore highly appropriate. It means that the Church shall be
   restored in such a manner that she shall obtain a large and numerous
   offspring, though she appear for a time to be childless and barren.

   Before her pain came upon her. He repeats the same statement which he
   has already employed on other occasions; but he expresses something
   more, namely, that this work of God shall be sudden and unexpected; for
   he guards believers against carnal views, that they may not judge of
   the restoration of the Church according to their own opinion. Women
   carry a child in the womb for nine months, and at length give birth to
   it with great pain. But the Lord has a very different manner of
   bringing forth children; for he says that he will cause the child to
   see the light, before it be possible to perceive or discern it by any
   feeling of pain. On this account he likewise claims the whole praise
   for himself, because a miracle sets aside the industry of men.

   She brought forth a male. He expressly mentions "a male," in order to
   describe the manly and courageous heart of these children; for he means
   that they shall be a noble offspring, and not soft or effeminate. In
   like manner we know that believers are regenerated by the Spirit of
   Christ, that they may finish, with unshaken fortitude, the course of
   their warfare; and in this sense Paul says that they "have not the
   spirit of timidity." (Romans 8:15.)

   8. Who hath heard such a thing? He extols the greatness of the thing of
   which he has spoken; for he means that there shall be a wonderful and
   "unheard of" restoration of the Church; so that believers shall not
   judge of it from the order of nature, but from the grace of God; for
   when men reflect upon it: they think that it is like a dream, as the
   Psalmist says. (Psalm 126:1.) He does not mean that the Church shall be
   restored perfectly and in a moment; for the advancement of this
   restoration is great and long-continued, and is even slow in the
   estimation of the flesh; but he shews that even the beginning of it
   exceeds all the capacity of the human understanding. And yet he does
   not speak hyperbolically; for we often see that the Church brings
   forth, which previously did not appear to be pregnant. Nay more, when
   she is thought to be barren, she is rendered fruitful by the preaching
   of the gospel; so that we greatly admire the event, when it has
   happened, which formerly we reckoned to be altogether incredible.

   These things were fulfilled in some measure, when the people returned
   from Babylon; but a far brighter testimony was given in the gospel, by
   the publication of which a diversified and numerous offspring was
   immediately brought forth. In our own times, have we not seen the
   fulfillment of this prophecy? How many children has the Church brought
   forth during the last thirty years, in which the gospel has been
   preached? Has not the Lord his people, at the present day, in vast
   numbers, throughout the whole world? Nothing, therefore, has been here
   foretold that is not clearly seen.

   Shall a nation be born at once? He illustrates the glory of the miracle
   by a metaphor. No "nation" ever came into the world in an instant; for
   it is by degrees that men assemble, and grow in number, and spread
   their nation. But the case is very different with the Church, which all
   at once, and in more than one place, brings forth a vast number of
   children. It amounts to this, that God, in a wonderful manner, will
   cause innumerable children of the Church, in an extraordinary manner,
   to be born all at once and suddenly.

   Shall a land be brought forth in one day? The word 'rph, (eretz,) "a
   land," may be taken either for any country, or for its inhabitants.

   9. Do I bring to the birth? As in the preceding verse he extolled in
   lofty terms the work of God, so he now shews that it ought not to be
   thought incredible, and that we ought not to doubt of his power, which
   surpasses all the order of nature; for, if we consider who it is that
   speaks, and how easy it is for him to perform what he has promised, we
   shall not remain in such uncertainty as not instantly to recollect that
   the renewal of the world is in the hand of him, who would have no
   difficulty in creating a hundred worlds in a moment. A little before,
   by a burst of astonishment, he intended to magnify the greatness of the
   work. But now, lest the minds of good men should be perplexed or
   embarrassed, he exhorts them to consider his strength; and, in order
   that he may more fully convince them that nothing is so difficult in
   the eyes of men as not to be in his power and easily performed by him,
   he brings forward those things which we see every day; for in a woman's
   bringing forth a child we see clearly his wonderful power. Shall not
   the Lord manifest himself to be far more wonderful in enlarging and
   multiplying the Church, which is the principal theater of his glory? It
   is therefore exceedingly wicked to limit his strength, by believing
   that he is less powerful, when he shall choose to act directly and by
   openly stretching out his hand, than when he acts by natural means.

   10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem. He promises that they who formerly were
   sad and melancholy shall have a joyful condition; for Isaiah has in
   view not his own age, but the time of the captivity, during which
   believers continually groaned, and, overwhelmed with grief, almost
   despaired; and therefore he exhorts and stimulates to joy all
   believers, who are moved by strong affection toward the Church, and
   reckon nothing more desirable than her prosperity. In this way he
   instructs them that none shall have a share in so valuable a blessing
   but they who are prompted by a godly love of the Church, and desire to
   seek her deliverance, and that too when she is contemptible in the eyes
   of the world; as the Psalmist says,

   "For thy meek ones love her stones, and will have compassion on her
   dust."
   (Psalm 102:14.)

   And therefore he adds, --

   All ye that mourn for her; for, since in the captivity there was
   frightful and shocking desolation, and there appeared to be no longer
   any hope of safety, he arouses believers, and bids them be of good
   cheer, or at least prepare themselves for joy. And this exhortation
   contains also a promise and something more, for a bare promise would
   not have carried so much weight. But those statements must not be
   limited exclusively to a single period; for we ought to abide by the
   general rule, of which we have often spoken already, namely, that those
   promises must be extended from the return of the people down to the
   reign of Christ, and to the full perfection of that reign.

   11. That ye may suck. This verse ought to be joined with the preceding
   verse; for the Prophet explains what shall be the occasion of joy,
   namely, because the wretched and miserable condition of the Church
   shall be changed into a happy and prosperous condition. By the word
   "suck" he makes an allusion to young infants; as if he had said, "That
   you may enjoy your mother with every advantage, and may hang on her
   breasts." Here all believers, whatever may be their age, are compared
   by him to children, that they may remember their infirmity and may be
   confirmed by the strength of the Lord; and therefore this metaphor of
   "sucking" and "milking" ought to be carefully observed.

   From the breast of her consolations. Some take the word "consolations"
   in an active, and others in a passive sense; but I prefer to adopt the
   passive signification; for he means the consolations which the Church
   has received, and of which he makes his children partakers. And indeed
   none can be greater or more abundant, none can be more excellent, than
   that ground of joy; and this appears more clearly from the following
   clause, "that ye may be delighted with the brightness of her glory."

   12. I cause peace to flow on her like a river. He continues his
   metaphor, and compares the children of God to infants, that are carried
   in the arms, and warmed in the bosom of their mothers, who even play
   with them. And in order that he may express more strongly his affection
   toward us, he compares himself to a mother, whose love, as we have
   formerly seen, ([24]page 30,) exceeds every other by a wide interval.
   (Isaiah 49:15.) The Lord wishes to be to us in the room of a mother,
   that, instead of the annoyances, reproaches, distresses, and anxieties,
   which we have endured, he may treat us gently, and, as it were, fondle
   us in his bosom. By the word "peace" he means prosperity.

   And the glory of the Gentiles as an overflowing torrent. The word
   "glory" contains a repetition, by which he denotes every kind of
   riches, so that nothing is wanting to full and perfect peace; for,
   since the Gentiles had formerly lived luxuriously, and had enjoyed a
   vast abundance of everything desirable, he affirms that all riches, and
   everything that belongs to a happy life, shall be possessed by
   believers, as the rivers run into the sea. By "constant flowing" he
   denotes continuance; for, since God is an inexhaustible fountain, his
   peace differs widely from the peace of the world, which quickly passes
   away and is dried up. Whenever therefore we behold the sad and
   melancholy condition of the Church, let us remember that these promises
   relate to us not less than to that people. Seeing that the Lord has
   rivers of peace which he wishes to cause to flow into his Church, let
   us not despair even amidst the fiercest wars; but, in our distresses
   and straits, let us cheer our hearts and rejoice. When he takes
   pleasure in us as infants, and not as men of mature age, we ought to
   acknowledge our condition, that we may be satisfied with such
   consolations. And indeed it is a token of remarkable condescension that
   he thus bears with our weakness.

   13. As a man [224] whom his mother comforteth. It is wonderful that the
   Prophet, who appeared to have already spoken enough about this renewal,
   dwells on it so largely. But, because he can neither express the
   greatness and warmth of the love which God bears toward us, nor satisfy
   himself with speaking about it, for that reason he mentions and repeats
   it frequently.

   And you shall have consolation in Jerusalem. There are two ways in
   which this may be explained. It may be said that believers shall have
   joyful hearts, when they shall behold the Church restored; or, that the
   Church, after having been restored, shall discharge her duty by
   gladdening her children. I prefer the latter interpretation, though
   either of them is admissible. The former appears to be a richer
   interpretation; but we must consider what the Prophet meant, and not
   what we think the most beautiful. In the first place, indeed, he makes
   God the author of the joy, and justly; but, in the second place, he
   adds that Jerusalem is his handmaid. But this is not addressed to
   irreligious scorners, who are not moved by any solicitude about the
   Church, but to those who, with holy zeal, declare that they are her
   children.

   14. And ye shall see. By the word "see," he expresses undoubted
   experience, that believers may not doubt as to the result, but,
   embracing this prediction with full belief, may patiently endure for a
   time the barrenness of the Church.

   And your bones shall flourish as grass. He illustrates his former
   statement by a metaphor, saying that "their bones" shall regain their
   former vigor, as faded "grass" becomes fresh and green again. He
   mentions the "bones," which are commonly dried up by a melancholy
   spirit, (Proverbs 17:22,) and, on the other hand, are replenished and
   invigorated by a happy and cheerful disposition. Thus he describes an
   ardent and invaluable joy, and seems to allude to the sadness by which
   believers had been almost dried up during the captivity, and had become
   like dead men. The Lord therefore comforts them, and promises that the
   Church shall flourish, and shall abound in everything that is
   desirable; as if bones, that wanted moisture, should regain their
   former vigor, or as grass, which appears to be dead during the winter,
   recovers its freshness every year.

   And the hand of Jehovah shall be known toward his servants. That they
   may cherish confidence, he nexts bids them rise to God, who will then
   reveal his assistance. It follows from this, that the hand of God has
   not always been known, but has sometimes remained concealed, as if he
   had no care about his people. At first sight, he appeared to have cast
   them off; for Daniel, and other good men, (Daniel 1:6,) not less than
   Zedekiah, (Jeremiah 52:9,) were carried into captivity. He says, that
   when the fine weather shall smile upon them, there shall be such a
   distinction between the good and the bad, as to make manifest this
   hand, which formerly was in some measure hidden; because he will no
   longer conceal himself, or permit the wicked to ravage without control,
   but will openly shew how great is his solicitude about his people. If
   therefore for a time the enemies have the superiority, and pursue their
   lawless course without being punished, if we appear to be overlooked
   and destitute of all assistance, let us not despair; for the time will
   come when the Lord will reveal himself, and will rescue us from their
   assaults and tyranny.

   15. For, lo, Jehovah will come in fire. The object of this
   (hupotuposis) lively description is, that believers, when they see
   worthless men laughing at their distresses, and growing more and more
   insolent, may not on that account turn aside from the right path, or
   lose courage; for he intended not only to smite wicked men, who are
   moved by no threatenings, and scorn all instruction, [225] but to
   comfort good men, that they may feel that they are happy, because they
   are under God's protection; and may not attach themselves to the wicked
   on account of the prosperity of all their undertakings. Their advantage
   is, therefore, what he has chiefly in view, that they may be satisfied
   with God's protection and grace. But it may admit of doubt whether or
   not he includes the last judgment, along with the temporal punishments
   with which he now begins to chastise the wicked. For my own part, I
   have no doubt that he intends to include that judgment also, along with
   those which were only the forerunners of eternal destruction.

   Will come. This began to be accomplished, when, by carrying away the
   people to Babylon, God took vengeance on domestic foes. Next, when the
   time of the deliverance was accomplished, he attacked more severely the
   wicked Gentiles by an armed force, and ceased not to give other and
   various proofs of his approach, by which he shewed himself to be
   present with the elect people, and came in fire to judge their enemies.
   Lastly, we know that he will come in fire at the last day, to take
   vengeance on all the wicked. But this passage ought not to be limited
   to the last judgment, so as to include all the rest. Yet these
   threatenings, as we shall see soon afterwards, are especially directed
   by the Prophet against hypocritical Jews.

   These metaphorical expressions are very customary in Scripture; for we
   could not comprehend this dreadful judgment of God in any other way
   than by the Prophets employing metaphors drawn from known and familiar
   objects. (2 Thessalonians 1:8; 2 Peter 3:7.) By means of them the
   prophets endeavor to make a deep impression on our senses, that, struck
   with the true fear of God, we may not envy the wicked, for whom such
   dreadful vengeance is prepared. Hence we see how trivial and useless
   are the speculations of the Sophists, who dispute about the refined
   nature and qualities of that fire; for the design of Scripture is to
   point out to us under figures the dreadful judgment of God, which
   otherwise we could not imagine or understand. This is still more
   evident from the word "sword," in the following verse; for it conveys
   the same meaning.

   16. For Jehovah will judge in fire. Here he brings forward nothing new,
   but merely confirms the former statement, and shews that this judgment
   will be dreadful; that none may think that it is a matter of small
   importance. Accordingly, he describes that horror in strong language,
   that the wicked may fear, and that believers, on the other hand, may
   keep themselves holy and chaste, and may withdraw from the society of
   the wicked. Yet let them endure patiently the unjust and cruel attacks
   of enemies, till the armed avenger come forth front heaven. [226]

   And many shall be the slain of Jehovah. He threatens the destruction of
   all men, so that there may be a prodigious mass of corpses. And he
   expressly added this, because ungodliness reigned everywhere, and
   believers were subjected to a dangerous temptation on account of the
   prosperity of the wicked; for such is the fickleness of our minds, that
   we allow ourselves to be led away by a bad custom, and are alarmed by a
   multitude, as if it were sufficient for restraining the hand of God.
   This sinful fear the Prophet corrects by reminding' them, that the more
   ungodliness shall abound, and the greater the number of wicked men, so
   much the more will the wrath of the Lord be kindled, that he may make a
   greater and more extensive slaughter; and the multitude and conspiracy
   of the ungodly shall not hinder him from carrying them away by the same
   ruin.

   17. They who sanctify themselves. He now describes those enemies of
   whom he said, that God's anger would be kindled against them; for it
   might have been doubtful whether he spoke of foreign and avowed
   enemies, or directed his discourse to the despisers of God, although
   they had been mixed with those who were elect and holy; and therefore
   he plainly addresses the false and degenerate Jews. Nor have I any
   doubt that, in the first place, he rebukes hypocrites, and, in the
   second place, when he says, "Who eat swine's flesh," he describes men
   of immoral lives, that is, those who were openly wicked and grossly
   licentious. Hypocrites sanctified themselves, that is, assumed false
   disguises of holiness, and deceived many under this pretense.

   They purified themselves in the gardens; that is, they polluted
   themselves with various superstitions, although they imagined that, by
   means of those superstitions, they rendered themselves pure in the
   sight of God. Others, without any reserve, despised God and all
   religion. It is therefore a general statement, in which he includes all
   the ungodly, to whatever class they may belong; that is, both those who
   openly display their wickedness, and those who hide and cover it by
   various disguises.

   Behind one in the midst. [227] Some commentators supply the word
   "pool," or "laver;" as if holy water had been placed "in the midst" of
   the garden for ablutions. But another meaning would be equally
   appropriate; that every one chose a God for himself exclusively, and
   therefore every one out of many trees had his own tree.

   18. For I -- their works, and their thoughts. [228] He confirms what he
   said in the preceding verse; namely, that punishment shall be executed
   on all the ungodly, in order that, although the Lord permit them for a
   time to sin with impunity, yet believers, being convinced that they
   shall one day be punished, may guard against following their example.
   The Lord here testifies that he sees and observes their works, and that
   one day he will actually manifest that none can be concealed from his
   eyes. Others understand by it that the ungodly can accomplish nothing
   without God's permission. That statement is indeed true, but is not
   applicable to this passage; for everybody sees that it is unnatural,
   and at variance with the context of the Prophet, who merely confirms
   what he formerly said, that hypocrites and wicked men shall not finally
   escape with impunity, because God perceives all their actions, and
   schemes, and thoughts; and that they gain nothing by their evasions, as
   if they were never to be dragged to the judgment.

   Because the time is come. These words confirm still more what has been
   already said, for he says that the time is at hand when he shall
   assemble all the nations, that he may cast off the hypocrites and
   ungodly, and gather and adopt a people to himself from among them. The
   Jews were puffed up with pride, and despised all other nations as
   unholy. But the Lord declares that he will adopt those nations, that
   they may be partakers of his glory, of which the Jews prove themselves
   to be unworthy.

   This is a remarkable passage, which teaches us that God is not confined
   to any people, so as not to choose whomsoever he pleases, by casting
   off unbelievers whom he formerly called to himself. This is abundantly
   explained by Paul, (Romans 10:19; 11:25,) where he shews that we have
   come into a possession which was left empty, after the Jews were cast
   off through their unbelief. Isaiah now threatens them in this manner.
   "Think not that God is in want of peoples when you have revolted and
   have rendered yourselves unworthy of his grace, for he will have
   others; but he will shew that he is the judge, and will not finally
   permit you to abuse so great forbearance."

   And they shall come. He says that "they shall come," because, being
   ingrafted by unity of faith, they shall be united in the Church with
   the true Jews, who have not swerved from the adoption; for, in
   consequence of the Jews being near to God, the Gentiles, who were at a
   distance, must be joined to them, that, by the removal of disagreement,
   they might become one body.

   And shall see my glory. To "see the glory" of the Lord, is nothing else
   than to enjoy that grace which he had bestowed on the Jews; for the
   special privilege of that nation was, that they beheld the glory of
   God, and had tokens of his presence, he says that now the Gentiles, who
   had not enjoyed these benefits, shall see and behold that glory, for
   the Lord will reveal himself to all without exception.

   19. And I will place in them a sign. This may be understood in two
   ways; either that God holds out a sign, or that by some symbol or mark
   he seals his own people, that they may be placed in safety. The former
   exposition is more generally approved, but some reason childishly about
   it as relating to the sign of the cross, while others refer it to the
   preaching of the Gospel. In my opinion both are mistaken; for he seems
   rather to allude to what, Moses tells us, happened at the departure and
   deliverance of the people. It is also declared (Revelation 7:3) that
   "as many as the Lord hath sealed" shall be safe, even when his anger
   shall be fiercely kindled throughout the whole world; just as they
   whose door-posts were marked in Egypt escaped safely. (Exodus 12:13.)
   And thus he shews that none can escape God's wrath, except the elect,
   on whom the Lord has impressed his mark and seal.

   And will send some of them, being reserved. In a word, the Prophet
   heightens the description of what has been already said about the
   grievous and terrible vengeance which the Lord will execute on the
   ungodly; for all would have perished without distinction if the Lord
   had not marked some of them with his seal. From the general destruction
   of the whole nation, therefore, he says that he will reserve a small
   number. And this is the true meaning of the Prophet; just as he had
   said, in other passages, that he would rescue "a remnant" from the
   general conflagration. (Isaiah 1:9; 10:22.) Of this band, which had
   been reserved, he says that some shall be his heralds to celebrate his
   name among the Gentiles; just as we see that the doctrine of salvation,
   by the agency of a few, was spread far and wide.

   To the nations of Tarshish, Pul, and Lud. By the name "Tarshish" he
   denotes Cilicia, and includes the whole coast of the Mediterranean Sea
   opposite to Judea. Others think that it denotes Africa and Cappadocia;
   but I rather adopt the former view. By Lud, some suppose Lydia to be
   meant; and others, Asia Minor. By "those who draw the bow" are meant
   the Parthians, because they were skillful in archery. By Tubal and
   Javan he denotes Italy and Greece, and by the Islands he denotes
   unknown countries; for by the name "Islands," as we have seen on many
   former occasions, the Jews denoted all that lay beyond the sea.

   Which have not heard my name. He means that the knowledge of God shall
   be spread throughout the whole world; for the Greeks, Italians,
   Parthians, Cilicians, and other nations had heard nothing about pure
   religion and the true worship of God; and the whole world was plunged
   in the deepest darkness of ignorance. He therefore promises that the
   glory of God shall be known in every part of the world. The word
   "nations" is emphatic; for at that time the Lord was known to not more
   than one people, but now he has revealed himself to all.

   20. And they shall bring. Here he clearly explains what was formerly
   said, namely, that all who shall escape and survive, though they be few
   in number, shall nevertheless be priests, who shall bring sacrifices to
   God from all places. He alludes to the ancient ceremony of the Law,
   though he points out the difference that will be between those
   oblations and the sacrifices of the ancient Law; for he appoints a new
   kind of punishment and new sacrifices. As he had said that he would
   gather all the nations, so he now shews that the priests, whom he had
   appointed, shall not labor in vain; for God will grant prosperity to
   their undertakings.

   All your brethren. He gives the name of "brethren" to those who
   formerly were strangers; for he has in his eye the new relation which
   arises from faith. We know that foreign nations were ingrafted by faith
   into the family of Abraham. Yet others bring out a different meaning,
   which I do not absolutely reject. "When God shall gather a new people
   to himself out of foreign nations, the Jews, who had been scattered in
   all directions, shall be brought into one place." This was also
   accomplished; but it seems more appropriate to refer it to the calling
   of the Gentiles, because at that time, by the removal of the
   difference, a brotherly relation began to be established among all whom
   God wished to adopt to be his children. Abraham was the father of one
   nation, and yet not all who were descended from him according to the
   flesh are accounted his children; for the Ishmaelites and the Edomites
   were rejected. (Romans 9:7.) The time when he became "the father of
   many nations" (Genesis 17:5; Romans 4:17) was when God adopted the
   Gentiles, and joined them to himself by a covenant, that they might
   follow the faith of Abraham. And thus we see the reason why the Prophet
   gives the name of "brethren" of the Jews to us, who formerly were
   aliens from the Church of God. It is because he had previously cast out
   of their place false and reprobate brethren.

   It is our duty to observe this fruit which is produced by the godly
   labors of those who faithfully serve the Lord, namely, that they "bring
   their brethren" from deadly errors to God, the fountain of life. By
   this consolation they ought to cheer their hearts, and to support them
   amidst the distresses and tribulations which they endure. The Lord does
   not suffer any of his own people to perish. Thus it is a high enjoyment
   and privilege, when he wishes to make use of our labors for delivering
   our "brethren."

   Out of all nations. He means that there shall no longer be any
   difference between Jews and Gentiles; because God will throw down "the
   partition-wall," (Ephesians 2:14,) and will form a Church "out of all
   nations." And thus was fulfilled the saying of David concerning Christ,

   "Ask of me; I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the
   ends of the earth for thy possession." (Psalm 2:8.)

   When he speaks of the "holy mountain," he accommodates himself to the
   customs and usages of that period; for at Jerusalem God was worshipped
   in the temple. But now the temple is everywhere diffused; for
   everywhere we are at liberty to "lift up holy hands to God," (1 Timothy
   2:8,) and there is no longer any distinction of places. He likewise
   mentions oblations and sacrifices, which were offered in the temple;
   although the sacrifices which are now to be offered differ widely from
   the ancient sacrifices. But the prophets, as we have frequently
   remarked, were under a necessity of borrowing comparisons from known
   and familiar objects. Formerly the sacrifices were taken from the
   flocks and herds; but the Apostles and other priests of Christ slew men
   themselves, and offered them as a living sacrifice to God by the
   Gospel. Paul testifies that he discharged the office of the priesthood,
   when he slew men by the sword of the Gospel, "that they might be an
   offering acceptable to God, sanctified by the Holy Spirit." (Romans
   15:1 6.)

   It is not therefore a legal priesthood, and does not resemble that of
   the Papists, who say that they sacrifice Christ; [229] but it is the
   priesthood of the Gospel, by which men are slain, in order that, being
   renewed by the Spirit, they may be offered to the Lord. Thus,
   whomsoever we can gain to Christ, we offer in sacrifice, that they may
   be wholly consecrated to God. Moreover, every person sacrifices when he
   devotes and dedicates himself to God, and offers to him unreserved
   obedience; and this is the sacrifice which Paul calls "reasonable."
   (Romans 12:1.) The end of our calling is here pointed out to be, that,
   washing away our pollutions, and being dead to ourselves, we may learn
   to devote ourselves to the cultivation of holiness.

   With horses and chariots. There are some who endeavor to find an
   allegory here, and who think that the Prophet made use of the word
   "bring" on this account, that the Gospel does not constrain men by
   fear, but rather draws them gently, so that of their own accord they
   betake themselves to God, and run with cheerfulness and joy. But for my
   own part, I take a simpler view of this passage. Because this doubt
   might arise in the minds of many persons, "How is it possible that men
   shall come to us from countries so distant?" he replies, "Horses,
   chariots, and carriages shall not be wanting; for the Lord has at his
   command all that can be of service for assisting his people and
   conducting them to the end which he has in view." Yet I do not deny
   that the Gospel may be called a "chariot," because it conveys us to the
   hope of eternal life; but I think that the Prophet simply declares that
   nothing shall hinder God from gathering his Church, and that he will
   have at his command all the necessary means, that none of the elect
   whom he has called may fail in the middle of the course.

   21. And I will even take some of them for priests and Levites. The
   Prophet heightens the description of that which he had already declared
   about the extraordinary grace of God. He had made known that the Church
   of God should be collected out of all nations, so that, in spite of
   every difficulty and obstruction, even distant nations should draw near
   to them. But now he proceeds further, and instructs them that the
   Gentiles shall not only be adopted by God, but shall also be elevated
   by him to the highest honor. Already it was a great honor, that unclean
   and polluted nations were reckoned to be a holy people; but now here is
   something far more wonderful, that they are elevated to the highest
   pinnacle of rank.

   Hence we see that the priesthood under Christ is very different from
   what it was under the Law; for under the Law one tribe exclusively was
   admitted to the priesthood, and the Gentiles, as unclean, were so far
   from having it in their power to discharge that priesthood, that they
   were even forbidden to enter into the temple; but now all are admitted
   without distinction. Some expound this passage in a general manner,
   that the Gentiles shall be priests; that is, shall offer themselves to
   God, as Scripture frequently denominates all believers "a royal
   priesthood." (1 Peter 2:9; Revelation 1:6; 5:10.) But he appears to
   describe in an especial manner ministers and teachers whom the Lord
   also chose from among the Gentiles, and appointed to execute this
   distinguished office; that is, to preach the Gospel; such as Luke,
   Timothy, and others of the same class, who offered spiritual sacrifices
   to God by the Gospel.

   22. For as the new heavens. Here he promises that the restoration of
   the Church shall be of such a nature that it shall last for ever. Many
   might be afraid that it would be ruined a second time; and therefore he
   declares that henceforth, after having been restored by God, its
   condition shall be permanent. Accordingly, he mentions here two
   benefits of surpassing excellence, restoration and eternity. When he
   speaks of "new heavens" and a "new earth," he looks to the reign of
   Christ, by whom all things have been renewed, as the Apostle teaches in
   the Epistle to the Hebrews. Now the design of this newness is, that the
   condition of the Church may always continue to be prosperous and happy.
   What is old tends to decay; what is restored and renewed must be of
   longer continuance. (Hebrews 8:13.)

   So shall your seed and your name remain. God had promised that "the sun
   and moon," so long as they remained in heaven, should be witnesses of
   the eternal succession, that the posterity of David might not be cut
   off. But because some interruption arose from the treachery and
   ingratitude of the people, the restoration effected by Christ actually
   confirmed that prediction. Justly, therefore, does Isaiah say, "Your
   sons shall succeed to you, and your grandsons shall succeed to your
   sons;" and as God will establish the world, that it may never perish,
   so the succession of the Church shall be perpetual, that it may be
   prolonged through all ages.

   In a word, he explains what he had formerly said about renewing the
   world, that none may think that this relates to trees, or beasts, or
   the order of the stars; for it must be referred to the inward renewal
   of man. The ancients were mistaken when they thought that these things
   related absolutely to the last judgment; and they had not sufficiently
   weighed the context of the Prophet or the authority of the Apostle. Yet
   I do not deny that they extend as far as to that judgment, because we
   must not hope for a perfect restoration before Christ, who is the life
   of the world, shall appear; but we must begin higher, even with that
   deliverance by which Christ regenerates his people, that they may be
   new creatures. (2 Corinthians 7:1.)

   23. From a month to his month, and from a Sabbath to his Sabbath. [230]
   The Prophet again points out what shall be the difference between the
   nature of the spiritual worship of God which shall be under the reign
   of Christ and of the carnal worship which was under the Law. Sacrifices
   were offered every month at the new moon. There were Sabbaths, and
   other festivals, and solemn days, which they carefully observed. But
   under the reign of Christ there shall be a constant and uninterrupted
   solemnity; for there are not fixed and stated days of sacrifices on
   which we must go to Jerusalem, or offer anything in one place or in
   another; but our oblations, festivals, and rejoicings are continued
   from day to day in unbroken succession. Yet he alludes to the ancient
   custom of sacrifices as we have already said that the prophets are
   frequently accustomed to do.

   So then the Lord wishes to have "pure sacrifices" offered to him daily,
   (1 Peter 2:5,) not such as were formerly offered under the Law or are
   now offered by Papists, who either rely foolishly on their ceremonies,
   as if they were expiations of crime, or basely venture to sacrifice
   Christ, [231] but spiritual sacrifices, that we may reverence and adore
   God with a pure and sincere worship. (John 4:24.) As to the opinion
   held by some, that this passage proves the abrogation of the Law and of
   ancient ceremonies, it does not appear to me to rest on sufficient
   grounds, it is indeed certain that those legal ceremonies have been set
   aside, and that may be gathered from this passage; but in proof of that
   point I would choose to employ other passages which contain stronger
   evidence. There is only here a contrast between the Sabbath and
   festivals which were celebrated under the Law, and the perpetual
   Sabbath which we have at the present day. (Hebrews 4:9, 10.)

   24. And they shall go forth. We must not here attempt to obtain subtle
   and ingenious interpretations; for he simply informs those who shall be
   adopted into the Church that they shall see, all around them, the
   dreadful vengeance of God. Yet there is an implied contrast between the
   straits of the calamity and the free departure; as if he had said, "Out
   of the dark prison in which they had been confined they shall again
   come forth to the light."

   And shall see the dead bodies of men. He does not mean that this
   slaughter shall take place in the assembly of believers; for this would
   greatly diminish the happiness of the Church, in which God displays all
   testimonies of joy and gladness. But as he formerly spoke of the
   perpetual glory by which he shall dignify his people, so he now
   threatens the punishment which he shall inflict on the reprobate, that
   the godly may be more careful to keep themselves in the fear of God.

   And their fire shall not be extinguished. When he says that they shall
   be tormented by "fire," this mode of expression, as I have formerly
   remarked, [232] is metaphorical. And this is clearly evident from the
   succeeding clause; for worms will not be formed out of the earth to
   gnaw the hearts of unbelievers. The plain meaning, therefore, is, that
   the wicked shall have a bad conscience as an executioner, to torment
   them without end, and that torment awaits them greater than all other
   torments; and finally, that they shall tremble and be agitated in a
   dreadful and shocking manner, as if a worm were gnawing the heart of a
   man, or a fire were consuming it, and yet thus consumed, he did not
   die.

   And they shall be an abhorrence to all flesh. Because the wicked are
   now held in the highest honor, and from their lofty position look down
   with contempt on good men, the Prophet threatens a shocking change;
   for, along with unutterable torments, they shall also endure the
   deepest disgrace; as it is just and right that they who despised and
   reproached the glory of God shall be loaded with every reproach, and
   shall be the objects of abhorrence to angels and to the whole world.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [217] "Et ne mesureroyent sa grandeur infinie a leur petitesse." "And
   would not measure his infinite greatness by their littleness."

   [218] "Afin que les hommes creussent de sa majeste tout ce que bon leur
   sembleroit." "In order that men might believe concerning his majesty
   whatever they thought fit."

   [219] "Qu' en sacrifiant un boeuf, e'est autant que s'ils coupoyent la
   gorge a un homme." "That, in sacrificing an ox, it is the same as if
   they were cutting a man's throat."

   [220] "That I may mock them.' Here the word tlvlyhm (tagnalulehem)
   means lhtvll vm, (lehithgnolel bam,), that I may mock them,' in the
   same sense as the words used in another passage, ky htllt vy, (ki
   hith-gnallalt bi) because thou hast mocked me.' (Numbers 22:29.)" --
   Jarchi.

   [221] "Et leur feray venir les choses qu'ils craignoyent." "And will
   bring (or cause to come) upon them the things which they dreaded."

   [222] "Je feray qu ils cognoistront avoir failli, tellement que ce qu
   ils craignoyent leur tombera dessus la teste." "I will cause them to
   know that they have been mistaken, and that what they dreaded has
   fallen on their own head."

   [223] "His verront la gloire de Dieu autrement qu'ils ne pensent."
   "They shall see the glory of God in a different manner from what they
   think."

   [224] "The English version, which in multitudes of cases inserts man'
   where the original expression is indefinite, (translating oudeis, for
   example, always no man') here reverses the process, and dilutes a man'
   to one.' The same liberty is taken by many other versions, old and new,
   occasioned no doubt by a feeling of the incongruity of making a
   full-grown man the subject of maternal consolations. The difficulty
   might, if it were necessary, be avoided by explaining 'ys (ish) to mean
   a man-child, as it does in Genesis 4:1; 1 Samuel 1:11; and in many
   other cases. But the truth is, that the solecism, which has been so
   carefully expunged by these translators, is an exquisite trait of
   patriarchal manners, in their primitive simplicity. Compare Genesis
   24:67; Judges 17:2; 1 Kings 2:19, 20, and the affecting scenes between
   Thetis and Achilles in the Iliad." -- Alexander.

   [225] "Et se moquent de tout ce qu'on leur dit." "And mock at
   everything that is said to them."

   [226] "Jusques a tant que Dieu vienne du ciel a main armee pour en
   faire vengeance." "Till God come from heaven with an armed force, to
   take vengeance on them."

   [227] "Gessenius attaches to it here (as he does in 2 Samuel 4:6) the
   sense of the interior or court of an oriental house, and applies it to
   the edifice in which the lustrations were performed before entering the
   gardens; which may also be the meaning of the Septuagint version, eis
   tous kepous, en tois prothurois. Maurer and others follow Scaliger, who
   makes it mean the midst of the grove or garden, where the idol was
   commonly erected. But Knobel, by ingeniously combining Genesis 42:5;
   Psalm 42:5; Psalm 68:26, makes it not improbable that "in the midst,"
   means in the crowd or procession of worshippers." -- Alexander.

   [228] "Car je voy leurs oeuvres et leurs pensees." "For I see their
   works and their thoughts."

   [229] "Qui se vantent de sacrifier Iesus Christ." "Who boast of
   sacrificing Jesus Christ."

   [230] "Depuis un mois jusques a un autre mois, et depuis un Sabbat
   jusques a son autre Sabbat." "From one month till another month, and
   from one Sabbath till his other Sabbath."

   [231] "Ou mesmes d'une audace desesperee osent se vanter qu'ils
   sacrifient Jesus Christ." "Or even with desperate audacity dare to
   boast that they sacrifice Jesus Christ."

   [232] Commentary on Isaiah, [25]vol. 2 p. 387.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   A TRANSLATION OF

   CALVIN'S VERSION OF

   THE PROPHECIES OF ISAIAH.

   CHAPTERS 49--66
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 49

   1 Hear me, O islands! And hearken, ye peoples from afar. Jehovah hath
   called me from the womb; From my mothers belly he hath had my name in
   remembrance.

   2 And he hath placed nay mouth like a sharp sword; In the shadow of his
   hand he hath protected me, And hath placed me as a polished arrow; in
   his quiver hath he hid me;

   3 And said to me, Thou art my servant, O Israel! In thee will I he
   glorified.

   4 But I said, In vain have I toiled; Uselessly And unprofitably have I
   exhausted my strength; and my judgment is before Jehovah; And my work
   before my God.

   5 And now saith Jehovah, Who formed me from the womb to be his servant,
   That I may bring back Jacob to him: And though Israel be not gathered,
   Yet I shall be glorious in the eyes of Jehovah, And my God shall be my
   strength.

   6 And he saith, It is a light thing that thou shouldst be my servant,
   To raise up the tribes of Jacob, And that thou shouldst restore the
   desolations of Israel; Therefore have I appointed thee to be a light of
   the Gentiles, That thou mayest be my salvation to the end of the earth.

   7 Thus saith Jehovah, The Redeemer of Israel, His Holy One, To the
   contemptible in the soul, To the abhorred nation, To the servant of
   rulers; Kings shall see, And princes shall arise, And shall worship for
   the sake of Jehovah; For faithful is the Holy One of Israel, who hath
   chosen thee.

   8 Thus saith Jehovah, In a time of good-pleasure have I listened to
   thee; In the day of salvation have I assisted thee; And I will preserve
   thee. And give thee for a covenant of the people, That thou mayest
   raise up the earth, That thou mayest possess by inheritance the
   desolate heritages;

   9 That thou mayest say to them that are bound, Go forth! To them that
   are in darkness, Show yourselves. On the ways they shall feed; On all
   the high places shall be their pastures.

   10 They shall not hunger nor thirst; The heat And the sun shall not
   smite them; For he that hath compassion on them shall guide them; And
   by the fountains of waters shall he lead them.

   11 And I will place all my mountains for a way; And my paths shall be
   elevated.

   12 Behold! those from afar shall come; And, behold! those from the
   North, And from the sea; And those from the land of Sinis. [233]

   13 Praise ye, O heavens! And rejoice, thou earth; And break forth into
   praise, ye mountains; For Jehovah hath comforted his people, And will
   have compassion on his poor.

   14 Yet Zion hath said, Jehovah hath forsaken me, And my Lord hath
   forgotten me.

   15 Shall a woman forget her infant, So as not to have compassion oil
   the soil of her womb? Even though they have forgotten, Yet will not I
   forget thee.

   16 Behold! on the palms of my hands have I engraven thee; Thy walls are
   continually before me.

   17 Thy builders hasten; Thy destroyers And demolishers shall depart far
   from thee.

   18 Lift up thine eyes round about, And see. All are assembled, And have
   come to thee. I live, saith Jehovah, That thou shalt be clothed with
   them all, as with an ornament, And shalt be bound with them round about
   as a bride.

   19 For thy desolations, And thy wastes, And thy ruined land, Shall now
   be too narrow for the multitude of its inhabitants; And thy destroyers
   shall depart far away.

   20 The children of thy bereavement shall yet say in thine ears, The
   place is too narrow for me; Make room for me. that I may dwell.

   21 And thou shalt say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me those? For I
   am bereaved [234] And solitary, A wanderer And an exile; Who then hath
   brought up those? Behold! I was left alone; Whence are they?

   22 Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold! I will lift up my hand to the
   Gentiles, And will erect my banner to the people; And they shall bring
   thy sons in their bosom, And thy daughters shall be carried on their
   shoulders.

   23 And kings shall be thy nursing-fathers, And their queens thy nurses;
   With their faces on the ground they shall worship thee, And shall lick
   the dust of thy feet; And thou shalt know that I am Jehovah, For they
   who wait for me shall not be ashamed.

   24 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty? And shall the captivity of
   the righteous [235] be delivered?

   25 Yet thus saith Jehovah; Even the captivity of the mighty shall be
   taken away, And the prey of the tyrant shall be delivered; For I will
   contend with him who contendeth with thee, And I will save thy
   children.

   26 And I will feed thy spoilers with their own flesh, And they shall be
   made drunk with their own blood as with new wine; And all flesh shall
   know that I am Jehovah, Thy Savior And thy Redeemer, The Mighty One of
   Jacob.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [233] Or, Sinim.

   [234] Or, Barren.

   [235] Or, The righteous captivity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 50

   1 Thus saith Jehovah: Where is that bill of your mothers divorcement
   Whom I have dismissed? Or who is the creditor To whom I sold you?
   Behold! for your iniquities ye have been sold, And to your
   transgressions was Your mother dismissed.

   2 Why came I, And no mall (met me)? Called I, And no man answered? By
   shortening hath my hand been shortened, So that it cannot redeem? Is
   there not in me power to deliver? Behold! by my rebuke I dry up the
   sea; I put rivers in the wilderness, So that their fishes purify for
   want of water, And die for thirst.

   3 I clothe the heavens with blackness, And make their covering like
   sackcloth.

   4 The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of the learned, That I may
   know a word in season to the weary. In the morning will he awaken, In
   the morning will he awaken mine ear, That I may hear as the learned.

   5 The Lord Jehovah hath opened mine ear, And I was not rebellious: I
   did not turn back.

   6 I exposed my body to the smiters, And my cheeks to them that tore me;
   My face I did not hide from shame And spitting.

   7 For the Lord Jehovah will assist me; Therefore I was not ashamed;
   Therefore have I set my time as a flint; And I know that I shall not be
   confounded.

   8 He is near that justifieth me: Who will contend with me? Let us stand
   up together: Who is the opponent of my cause? Let him draw near to me.

   9 Behold! the Lord Jehovah will assist me; Who is he that shall condemn
   me? Behold! all shall wax old as a garment; The moth shall consume
   them.

   10 Who is there among you that feareth Jehovah? Let him hear the voice
   of his servant. He who hath walked in darkness, And hath had no light;
   Let him trust in the name of Jehovah, And rely on his God.

   11 Behold! ye all kindle a fire, And are surrounded with sparks. Walk
   ye in the light of your fire, And in the sparks which ye have kindled.
   From my hand hath this been to you; Ill sorrow shall ye lie down.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 51

   1 Hearken to me, ye that follow righteousness, Ye that seek Jehovah;
   Look ye to the rock of your hewing, And to the hole of the pit whence
   ye were digged.

   2 Look ye to Abraham your father; And to Sarah, who bore you; For I
   called him alone, And blessed And multiplied him.

   3 Surely Jehovah will comfort Zion; He will comfort all her
   desolations; And he will make her desert like a place of delights, And
   her wilderness like the garden of Jehovah: Gladness And joy shall be
   found in her; Confession And the voice of a song.

   4 Attend to me, my people; And listen to me, my nation; For the law
   shall go forth from me; And I will reveal my judgment for a light of
   the peoples.

   5 My righteousness is near; My salvation hath gone forth; And my arms
   shall judge the peoples: For me shall the islands wait, And in my arm
   shall they hope.

   6 Lift up your eyes toward heaven, And look upon the earth beneath; For
   the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, And the earth shall wax old
   like a garment, And its inhabitants shall perish in the same manner;
   But my salvation shall endure for ever. And my righteousness shall not
   perish.

   7 Hearken to me, ye that know righteousness; A people in whose heart is
   my law. Fear ye not the reproach of men, And be not discouraged by
   their slander.

   8 For the moth shall consume them like a garment; The worm shall
   consume them like wool; But my righteousness shall continually endure,
   And my salvation for ever And ever.

   9 Awake, O arm of Jehovah! Awake, be clothed with strength! Awake as in
   ancient days, As in generations long ago past. Art thou not that arm
   which crushed the proud one, Which slew the dragon?

   10 Art thou not that arm which dried up the sea, The water of the vast
   gulf; Which turned the depth of the sea into a path, For the passage of
   the redeemed?

   11 Therefore the redeemed by Jehovah shall return; They shall come to
   Zion with a song; And everlasting joy shall be upon their head; They
   shall obtain gladness And joy, And sorrow And groaning shall flee away.

   12 I, I am he that comforteth you. Who art thou that thou shouldst be
   afraid of man that shall die, Of the son of man, that shall be
   accounted grass?

   13 And hast forgotten Jehovah thy Maker, Who stretched out the heavens,
   And founded the earth; And hast dreaded continually every day The rage
   of the destroyer, When he prepareth to lay waste? And where is the rage
   of the destroyer?

   14 The exile hasteneth to be loosed, That he may not die in a pit, And
   that his bread may not fail.

   15 And I am Jehovah thy God, Who divide the sea, And its waves shall
   roar; Jehovah of hosts is his name.

   16 And I have put my words in thy mouth; And in the shadow of my hand
   have I protected thee; That I may plant the heavens And found the
   earth; That I may say to Zion, Thou art my people.

   17 Awake, awake, O Jerusalem! Arise, thou who hast drunk from the hand
   of Jehovah the cup of his fury; Pressing out, thou hast drunk the dregs
   of the cup of distress. [236]

   18 Of all the sons whom she bore, There is no one to guide her; Of all
   the sons whom she brought up, There is no one to take her by the hand.

   19 These two things have happened to thee; Who shall bewail thee?
   Desolation And destruction, And the famine And the sword; Who shall
   comfort thee?

   20 Thy sons have fainted; They lay down at the head of all the streets,
   As a wild bull in a net, Full of the indignation of Jehovah, Of the
   rebuke of thy God.

   21 Therefore now hear this, thou afflicted, And drunken, but not with
   wine

   22 Thus saith thy Lord, Jehovah, And thy God, the avenger of his
   people; Behold! I have taken out of thy hand The cup of affliction
   [237] The dregs of the cup of my fury; Thou shalt not drink of it any
   more.

   23 And I will put it into the hand of thy oppressors, Who said to thy
   soul, Bow down, And we shall pass over; And thou didst lay thy body as
   the ground, And as the street to them that pass over.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [236] Or, Of trembling.

   [237] Or, Of trembling.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 52

   1 Awake, awake, O Zion! Be clothed with thy strength, Be clothed with
   the garments of thy beauty, O Jerusalem! the holy city; For there shall
   no longer come into thee, The uncircumcised And unclean.

   2 Shake thyself from the dust; Arise, sit, O Jerusalem! Loose thyself
   from the chains of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion!

   3 For rims saith Jehovah for naught were ye sold; Therefore shall ye be
   redeemed without money.

   4 For thus saith the Lord Jehovah Into Egypt my people went down
   aforetime, That they might sojourn there; But Assyria hath oppressed
   them without cause.

   5 And now, What have I here, saith Jehovah, That my people should be
   carried away for naught, And that they who rule over them should cause
   them to howl, Saith Jehovah, And that every day continually: My name
   should be exposed to reproach?

   6 Therefore shall my people know my name; Therefore shall they know in
   that day That it is I who speak; Behold! I shall be present.

   7 How beautiful upon the mountains Are the feet of him that bringeth
   tidings, That proclaimeth peace, That bringeth good tidings, That
   proclaimeth salvation, That saith to Zion, Thy God reigneth!

   8 The voice of thy watchmen! They have lifted up the voice; They shall
   shout for joy together; For they shall see eye to eye, When Jehovah
   shall restore Zion.

   9 Praise ye, And rejoice together, Ye wildernesses of Jerusalem; For
   Jehovah hath comforted his people; He hath redeemed Jerusalem.

   10 Before the eyes of all the nations Jehovah hath made bare the arm of
   his holiness; And all the ends of the earth Shall see the salvation of
   our God.

   11 Depart ye, depart ye; Go ye out thence; Touch not the unclean thing;
   Go ye out of the midst of her; Be clean, ye that bear the vessels of
   Jehovah.

   12 For not in haste shall ye go out, And not in flight shall be your
   journey; For Jehovah shall go before you, And the God of Israel shall
   assemble you.

   13 Behold! my servant shall have prosperous success, Shall be exalted,
   Shall be lifted up, And shall be very high.

   14 As many were shocked at thee; (So much was his face disfigured by
   men, [238] And his form by the sons of men;) [239]

   15 So shall he sprinkle many nations; Kings shall shut their mouths on
   him; For what had not been declared to them they shall see, And what
   they had not heard they shall understand.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [238] Or, More than men.

   [239] Or, More than the sons of men.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 53

   1 Who will believe our report? And to whom hath the arm of Jehovah been
   revealed?

   2 Yet he shall grow up before him as a twig, And as a root out of a
   desert land; He hath no form nor beauty; We will see him; And his
   countenance is not such that we should desire him.

   3 Despised And rejected among men; A man of sorrows; Acquainted with
   infirmity; We hid, as it were, the face from him; And we did not at all
   esteem him.

   4 Surely our sicknesses he bare; And our sorrows he carried; And we
   thought him to be smitten, Wounded by God And afflicted.

   5 But he was wounded for our iniquities; He was bruised for our sins;
   The chastisement of our peace was upon him; And in his wound [240] we
   have healing.

   6 We all, like sheep, have gone astray; Every one hath turned to his
   own way; And Jehovah hath laid upon him the iniquities of us all.

   7 He was condemned And afflicted; [241] And he opened not his mouth. As
   a lamb shall he be led to the slaughter; And as a sheep before her
   shearers shall he be dumb, And shall not open his mouth.

   8 From prison And judgment was he taken; And who shall relate his
   generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the living; For the
   transgression of my people was he wounded.

   9 And he laid open to wicked men his grave, And to the rich man his
   death. Although he did no iniquity, And there was no deceit in his
   mouth.

   10 Yet Jehovah was pleased to bruise him, And to subject him to
   infirmity. When he shall have offered his soul as a sacrifice, He shall
   see a seed; [242] He shall prolong his days; And the will of Jehovah
   shall prosper in his hand.

   11 Of the labor of his soul he shall see, And shall be satisfied; And
   by his doctrine [243] shall my righteous servant justify many; For he
   shall bear their iniquities.

   12 Therefore will I divide to him a portion with the great; And he
   shall divide the spoil with the strong; Because he poured out his soul
   unto death, And was ranked with the transgressors; He bare the sin of
   many, And prayed for the transgressors.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [240] Or, In his medicine.

   [241] Or, Oppressed.

   [242] Or, He shall see posterity.

   [243] Or, By the knowledge of him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 54

   1 Shout, O barrens that didst not bear; Shout And sing, thou that didst
   not conceive; For more are the children of the widow, Than the children
   of the married woman, saith Jehovah.

   2 Widen the place of thy tabernacles; And let them stretch out the
   curtains of thy tents; Spare not; Lengthen thy cords; And strengthen
   thy stakes.

   3 For on the right hand And on the left thou shalt be multiplied; And
   thy seed shall possess the Gentiles; And they shall inhabit the
   desolate cities.

   4 Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed; And blush not, for thou
   shalt not be exposed to disgrace; Yea, the shame of thy youth thou
   shalt forget; And the reproach of thy widowhood thou shalt no longer
   remember.

   5 For thy husband is thy Make, Whose name is Jehovah of hosts; And thy
   Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he
   be called. [244]

   6 For as a woman forsaken And broken in spirit Jehovah hath called
   thee; And a wife of youth, Who hadst been dismissed, Saith thy God.

   7 For a little moment have I forsaken thee, And with great mercies will
   I gather thee.

   8 In a moment of wrath I hid my face for a little from thee; But with
   everlasting kindness have I had compassion on thee, Saith Jehovah thy
   Redeemer.

   9 For the waters of Noah [245] this is to me; As I have sworn that the
   waters of Noah Shall no more pass over the earth; So have I sworn that
   I will not be wroth with thee, To rebuke thee.

   10 For the mountains shall indeed be shaken, And the hills shall
   tremble; But my mercy shall not depart from thee, And the covenant of
   my peace shall not waver, Saith Jehovah, who hath compassion on thee.

   11 O thou wretched, tossed by a tempest, Destitute of consolation;
   Behold! I will build thy stones on carbuncles, And will found thee on
   sapphires.

   12 And I will lay thy windows with pearls, And thy gates with shilling
   stone, And all thy borders with precious stone.

   13 For all thy children shall be taught by Jehovah, And thy children
   shall have great peace.

   14 In righteousness shalt thou be equipped; Thou shalt be far from
   oppression, for thou shalt not fear it; And from terror, for it shall
   not come near thee.

   15 And he who assembleth shall assemble against thee without me; He who
   assembleth in thee shall fall against thee.

   16 Behold! I have created the smith, That bloweth the coals in the
   fire, And bringeth out the instrument for his work; I have created the
   waster to destroy.

   17 No instrument that hath been formed against thee shall prosper; And
   every tongue that hath risen against thee in judgment thou shalt
   condemn. This is the inheritance of the servants of Jehovah; And their
   righteousness is from me, saith Jehovah.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [244] Or, The Holy One of Israel shall be called the Redeemer And God
   of the whole earth.

   [245] Or, As the days of Noah.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 55

   1 Ho! all that are thirsty, Come ye to the waters; And ye who have not
   money, Come ye, buy, And eat. Come ye, buy without money, And wine And
   milk without any price.

   2 Wherefore do ye spend [246] money, not for bread? And your labor, not
   so as to be satisfied, Hear ye by hearing me; And eat ye that which is
   good; And let your soul delight itself in fatness.

   3 Incline your ear, And come to me; Hear, And your soul shall live; And
   I will strike a covenant of eternity with you, The faithful mercies of
   David.

   4 Behold I have given him a witness to the peoples, A leader And
   instructor to the peoples.

   5 Behold! thou shalt call a nation which thou knowest not; And a nation
   that knew not thee shall run to thee; For the sake of Jehovah thy God,
   And of the Holy One of Israel; For he hath glorified thee.

   6 Seek ye Jehovah, while he is found; Call upon him, while he is near.

   7 Let the wicked man forsake his way, And the unrighteous man his
   thoughts; Let him return to Jehovah, And he will have compassion on
   him; To our God; for he aboundeth in pardoning.

   8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, And my ways are not your ways,
   saith Jehovah.

   9 For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So far do my ways
   exceed your ways, And my thoughts your thoughts.

   10 Surely, as the rain cometh down, And the snow from heaven, And
   returneth not thither. But watereth the earth, And causeth it to bring
   forth And bud. That it may give seed to the sower And bread to the
   eater;

   11 So shall be my word which shall go out of nay mouth It shall not
   return to me empty; Till it do what I wish, And accomplish that to
   which I sent it.

   12 Therefore with peace shall ye go out, And with peace shall ye be led
   forth; The mountains And hills shall break out before you into joy, And
   all the trees of the fields shall clap their hands.

   13 Instead of the bramble shall grow up the fir-tree; And instead of
   the nettle [247] shall grow up the myrtle; [248] And it shall be to
   Jehovah for a name; For an everlasting covenant, that shall not be cut
   off.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [246] Or, Weigh out.

   [247] Or, The thorn.

   [248] Or, The Elm.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 56

   1 Thus saith Jehovah; Keep ye judgment, And do righteousness; For my
   salvation is near, that it may come; And my righteousness, that it may
   be revealed.

   2 Happy is the man who shall do this, And the son of man who shall take
   hold of this; Keeping the Sabbath, so that he may not profane it; And
   keeping his hand, that he may abstain from all that is evil.

   3 And let not the son, that is a foreigner, speak, That is joined to
   Jehovah, saying, By separating hath Jehovah separated me from his
   people; And let not the eunuch say, I am a dry tree.

   4 For thus saith Jehovah to the eunuchs, Who keep my Sabbaths, And
   choose the things that please me, And take hold of my covenant;

   5 In my house And within my walls, I will give to them a place And a
   name Better than of sons And of daughters; I will give to them an
   everlasting name, Which shall not be cut off.

   6 The children, I say, of the foreigner, Who shall be joined to
   Jehovah? That they may minister to him, And may love the name of
   Jehovah; That they may be his servants; Whosoever shall keep the
   Sabbath, so that he may not profane it, And shall embrace my covenant:

   7 Them will I bring into the mountain of my holiness, And will make
   them joyful in my house of prayer; Their burnt-offerings And sacrifices
   Shall be acceptable on mine altar; For my house shall be called A house
   of prayer to all peoples,

   8 Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Who gathereth the outcasts of Israel:
   Still more will I gather upon him his gathered.

   9 O all ye beasts of the field! Come to devour; O all ye beasts of the
   forest!

   10 His watchmen are blind; All are ignorant; All are dumb dogs, that
   cannot bark; They lie down And sleep; They love slumber.

   11 And those dogs, strong of appetite, know not to be satisfied; The
   shepherds themselves know not? nor understand; All of them look to
   their own ways; Every one to his gain from his end.

   12 Come ye, I will fletch wine; We shall drink strong liquor; As today,
   so shall be tomorrow, Or better, And more abundant.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 57

   1 The righteous man hath perished, And there is no man that layeth it
   to heart: Men of mercy are gathered, And there is none that
   considereth, That the righteous man is gathered from the face of the
   evil.

   2 Peace shall come; They shall rest in their beds, Whosoever walketh
   before him.

   3 And draw near, ye sons of the sorceress; The seed of the adulterer
   And the whore.

   4 On whom have ye made sport? On whom have ye opened the mouth? On whom
   have ye stretched out the tongue? Are ye not rebellious children? A
   lying seed?

   5 Warming themselves among the oaks [249] under every green tree;
   Sacrificing children in the valleys, Under the cliffs of the rocks,

   6 Among the smooth stones of the valley [250] is thy portion; They,
   they are thy lot; Even to them hast thou poured out a drink-offering,
   And offered a sacrifice. Shall I take pleasure in these things? [251]

   7 On a lofty And high mountain hast thou set thy bed; Yea, thou art
   gone up to it to offer a sacrifice.

   8 Behind the door And behind the door-post Hast thou set thy memorial;
   Thou hast been discovered to another than me; Thou art gone up; Thou
   hast enlarged thy bed; Thou hast made a covenant with them; Thou
   lovedst their bed in the place which thou sawest.

   9 And thou wentest to the king with ointment; Thou multipliedst thy
   disguises; Thou sentest thy ambassadors to a distant place; Thou art
   humbled even to hell.

   10 Thou art wearied with thy manifold journeying; And hast not said,
   There is no hope: Thou hast found the life of thine hand; Therefore
   thou hast not grieved.

   11 And whom hast thou worshipped, And of whom hast thou been afraid,
   That thou hast dealt falsely, And hast not remembered me, Blot laid it
   on thy heart? Is it not because I have held my peace, And therefore
   thou never fearest me?

   12 I will declare thy righteousness, And thy deeds; And they shall not
   profit thee.

   13 When thou shalt cry, let thy troops deliver thee; Yet the wind shall
   carry them all away; Vanity shall seize them. But he who hopeth in me
   shall obtain the land by inheritance, And shall possess the mountain of
   my holiness.

   14 And he shall say, Prepare, prepare; Level the road; Remove the
   stumbling-block out of the way of my people.

   15 For thus hath spoken the high And Lofty One, Who dwelleth in
   eternity, Whose name is Holy; I inhabit the high And holy, And with the
   afflicted, And with him who is lowly in spirit; That I may revive the
   spirit of the lowly, That I may revive the heart of the afflicted.

   16 For I will not contend for ever, Nor will I be always wroth; For the
   spirit shall be clothed [252] before me, And the wind have I made.

   17 For the iniquity of his lust I was wroth, And smote him; I have
   concealed myself, And will be wroth; But he turned And departed in the
   way of his heart.

   18 I have seen his ways, And will heal him, And will lead him,
   restoring consolations To him And to his mourners.

   19 I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to them that are afar
   off, And to them that are near, saith Jehovah, And I heal him.

   20 But the wicked are as the troubled sea, Which cannot rest; And its
   waters will east out filth And mud.

   21 There is no peace to the wicked, saith my God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [249] Or, With the gods.

   [250] Or, In parts of the river.

   [251] Or, Shall I repent of these things?

   [252] Or, Shall be concealed, or, Shall fail.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 58

   1 Cry with the throat, spare not; Raise thy voice as with a trumpet;
   And proclaim to my people their sin, And to the house of Jacob their
   iniquity.

   2 Yet they seek me daily, And wish to know my ways, As a nation that
   did righteousness, And neglected not the judgment of her God; They
   inquire at me about the judgments of righteousness: They wish to
   approach to God.

   3 Wherefore have we fasted, And thou didst not take notice of it?
   Wherefore have we humbled our souls, And thou knewest not? Behold! on
   the day that ye fast, ye find pleasure, And exact all your demands.

   4 Behold! for strife And contention ye fast, And that ye may smite with
   the wicked fist. Fast not, as ye do this day, That ye may cause your
   voice to be heard on high.

   5 Is it such a fast as I have chosen? That a man may afflict his soul
   for a day, And may hang down his head as a bulrush, And may spread
   sackcloth And ashes? Wilt thou call this a fast, And a day acceptable
   to Jehovah?

   6 Is not this the fast that I have chosen? To loose wicked bonds, To
   undo heavy burdens, To let the oppressed go free, And that ye may burst
   asunder every yoke?

   7 Is it not that thou shalt break thy bread to the hungry, And shalt
   bring the wandering poor to thy house? If thou shalt see the naked,
   that thou shalt cover him; And that thou shalt not hide thyself from
   thine own flesh?

   8 Then shall break forth as the dawn thy light; And thy health shall
   quickly spring up; Righteousness shall go before thy face, And the
   glory of Jehovah shall gather thee.

   9 Then shalt thou call, And Jehovah will listen; Thou shalt cry, And he
   shall say, Behold! I am here. If thou shalt take away from the midst of
   thee the burden, And the pointing of the finger, And the speech of
   vanity; [253]

   10 If thou shalt pour out thy soul to the hungry man, And shalt satisfy
   the afflicted soul, Thy light shall arise in darkness, And thy
   obscurity as noon-day;

   11 And Jehovah shall always conduct thee, And shall satisfy thy soul in
   drought, And shall make fit thy bones; And thou shalt be as a
   well-watered garden, And as a fountain of waters, Whose waters fail
   not.

   12 And from thee shall be those who shall restore the deserts of the
   age; Thou shalt raise up the foundations of generation And generation;
   And thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of
   paths for inhabiting.

   13 If thou shalt turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, And shalt not do
   thy pleasure on my holy day, And shalt call the Sabbath a delight, To
   consecrate it to Jehovah, because it is honorable, And shall give honor
   to it, So as not to follow thine own ways, Nor to find thine own
   pleasure, Nor to speak thine own words;

   14 Then shalt thou delight thyself in Jehovah; And I will cause thee to
   ride on the high places of the earth, And will feed thee with the
   heritage of Jacob thy father; For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [253] Or, The unprofitable speech.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 59

   1 Behold! the hand of Jehovah is not shortened, That it cannot, save;
   Nor is his ear heavy, That it cannot hear.

   2 But your sins have made a separation Between you And your God; And
   your sins have hidden his face from you, That he may not heal.

   3 For your hands are polluted with blood, And your fingers with
   iniquity; Your lips have uttered falsehood; Your tongue hath spoken
   wickedness.

   4 There is none that crieth for justice, None that contendeth for
   truth; They trust in vain things, And talk icily; They conceive
   mischief, arid bring forth iniquity.

   5 They hatch the eggs of the basilisk, And weave the webs of spiders;
   He that eateth of their eggs shall die; If they be crushed, there shall
   come forth a viper.

   6 Their webs shall not become clothing, And they shall not cover
   themselves with their works; For their works are works of iniquity;
   [254] And the work of violence is in their hands.

   7 Their bet run to evil, And hasten to shed innocent blood; Their
   thoughts are vain thoughts; [255] Wasting And destruction are in their
   paths.

   8 The way of peace they know not; And there is no judgment in their
   steps: They have corrupted their paths; Whosoever walketh by them shall
   not know peace.

   9 Therefore judgment hath departed far from us; And justice doth not
   overtake us. We looked for light, And, behold! obscurity; For
   brightness, And, behold! we walk amidst thick darkness.

   10 We grope for the wall like the blind; We grope like those who have
   been deprived of sight; We stumble at noon-day as in the night; Ill
   solitary places like dead men.

   11 We all roar like bears; And moaning, we moan like doves We looked
   for judgment, And it is not visible; For salvation, And it is far off
   from us.

   12 For our iniquities are multiplied before thee; And our sins have
   testified against us; [256] for our iniquities are with us, And we know
   our sins.

   13 We have done wickedly, And have lied to Jehovah, And have turned
   back from our God; Speaking slander And revolt; Conceiving And uttering
   from the heart words of falsehood.

   14 And judgment is driven back, And justice is far off; For truth is
   fallen in the street, And equity cannot come forth.

   15 Yea, truth faileth; And he who hath withdrawn from evil hath become
   a prey. And Jehovah saw it; And it displeased his eyes, that there was
   no judgment.

   16 He saw that there was no man, And wondered that none came forward;
   [257] Therefore his arm brought [258] salvation to him; And his
   righteousness, it upheld him.

   17 And he put on righteousness as a coat of mail, And the helmet of
   salvation on his head; He put on vengeance as a robe, And was clothed
   with indignation as a cloak.

   18 As if for the sake of recompenses, As if for rendering vengeance,
   For rendering indignation to his adversaries, Recompense to his
   enemies, He will render recompense to the islands.

   19 Therefore they shall fear the name of Jehovah from the west, And his
   glory from the rising of the sun; For the enemy shall come as a river;
   And the Spirit of Jehovah shall drive him. [259]

   20 And a Redeemer shall come to Zion, And to them who have returned
   from iniquity in Jacob, Saith Jehovah.

   21 And this my covenant I make with them, saith Jehovah; My Spirit that
   is upon thee, And my words which I have put in thy mouth, Shall not
   depart out of thy mouth, Nor out of the mouth of thy seed, Nor out of
   the mouth of thy seeds seed, saith Jehovah, From this time even for
   ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [254] Or, Of vanity. And the work of violence is in their hands.

   [255] Or, Thoughts of iniquity.

   [256] Or, Our sins answer to us.

   [257] Or, Interceded.

   [258] Or, Made.

   [259] Or, Shall chase him away.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 60

   1 Arise, be bright; For thy brightness is come; And the glory of
   Jehovah is risen upon thee.

   2 For, behold! darkness shall cover the earth, And thick darkness the
   peoples; But Jehovah shall arise upon thee; And his glory shall be seen
   upon thee.

   3 And the Gentiles shall walk to thy brightness, And kings to the
   luster of thy rising.

   4 Lift up thine eyes round about, And see. They all are assembled that
   they may come to thee; Thy sons shall come from afar; Thy daughters
   shall be nursed at the side.

   5 Then thou shalt see, And shalt be bright; Thou shalt tremble, And thy
   heart shall be enlarged; Because the abundance of the sea [260] shall
   be converted to thee; The riches [261] of the Gentiles shall come to
   thee.

   6 A multitude of camels shall cover thee, Of the dromedaries of Midian
   And Ephah; All they from Sheba shall come; They shall bring gold And
   incense, And shall declare the praises of Jehovah.

   7 All the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered together to thee; The rams
   of Nebaioth shall minister to thee; They shall ascend to the
   good-pleasure of mine altar; And I will glorify the house of my glory.

   8 Who are those that fly as a cloud, And as doves to their windows?

   9 Surely the islands shall wait for me, And the ships of Tarshish; That
   they may bring thy sons from afar, Their silver And their gold with
   them, To the name of Jehovah thy God, And to the Holy One of Israel;
   For he hath glorified thee.

   10 And the sons of the foreigner shall build thy walls, And their kings
   shall minister to thee; For in my wrath I smote thee; And in my
   loving-kindness have I had compassion on thee.

   11 And thy gates shall be open continually; They shall not be shut by
   day nor by night; That the riches [262] of the Gentiles may be carried
   to thee, And that their kings may be led.

   12 For the nation And kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish;
   The nations, Is, shall be utterly destroyed.

   13 The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee; The fir-tree, the pine, And
   the box together; To the beauty [263] of the place of my holiness; For
   I will glorify the place of my feet.

   14 And the sons of them that afflict thee Shall come bending to thee;
   And all who despised thee, Shall bow themselves down at the soles of
   thy feet; And they shall call thee the City of Jehovah, The Zion of the
   Holy One of Israel.

   15 Instead of thy having been forsaken And hated, So that no man passed
   through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, The joy of
   generation And generation.

   16 And thou shalt suck the milk of the Gentiles; Thou shalt suck the
   breast of kings; And thou shalt know that Jehovah Am thy Savior And thy
   Redeemer, The Mighty One of Jacob.

   17 For brass I will bring gold; And for iron I will bring silver; And
   for wood, brass; And for stones, iron; And I will make thy magistracy
   peace, And thine exactors, righteousness.

   18 Oppression shall no longer be heard in thy hind; Wasting or
   destruction within thy borders; And thou shalt call thy walls
   Salvation, And thy gates, Praise.

   19 And thou shalt no longer have the sun for the light of days, Nor
   shall the brightness of the moon give light to thee; For Jehovah shall
   be to thee an everlasting light, And thy God shall be thy glory.

   20 Thy sun shall no longer set; And thy moon shall no longer wane; For
   Jehovah shall be to thee an everlasting light; And the days of thy
   mourning shall be ended.

   21 Thy people also shall all be righteous; They shall inherit the land
   for ever; The branch of his planting shall be the work of my hands,
   That I may be glorified.

   22 A little one shall become a thousand; A small one, a strong nation;
   Jehovah will hasten this in her time.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [260] Or, The multitude of the sea.

   [261] Or, Strength.

   [262] Or, Strength.

   [263] Or, To adorn.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 61

   1 The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah is upon me; On that account Jehovah
   hath anointed me; He hath sent me to preach to the afflicted; [264] To
   bind up the broken in heart; To proclaim liberty to the captives, The
   opening of the prison to them that are bound.

   2 To proclaim the year of the good-pleasure of Jehovah, And the day of
   vengeance to our God; To comfort all that mourn.

   3 To appoint to the mourners in Zion; That I may give to them beauty
   instead of ashes, The oil of joy instead of mourning, The garment of
   gladness instead of an afflicted spirit; To call them trees of
   righteousness, The plantation of Jehovah, To glorify him.

   4 And they shall build the deserts of the age; They shall raise up the
   ancient wildernesses; And they shall restore the cities of desolation,
   The wildernesses of many ages.

   5 And strangers shall stand And feed your sheep; And the sons of the
   foreigner shall be Your husbandmen And vine-dressers.

   6 But ye shall be called the Priests of Jehovah; Men shall call you the
   Ministers of our God; Ye shall eat the substance of the Gentiles; And
   ye shall rise by their glory.

   7 Instead of your shame there shall be a double reward; And instead of
   disgrace they shall rejoice in their portion; For in their land they
   shall possess the double, And they shall have everlasting joy.

   8 For I Jehovah love judgment; I hate robbery in the burnt-offering;
   And I will establish their work in truth, And will make an everlasting
   covenant with them.

   9 And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles; And their offspring
   in the midst of the peoples; All who see them shall acknowledge them
   That they are the seed blessed by Jehovah.

   10 Rejoicing I will rejoice in Jehovah; My soul shall be joyful in my
   God; Nor he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation; He hath
   covered me with the robe of righteousness; As a bridegroom hath he
   adorned me, And as a bride decorated with her jewels.

   11 For, as the earth putteth forth her bud, And as the garden causeth
   her seed to spring up, So the Lord Jehovah will cause righteousness to
   spring up, And praise before all the nations.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [264] Or, To the meek.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 62

   1 On account of Zion I will not be silent; And on account of Jerusalem
   I will not rest; Till her righteousness go forth as brightness, And
   till her salvation burn like a lamp.

   2 And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, And all the kings of
   the earth thy glory; And thou shalt be called by a new name, Which the
   mouth of Jehovah shall name.

   3 And thou shalt be a crown of glory in the hand of Jehovah; And the
   diadem of the kingdom in the hand of thy God.

   4 Thou shalt no more be called forsaken; Nor shall thy land be any more
   called desolate; For they shall call thee, My good-pleasure in her; And
   they shall call thy land, Married; For the good-pleasure of Jehovah is
   in thee, And thy land shall be married.

   5 For, as a young man marrieth a virgin, So shall thy sons marry thee;
   And with the joy of the bridegroom over the bride Thy God will rejoice
   over thee.

   6 On thy walls, O Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen, Who, during the
   whole day And the whole night together, Shall not keep silence. Ye that
   are mindful [265] of Jehovah, Be ye not silent;

   7 And give him not silence, Till he establish, And till he make
   Jerusalem, A praise in the earth.

   8 Jehovah hath sworn by his right hand, And by the arm of his strength;
   If I shall any more give thy corn For food to thine enemies, And if the
   sons of the foreigner shall drink thy wine, For which thou hast
   labored.

   9 For they who have gathered it shall eat it, And shall praise Jehovah;
   And they that collect it shall drink wine, In my holy courts.

   10 Pass through, pass through the gates; Clear the way for the people;
   Level, level the road; Pave it with stones; Lift up a standard to the
   peoples.

   11 Behold! Jehovah hath proclaimed to the end of the earth; Say ye to
   the daughter of Zion, Behold! thy Savior cometh; Behold! his reward is
   with him, And the effect of his work is before him.

   12 And they shall call thee, A holy people, Redeemed by Jehovah; And
   they shall call thee The City sought out, Not forsaken.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [265] Or, That celebrate the memory.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 63

   1 Who is this that cometh from Edom? With red garments from Bozrah?
   This that is beautiful in his raiment, Marching in the greatness of his
   strength? I, who speak in righteousness, Mighty to save.

   2 Wherefore is thy raiment red? And thy garments like one that treadeth
   in the wine-press?

   3 Alone have I pressed the wine-press; And of the peoples there was
   none with me; For I will tread them in my wrath, And will trample them
   down in my fury; And their blood shall be sprinkled on my garments, And
   I will stain all my raiment.

   4 For the day of vengeance is in my heart; And the year of my redeemed
   is come.

   5 Therefore I looked, And there was none to help; And I wondered that
   there was none to uphold; Therefore mine arm brought salvation to me
   And my wrath upheld me.

   6 And I will tread down the peoples in my wrath, And will make them
   drunk in my fury, And will east down their strength to the earth.

   7 The mercies of Jehovah will I keep in remembrance, The praises of
   Jehovah; According to all that Jehovah hath bestowed on us, And in the
   abundance of kindness toward the house of Israel, Which he hath
   bestowed on them according to his mercies, And according to the
   multitude of his loving-kindnesses.

   8 For he said, Surely they are my people; Children that do not lie;
   Therefore he became their Savior.

   9 In all their affliction he was afflicted; [266] And the angel of his
   presence saved them; In his love And in his compassion he redeemed
   them; And he bare them And carried them all the days of the age.

   10 But they were rebellious, And provoked his Holy Spirit; Therefore he
   was turned to be their enemy, And fought against them.

   11 And he remembered the days of old, In which Moses was with his
   people. Where is he that made them to come up out of the sea, With the
   shepherd of his flock? Where is he that put his Holy Spirit in the
   midst of them?

   12 That led them by the right hand of Moses, By the arm of his glory;
   That divided the waters before them, That he might gain for himself all
   everlasting name?

   13 That made them walk through the depths, As a horse ill the desert,
   So that they did not stumble?

   14 He went down, as a beast into a plain; The Spirit of Jehovah gave
   him rest; So didst thou lead thy people, That thou mightst make for
   thyself a glorious name.

   15 Look down from heaven; Behold from the habitation, Of thy holiness
   And of thy glory. Where is thy zeal And thy strength? The multitude of
   thy bowels, And of thy compassions toward me, Have been restrained.

   16 Surely thou art our Father, Though Abraham do not know us, And
   Israel do not acknowledge us; Yet thou art our Fattier And out
   Redeemer; From everlasting is thy name.

   17 Why didst thou cause us, O Jehovah, To wander from thy ways? Why
   didst thou cause our heart To depart from thy fear? Return, on account
   of thy servants, To the tribes of thine inheritance.

   18 For a little time the people of thy holiness possessed it; Our
   adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

   19 For a long period have we been They over whom thou hast not ruled,
   On whom thy name hath not been called.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [266] Or, In all their affliction there was no affliction.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 64

   1 O that thou wouldst rend the heavens! That thou wouldst come down!
   That the mountains would flow down at thy presence!

   2 As by the burning of a melting fire, [267] The fire hath made the
   waters to boil, That thou mightst make thy name known to thine
   adversaries; The nations trembled at thy presence.

   3 When thou didst terrible things, Which we looked not for, Thou camest
   down; The mountains flowed down at thy presence.

   4 From of old they have not heard, Nor perceived by the ears; Eye hath
   not seen a God besides thee, That doeth such things to him that waiteth
   for him.

   5 Thou hast met him that rejoiceth And worketh righteousness; In thy
   ways they remembered thee; Behold! thou wast angry, And we have sinned;
   In them is perpetuity, And we shall be saved. [268]

   6 And we have all been as the unclean; And all our righteousnesses as a
   defiled garment; And we all fade as a leaf; And our iniquities, as the
   wind, Have carried us away.

   7 There is none that calleth on thy name, Nor that stirreth up himself
   to take hold of thee; For thou hast hidden thy face from us, And hast
   made us to languish In the hand of our iniquity.

   8 And now, O Jehovah, thou art our Father; We are the clay, And thou
   our potter; We all are the work of thy hands.

   9 Be not angry, O Jehovah, beyond measure; Neither remember iniquity
   for ever. Behold! see, we beseech thee, We all are thy people.

   10 The cities of thy holiness have been a desert; Zion hath been a
   desert; Jerusalem hath been a wilderness.

   11 The house of our sanctuary And of our glory, In which our fathers
   praised thee, Hath been burnt with fire; And all our desirable things
   are laid waste.

   12 Wilt thou restrain thyself for these things, O Jehovah! Wilt thou be
   silent? And wilt thou afflict us beyond measure?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [267] Or, As by a burning fire that melteth.

   [268] Or, We have been saved.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 65

   1 I have manifested myself to them that asked not; I have been found by
   them that sought me not; I said, Behold me, behold me, To a nation that
   called not on my name.

   2 I have stretched out my hands every day To a rebellious people,
   Walking in a way not good, After their own thoughts.

   3 A people that provoketh me always to my face, That sacrifieth in
   gardens, And offereth incense on bricks:

   4 Who dwell in the graves; Who pass the night in the deserts; Who eat
   swines flesh; And broth of unclean things is in their vessels:

   5 Who say, Remain by thyself; Approach not to me; For I would sanctify
   thee; [269] Those shall be smoke in my fury, A fire that burneth all
   the day.

   6 Behold! it is written before me; I will not be silent from rendering
   And recompensing into their bosom,

   7 Your iniquities, And the iniquities of your fathers together, saith
   Jehovah. Because they have offered incense on the mountains, And have
   dishonored me on the hills, Therefore I will measure back their ancient
   work, Into their bosom.

   8 Thus saith Jehovah: As if one should find a grape in a cluster, And
   should say, Destroy it not, For a blessing is in it; So will I do for
   the sake of my servants, That I may not destroy the whole.

   9 And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, And out of Judah the heir
   of my mountains; And mine elect shall possess it by inheritance; And my
   servants shall dwell there.

   10 And Sharon shall be an abode of flocks, And the valley of Achor a
   place for herds to lie down in, To my people who have sought me.

   11 But ye are forsakers of Jehovah, Who forget the mountain of my
   holiness, Who prepare a table for the army, And fill an oblation to the
   number.

   12 Therefore I will number you to the sword, And ye all shall be cut
   down by slaughter; Because I called, And ye answered not; I spoke, And
   ye heard not; And ye did evil before mine eyes, And chose the things in
   which I took no pleasure.

   13 Therefore thus saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold! my servants shall
   eat, And ye shall be hungry; Behold! my servants shall drink, And ye
   shall be thirsty; Behold! my servants shall rejoice, And ye shall be
   covered with shame.

   14 Behold! my servants shall shout for gladness of heart; And ye shall
   cry aloud for grief of heart, And shall howl for anguish of spirit.

   15 And ye shall leave your name for a curse to mine elect; The Lord
   Jehovah shall slay you, And shall call his servants by another name.

   16 He who blesseth himself in the earth Shall bless himself in the
   faithful God; And he who sweareth in the earth Shall swear by the
   faithful God; For the former afflictions, Are surrendered to
   forgetfulness, And hidden from mine eyes.

   17 For, behold! I will create, New heavens And a new earth; The former
   shall not be remembered, Igor come into mind.

   18 But rejoice And be glad for ever, In the things which I create; For,
   behold! I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, And her people a joy.

   19 And I will be glad in Jerusalem, And will rejoice in my people; And
   the voice of weeping shall no more be heard in her, Nor the voice of
   crying.

   20 There shall be no more there an infant of days, Nor an old man that
   fulfilleth not his days; For the son of a hundred years shall die
   young; And the sinner who is the son of a hundred years shall be
   accursed.

   21 They shall build houses, And shall inhabit them; They shall plant
   vines, And shall eat the fruit of them.

   22 They shall not build that another may inhabit; They shall not plant
   that another may eat; For according to the days of a tree Shall be the
   days of my people; And mine elect shall perpetually enjoy, The work of
   their hands.

   23 They shall not toil in vain; And they shall not bring forth in
   terror; For the seed of the blessed of Jehovah shall they be, And their
   offspring with them.

   24 And it shall be, before they cry, I will listen; While they are yet
   speaking, I will hear.

   25 The wolf And the lamb shall feed together; And the lion shall eat
   straw like the ox; And the serpent shall have dust for his food. They
   shall not destroy, And shall not hurt, In all my holy mountain, saith
   Jehovah.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [269] Or, For I am holier than thou.
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 66

   1 Thus saith Jehovah: Heaven is my throne, And the earth is my
   footstool: Where is that house which ye will build for me? And where is
   this place of my rest?

   2 Yet all these things hath my hand made, And all these things began to
   be, saith Jehovah; And I look to him who is humble And contrite in
   spirit, And who trembleth at my word.

   3 He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; He that sacrificeth a
   sheep, as if he stabbed a dog; He that offereth an oblation, as if he
   offered swines flesh; He that burneth incense, as if he blessed an
   idol; And truly they have chosen their own ways; And their soul hath
   delighted in their abominations.

   4 I also will choose their delusions, And will bring upon them their
   terror; Because I called, And no man answered; I spoke, And they heard
   not; And they did evil before mine eyes, And chose those things in
   which I take no delight.

   5 Hear the word of Jehovah, Ye that tremble at his word. Your brethren
   that hate you. And that cast you out for my names sake, Have said, Let
   Jehovah be glorified. [270] But he shall be seen to your joy, And they
   shall be ashamed.

   6 A voice of tumult from the city! A voice from the temple! The voice
   of Jehovah Rendering recompense to his adversaries.

   7 Before she was in labor, she brought forth; Before her pain came upon
   her she was delivered of a male.

   8 Who hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such thing? Shall the
   earth bring forth in one day? Shall a nation be born at once? For as
   soon as Zion had the pains of child-bearing? Immediately she brought
   forth.

   9 Shall I bring to the birth, And not bring forth? saith Jehovah. Shall
   I cause to bear. And yet restrain? saith thy God.

   10 Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, And be glad with her, All ye that love
   her; Rejoice for joy with her, All ye that mourn for her;

   11 That ye may suck And be satisfied From the breast of her
   consolations; That ye may milk And be delighted, With the brightness of
   her glory.

   12 For thus saith Jehovah: Behold! I cause peace to flow on her like a
   river, And the glory of the Gentiles as an overflowing torrent; Thus ye
   shall suck; Ye shall be carried on the shoulder, And shall be dandled
   on the knees.

   13 As a man whom his mother comforteth, So will I comfort you; And ye
   shall have comfort on Jerusalem.

   14 And ye shall see, And your heart shall rejoice; And your bones shall
   flourish like the grass; And the hand of Jehovah shall be known toward
   his servants, And he shall be enraged against his enemies.

   15 For, behold! Jehovah shall come in fire; And his chariots, as a
   whirlwind; That he may utter his wrath in fury, And his rebuke in a
   flame of fire.

   16 For with fire, And with his sword, Shall Jehovah judge all flesh;
   And many shall be the slain of Jehovah.

   17 They that sanctify themselves, And that purify themselves in the
   gardens behind one in the midst, That eat swines flesh, And the
   abomination, And the mouse, Shall be consumed together, saith Jehovah.

   18 For I (know) their deeds And their thoughts; Because the time is
   come, That I should assemble all nations And languages; And they shall
   come, And shall see my glory.

   19 And I will put a mark upon them, And will send some of them that are
   escaped, To the nations of Tarshish, Pul, And Lud, that draw the bow To
   Tubal And Jayan; To the distant islands, Which have not heard my name,
   And have not seen my glory; And they shall declare my glory among the
   Gentiles.

   20 And they shall bring all your brethren, Out of all nations, An
   oblation to Jehovah, On horses, And chariots, And wagons, On mules And
   swift animals, To my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith Jehovah; As the
   children of Israel bring in a clean vessel To the house of Jehovah.

   21 And even some of them will I take For priests And Levites, saith
   Jehovah.

   22 For, as the new heavens And the new earth, which I make, Remain
   before me, saith Jehovah; So shall your seed And your name remain.

   23 And it shall be, That from month to his month, And from Sabbath to
   his Sabbath, All flesh shall come, To worship before me, saith Jehovah.

   24 And they shall go forth, And shall see the carcasses of the men who
   have rebelled against me; For their worm shall not die, And their fire
   shall not be quenched; And they shall be an abhorrence to all flesh.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [270] Or, Jehovah is severe, or, Jehovah shall be glorified.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [26]1:28   [27]2:15   [28]3:24   [29]4:1   [30]4:7   [31]9:10
   [32]11:5   [33]12:3   [34]15:5   [35]15:5   [36]15:5   [37]15:6
   [38]15:14   [39]16:2   [40]17:1   [41]17:5   [42]17:5   [43]17:7
   [44]17:7   [45]17:7   [46]17:8   [47]18:21   [48]18:32   [49]19:4
   [50]22:2   [51]22:12   [52]22:16   [53]22:17   [54]22:17   [55]22:18
   [56]22:18   [57]22:18   [58]24:67   [59]30:11   [60]36:1   [61]36:8
   [62]36:9   [63]39:5   [64]42:5   [65]46:5   [66]47:2   [67]48:4
   [68]48:20

   Exodus

   [69]2:24   [70]5:3   [71]10:22   [72]12:13   [73]12:31   [74]12:33
   [75]13:21   [76]14:21   [77]14:21   [78]14:22   [79]14:28   [80]16:35
   [81]17:5   [82]17:6   [83]19:6   [84]19:6   [85]20:8   [86]20:24
   [87]20:25   [88]29:14   [89]29:15   [90]30:10   [91]31:3   [92]31:13
   [93]31:17   [94]32:13   [95]33:1   [96]35:31

   Leviticus

   [97]2:2   [98]2:12   [99]5:12   [100]11:7   [101]18:5   [102]23:10
   [103]23:39   [104]24:7   [105]25:10   [106]26:10   [107]26:22

   Numbers

   [108]5:21   [109]5:26   [110]11:1   [111]11:17   [112]18:20
   [113]20:3   [114]22:29   [115]36:13

   Deuteronomy

   [116]4:33   [117]4:37   [118]6:5   [119]6:8   [120]6:9   [121]7:7-8
   [122]11:20   [123]12:18   [124]13:3   [125]14:8   [126]18:10-11
   [127]23:1   [128]24:1   [129]28:33   [130]28:48   [131]29:4
   [132]30:12   [133]30:14   [134]30:19   [135]32:11   [136]32:13
   [137]32:13   [138]32:13   [139]32:15   [140]32:21   [141]32:21
   [142]32:21   [143]33:10

   Joshua

   [144]3:16   [145]3:16

   Judges

   [146]7:22   [147]10:16   [148]11:7   [149]17:2

   1 Samuel

   [150]1:11   [151]15:22   [152]15:22

   2 Samuel

   [153]1:26   [154]4:6   [155]7:12   [156]7:14   [157]16:6   [158]16:13

   1 Kings

   [159]2:19-20   [160]4:25   [161]8:30   [162]10:21   [163]10:27

   2 Kings

   [164]11:18

   2 Chronicles

   [165]6:41   [166]36:22-23

   Ezra

   [167]3:10

   Esther

   [168]4:3

   Job

   [169]1:1   [170]26:12

   Psalms

   [171]2:1   [172]2:7   [173]2:8   [174]2:10-11   [175]2:10-12
   [176]7:15   [177]9:15   [178]14:3   [179]16:5   [180]18:11
   [181]22:2   [182]22:18   [183]25:3   [184]30:5   [185]31:19
   [186]32:6   [187]34:5   [188]34:5   [189]37:5   [190]40:6   [191]42:5
   [192]49:14-15   [193]50:10   [194]50:14   [195]51:17   [196]56:6
   [197]68:18   [198]68:26   [199]73:1   [200]76:2   [201]77:20
   [202]78:38-39   [203]79:12   [204]87:4   [205]89:39   [206]90:6
   [207]90:9-10   [208]91:11   [209]93:1   [210]99:5   [211]102:14
   [212]102:16   [213]102:23-24   [214]102:26   [215]102:26-27
   [216]102:27-28   [217]102:28   [218]103:11   [219]103:13-14
   [220]103:16   [221]103:17   [222]103:18   [223]113:7   [224]114:4-5
   [225]115:3   [226]116:15   [227]126:1   [228]126:1   [229]127:2
   [230]128:2   [231]129:3   [232]132:1   [233]132:7   [234]132:14
   [235]132:14   [236]137:6   [237]137:7   [238]138:6   [239]143:6
   [240]144:15   [241]147:2   [242]147:2

   Proverbs

   [243]5:18   [244]14:13   [245]14:16   [246]17:22

   Isaiah

   [247]1:1   [248]1:1   [249]1:4   [250]1:5   [251]1:9   [252]1:9
   [253]1:9   [254]1:9   [255]1:9   [256]1:11   [257]1:21   [258]2:2
   [259]2:3   [260]3:9   [261]5:2   [262]5:2   [263]5:4   [264]5:4
   [265]5:7   [266]8:6   [267]8:12   [268]8:16   [269]8:19   [270]10:22
   [271]10:22   [272]10:22   [273]11:1   [274]11:10   [275]19:14
   [276]22:13   [277]22:14   [278]28:15   [279]29:9   [280]33:20
   [281]34:6   [282]34:6   [283]36:3   [284]36:22   [285]38:14
   [286]40:1-4   [287]40:7   [288]40:10   [289]40:11   [290]40:29
   [291]41:25   [292]42:3   [293]43:13   [294]43:18   [295]43:21
   [296]43:26   [297]45:14   [298]46:11   [299]47:1   [300]47:1
   [301]47:9   [302]49:1-26   [303]49:2   [304]49:8   [305]49:8
   [306]49:14   [307]49:15   [308]50:1-11   [309]51:1-23   [310]52:1
   [311]52:1-15   [312]52:8   [313]53:1-12   [314]54:1-17
   [315]54:11-12   [316]55:1-13   [317]55:5   [318]56:1-12   [319]56:8
   [320]57:1-21   [321]57:15   [322]58:1-14   [323]59:1-21
   [324]60:1-22   [325]60:8   [326]61:1-11   [327]62:1-12   [328]62:4
   [329]62:5   [330]63:1-19   [331]63:10   [332]63:17   [333]64:1-12
   [334]65:1-25   [335]66:1-24   [336]66:3   [337]66:21

   Jeremiah

   [338]1:5   [339]1:18   [340]3:1   [341]5:1   [342]6:17   [343]7:4
   [344]7:11   [345]7:13   [346]10:24   [347]11:7   [348]14:7
   [349]17:1   [350]17:5   [351]18:12   [352]24:6   [353]24:6
   [354]25:15   [355]29:22   [356]30:14-17   [357]31:34   [358]32:18
   [359]32:35   [360]35:14   [361]52:9

   Lamentations

   [362]3:29

   Ezekiel

   [363]3:8   [364]3:9   [365]3:17   [366]16:3   [367]18:2   [368]18:20
   [369]20:12   [370]20:39   [371]22:30   [372]24:21   [373]29:3
   [374]33:2   [375]33:2   [376]33:6   [377]33:7   [378]34:4
   [379]44:11   [380]45:22

   Daniel

   [381]1:6   [382]9:11

   Hosea

   [383]1:10   [384]1:10   [385]2:2   [386]2:19   [387]2:19-20
   [388]2:20   [389]4:5   [390]6:6   [391]6:6   [392]7:10   [393]9:12
   [394]12:1

   Joel

   [395]1:13   [396]1:14   [397]2:12

   Amos

   [398]5:18

   Micah

   [399]6:4

   Habakkuk

   [400]3:2

   Haggai

   [401]2:9   [402]2:10

   Zechariah

   [403]1:12   [404]1:15   [405]2:5   [406]3:2

   Malachi

   [407]2:14   [408]4:2   [409]4:2

   Matthew

   [410]2:11   [411]3:12   [412]7:7   [413]7:11   [414]8:12   [415]9:13
   [416]9:13   [417]9:38   [418]10:1   [419]11:28   [420]11:28
   [421]12:7   [422]12:7   [423]12:29   [424]15:13   [425]16:18
   [426]16:18   [427]17:21   [428]19:8   [429]21:13   [430]21:43
   [431]23:19   [432]23:19   [433]23:24   [434]26:66   [435]27:24
   [436]27:35   [437]27:51   [438]27:51   [439]27:60   [440]27:63
   [441]28:18

   Mark

   [442]11:17   [443]15:14   [444]15:28   [445]16:15   [446]16:15

   Luke

   [447]4:18   [448]11:22   [449]16:15   [450]21:19   [451]23:4
   [452]23:14   [453]23:22

   John

   [454]1:13   [455]1:14   [456]1:16   [457]1:29   [458]1:36   [459]4:10
   [460]4:13-14   [461]4:21   [462]4:24   [463]4:24   [464]4:24
   [465]5:35   [466]6:27   [467]6:45   [468]6:45   [469]7:12   [470]8:36
   [471]8:36   [472]10:11   [473]10:16   [474]10:16   [475]12:35
   [476]12:37-38   [477]14:6   [478]17:1   [479]17:19   [480]17:20
   [481]18:36   [482]18:38   [483]19:16   [484]19:24   [485]19:38
   [486]20:23

   Acts

   [487]3:21   [488]5:41   [489]7:49   [490]10:6   [491]10:34-35
   [492]10:42   [493]13:47   [494]13:48   [495]14:14   [496]16:20
   [497]17:24   [498]20:35   [499]27:24   [500]27:37

   Romans

   [501]1:5   [502]1:28   [503]1:28   [504]2:14   [505]2:17-21
   [506]2:25   [507]2:26   [508]3:2   [509]3:10   [510]3:17   [511]3:20
   [512]3:25   [513]3:29   [514]4:15   [515]4:17   [516]4:18
   [517]4:18-21   [518]4:20   [519]5:1   [520]5:1   [521]5:3   [522]5:10
   [523]5:12   [524]5:18   [525]5:19   [526]6   [527]6:9   [528]7:14
   [529]8:3   [530]8:3   [531]8:3-4   [532]8:11   [533]8:15   [534]8:15
   [535]8:20   [536]8:28   [537]8:28   [538]8:31   [539]8:33-34
   [540]9:4   [541]9:7   [542]9:18   [543]9:18   [544]9:25   [545]10:3
   [546]10:8   [547]10:8   [548]10:8   [549]10:12   [550]10:15
   [551]10:15   [552]10:16   [553]10:17   [554]10:17   [555]10:19
   [556]11:24   [557]11:25   [558]11:26   [559]11:29   [560]12:1
   [561]12:1   [562]12:1   [563]13:11-12   [564]14:1-7   [565]15:1
   [566]15:16   [567]15:21   [568]16:26

   1 Corinthians

   [569]2:9   [570]3:2   [571]3:7   [572]3:7   [573]3:10-13   [574]3:16
   [575]3:16   [576]4:4   [577]4:4   [578]4:11   [579]4:13   [580]6:19
   [581]12:3   [582]12:4   [583]12:12   [584]13:3

   2 Corinthians

   [585]1:20   [586]2:16   [587]3:5   [588]3:6   [589]4:17   [590]4:17
   [591]5:20   [592]5:20-21   [593]5:21   [594]5:21   [595]6:2
   [596]6:2   [597]6:2   [598]6:2   [599]6:8   [600]7:1   [601]7:1
   [602]9:7   [603]11:2   [604]13:4

   Galatians

   [605]1:15   [606]2:16   [607]2:21   [608]3:10-11   [609]3:12
   [610]3:13   [611]3:16   [612]3:24   [613]4:4   [614]4:4   [615]4:6
   [616]4:28   [617]5:6   [618]5:22

   Ephesians

   [619]1:4   [620]1:4   [621]1:4   [622]1:4   [623]1:10   [624]1:10
   [625]1:12   [626]2:10   [627]2:12-13   [628]2:13   [629]2:14
   [630]2:14   [631]2:17   [632]2:17   [633]2:18   [634]2:19   [635]2:21
   [636]3:5   [637]3:12   [638]3:20   [639]4:8   [640]4:11   [641]4:11
   [642]4:13   [643]4:13   [644]4:30

   Philippians

   [645]2:6-11   [646]2:8   [647]2:8   [648]2:9   [649]3:14   [650]4:1
   [651]4:5   [652]4:7

   Colossians

   [653]2:3   [654]2:14

   1 Thessalonians

   [655]2:19

   2 Thessalonians

   [656]1:6   [657]1:6-8   [658]1:8   [659]2:3   [660]2:9   [661]2:11

   1 Timothy

   [662]2:8   [663]2:8   [664]2:8   [665]3:15   [666]3:15   [667]4:1
   [668]4:8   [669]6:10

   2 Timothy

   [670]2:13   [671]2:19   [672]3:16

   Titus

   [673]1:2

   Hebrews

   [674]1:14   [675]1:14   [676]2:5   [677]2:8   [678]4:9-10   [679]4:12
   [680]4:15   [681]4:16   [682]5:4-5   [683]6:13   [684]8:13   [685]9:7
   [686]9:12   [687]9:14   [688]11:26

   1 Peter

   [689]1:23   [690]2:5   [691]2:5   [692]2:5   [693]2:9   [694]2:9
   [695]2:9   [696]2:9   [697]2:22   [698]2:23   [699]5:7

   2 Peter

   [700]2:10   [701]3:7

   1 John

   [702]2:2   [703]3:17   [704]4:10

   Revelation

   [705]1:6   [706]5:10   [707]7:3   [708]21:25
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Isaiah

   [709]49   [710]49:1   [711]49:2   [712]49:3   [713]49:4   [714]49:5
   [715]49:6   [716]49:7   [717]49:8   [718]49:9   [719]49:10
   [720]49:11   [721]49:12   [722]49:13   [723]49:14   [724]49:15
   [725]49:16   [726]49:17   [727]49:18   [728]49:19   [729]49:20
   [730]49:21   [731]49:22   [732]49:23   [733]49:24   [734]49:25
   [735]49:26   [736]50   [737]50:1   [738]50:2   [739]50:3   [740]50:4
   [741]50:5   [742]50:6   [743]50:7   [744]50:8   [745]50:9
   [746]50:10   [747]50:11   [748]51   [749]51:1   [750]51:2   [751]51:3
   [752]51:4   [753]51:5   [754]51:6   [755]51:7   [756]51:8   [757]51:9
   [758]51:10   [759]51:11   [760]51:12   [761]51:13   [762]51:14
   [763]51:15   [764]51:16   [765]51:17   [766]51:18   [767]51:19
   [768]51:20   [769]51:21   [770]51:22   [771]51:23   [772]52
   [773]52:1   [774]52:2   [775]52:3   [776]52:4   [777]52:5   [778]52:6
   [779]52:7   [780]52:8   [781]52:9   [782]52:10   [783]52:11
   [784]52:12   [785]52:13   [786]52:14   [787]52:15   [788]53
   [789]53:1   [790]53:2   [791]53:3   [792]53:4   [793]53:5   [794]53:6
   [795]53:7   [796]53:8   [797]53:9   [798]53:10   [799]53:11
   [800]53:12   [801]54   [802]54:1   [803]54:2   [804]54:3   [805]54:4
   [806]54:5   [807]54:6   [808]54:7   [809]54:8   [810]54:9
   [811]54:10   [812]54:11   [813]54:12   [814]54:13   [815]54:14
   [816]54:15   [817]54:16   [818]54:17   [819]55:1   [820]55:2
   [821]55:3   [822]55:4   [823]55:5   [824]55:6   [825]55:7   [826]55:8
   [827]55:9   [828]55:10   [829]55:11   [830]55:12   [831]55:13
   [832]56   [833]56   [834]56:1   [835]56:2   [836]56:3   [837]56:4
   [838]56:5   [839]56:6   [840]56:7   [841]56:8   [842]56:9
   [843]56:10   [844]56:11   [845]56:12   [846]57   [847]57:1
   [848]57:2   [849]57:3   [850]57:4   [851]57:5   [852]57:6   [853]57:7
   [854]57:8   [855]57:9   [856]57:10   [857]57:11   [858]57:12
   [859]57:13   [860]57:14   [861]57:15   [862]57:16   [863]57:17
   [864]57:18   [865]57:19   [866]57:20   [867]57:21   [868]58
   [869]58:1   [870]58:2   [871]58:3   [872]58:4   [873]58:5   [874]58:6
   [875]58:7   [876]58:8   [877]58:9   [878]58:10   [879]58:11
   [880]58:12   [881]58:13   [882]58:14   [883]59   [884]59:1
   [885]59:2   [886]59:3   [887]59:4   [888]59:5   [889]59:6   [890]59:7
   [891]59:8   [892]59:9   [893]59:10   [894]59:11   [895]59:12
   [896]59:13   [897]59:14   [898]59:15   [899]59:16   [900]59:17
   [901]59:18   [902]59:19   [903]59:20   [904]59:21   [905]60
   [906]60:1   [907]60:2   [908]60:3   [909]60:4   [910]60:5   [911]60:6
   [912]60:7   [913]60:8   [914]60:9   [915]60:10   [916]60:11
   [917]60:12   [918]60:13   [919]60:14   [920]60:15   [921]60:16
   [922]60:17   [923]60:18   [924]60:19   [925]60:21   [926]60:22
   [927]61   [928]61:1   [929]61:2   [930]61:3   [931]61:4   [932]61:5
   [933]61:6   [934]61:7   [935]61:8   [936]61:9   [937]61:10
   [938]61:11   [939]62   [940]62:1   [941]62:2   [942]62:3   [943]62:4
   [944]62:5   [945]62:6   [946]62:7   [947]62:8   [948]62:9
   [949]62:10   [950]62:11   [951]62:12   [952]63   [953]63:1
   [954]63:2   [955]63:3   [956]63:4   [957]63:5   [958]63:6   [959]63:7
   [960]63:8   [961]63:9   [962]63:10   [963]63:11   [964]63:12
   [965]63:13   [966]63:14   [967]63:15   [968]63:16   [969]63:17
   [970]63:18   [971]63:19   [972]64   [973]64:1   [974]64:2   [975]64:3
   [976]64:4   [977]64:5   [978]64:6   [979]64:7   [980]64:8   [981]64:9
   [982]64:10   [983]64:11   [984]64:12   [985]65   [986]65:1
   [987]65:2   [988]65:3   [989]65:4   [990]65:5   [991]65:6   [992]65:7
   [993]65:8   [994]65:9   [995]65:10   [996]65:11   [997]65:12
   [998]65:13   [999]65:15   [1000]65:16   [1001]65:17   [1002]65:18
   [1003]65:19   [1004]65:20   [1005]65:21   [1006]65:22   [1007]65:23
   [1008]65:24   [1009]65:25   [1010]66   [1011]66:1   [1012]66:2
   [1013]66:3   [1014]66:4   [1015]66:5   [1016]66:6   [1017]66:7
   [1018]66:8   [1019]66:9   [1020]66:10   [1021]66:11   [1022]66:12
   [1023]66:13   [1024]66:14   [1025]66:15   [1026]66:16   [1027]66:17
   [1028]66:18   [1029]66:19   [1030]66:20   [1031]66:21   [1032]66:22
   [1033]66:23   [1034]66:24
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * 'Onos luras akouon kinei ta ota: [1035]1
     * 'Ono tis elege muthon; ho de ta ota ekinei: [1036]1
     * anakephalaiosis: [1037]1
     * astorgous: [1038]1
     * archontas: [1039]1
     * emphatikos: [1040]1
     * en Thumo mikro: [1041]1
     * en tho tapeinosei autou he krisis autou erthe: [1042]1
     * epi toutois ous ouk orgisthesomai: [1043]1
     * episkope: [1044]1
     * hoti: [1045]1
     * hupotuposin: [1046]1
     * hupotuposis: [1047]1
     * hupotutosis: [1048]1
     * authadeis: [1049]1
     * eis tous kepous, en tois prothurois: [1050]1
     * eipon lego: [1051]1
     * eudokia: [1052]1
     * kakozeloi: [1053]1
     * kakozelia: [1054]1 [1055]2
     * kat' exochen: [1056]1
     * latreia: [1057]1
     * men: [1058]1
     * mene: [1059]1
     * oudeis: [1060]1
     * por'rho ap ' emou: [1061]1
     * panoplian: [1062]1
     * paradoxon: [1063]1
     * paroimiode: [1064]1
     * sumpatheian: [1065]1
     * sumpatheia: [1066]1
     * sunekdochikos: [1067]1
     * to poiema: [1068]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * l': [1069]1
     * ': [1070]1 [1071]2
     * 'zkrh: [1072]1
     * 'ys: [1073]1 [1074]2
     * 'kn: [1075]1
     * 'lhym: [1076]1
     * 'lym: [1077]1
     * 'nsy phqdh: [1078]1
     * 'sph: [1079]1
     * 'phr: [1080]1
     * 'rgy: [1081]1
     * 'rph: [1082]1
     * 'sm: [1083]1 [1084]2 [1085]3 [1086]4 [1087]5 [1088]6 [1089]7
     * 'smnym: [1090]1
     * 'sr: [1091]1 [1092]2 [1093]3
     * 'sr l' yvsv qry: [1094]1
     * 'sr mkrtm 'vty mtsrymh: [1095]1
     * 'stvmm: [1096]1
     * 't: [1097]1 [1098]2
     * 'tnv: [1099]1 [1100]2
     * vgd: [1101]1
     * vgd dym: [1102]1
     * vgr dym: [1103]1
     * vzh: [1104]1 [1105]2
     * vn nkr: [1106]1
     * vnv: [1107]1 [1108]2
     * vnym shyyth skvlh mhm: [1109]1
     * vly phqdh: [1110]1
     * vtsv: [1111]1
     * vqtshv: [1112]1
     * vstsph qtsph: [1113]1
     * gd: [1114]1 [1115]2 [1116]3 [1117]4
     * gvy: [1118]1
     * dvr: [1119]1
     * dt: [1120]1
     * drvsh: [1121]1
     * h: [1122]1
     * ht't: [1123]1 [1124]2
     * hmzkyrym: [1125]1
     * hn: [1126]1
     * hnny: [1127]1
     * v: [1128]1 [1129]2 [1130]3
     * vysql v'vnym 't dvd: [1131]1
     * zh: [1132]1
     * chy-'ny: [1133]1
     * chphph: [1134]1
     * yd: [1135]1
     * ychdv: [1136]1
     * ymy: [1137]1 [1138]2
     * ymym: [1139]1
     * ytvph: [1140]1
     * ysh: [1141]1
     * yqr': [1142]1
     * yrvtsv: [1143]1
     * yskyl: [1144]1
     * ystvmm: [1145]1
     * k: [1146]1 [1147]2 [1148]3
     * ky: [1149]1 [1150]2 [1151]3 [1152]4
     * ky htllt vy: [1153]1
     * ky my: [1154]1 [1155]2
     * kymy: [1156]1
     * kn: [1157]1
     * l'mr: [1158]1
     * lhtvll vm: [1159]1
     * lv: [1160]1 [1161]2
     * lv': [1162]1
     * m: [1163]1
     * m: [1164]1
     * m'vn: [1165]1
     * m'dm: [1166]1
     * m'ys: [1167]1
     * mvnym: [1168]1
     * mhyvt sm 'vn: [1169]1
     * my: [1170]1
     * mym: [1171]1
     * mnh: [1172]1 [1173]2
     * mny: [1174]1
     * mphgy: [1175]1
     * mqtshv: [1176]1
     * mrvm: [1177]1
     * mslym: [1178]1
     * nhr: [1179]1 [1180]2
     * nzh: [1181]1
     * nkr: [1182]1
     * nspht: [1183]1
     * s: [1184]1
     * sql: [1185]1 [1186]2
     * sqlv hdrk m'vn: [1187]1
     * sqlv m'vn: [1188]1
     * gg: [1189]1
     * d m'd: [1190]1
     * vlm: [1191]1 [1192]2
     * l: [1193]1 [1194]2 [1195]3
     * l 'sr: [1196]1
     * l kn: [1197]1
     * nh: [1198]1
     * nvym: [1199]1
     * syr: [1200]1 [1201]2
     * srym: [1202]1
     * ph'r: [1203]1 [1204]2
     * phqdh: [1205]1
     * phrnsk: [1206]1
     * tsh: [1207]1 [1208]2
     * tsr lv: [1209]1
     * qdvs: [1210]1
     * qsch: [1211]1
     * r'snh: [1212]1
     * rvym: [1213]1 [1214]2
     * rg: [1215]1 [1216]2
     * rnh: [1217]1
     * rh: [1218]1 [1219]2
     * ry: [1220]1 [1221]2
     * rtsvn: [1222]1 [1223]2 [1224]3
     * svr: [1225]1
     * skl: [1226]1
     * skrt dvr 'hd sl' myyn: [1227]1
     * slvm: [1228]1
     * smn: [1229]1 [1230]2
     * stsph: [1231]1 [1232]2
     * tcht: [1233]1 [1234]2
     * tlvlyhm: [1235]1
     * tqsych: [1236]1
     * trlh: [1237]1 [1238]2
     * ttgg: [1239]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Animadversiones Philologicae: [1240]1
     * Distulit in seram commissa piacula mortem: [1241]1
     * Nunquid super his non indignabor: [1242]1
     * Quum fortunic ipsi minaci Mandaret ]aqueum, mediumque ostenderet
       unguem: [1243]1
     * Recede a me: [1244]1
     * afflues: [1245]1
     * conflues: [1246]1
     * ejus tempore: [1247]1
     * lectisternium: [1248]1
     * quod Babylonium olet: [1249]1
     * suo tempore: [1250]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * A en remercier Dieu: [1251]1
     * A l'histoire de la deliverance d'Egypte: [1252]1 [1253]2
     * Admonneste les fideles: [1254]1
     * Afin de donner puis apres a son Eglise des enfans legitimes qui luy
       assistent: [1255]1
     * Afin que les hommes creussent de sa majeste tout ce que bon leur
       sembleroit: [1256]1
     * Afin que nous comprenions mieux ce qui nons est dit de luy: [1257]1
     * Ains recognoissent que leurs vices empeschent que ceste puissance
       ne se monstre: [1258]1
     * Au bon chemin: [1259]1
     * Au chapitre precedent: [1260]1
     * Au pere celeste: [1261]1
     * Au service de leur maistre: [1262]1
     * Ausquels la grace a este faite: [1263]1
     * Avec ceux qui leur remonstrent choses pour leur salut: [1264]1
     * C'est comme s'il accordoit qu'il fust ainsi: [1265]1
     * Car je voy leurs oeuvres et leurs pensees: [1266]1
     * Ceux qui traduisent, Je luy distribueray portion avec plusieurs:
       [1267]1
     * Ceux-la sont doctes: [1268]1
     * Chacun en son endroict: [1269]1
     * Comme aux asnes qui font signe d'oreilles: [1270]1
     * Comme les hommes sont incontinent destournez du droit chemin:
       [1271]1
     * Comme par feu ardent qui fait fondre: [1272]1
     * Comme plusieurs t'ont eu en horreur: [1273]1
     * Comme s'il accordoit qu'elles fassent vrayes: [1274]1
     * Comme si tu eusses gaigne ta vie en travaillant de tes mains:
       [1275]1
     * De desloyaute et traison: [1276]1
     * De mort: [1277]1
     * De nons amener a salut: [1278]1
     * De tout temps: [1279]1
     * Depuis un mois jusques a un autre mois, et depuis un Sabbat jusques
       a son autre Sabbat: [1280]1
     * Des esprits malins: [1281]1
     * Doit neeessairement estre aussi mechant qu'eux: [1282]1
     * Dureront a jamais: [1283]1
     * En ce qu'il addresse sa parole a tous: [1284]1
     * En cherchant le chemin de vie eternelle: [1285]1
     * En l'histoire de la deliverance d'Egypte: [1286]1
     * En nos articles de foy: [1287]1
     * En recognoissance du bien que Joseph avoit fait au royaume: [1288]1
     * Encore qu'ils facent du pis qu'ils pourrent: [1289]1
     * Et Persiques: [1290]1
     * Et ce ne sont pas les ignorans seulement qui font cela, ains ceux
       qui veulent estre estimez les plus subtils entre eux: [1291]1
     * Et gehenne: [1292]1
     * Et les appelle apostats: [1293]1
     * Et leur feray venir les choses qu'ils craignoyent: [1294]1
     * Et mesmes vent redresser celuy qui est au sepulcher: [1295]1
     * Et ne mesureroyent sa grandeur infinie a leur petitesse: [1296]1
     * Et ne veulent ouir autre chanson: [1297]1
     * Et que Mercure estoit le dieu des marchans qui out leurs livres de
       contes: [1298]1
     * Et se moquent de tout ce qu'on leur dit: [1299]1
     * Fideles: [1300]1
     * His verront la gloire de Dieu autrement qu'ils ne pensent: [1301]1
     * Hors du pays qui leur avoit este promis et donne: [1302]1
     * Il n'a point change de nature: [1303]1
     * Il ne faut plus offrir a Dieu des bestes brutes: [1304]1
     * J'aime mieux le prendre pour cantique : [1305]1
     * Je feray qu ils cognoistront avoir failli, tellement que ce qu ils
       craignoyent leur tombera dessus la teste: [1306]1
     * Je ne voy point de raison pourquoy OEcolampade a traduit, II a
       expose ses hants lieux au riche: [1307]1
     * Jusques a tant que Dieu vienne du ciel a main armee pour en faire
       vengeance: [1308]1
     * L'une au ciel, l'autre en terre: [1309]1
     * Le Sainct d'Israel, qui est ton Redempteur, sera appele le Dieu de
       toute la terre, ou, Le Sainct d'Israel sera appele ton Redempteur
       et Dieu de toute la terre: [1310]1
     * Le danger estoit qu'ils n' estaignissent la foy d'une petite troupe
       de fideles: [1311]1
     * Les hommes miserables de nature: [1312]1
     * Lesquels desirent (s'ils veulent dire la verite) estre certains de
       leur salut, et que ce qu'ils deviendront: [1313]1
     * Leur droit: [1314]1
     * Mais c'est sans parler: [1315]1
     * Mais celle des meschans est effroyable: [1316]1
     * Mais d'autant qu'il leur avoit jure fidelite: [1317]1
     * Mais ils n'ont jamais peu faire un seul hornroe juste: [1318]1
     * Mais leur peche en est cause: [1319]1
     * Mais seulement pour la petite troupe des fideles: [1320]1
     * Mais tout s'evanouira comme fumee: [1321]1
     * Maistres charpentiers et massons: [1322]1
     * Maistres passez: [1323]1
     * Murmurent entre les dents: [1324]1
     * Ne touchcz point la souillure: [1325]1
     * Non pas mesmes de l'espesseur d'une ongle: [1326]1
     * Non pas qu'il puisse tenir les meschans en bride: [1327]1
     * Non pas qu'ils le pensent oisif ni endormi au ciel: [1328]1
     * Non point pour soy, mais pour nous: [1329]1
     * Nous n'avons aucune part au royaume de Dieu: [1330]1
     * On ne sauroit recevoir promesse queleonque: [1331]1
     * On peut lire ceci en deux sortes, assavoir comme nous l'avons
       traduit, Car ceci m'est comme les eaux de Noe, ou, Ceci m'est comme
       les jours de Noe: [1332]1
     * Ou mesmes d'une audace desesperee osent se vanter qu'ils sacrifient
       Jesus Christ: [1333]1
     * Ou, jouiront en vieil aage de l'oeuvre de leurs mains: [1334]1
     * Par Rahab, : [1335]1
     * Par la predication de l'Evangile: [1336]1
     * Par les biens terriens: [1337]1
     * Par une obstination mechante: [1338]1
     * Piacula commissa propter quae expiatio debetur: [1339]1
     * Piaculum committere: [1340]1
     * Pour conformer l'esperance des fideles: [1341]1
     * Pour debatre: [1342]1
     * Pour piller et brigander: [1343]1
     * Pour rire et chanter quand elle florit, et pleurer lors qu'elle est
       persecutee: [1344]1
     * Pour vous estre rude et ennemi a jamais: [1345]1
     * Pource qu'elles ont este mesprisees et rejettees: [1346]1
     * Pource qu'il retient son bras: [1347]1
     * Pource que c'est une chose avenue depuis peu d'annees: [1348]1
     * Qu' en sacrifiant un boeuf, e'est autant que s'ils coupoyent la
       gorge a un homme: [1349]1
     * Quand la guerre est juste, celuy qui prend la prove est juste
       possesseur d'icelle: [1350]1
     * Que la moindre partie de leur corps est souillee d'extorsion:
       [1351]1
     * Que nons avons traduit banni: [1352]1
     * Que telles gens n'esperent point que Dieu s'approche d'eux: [1353]1
     * Quelqu'un dira: [1354]1
     * Qui ferment les entrailles, et sont sans affection: [1355]1
     * Qui gemissent sous le fardeau de leurs pechez: [1356]1
     * Qui la fait reluire: [1357]1
     * Qui pensent bien honnorer Christ en s'agenouillant derant cette
       idole de Rome pour baiser sa pantoufle: [1358]1
     * Qui se vantent de sacrifier Iesus Christ: [1359]1
     * Regardez a la pierre dont vous avez este coupez: [1360]1
     * S'il ne nous recoit gratuitement, en pardonnant nos offenses:
       [1361]1
     * S'il veut contrefaire le docteur, et n'a doctrine ni savoir:
       [1362]1
     * Selon la coustume des criminels qui demandent misericorde: [1363]1
     * Si nons l'escoutons attentivement: [1364]1
     * Si nous ne changeons de vie: [1365]1
     * Tellement que le nombre de ceux qui revindrent en Judee fut bien
       petit: [1366]1
     * Tout le vieil homme: [1367]1
     * Toutes fois sa posterite en a este delivree: [1368]1
     * Toutes les marques exterieures: [1369]1
     * si nous sommes persecutez: [1370]1
     * tout leur saoul: [1371]1
     * trousser: [1372]1
     * trousser baggage: [1373]1
     * trousser un homme: [1374]1
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. http://www.ccel.org/
   2. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p244
   3. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p201p202
   4. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p197
   5. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p488
   6. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p411
   7. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p56p57
   8. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p84.note1
   9. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol33.htm|vol33.p93
  10. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.Isa12.vs1
  11. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.Isa26.vs1
  12. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p210
  13. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p26
  14. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p83
  15. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p121
  16. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p264
  17. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p132
  18. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p318
  19. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p338
  20. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol16.htm|vol16.chap65.vs1b
  21. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p70
  22. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol15.htm|vol15.p467
  23. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol13.htm|vol13.p383
  24. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol16.htm|vol16.p30
  25. file:///ccel/Calvin/comm_vol14.htm|vol14.p387
  26. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#xviii.i-p180.1
  27. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.i-p65.1
  28. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iv.i-p65.2
  29. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=1#xix.i-p117.3
  30. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xii.i-p105.3
  31. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=10#vii.i-p78.7
  32. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=5#xvii.i-p31.2
  33. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=3#ii.i-p202.1
  34. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iv.i-p53.3
  35. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=5#viii.i-p59.1
  36. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=5#ix.i-p50.1
  37. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#ix.i-p50.3
  38. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=14#v.i-p51.2
  39. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iv.i-p58.1
  40. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#xi.i-p40.1
  41. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=5#iv.i-p60.2
  42. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=5#xix.i-p151.2
  43. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#viii.i-p59.1
  44. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#xvii.i-p51.1
  45. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#xviii.i-p54.1
  46. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=8#xvi.i-p151.1
  47. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=21#xvii.i-p31.2
  48. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=32#xviii.i-p99.1
  49. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=4#ix.i-p98.2
  50. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=2#x.i-p75.3
  51. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=12#x.i-p75.4
  52. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=16#x.i-p75.1
  53. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=17#iv.i-p53.4
  54. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=17#ix.i-p50.2
  55. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#xiii.i-p62.1
  56. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#xiv.i-p81.1
  57. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#xviii.i-p136.5
  58. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=67#xix.i-p117.5
  59. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=11#xviii.i-p118.8
  60. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=36&scrV=1#xvi.i-p44.1
  61. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=36&scrV=8#xvi.i-p44.1
  62. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=36&scrV=9#xvi.i-p44.1
  63. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=5#xviii.i-p99.4
  64. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=42&scrV=5#xix.i-p136.3
  65. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=46&scrV=5#v.i-p52.1
  66. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=47&scrV=2#ix.i-p98.2
  67. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=4#xvi.i-p151.1
  68. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=20#xviii.i-p136.5
  69. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=24#viii.i-p59.2
  70. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.i-p96.2
  71. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iii.i-p43.1
  72. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=13#xix.i-p145.2
  73. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=31#v.i-p96.1
  74. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=33#v.i-p96.3
  75. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=21#ii.i-p129.2
  76. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.i-p41.2
  77. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iv.i-p133.1
  78. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=22#viii.i-p111.1
  79. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=28#v.i-p51.1
  80. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=35#ii.i-p129.1
  81. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=5#xvi.i-p99.1
  82. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=6#ii.i-p130.1
  83. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=6#xiv.i-p59.1
  84. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=6#xv.i-p95.1
  85. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=8#xi.i-p106.1
  86. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=24#ix.i-p76.3
  87. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=25#x.i-p78.1
  88. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=29&scrV=14#vi.i-p80.7
  89. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=29&scrV=15#vi.i-p81.3
  90. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=10#vi.i-p110.1
  91. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=3#xvi.i-p107.9
  92. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=13#ix.i-p39.1
  93. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=17#ix.i-p39.1
  94. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=13#xvii.i-p79.2
  95. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=1#viii.i-p59.2
  96. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=35&scrV=31#xvi.i-p107.9
  97. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xv.i-p60.5
  98. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xv.i-p78.1
  99. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xv.i-p60.5
 100. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=11&scrV=7#xviii.i-p74.1
 101. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=18&scrV=5#vi.i-p95.2
 102. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=10#xv.i-p78.1
 103. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=39#vii.i-p48.1
 104. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=7#xv.i-p60.5
 105. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=10#xiv.i-p38.1
 106. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=10#xviii.i-p162.1
 107. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=22#xviii.i-p168.1
 108. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=5&scrV=21#xviii.i-p136.2
 109. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=5&scrV=26#xv.i-p60.6
 110. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=1#xvi.i-p99.2
 111. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=17#xvi.i-p107.8
 112. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=20#x.i-p79.2
 113. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=3#xvi.i-p99.2
 114. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=22&scrV=29#xix.i-p75.4
 115. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=36&scrV=13#vi.i-p87.1
 116. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=33#iii.i-p37.1
 117. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=37#xvi.i-p93.1
 118. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=5#xviii.i-p113.1
 119. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=8#ii.i-p150.1
 120. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=9#x.i-p87.1
 121. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=7#xvi.i-p93.1
 122. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=20#x.i-p87.1
 123. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=18#xv.i-p79.1
 124. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=3#x.i-p105.1
 125. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=14&scrV=8#xviii.i-p74.2
 126. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=10#xviii.i-p73.2
 127. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=1#ix.i-p54.1
 128. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=24&scrV=1#iii.i-p30.1
 129. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=33#xv.i-p72.1
 130. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=48#xviii.i-p168.2
 131. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=4#xvi.i-p140.2
 132. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=12#viii.i-p101.2
 133. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=14#vi.i-p95.5
 134. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=19#vi.i-p94.2
 135. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=11#xvi.i-p95.1
 136. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=13#ii.i-p132.1
 137. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=13#xi.i-p111.1
 138. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=13#xi.i-p111.3
 139. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=15#xvi.i-p80.1
 140. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=21#viii.i-p76.1
 141. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=21#xviii.i-p61.1
 142. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=21#xviii.i-p65.1
 143. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=10#xiv.i-p59.2
 144. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.i-p41.3
 145. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=3&scrV=16#viii.i-p111.2
 146. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=7&scrV=22#ii.i-p204.1
 147. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=10&scrV=16#xvi.i-p88.1
 148. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=7#xvi.i-p88.1
 149. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=17&scrV=2#xix.i-p117.6
 150. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xix.i-p117.4
 151. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=22#xviii.i-p73.4
 152. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=22#xviii.i-p116.2
 153. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=26#xvi.i-p88.3
 154. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=6#xix.i-p136.1
 155. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=12#viii.i-p59.3
 156. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=14#xvii.i-p76.3
 157. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=6#xv.i-p86.5
 158. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=13#xv.i-p86.5
 159. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=19#xix.i-p117.7
 160. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=25#xv.i-p73.1
 161. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=30#ix.i-p76.4
 162. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=21#xiv.i-p80.2
 163. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=27#xiv.i-p80.2
 164. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=18#xiii.i-p143.5
 165. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=41#xix.i-p57.2
 166. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=36&scrV=22#v.i-p87.1
 167. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.i-p87.2
 168. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=4&scrV=3#xiv.i-p44.1
 169. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=1#xii.i-p119.2
 170. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=26&scrV=12#iv.i-p133.2
 171. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vii.i-p118.1
 172. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#viii.i-p62.1
 173. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#xix.i-p154.1
 174. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xiii.i-p135.1
 175. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=10#ii.i-p186.1
 176. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=15#xii.i-p70.2
 177. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=15#xii.i-p70.1
 178. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.i-p56.2
 179. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=5#x.i-p79.3
 180. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=11#xvii.i-p33.1
 181. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=2#xi.i-p34.1
 182. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iii.i-p47.1
 183. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=3#vii.i-p53.1
 184. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=5#xvii.i-p57.2
 185. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=19#viii.i-p30.3
 186. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=6#viii.i-p77.1
 187. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#xiii.i-p73.3
 188. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#xiii.i-p73.6
 189. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=5#xvi.i-p125.1
 190. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=6#iii.i-p58.1
 191. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=5#xix.i-p136.4
 192. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=14#iii.i-p77.1
 193. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=10#xix.i-p61.1
 194. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=14#ix.i-p78.1
 195. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=17#xix.i-p65.1
 196. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=6#xiii.i-p91.1
 197. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=18#vi.i-p103.3
 198. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=26#xix.i-p136.5
 199. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=1#xiii.i-p155.1
 200. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#vii.i-p62.2
 201. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=20#xvi.i-p107.6
 202. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=38#x.i-p135.2
 203. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=79&scrV=12#xviii.i-p87.1
 204. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=87&scrV=4#iv.i-p103.2
 205. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=39#iii.i-p33.1
 206. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=6#xvii.i-p63.1
 207. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=9#xviii.i-p157.2
 208. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#xv.i-p58.1
 209. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=93&scrV=1#vii.i-p86.1
 210. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=99&scrV=5#xiii.i-p116.2
 211. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=14#xix.i-p106.2
 212. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=16#ii.i-p151.1
 213. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=23#xvi.i-p152.1
 214. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=26#vii.i-p87.2
 215. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=26#iv.i-p81.2
 216. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=27#iv.i-p92.1
 217. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=28#vii.i-p87.2
 218. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=11#viii.i-p94.1
 219. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=13#x.i-p135.1
 220. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=16#xvii.i-p63.1
 221. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=17#iv.i-p90.1
 222. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=18#iv.i-p154.1
 223. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=7#xv.i-p39.1
 224. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=114&scrV=4#viii.i-p111.3
 225. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#xvi.i-p141.1
 226. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=15#x.i-p59.3
 227. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=1#ii.i-p110.1
 228. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=1#xix.i-p98.1
 229. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=2#x.i-p92.1
 230. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=128&scrV=2#xv.i-p76.1
 231. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=129&scrV=3#iv.i-p179.1
 232. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=1#xvi.i-p144.1
 233. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=7#xiii.i-p118.2
 234. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#iv.i-p112.1
 235. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#xix.i-p57.1
 236. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=6#v.i-p38.1
 237. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=7#xvi.i-p45.1
 238. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=6#x.i-p125.1
 239. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=6#viii.i-p44.2
 240. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=15#iv.i-p168.2
 241. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=2#ix.i-p81.1
 242. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=2#xiii.i-p67.1
 243. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vii.i-p67.1
 244. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=13#iv.i-p114.2
 245. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=16#xii.i-p121.1
 246. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=17&scrV=22#xix.i-p121.1
 247. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.i-p46.1
 248. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.i-p57.1
 249. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xvii.i-p61.2
 250. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=5#xii.i-p113.1
 251. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.i-p80.1
 252. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xiii.i-p161.1
 253. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xiv.i-p80.1
 254. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xviii.i-p100.1
 255. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#xix.i-p146.1
 256. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=11#xi.i-p56.5
 257. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=21#xi.i-p37.1
 258. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=2#xiii.i-p73.2
 259. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=3#xiii.i-p63.1
 260. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=3&scrV=9#xii.i-p103.2
 261. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xv.i-p86.6
 262. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=2#xviii.i-p98.1
 263. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xvi.i-p81.1
 264. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#xviii.i-p98.1
 265. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xviii.i-p98.1
 266. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=6#x.i-p115.2
 267. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iii.i-p80.2
 268. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=16#xix.i-p83.2
 269. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=19#xviii.i-p73.3
 270. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=22#xiii.i-p161.1
 271. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=22#xiv.i-p80.1
 272. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=22#xix.i-p146.1
 273. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vi.i-p37.1
 274. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=10#xix.i-p57.3
 275. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=19&scrV=14#xvi.i-p69.2
 276. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=13#ix.i-p102.1
 277. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=14#ix.i-p105.2
 278. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=15#ix.i-p102.2
 279. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=9#xvi.i-p69.1
 280. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=20#iii.i-p51.1
 281. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=6#xvi.i-p47.1
 282. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=6#xvi.i-p56.1
 283. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=3#xv.i-p60.2
 284. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=36&scrV=22#xv.i-p60.2
 285. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=14#xii.i-p98.1
 286. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=1#x.i-p121.1
 287. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=7#iv.i-p122.1
 288. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=10#xv.i-p93.1
 289. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=11#xvi.i-p96.1
 290. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=29#iii.i-p50.2
 291. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=25#vii.i-p121.2
 292. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=3#xi.i-p56.1
 293. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=13#xiii.i-p164.4
 294. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=18#xviii.i-p148.1
 295. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=21#xvi.i-p83.1
 296. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=26#xv.i-p60.7
 297. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=14#xiv.i-p56.1
 298. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=11#xiii.i-p164.4
 299. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=1#v.i-p43.1
 300. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=1#xiii.i-p50.1
 301. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=9#iv.i-p159.1
 302. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=1#ii.i-p1.1
 303. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=2#viii.i-p62.2
 304. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=8#viii.i-p78.1
 305. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=8#xiv.i-p38.3
 306. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=14#xv.i-p97.2
 307. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=15#xix.i-p113.2
 308. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=1#iii.i-p1.1
 309. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=1#iv.i-p1.1
 310. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=1#xiii.i-p50.2
 311. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=1#v.i-p1.1
 312. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=8#ix.i-p90.3
 313. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#vi.i-p1.1
 314. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#vii.i-p1.1
 315. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=11#xiii.i-p141.1
 316. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=1#viii.i-p1.1
 317. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=5#xvi.i-p83.1
 318. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=1#ix.i-p1.1
 319. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=8#xiii.i-p67.2
 320. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=1#x.i-p1.1
 321. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#xi.i-p56.3
 322. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=1#xi.i-p1.1
 323. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=1#xii.i-p1.1
 324. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=1#xiii.i-p1.1
 325. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=8#xiii.i-p89.1
 326. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=1#xiv.i-p1.1
 327. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=1#xv.i-p1.1
 328. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=4#vii.i-p67.3
 329. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=5#xviii.i-p155.2
 330. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=1#xvi.i-p1.1
 331. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=10#xviii.i-p155.1
 332. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=17#xviii.i-p68.1
 333. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=1#xvii.i-p1.1
 334. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=1#xviii.i-p1.1
 335. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=1#xix.i-p1.1
 336. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=3#xv.i-p60.3
 337. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=21#v.i-p93.1
 338. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=5#ii.i-p63.3
 339. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.i-p67.1
 340. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=1#x.i-p71.1
 341. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=1#xii.i-p129.4
 342. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=6&scrV=17#ix.i-p90.1
 343. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=4#xvii.i-p87.1
 344. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=11#ix.i-p76.7
 345. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=13#xviii.i-p58.1
 346. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=24#xvii.i-p76.2
 347. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=7#xviii.i-p58.1
 348. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=14&scrV=7#xii.i-p103.3
 349. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=1#xviii.i-p86.2
 350. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=5#x.i-p115.1
 351. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=12#x.i-p96.1
 352. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=24&scrV=6#ii.i-p151.2
 353. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=24&scrV=6#vii.i-p99.1
 354. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=25&scrV=15#iv.i-p149.1
 355. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=22#xviii.i-p136.3
 356. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=30&scrV=14#xv.i-p97.3
 357. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=34#vii.i-p111.1
 358. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=18#xviii.i-p87.2
 359. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=35#xviii.i-p118.2
 360. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=14#xviii.i-p58.1
 361. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=52&scrV=9#xix.i-p122.2
 362. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=29#v.i-p74.1
 363. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=8#xi.i-p100.1
 364. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.i-p67.2
 365. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=17#ix.i-p90.2
 366. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=3#x.i-p64.1
 367. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=2#iii.i-p28.1
 368. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=20#xviii.i-p91.1
 369. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=12#ix.i-p39.2
 370. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=39#x.i-p79.1
 371. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=30#xii.i-p129.1
 372. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=24&scrV=21#iii.i-p33.2
 373. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=29&scrV=3#iv.i-p105.2
 374. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=2#ix.i-p90.2
 375. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=2#ix.i-p98.3
 376. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=6#ix.i-p90.2
 377. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=7#ix.i-p90.2
 378. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=4#ix.i-p95.1
 379. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=44&scrV=11#xiii.i-p143.6
 380. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=45&scrV=22#vi.i-p80.8
 381. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xix.i-p122.1
 382. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=11#xviii.i-p136.1
 383. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=10#ix.i-p45.1
 384. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=10#x.i-p155.2
 385. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=2#x.i-p71.2
 386. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=19#xv.i-p48.2
 387. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=19#ix.i-p65.1
 388. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=20#xiv.i-p88.3
 389. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=4&scrV=5#x.i-p71.2
 390. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=6#xi.i-p82.1
 391. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=6#xiv.i-p75.1
 392. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=10#xii.i-p103.4
 393. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=9&scrV=12#xv.i-p86.10
 394. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=1#viii.i-p44.1
 395. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=1&scrV=13#xi.i-p63.1
 396. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xi.i-p56.4
 397. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=12#xi.i-p56.4
 398. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=18#xix.i-p87.1
 399. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xvi.i-p107.7
 400. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xiii.i-p102.1
 401. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.i-p47.3
 402. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.i-p94.2
 403. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xv.i-p65.2
 404. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii.i-p75.5
 405. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vii.i-p47.1
 406. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xviii.i-p136.4
 407. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.i-p67.2
 408. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vii.i-p47.2
 409. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#xiii.i-p61.1
 410. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xiii.i-p80.1
 411. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xiii.i-p153.1
 412. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#viii.i-p78.3
 413. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#ii.i-p147.1
 414. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=12#xiv.i-p70.2
 415. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#xi.i-p82.2
 416. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#xiv.i-p75.2
 417. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=38#ii.i-p155.1
 418. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=1#xiii.i-p98.1
 419. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#iii.i-p50.3
 420. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#xiv.i-p35.2
 421. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=7#xi.i-p82.2
 422. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=7#xiv.i-p75.2
 423. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=29#ii.i-p200.1
 424. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=13#xiii.i-p158.3
 425. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#ii.i-p151.3
 426. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#vii.i-p99.2
 427. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=21#xi.i-p66.1
 428. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=8#iii.i-p30.2
 429. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=13#ix.i-p76.5
 430. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=43#xviii.i-p63.1
 431. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=19#ix.i-p73.1
 432. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=19#xiii.i-p82.1
 433. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=24#xi.i-p48.2
 434. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=66#vi.i-p72.2
 435. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=24#vi.i-p46.1
 436. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=35#iii.i-p47.2
 437. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#ix.i-p77.1
 438. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#xviii.i-p175.1
 439. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=60#vi.i-p70.4
 440. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=63#iii.i-p63.1
 441. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#xiv.i-p56.2
 442. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=17#ix.i-p76.6
 443. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=14#vi.i-p72.3
 444. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=28#vi.i-p106.1
 445. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#ix.i-p49.1
 446. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#xiii.i-p87.1
 447. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=18#xiv.i-p26.1
 448. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=22#ii.i-p200.2
 449. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=15#viii.i-p90.1
 450. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=19#x.i-p59.1
 451. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=4#vi.i-p46.2
 452. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=14#vi.i-p46.2
 453. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=22#vi.i-p46.2
 454. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=13#ii.i-p173.1
 455. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.i-p108.2
 456. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#viii.i-p30.2
 457. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#vi.i-p60.2
 458. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=36#vi.i-p60.2
 459. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#viii.i-p32.1
 460. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#viii.i-p34.1
 461. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=21#xviii.i-p139.1
 462. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#ix.i-p75.2
 463. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#xix.i-p55.1
 464. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#xix.i-p170.2
 465. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#iii.i-p85.1
 466. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=27#ii.i-p88.1
 467. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#iii.i-p60.2
 468. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#vii.i-p105.1
 469. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iii.i-p63.2
 470. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#vi.i-p56.1
 471. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#xiv.i-p34.1
 472. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#ii.i-p126.1
 473. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#ii.i-p159.1
 474. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#xii.i-p156.3
 475. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=35#viii.i-p78.2
 476. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=37#vi.i-p33.2
 477. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#ii.i-p100.1
 478. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#ii.i-p77.1
 479. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=19#vi.i-p98.1
 480. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=20#vi.i-p110.3
 481. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=36#xiii.i-p99.1
 482. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=38#vi.i-p46.3
 483. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=16#vi.i-p72.4
 484. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=24#iii.i-p47.3
 485. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=38#vi.i-p70.5
 486. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=23#xvi.i-p110.1
 487. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=21#xviii.i-p150.1
 488. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#iv.i-p89.1
 489. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=49#xix.i-p59.1
 490. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=6#ii.i-p189.1
 491. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=34#ix.i-p51.1
 492. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=42#vi.i-p63.1
 493. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=47#ii.i-p97.1
 494. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=48#vii.i-p105.2
 495. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=14#ii.i-p189.2
 496. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=20#iii.i-p63.3
 497. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=24#xix.i-p59.2
 498. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=35#xiii.i-p136.1
 499. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=24#xviii.i-p99.3
 500. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=37#xviii.i-p99.2
 501. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=5#viii.i-p72.1
 502. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#xvi.i-p137.2
 503. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#xvi.i-p69.3
 504. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xii.i-p86.2
 505. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=17#xi.i-p35.1
 506. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=25#v.i-p40.2
 507. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=26#xii.i-p86.3
 508. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=2#xiv.i-p82.1
 509. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.i-p56.3
 510. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xii.i-p86.1
 511. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.i-p92.1
 512. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#vi.i-p80.3
 513. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=29#vii.i-p62.3
 514. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vi.i-p94.4
 515. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xix.i-p151.3
 516. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=18#ix.i-p50.4
 517. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.i-p63.2
 518. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.i-p53.2
 519. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.i-p49.1
 520. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#ix.i-p71.2
 521. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#x.i-p59.2
 522. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi.i-p95.6
 523. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vi.i-p109.1
 524. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vi.i-p109.1
 525. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi.i-p59.1
 526. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#xix.i-p155.2
 527. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vi.i-p65.2
 528. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.i-p32.1
 529. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vi.i-p80.3
 530. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vi.i-p94.3
 531. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vi.i-p82.3
 532. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#xiv.i-p28.1
 533. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#ix.i-p76.1
 534. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#xix.i-p96.1
 535. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=20#xviii.i-p149.1
 536. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#viii.i-p114.1
 537. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#xviii.i-p153.1
 538. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iv.i-p117.1
 539. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=33#iii.i-p76.1
 540. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=4#ix.i-p74.2
 541. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=7#xix.i-p151.1
 542. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=18#xvi.i-p137.3
 543. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=18#xvi.i-p138.1
 544. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=25#x.i-p155.1
 545. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vi.i-p95.1
 546. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#viii.i-p79.1
 547. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#vi.i-p95.4
 548. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#viii.i-p101.3
 549. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=12#ii.i-p98.2
 550. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=15#v.i-p69.1
 551. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=15#xv.i-p66.1
 552. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.i-p34.1
 553. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=17#viii.i-p54.1
 554. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=17#xviii.i-p116.3
 555. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=19#xix.i-p141.1
 556. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=24#ix.i-p60.1
 557. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#xix.i-p141.1
 558. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=26#xii.i-p156.1
 559. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=29#xii.i-p156.2
 560. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xiii.i-p78.2
 561. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xiv.i-p65.1
 562. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#xix.i-p157.2
 563. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=11#ix.i-p33.2
 564. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=1#ix.i-p71.1
 565. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=1#xix.i-p155.2
 566. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=16#xiv.i-p63.1
 567. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=21#v.i-p115.1
 568. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=26#viii.i-p72.1
 569. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xvii.i-p48.1
 570. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.i-p106.1
 571. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#viii.i-p103.1
 572. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#xiv.i-p45.2
 573. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii.i-p101.1
 574. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.i-p94.3
 575. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#xiv.i-p28.2
 576. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#ii.i-p84.1
 577. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.i-p72.2
 578. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xviii.i-p131.1
 579. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.i-p88.1
 580. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v.i-p94.3
 581. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#xiv.i-p29.1
 582. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#xiv.i-p28.3
 583. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#ii.i-p75.1
 584. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#xi.i-p90.1
 585. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#xvi.i-p149.2
 586. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#xv.i-p66.2
 587. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#ii.i-p154.2
 588. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#ii.i-p182.1
 589. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii.i-p75.8
 590. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#xiv.i-p68.1
 591. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#x.i-p149.1
 592. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vi.i-p96.1
 593. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vi.i-p80.4
 594. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vi.i-p82.2
 595. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#ii.i-p113.1
 596. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#ii.i-p115.4
 597. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#ii.i-p117.1
 598. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#xiv.i-p38.4
 599. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iii.i-p64.1
 600. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.i-p92.2
 601. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#xix.i-p165.1
 602. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=7#ix.i-p66.1
 603. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#xv.i-p53.1
 604. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vi.i-p103.2
 605. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ii.i-p63.1
 606. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.i-p92.1
 607. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vi.i-p92.1
 608. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.i-p92.1
 609. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi.i-p95.3
 610. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vi.i-p82.1
 611. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ii.i-p73.1
 612. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#xviii.i-p157.1
 613. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#ii.i-p115.1
 614. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#xiv.i-p38.2
 615. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#ix.i-p76.2
 616. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=28#xiii.i-p155.2
 617. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.i-p40.1
 618. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#xi.i-p68.1
 619. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#ii.i-p60.2
 620. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#ii.i-p63.2
 621. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xiii.i-p158.2
 622. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#xiv.i-p45.1
 623. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#ii.i-p88.4
 624. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.i-p140.1
 625. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=12#xiii.i-p159.2
 626. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.i-p121.2
 627. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#ix.i-p48.2
 628. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii.i-p62.4
 629. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#ii.i-p120.1
 630. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#xix.i-p153.1
 631. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=17#ii.i-p120.1
 632. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=17#x.i-p153.1
 633. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=18#xviii.i-p174.1
 634. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=19#xvi.i-p77.1
 635. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=21#xiii.i-p114.1
 636. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=5#ii.i-p98.1
 637. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=12#xviii.i-p174.1
 638. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.i-p66.1
 639. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi.i-p103.4
 640. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#ii.i-p88.2
 641. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii.i-p104.2
 642. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=13#ii.i-p88.2
 643. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vii.i-p106.2
 644. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#xvi.i-p102.1
 645. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.i-p110.1
 646. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi.i-p59.2
 647. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi.i-p105.1
 648. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.i-p63.2
 649. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=14#x.i-p58.1
 650. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=1#ii.i-p91.1
 651. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=5#viii.i-p79.2
 652. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=7#xiv.i-p70.1
 653. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#viii.i-p30.1
 654. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.i-p104.1
 655. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=19#ii.i-p91.2
 656. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xiv.i-p39.1
 657. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.i-p178.2
 658. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=8#xix.i-p127.1
 659. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.i-p83.1
 660. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#x.i-p74.1
 661. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xvi.i-p137.1
 662. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#ix.i-p75.1
 663. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#xviii.i-p140.2
 664. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#xix.i-p155.1
 665. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ii.i-p75.2
 666. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#xviii.i-p103.1
 667. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vii.i-p83.2
 668. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#xviii.i-p111.2
 669. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#x.i-p137.2
 670. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#xvii.i-p94.1
 671. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#xvi.i-p82.1
 672. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.i-p51.2
 673. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.i-p137.1
 674. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xvi.i-p90.1
 675. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#xv.i-p58.2
 676. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xviii.i-p147.1
 677. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=8#xiv.i-p57.1
 678. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=9#xix.i-p170.3
 679. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#ii.i-p67.1
 680. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vi.i-p57.1
 681. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#xviii.i-p177.2
 682. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=4#ii.i-p62.1
 683. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=13#xv.i-p70.1
 684. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=13#xix.i-p163.1
 685. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vi.i-p110.2
 686. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=12#xiv.i-p64.1
 687. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#vi.i-p80.6
 688. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iv.i-p88.2
 689. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=23#ii.i-p176.1
 690. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xiii.i-p78.1
 691. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xiii.i-p114.2
 692. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#xix.i-p169.1
 693. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.i-p94.2
 694. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xiii.i-p159.1
 695. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xiv.i-p60.1
 696. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#xix.i-p161.1
 697. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.i-p57.2
 698. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#vi.i-p60.1
 699. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=7#xvi.i-p120.1
 700. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=10#xviii.i-p59.2
 701. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#xix.i-p127.2
 702. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi.i-p80.5
 703. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#xi.i-p90.2
 704. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi.i-p80.5
 705. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=6#xix.i-p161.2
 706. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=10#xix.i-p161.2
 707. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=3#xix.i-p145.1
 708. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=25#xiii.i-p105.1
 709. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=0#ii-p1.1
 710. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=1#ii.i-p56.1
 711. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=2#ii.i-p65.1
 712. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=3#ii.i-p71.1
 713. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=4#ii.i-p79.1
 714. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=5#ii.i-p86.1
 715. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=6#ii.i-p94.1
 716. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=7#ii.i-p101.1
 717. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=8#ii.i-p112.1
 718. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=9#ii.i-p123.1
 719. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=10#ii.i-p128.1
 720. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=11#ii.i-p131.1
 721. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=12#ii.i-p133.1
 722. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=13#ii.i-p138.1
 723. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=14#ii.i-p142.1
 724. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=15#ii.i-p144.1
 725. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=16#ii.i-p149.1
 726. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=17#ii.i-p152.1
 727. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=18#ii.i-p156.1
 728. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=19#ii.i-p164.1
 729. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=20#ii.i-p167.1
 730. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=21#ii.i-p172.1
 731. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=22#ii.i-p178.1
 732. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=23#ii.i-p184.1
 733. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=24#ii.i-p194.1
 734. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=25#ii.i-p198.1
 735. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=26#ii.i-p203.1
 736. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=0#iii-p0.1
 737. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=1#iii.i-p25.1
 738. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=2#iii.i-p34.1
 739. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=3#iii.i-p42.1
 740. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=4#iii.i-p46.1
 741. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=5#iii.i-p56.1
 742. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=6#iii.i-p62.1
 743. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=7#iii.i-p65.1
 744. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=8#iii.i-p70.1
 745. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=9#iii.i-p75.1
 746. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=10#iii.i-p78.1
 747. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=11#iii.i-p84.1
 748. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=0#iv-p1.1
 749. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=1#iv.i-p50.1
 750. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=2#iv.i-p57.1
 751. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=3#iv.i-p61.1
 752. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=4#iv.i-p67.1
 753. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=5#iv.i-p73.1
 754. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=6#iv.i-p77.1
 755. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=7#iv.i-p83.1
 756. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=8#iv.i-p87.1
 757. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=9#iv.i-p94.1
 758. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=10#iv.i-p108.1
 759. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=11#iv.i-p110.1
 760. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=12#iv.i-p115.1
 761. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=13#iv.i-p120.1
 762. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=14#iv.i-p124.1
 763. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=15#iv.i-p131.1
 764. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=16#iv.i-p136.1
 765. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=17#iv.i-p142.1
 766. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=18#iv.i-p151.1
 767. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=19#iv.i-p157.1
 768. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=20#iv.i-p162.1
 769. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=21#iv.i-p166.1
 770. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=22#iv.i-p172.1
 771. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=23#iv.i-p176.1
 772. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=0#v-p1.1
 773. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=1#v.i-p33.1
 774. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=2#v.i-p41.1
 775. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=3#v.i-p44.1
 776. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=4#v.i-p50.1
 777. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=5#v.i-p55.1
 778. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=6#v.i-p62.1
 779. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=7#v.i-p65.1
 780. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=8#v.i-p71.1
 781. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=9#v.i-p77.1
 782. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=10#v.i-p84.1
 783. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=11#v.i-p88.1
 784. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=12#v.i-p95.1
 785. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=13#v.i-p99.1
 786. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=14#v.i-p103.1
 787. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=15#v.i-p112.1
 788. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#vi-p1.1
 789. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#vi.i-p27.1
 790. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=2#vi.i-p36.1
 791. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=3#vi.i-p40.1
 792. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#vi.i-p43.1
 793. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#vi.i-p47.1
 794. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=6#vi.i-p52.1
 795. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#vi.i-p58.1
 796. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=8#vi.i-p61.1
 797. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=9#vi.i-p69.1
 798. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#vi.i-p77.1
 799. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=11#vi.i-p89.1
 800. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=12#vi.i-p99.1
 801. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=0#vii-p1.1
 802. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#vii.i-p37.1
 803. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=2#vii.i-p44.1
 804. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=3#vii.i-p50.1
 805. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=4#vii.i-p52.1
 806. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#vii.i-p56.1
 807. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=6#vii.i-p63.1
 808. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=7#vii.i-p68.1
 809. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=8#vii.i-p73.1
 810. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=9#vii.i-p76.1
 811. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=10#vii.i-p85.1
 812. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=11#vii.i-p92.1
 813. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=12#vii.i-p98.1
 814. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=13#vii.i-p103.1
 815. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=14#vii.i-p114.1
 816. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=15#vii.i-p117.1
 817. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=16#vii.i-p123.1
 818. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=17#vii.i-p127.1
 819. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=1#viii.i-p29.1
 820. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=2#viii.i-p39.1
 821. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=3#viii.i-p49.1
 822. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=4#viii.i-p60.1
 823. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=5#viii.i-p65.1
 824. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=6#viii.i-p75.1
 825. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=7#viii.i-p80.1
 826. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=8#viii.i-p88.1
 827. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=9#viii.i-p93.1
 828. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=10#viii.i-p99.1
 829. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=11#viii.i-p106.1
 830. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=12#viii.i-p109.1
 831. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=13#viii.i-p112.1
 832. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=0#ix-p1.1
 833. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=0#viii-p1.1
 834. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=1#ix.i-p27.1
 835. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=2#ix.i-p34.1
 836. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=3#ix.i-p42.1
 837. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=4#ix.i-p52.1
 838. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=5#ix.i-p57.1
 839. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=6#ix.i-p64.1
 840. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=7#ix.i-p69.1
 841. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=8#ix.i-p79.1
 842. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=9#ix.i-p83.1
 843. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=10#ix.i-p87.1
 844. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=11#ix.i-p94.1
 845. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=12#ix.i-p100.1
 846. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=0#x-p1.1
 847. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=1#x.i-p45.1
 848. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=2#x.i-p54.1
 849. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=3#x.i-p61.1
 850. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=4#x.i-p65.1
 851. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=5#x.i-p70.1
 852. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=6#x.i-p76.1
 853. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=7#x.i-p83.1
 854. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=8#x.i-p86.1
 855. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=9#x.i-p91.1
 856. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=10#x.i-p93.1
 857. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=11#x.i-p103.1
 858. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=12#x.i-p110.1
 859. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=13#x.i-p113.1
 860. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=14#x.i-p119.1
 861. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=15#x.i-p124.1
 862. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=16#x.i-p131.1
 863. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=17#x.i-p136.1
 864. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=18#x.i-p140.1
 865. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=19#x.i-p147.1
 866. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=20#x.i-p156.1
 867. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=21#x.i-p160.1
 868. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=0#xi-p1.1
 869. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=1#xi.i-p31.1
 870. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=2#xi.i-p39.1
 871. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=3#xi.i-p45.1
 872. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=4#xi.i-p51.1
 873. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=5#xi.i-p59.1
 874. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=6#xi.i-p67.1
 875. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=7#xi.i-p70.1
 876. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=8#xi.i-p75.1
 877. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=9#xi.i-p81.1
 878. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=10#xi.i-p89.1
 879. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=11#xi.i-p93.1
 880. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=12#xi.i-p98.1
 881. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=13#xi.i-p105.1
 882. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=14#xi.i-p108.1
 883. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=0#xii-p1.1
 884. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=1#xii.i-p45.1
 885. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=2#xii.i-p49.1
 886. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=3#xii.i-p52.1
 887. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=4#xii.i-p58.1
 888. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=5#xii.i-p67.1
 889. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=6#xii.i-p71.1
 890. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=7#xii.i-p75.1
 891. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=8#xii.i-p81.1
 892. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=9#xii.i-p88.1
 893. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=10#xii.i-p92.1
 894. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=11#xii.i-p97.1
 895. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=12#xii.i-p100.1
 896. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=13#xii.i-p107.1
 897. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=14#xii.i-p112.1
 898. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=15#xii.i-p115.1
 899. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=16#xii.i-p127.1
 900. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=17#xii.i-p138.1
 901. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=18#xii.i-p142.1
 902. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=19#xii.i-p145.1
 903. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=20#xii.i-p150.1
 904. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=21#xii.i-p158.1
 905. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=0#xiii-p1.1
 906. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=1#xiii.i-p47.1
 907. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=2#xiii.i-p53.1
 908. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=3#xiii.i-p59.1
 909. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=4#xiii.i-p65.1
 910. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=5#xiii.i-p70.1
 911. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=6#xiii.i-p76.1
 912. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=7#xiii.i-p79.1
 913. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=8#xiii.i-p84.1
 914. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=9#xiii.i-p90.1
 915. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=10#xiii.i-p96.1
 916. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=11#xiii.i-p103.1
 917. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=12#xiii.i-p108.1
 918. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=13#xiii.i-p112.1
 919. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=14#xiii.i-p121.1
 920. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=15#xiii.i-p127.1
 921. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=16#xiii.i-p131.1
 922. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=17#xiii.i-p139.1
 923. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=18#xiii.i-p145.1
 924. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=19#xiii.i-p148.1
 925. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=21#xiii.i-p152.1
 926. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=22#xiii.i-p160.1
 927. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=0#xiv-p1.1
 928. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=1#xiv.i-p25.1
 929. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=2#xiv.i-p36.1
 930. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=3#xiv.i-p42.1
 931. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=4#xiv.i-p48.1
 932. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=5#xiv.i-p51.1
 933. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=6#xiv.i-p53.1
 934. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=7#xiv.i-p66.1
 935. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=8#xiv.i-p71.1
 936. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=9#xiv.i-p79.1
 937. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=10#xiv.i-p83.1
 938. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=11#xiv.i-p89.1
 939. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=0#xv-p1.1
 940. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=1#xv.i-p27.1
 941. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=2#xv.i-p35.1
 942. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=3#xv.i-p41.1
 943. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=4#xv.i-p45.1
 944. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=5#xv.i-p52.1
 945. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=6#xv.i-p55.1
 946. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=7#xv.i-p64.1
 947. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=8#xv.i-p68.1
 948. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=9#xv.i-p74.1
 949. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=10#xv.i-p80.1
 950. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=11#xv.i-p89.1
 951. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=12#xv.i-p94.1
 952. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=0#xvi-p1.1
 953. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=1#xvi.i-p41.1
 954. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=2#xvi.i-p50.1
 955. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=3#xvi.i-p52.1
 956. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=4#xvi.i-p60.1
 957. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=5#xvi.i-p64.1
 958. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=6#xvi.i-p67.1
 959. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=7#xvi.i-p71.1
 960. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=8#xvi.i-p79.1
 961. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=9#xvi.i-p85.1
 962. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=10#xvi.i-p98.1
 963. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=11#xvi.i-p104.1
 964. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=12#xvi.i-p109.1
 965. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=13#xvi.i-p112.1
 966. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=14#xvi.i-p114.1
 967. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=15#xvi.i-p118.1
 968. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=16#xvi.i-p124.1
 969. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=17#xvi.i-p135.1
 970. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=18#xvi.i-p150.1
 971. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=19#xvi.i-p155.1
 972. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=0#xvii-p1.1
 973. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=1#xvii.i-p27.1
 974. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=2#xvii.i-p35.1
 975. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=3#xvii.i-p43.1
 976. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=4#xvii.i-p45.1
 977. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=5#xvii.i-p52.1
 978. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=6#xvii.i-p59.1
 979. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=7#xvii.i-p65.1
 980. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=8#xvii.i-p69.1
 981. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=9#xvii.i-p74.1
 982. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=10#xvii.i-p80.1
 983. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=11#xvii.i-p83.1
 984. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=12#xvii.i-p91.1
 985. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=0#xviii-p1.1
 986. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=1#xviii.i-p53.1
 987. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=2#xviii.i-p56.1
 988. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=3#xviii.i-p67.1
 989. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=4#xviii.i-p71.1
 990. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=5#xviii.i-p76.1
 991. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=6#xviii.i-p82.1
 992. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=7#xviii.i-p88.1
 993. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=8#xviii.i-p96.1
 994. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=9#xviii.i-p102.1
 995. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=10#xviii.i-p107.1
 996. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=11#xviii.i-p114.1
 997. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=12#xviii.i-p121.1
 998. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=13#xviii.i-p129.1
 999. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=15#xviii.i-p134.1
1000. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=16#xviii.i-p138.1
1001. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=17#xviii.i-p145.1
1002. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=18#xviii.i-p151.1
1003. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=19#xviii.i-p154.1
1004. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=20#xviii.i-p156.1
1005. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=21#xviii.i-p161.1
1006. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=22#xviii.i-p163.1
1007. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=23#xviii.i-p167.1
1008. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=24#xviii.i-p172.1
1009. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=25#xviii.i-p179.1
1010. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=0#xix-p1.1
1011. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=1#xix.i-p51.1
1012. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=2#xix.i-p60.1
1013. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=3#xix.i-p67.1
1014. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=4#xix.i-p73.1
1015. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=5#xix.i-p81.1
1016. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=6#xix.i-p90.1
1017. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=7#xix.i-p93.1
1018. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=8#xix.i-p97.1
1019. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=9#xix.i-p102.1
1020. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=10#xix.i-p104.1
1021. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=11#xix.i-p109.1
1022. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=12#xix.i-p112.1
1023. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=13#xix.i-p115.1
1024. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=14#xix.i-p119.1
1025. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=15#xix.i-p123.1
1026. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=16#xix.i-p128.1
1027. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=17#xix.i-p132.1
1028. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=18#xix.i-p137.1
1029. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=19#xix.i-p144.1
1030. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=20#xix.i-p149.1
1031. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=21#xix.i-p159.1
1032. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=22#xix.i-p162.1
1033. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=23#xix.i-p166.1
1034. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=24#xix.i-p171.1
1035. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p126.4
1036. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p126.3
1037. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p88.3
1038. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p82.1
1039. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p143.7
1040. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p107.1
1041. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p75.4
1042. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p62.1
1043. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p82.1
1044. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p143.2
1045. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p162.3
1046. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p42.1
1047. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p124.1
1048. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiv.i-p84.1
1049. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p59.1
1050. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p136.2
1051. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p162.4
1052. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p115.3
1053. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p69.1
1054. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p75.2
1055. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p75.5
1056. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p94.1
1057. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p74.1
1058. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.4
1059. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.5
1060. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p117.1
1061. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p78.1
1062. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p139.1
1063. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p89.2
1064. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p69.1
1065. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p73.1
1066. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p86.1
1067. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p92.2
1068. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p121.1
1069. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p87.1
1070. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p87.2
1071. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p87.3
1072. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p60.4
1073. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p129.3
1074. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p117.2
1075. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p44.1
1076. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p47.1
1077. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p72.1
1078. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p143.3
1079. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p89.2
1080. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiv.i-p44.3
1081. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p72.1
1082. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p101.1
1083. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p79.1
1084. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p80.1
1085. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p81.1
1086. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p82.4
1087. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p82.5
1088. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p84.1
1089. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p96.2
1090. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p96.1
1091. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p191.1
1092. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p192.2
1093. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p86.1
1094. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p192.1
1095. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p192.3
1096. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p130.1
1097. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p70.1
1098. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p70.3
1099. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p104.1
1100. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p105.1
1101. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.9
1102. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p60.1
1103. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p61.1
1104. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p103.1
1105. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p104.1
1106. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p44.1
1107. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p101.1
1108. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p102.1
1109. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p170.1
1110. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p143.4
1111. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p137.1
1112. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p98.6
1113. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p75.1
1114. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.6
1115. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.7
1116. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.10
1117. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.11
1118. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p106.1
1119. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p65.1
1120. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p91.1
1121. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p97.1
1122. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p89.1
1123. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p80.2
1124. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p81.2
1125. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p60.1
1126. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p47.1
1127. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p64.1
1128. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p104.1
1129. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p109.1
1130. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p87.4
1131. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p86.4
1132. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iii.i-p30.3
1133. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p162.1
1134. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p88.1
1135. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p59.1
1136. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p90.1
1137. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p77.5
1138. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p78.3
1139. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p78.4
1140. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p135.3
1141. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p47.2
1142. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p61.1
1143. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p70.1
1144. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p101.2
1145. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p129.5
1146. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p70.2
1147. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p77.4
1148. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p92.1
1149. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p162.2
1150. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p54.1
1151. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p77.2
1152. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p148.1
1153. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p75.3
1154. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p77.1
1155. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p81.1
1156. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p77.3
1157. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p105.1
1158. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p125.1
1159. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p75.2
1160. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p65.1
1161. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p87.5
1162. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p28.1
1163. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p136.2
1164. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p106.2
1165. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p86.7
1166. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p86.9
1167. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p106.1
1168. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p62.1
1169. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p86.8
1170. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p78.1
1171. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p78.2
1172. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.3
1173. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p122.2
1174. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p122.1
1175. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p131.1
1176. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p98.5
1177. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p56.2
1178. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p107.1
1179. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p72.1
1180. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p73.1
1181. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p113.1
1182. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p44.2
1183. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p60.1
1184. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p136.1
1185. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p85.1
1186. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p86.3
1187. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p86.2
1188. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xv.i-p86.1
1189. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p109.2
1190. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p76.1
1191. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p105.1
1192. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p57.1
1193. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p74.1
1194. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p75.1
1195. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p82.1
1196. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p75.2
1197. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p90.1
1198. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p103.1
1199. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiv.i-p32.1
1200. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p71.1
1201. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p75.3
1202. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p71.2
1203. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiv.i-p44.2
1204. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiv.i-p88.2
1205. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p143.1
1206. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p143.8
1207. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p125.1
1208. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p48.1
1209. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p88.2
1210. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p128.1
1211. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p142.2
1212. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p94.1
1213. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p101.1
1214. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p108.1
1215. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p72.2
1216. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p75.3
1217. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p113.1
1218. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p107.2
1219. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p107.3
1220. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p107.1
1221. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p107.5
1222. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p115.2
1223. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p81.1
1224. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p81.2
1225. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p38.1
1226. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p101.3
1227. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p171.1
1228. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p58.2
1229. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p96.3
1230. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p96.4
1231. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p75.2
1232. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p75.7
1233. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p129.1
1234. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p129.2
1235. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p75.1
1236. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p142.1
1237. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p147.1
1238. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p175.1
1239. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p109.1
1240. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p75.6
1241. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p83.1
1242. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p82.2
1243. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p86.1
1244. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p78.2
1245. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p73.4
1246. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p73.5
1247. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p164.1
1248. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p118.1
1249. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p101.1
1250. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p164.2
1251. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p79.1
1252. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iii.i-p45.1
1253. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p134.1
1254. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p33.1
1255. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p156.1
1256. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p58.1
1257. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p31.1
1258. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iii.i-p41.1
1259. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p105.1
1260. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p49.1
1261. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p68.1
1262. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p115.1
1263. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p36.1
1264. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p81.1
1265. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p71.1
1266. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p139.1
1267. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p102.1
1268. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iii.i-p55.1
1269. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p98.7
1270. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p126.1
1271. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p58.1
1272. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p37.1
1273. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p108.1
1274. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p94.1
1275. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p99.1
1276. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p63.1
1277. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p137.1
1278. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p51.1
1279. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p133.1
1280. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p168.1
1281. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p73.1
1282. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p123.1
1283. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p134.1
1284. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p72.1
1285. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p42.1
1286. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p41.1
1287. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p39.1
1288. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p53.1
1289. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p121.1
1290. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p94.1
1291. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p155.1
1292. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p159.1
1293. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p116.1
1294. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p77.1
1295. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p65.1
1296. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p56.1
1297. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p95.1
1298. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p123.1
1299. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p125.1
1300. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p146.1
1301. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p88.1
1302. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p56.1
1303. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p48.1
1304. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiv.i-p62.1
1305. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p114.1
1306. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p78.1
1307. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p72.1
1308. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p130.1
1309. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p120.1
1310. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p62.1
1311. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iii.i-p80.1
1312. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p71.1
1313. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p101.1
1314. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p133.1
1315. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p78.1
1316. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p60.1
1317. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p149.1
1318. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p94.1
1319. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p140.1
1320. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvii.i-p79.1
1321. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p129.1
1322. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p154.1
1323. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p77.1
1324. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p73.1
1325. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p92.1
1326. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p75.1
1327. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iii.i-p72.1
1328. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p96.1
1329. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p103.1
1330. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p174.1
1331. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p55.1
1332. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p78.6
1333. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p170.1
1334. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p166.1
1335. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p102.1
1336. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p181.1
1337. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p110.1
1338. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p82.1
1339. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p83.2
1340. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vi.i-p83.3
1341. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p158.1
1342. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p61.1
1343. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p79.1
1344. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p37.1
1345. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p92.1
1346. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p68.1
1347. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p146.1
1348. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p53.1
1349. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p70.1
1350. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p197.1
1351. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xii.i-p56.1
1352. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p126.1
1353. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#x.i-p130.1
1354. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p82.1
1355. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p91.1
1356. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iii.i-p50.1
1357. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p74.1
1358. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiii.i-p124.1
1359. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xix.i-p157.1
1360. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p53.1
1361. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#vii.i-p89.1
1362. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xiv.i-p30.1
1363. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xi.i-p65.1
1364. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#viii.i-p48.1
1365. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p85.1
1366. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p90.1
1367. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xviii.i-p159.1
1368. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#v.i-p58.1
1369. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ix.i-p55.1
1370. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#iv.i-p178.1
1371. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#xvi.i-p69.4
1372. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p89.3
1373. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p90.1
1374. file:///ccel/c/calvin/calcom16/cache/calcom16.html3#ii.i-p90.3
