     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Catholic Encyclopedia, Volume 16 [Supplement]
      Creator(s): Herbermann, Charles George (1840-1916)
     Print Basis: 1907-1913
          Rights: From online edition Copyright 2003 by K. Knight, used by
                  permission
   CCEL Subjects: All; Reference
      LC Call no: BX841.C286
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Roman Catholic Church

                  Dictionaries. Encyclopedias
     __________________________________________________________________

                           THE CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA

  AN INTERNATIONAL WORK OF REFERENCE
  ON THE CONSTITUTION, DOCTRINE,
  DISCIPLINE, AND HISTORY OF THE
  CATHOLIC CHURCH

   EDITED BY

   CHARLES G. HERBERMANN, Ph.D., LL.D.

   EDWARD A. PACE, Ph.D., D.D.   CONDE B PALLEN, Ph.D., LL.D.

   THOMAS J. SHAHAN, D.D.   JOHN J. WYNNE, S.J.

   ASSISTED BY NUMEROUS COLLABORATORS

  IN FIFTEEN VOLUMES

  VOLUME 16

  [Supplement]

   New York: ROBERT APPLETON COMPANY

   Imprimatur

   JOHN M. FARLEY

   ARCHBISHOP OF NEW YORK
     __________________________________________________________________

   Ancient See of Aarhus in Denmark

                        Ancient See of Aarhus in Denmark

          (ARUSIA, ARUSIENSIS).

          The diocese included the provinces (amter) of Aarhus and
          Randers, the islands of Samso and Tuno, and, after 1396, part of
          the province of Viborg. Frode, King of Jutland, built the church
          of the Holy Trinity at Aarhus about 900. In 948 Archbishop
          Adaldag of Hamburg consecrated Reginbrand as missionary Bishop
          of Aarhus. After the latter's death in 988 all Jutland was
          united in one diocese, with Ribe or Viborg as its centre. It was
          redivided in 1060, and one Christian was ordained Bishop of
          Aarhus by Adalbert I, Archbishop of Hamburg. Another bishop,
          Ulfketil (1102-34) planned the town of Aarhus. The warlike Svend
          Udsson (1166-91) founded the Cistercian abbey at Om. His
          successor, Peter Vagnsen, began in 1201 the Cathedral of St.
          Clement. Near it lay the wooden church built by Bishop Ulfketil
          in 1102 to contain the relics of St. Clement. About 1150 the
          Venerable Niels, Prince of Denmark, died and was buried in St.
          Clement's churchyard. The offerings at his tomb facilitated the
          commencement of the new stone cathedral. This was finished about
          1263, but in 1330 the greater part of it was burnt down. Peter
          Jensen Lodeliat (1386-95) and Bo Magnussen (1395-1423) were the
          prelates mainly concerned in the erection of the fine building
          extant to-day. The last Catholic bishop, Ove Bilde (imprisoned
          1536), and Paulus Heliae, prior of the Carmelite monastery at
          Elsinore, attempted in vain to stay the progress of the
          Reformation at Aarhus. There were in the diocese: a chapter with
          34 prebendaries at Aarhus cathedral; Benedictines at Essenbeck,
          Voer, Alling, and Veirlov; Augustinian Canons at Tvilum,
          Cistercians at Om, who survived till 1560; and Carthusians at
          Aarhus. There were also Franciscans at Horsens and Randers,
          Dominicans at Aarhus, Horsens, and Randers, Carmelites and a
          hospital of the Holy Spirit at Aarhus. There were Hospitallers
          of St. John till 1568 at Horsens. Lastly there were Brigittines
          at Mariager from 1412 to 1592.

          At Aarhus there is now a Jesuits' college with a fine church, as
          well as a large hospital in charge of the Sisters of St. Joseph
          of Chambery, who also have hospitals at Horsens and Randers,
          which last two towns also contain Catholic churches.

          BAUDRILLART, Dictionnaire d'histoire ecclesiastique, I (Paris,
          1909-12), coll. 3, 4; Scriptores rerum danicarum, V, 231-302;
          VI, 176-519; VII, 209-216; HOFFMEYER, Blade of Aarhus Bys
          Historie, I (Copenhagen, 1904-06).

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Adelard of Bath

                                Adelard of Bath

          A twelfth-century Scholastic philosopher, b. about 1100. Adelard
          was probably an Englishman by birth; he seems to have studied at
          Tours and Laon and probably taught at Laon and at Paris. He was
          one of the first medieval scholars to seek knowledge by
          travelling in Greece and Asia Minor. It was these journeys that,
          apparently, brought him into contact with the learning of the
          Arabians, which he utilized especially in the discussion of
          physical and physiological problems. He wrote a translation of
          Euclid's geometry from the Arabic, and composed two original
          treatises entitled "De eodem et diverso" and "Quaestiones
          naturales". The former was edited in 1903 and printed in
          Baumker's "Beitrage"; the latter exists in an edition dated
          1477. Adelard was a pronounced Platonist in psychology and
          metaphysics, while he opposed the Platonic doctrine of realism
          in his theory of universals. His position in regard to the
          latter question was that of Walter of Montagne, and the other
          Indifferentists. His most noteworthy contribution to psychology
          is his attempt to localize mental functions, in which he shows
          the influence of Galen and the Arabians.

          BAUMKER, Beitrage zur Gesch. der Phil. des Mittelalters, IV
          (Munster, 1903), 1; DE WULF, Hist. of Medieval Phil., tr. COFFEY
          (New York, 1909), 186; TURNER, History of Philosophy (Boston,
          1903), 283 sqq.

          WILLIAM TURNER

   Pedro Antonio de Alarcon

                           Pedro Antonio de Alarcón

          Novelist and poet, b. at Guadix, Spain, in 1833; d. at
          Valdemoro, near Madrid, in 1891. After having shown ability for
          journalism at his native place he went to Madrid where he came
          into prominence, especially when at the outbreak of the
          Revolution of July, 1854, he edited the republican journal "El
          Látigo". A year later, in 1855, he published "El final de
          Norma", a work written when he was only seventeen years old. As
          a volunteer he went in 1859 to the African war, where he wrote
          the most interesting and probably the most lasting of all his
          writings, "Diario de un testigo de la guerra de Africa" (1860).
          Some parts of this work, as "La batalla de Castillejos" and "La
          toma de Tetuán", have not been surpassed for vividness of
          description and grace of narrative by any Spanish writer.
          Similar to this work are Alarcon's historical sketches
          "Historietas nacionales", which perhaps will have a more lasting
          fame than his novels. "El sombrero de tres picos" (Madrid, 1874;
          tr. M. Springer, New York, 1899) is the novel that carried its
          author's name throughout Europe. The following year he published
          "El Escándalo", the publication of which created as much of a
          sensation as Coloma's "Pequeñeces". Better and more worthy of
          being known is the fantastic novel he wrote in the latter part
          of his life "El nino de la Bola" (Madrid, 1880; tr. M.J.
          Serrano, New York, 1892). His poetical qualities are revealed in
          "Poesías serias y humoristicas" and "Comedias escogidas" (1886),
          and particularly in the play "El hijo pródigo". He was all his
          life a practical Catholic.

          PLUMMER, Contemporary Spain as shown in her Novelists (New York,
          1899); SPRINGER, The Three Crowned [sic, i.e., Cornered] Hat
          (New York, 1899), 3-15; BLANCO GARCIA, Historia de la literatura
          espagnola en el Siglo XIX, II (Madrid, 1891), 454; VALBUENA, La
          ciencia cristiana, XIII (Madrid, 1880), 551; NOCEDAL, Discursos
          de recepcion en la Real Academia (Madrid, 1877);
          FITZMAURICE-KELLY, History of Spanish Literature (New York,
          1910).

          W. FURLONG

   Alvarus Pelagius

                                Alvarus Pelagius

          (ALVARO PELAYO.)

          Celebrated writer, b. in Spain about 1280; d. at Seville, 25
          Jan., 1352. Alvarus studied canon law at Bologna, but in 1304
          resigned his benefices, and entered the Franciscan Order. He is
          said to have been a pupil of Duns Scotus and to have been tutor
          to the children of Don Pedro, Regent of Portugal. Certain it is
          that he became penitentiary to Pope John XXII at Avignon, that
          he enjoyed much favour with this pontiff, and was employed by
          him to refute the claims of the antipope Pietro Rainalducci of
          Corbario. In 1233 Alvarus became titular Bishop of Coron in
          Achaia, and two years later was appointed to the See of Sylves
          in Portugal. He also served as Apostolic nuncio in Portugal, but
          was not created cardinal, as some writers have asserted. He was
          buried in the Monastery of St. Clare at Seville.

          Alvarus is chiefly remarkable for his work "De planctu ecclesiae
          libri duo". This work, begun at Avignon in 1330, completed in
          1332, corrected in 1335 and again in 1340 at Compostella, is
          notable not only for its extreme defence of ecclesiastical
          rights but still more, perhaps, for the freedom and force with
          which the author assails and rebukes the ecclesiastical abuses
          of his time. Alvarus has been reproached by St. Antoninus and
          others with having too far favoured the error of the Fraticelli
          about poverty, but, as Sbaralea shows, it is not difficult to
          justify him against this charge. On the then agitated question
          of poverty in the Franciscan Order he wrote with less passion
          and with more weight than Ubertino da Casale, although he
          addressed almost the same reproaches as the latter to the
          relaxed friars within the order. The "De planctu" was first
          published at Ulm in 1474. This edition is very rare, and is not
          free from error. Later editions appeared at Venice (1500) and at
          Lyons (1517). Besides the "De planctu", Wadding attributed to
          Alvarus the following: "Collyrium adversus haereses"; "Speculum
          regum" (one book); "Super sentent. libros 4"; "Apologia contra
          Marsilum Patav. et Guliel. Ocham"; and other unedited works.

          ARTHUR, Martyrologium franciscanum, 289; WADDING, Annales
          minorum ad ann. 1308, 1329, and 1340; IDEM, Script. ord. min.
          (1908), 14; SBARALEA, Supplementum (edit., 1908), Pt. I, 31-32;
          Speculum perfectionis, ed. SABATIER (1898), p. clxi; RENE, Hist.
          des spirituels dans l'ordre de S. Francois (1909), 94; OLIGER,
          Expositio regulae (1912), passim.

          PASCHAL ROBINSON

   Anastasius Bibliothecarius

                           Anastasius Bibliothecarius

          Librarian of the Roman Church, b. about 810; d. 879. He was a
          nephew of Bishop Arsenius of Orta, who executed important
          commissions as papal legate. Anastasius learned Greek from Greek
          monks, and obtained an unusual education for his era, so that he
          appears to be the most learned ecclesiastic of Rome in the
          barbaric period of the ninth century. During the reign of
          Nicholas I (855-67) Anastasius was abbot of the monastery of the
          Virgin Mary on the farther side of the Tiber (in Trastevere),
          and he was employed by the pope in various matters. He was also
          active as an author, and translated Greek works into Latin, one
          of these being the biography of St. John the Almsgiver, which he
          dedicated to Nicholas I. The successor of Nicholas, Adrian II
          (867-72), appointed Anastasius librarian of the Roman Church, an
          important office which gave him much influence at the papal
          Court. In 869 he was sent by Emperor Louis II as envoy to
          Constantinople, with two men of high rank in the Frankish
          Empire, to negotiate a marriage between the oldest son of the
          Byzantine emperor and the daughter of the emperor in the West.
          When the envoys arrived at Constantinople, the Eighth
          Oecumenical Council was still in session, and Anastasius, who
          attended the last session (February, 870), zealously defended
          the papal cause and was of much service to the papal legates. On
          their way home the papal legates were robbed, and the "Acts" of
          the council were carried off. However, they had given most of
          the declarations of obedience of the Greek bishops to
          Anastasius, who also had a copy of the "Acts", and was thus able
          to bring these documents to the pope. At the pope's order he
          translated the "Acts" into Latin. The succeeding pope, John VIII
          (872-82), also esteemed Anastasius, confirmed him in the office
          of librarian, entrusted important affairs to him, and encouraged
          him to further literary work. Anastasius was in correspondence
          with the deposed Byzantine patriarch, Photius, and sought to
          mediate between the patriarch and the pope and also to assuage
          the controversy over the Holy Ghost by assuming that the Latins
          understood the procession (processio) of the Holy Ghost from the
          Son in the sense of transmission (missio).

          If a passage in the annals of Hincmar of Reims is genuine (Mon.
          Germ. Hist.: Scriptores, I, 447) and Hincmar has not confused
          two men, then the librarian Anastasius is identical with the
          Roman presbyter Anastasius who in 874 became titular priest of
          St. Marcellus, and in 848 fled from Rome, and resided in various
          cities. On account of his flight he was excommunicated by a
          Roman synod in 850, and, as he did not return, was anathematized
          and deposed by another synod in 853. After the death of Leo IV
          in 855 this Anastasius was elected as antipope by the imperial
          party, but the rightfully elected pope, Benedict III, gained the
          supremacy, and acted kindly towards the usurper. During the
          pontificate of Adrian II Anastasius became involved in serious
          difficulties, in 868 a near relative of his named Eleutherius
          forcibly carried off the daughter of the pope, and soon after
          killed both her and her mother. The murderer was executed and
          Anastasius, who was regarded as the instigator of the murder,
          was punished by excommunication and deposition. He lived at the
          imperial Court, and sought by the intervention of the emperor to
          exculpate himself before the pope. Hergenröther (Photius, II,
          230-240) maintains, with good reason, that the librarian and the
          presbyter Anastasius (the antipope) were one and the same
          person, and weaves all the statements concerning the latter into
          the biography of Anastasius, while Langen (Geschichte der
          römischen Kirche, III, 270 sqq.) considers them different
          persons. In August, 879, Zacharias of Anagni appears as
          librarian of the Roman Church, so that Anastasius must have died
          shortly before this date.

          Anastasius translated from Greek into Latin the "Acts" of the
          Seventh and Eighth Ecumenical Councils, as well as several
          legends of saints, and other writings. He also compiled a
          historical work, "Chronographia tripartita", from the Greek
          writings of Theophanes, Nicephorus, and Syncellus, and made a
          collection of documents concerning the affairs of Pope Honorius.
          Several important letters written by him have been preserved.
          His writings are to be found in P.G., XXIX; P.L., LXXIII, CXXII,
          CXXIX. The "Liber Pontificalis", which was formerly ascribed to
          him, was not written by him; he seems to have shared in the
          revision of the "Life" of Nicholas I.

          LAPOTRE, De Anastasio Bibliothecario (Paris, 1884); KRUMBACHER,
          Geschichte der byzantinischen Litteratur, 2nd ed., 344 sq.;
          FRIEDRICH, Ein Brief des Anastasius Bibliothecarius an den
          Bischof Gaudericus von Vellevri in Sitzungsber. der bayer.
          Akademie der Wiss. phil.-hist. Klasse (1892-93), 393 sqq.;
          D'AVRIL, La lettre d'Anastase le Bibliothecaire in Revue de
          l'Orient chretien (1896), 124 sqq.

          J.P. KIRSCH

   Andechs

                                    Andechs

          A Benedictine monastery and famous place of pilgrimage on a hill
          about two miles east of the Ammersee in Upper Bavaria. Its site
          was originally occupied by a castle belonging to the counts of
          Diessen and probably of Roman origin. Its fame as a place of
          pilgrimage dates back to 955, when the relics which St. Rasso,
          one of the counts of Diessen, had brought from Rome and the
          Orient to his monastery at Wörth (later called Grafath) were
          transferred hither to save them from the ravages of the Huns. In
          the twelfth century three Sacred Hosts, two of which are reputed
          to have been consecrated by Pope Gregory I (Joannes Diaconus,
          "Vita S. Gregorii", in P.L., LXXV, 103) the other by Pope Leo
          IX, were added to the relics of Andechs, which henceforth became
          popularly known as "Der heilige Berg". The earliest mention of
          these Hosts is found in a thirteenth-century missal of Andechs,
          now preserved at the state library of Munich (Cod. Lat. 3005).
          The collegiate church which Duke Ernest had erected in 1438 was
          changed into a Benedictine monastery by Duke Albert III in 1455,
          and colonized with monks from Tegernsee. In 1458 it was raised
          to an abbey, and thenceforth enjoyed a period of uninterrupted
          prosperity until its secularization in 1803. It was
          re-established in 1850 as a Benedictine priory, affiliated to
          the Abbey of St. Boniface in Munich.

          SATTLER, Chronik von Andechs (Donauworth, 1877); HEINDL, Der
          heilige Berg Andechs (Munich, 1895).

          MICHAEL OTT

   Juan Andres

                                  Juan Andrés

          Littérateur and historian, b. at Planes, Valencia, Spain, in
          1740; d. in Rome in 1817. He entered the Society of Jesus in
          1754. When the Jesuits were expelled from Spain in 1767 Andrés
          made his abode at Ferrara (Italy) and taught philosophy there.
          After the suppression of the Society in 1773 he travelled
          through Europe to collect matter for a history of universal
          literature; this work he wrote at intervals from 1782 to 1799,
          and published under the title "Dell'origine, progresso e stato
          attuale d'ogni letteratura". Under this title was included not
          only literature but also Holy Scripture, theology, philosophy,
          and the sciences. Mr. Hallam styles the work "an extraordinary
          performance, embracing both ancient and modern literature in its
          full extent" ("Introduction to the Literature of Europe", New
          York, 1842, I, 8).

          The inexactness of some of the statements and the superficiality
          of some of Andrés's criticisms are almost negligible when we
          consider the cleverness of the general surveys and the original
          remarks met with frequently in the course of his great work. His
          Italian style, according to Cian (Gesuiti spagnuoli letterati in
          Italia, p. 15), is not inferior to that of his contemporaries
          for charm and clearness. Andrés has been severely criticized for
          ascribing to the Arabs an extraordinary influence on modern
          poetry. He is also the author of "Saggio della filosofia del
          Galileo", an essay in which he shows the systematic
          philosophical ideas of the famous scientist. The volumes of his
          "Cartas familiares" evidence the versatile genius of their
          author, and are full of interesting reviews on literary topics.
          Joseph Bonaparte and Murat highly appreciated his talents. The
          former appointed him royal librarian. At the age of sixty-four
          Andrés re-entered the Society of Jesus shortly after its
          restoration in the Kingdom of Naples.

          MENENDEZ Y PELAYO, Revista critica de historia y literatura
          (January, 1896); Historia de las ideas esteticas en Espana, IV
          (Madrid, 1890); TICKNOR, History of Spanish Literature, III (New
          York, 1854), 374; PASTOR Y FUSTER, Biblioteca de escritores
          Valencianos, I (Valencia, 1827-30); CABALLERO, Bibliothecae
          scriptorum Societatis Jesu supplementa (Rome, 1814-1816); CIAN,
          L'immigrazione dei Gesuiti spagnuoli letterati in Italia (Turin,
          1895); TIRABOSCHI, Istoria della letteratura italiana, VIII
          (Florence, 1812), 170 and passim; SOMMERVOGEL, Bibliotheque de
          la Compagnie de Jesus.

          W. FURLONG

   Aquileian Rite

                                 Aquileian Rite

          The See of Aquileia fell into schism during the quarrel of the
          Three Chapters (under Bishop Macedonius, 539-56) and became a
          schismatical patriarchate, which lasted till the year 700. A
          number of allusions tell us that Aquileia and certain of its
          suffragan sees had a special rite (generally called the "ritus
          patriarchinus"); but they do not give us any clear indication as
          to what this rite was. The earliest and most instructive
          document of the Patriarchine Rite is a capitulare of the eighth
          century added by a Lombard hand to the "Codex Richdigeranus"
          (sixth century). Dom G. Morin (Revue benedictine, 1902, p. 2
          sq.) and H. F. Haase, who edited the Codex (Breslau, 1865), show
          reason to suppose that this capitulare represents the use of
          Aquileia. Supposing this, it gives us valuable information about
          the Aquileian Calendar for the time it covers (Advent to June).
          Advent had five Sundays; St. Stephen's Day is 27 Dec., as in the
          Rites of Jerusalem-Antioch and their descendants. There is no
          Septuagesima; two Sundays (Sexagesima and Quinquagesima) prepare
          for Lent. The "tradition of the symbol" is on the Sunday before
          Easter. It and Maundy Thursday have each two Masses, as in the
          Gallican Rites. There is a "Mid- Pentecost" feast, as in many
          Eastern Rites. We have then many indications of the divergence
          from Rome; this fragment of a calendar points to Gallican usages
          mixed with some from the East. If we accept the most probable
          theory that the Gallican Rite is Eastern (Antiochene) in origin,
          we may consider the local Aquileian Use as one more variant of
          the wide-spread Gallican family. For the rest we are reduced to
          mere conjecture about this liturgy. There are many theories,
          especially as to its relation to the rites of Milan, Ravenna,
          and the fragments in "De sacramentis", IV, 4-6. Dr. Buchwald
          defends the view that the prayers in "De Sacr." are Aquileian.
          Aquileia adopted them from Alexandria, under whose influence she
          stood (so a synod of Aquileia declared in 381; op. cit., 47).
          Rome then took her Canon from Aquileia about the fifth century
          (Weidenauer, Studien, I, 1906, pp. 21-56). If this be true, the
          influence of Aquileia on the Western liturgy has been enormous.
          Aquileia would be the gate by which our Roman Canon came to
          Europe. Baumstark ascribes "De sacr." to Ravenna. But he agrees
          that it came from Alexandria and that Aquileia used the same
          rite. The "ritus patriarchinus" then would be the same as the
          Rite of the Exarchate, which he defends ("Liturgia romana e
          liturgia dell'esarcato", Rome, 1904, pp. 168-73). We may accept
          as certain that Aquileia had from the time of the formation of
          separate rites (fourth century) its own use, that this use was
          not the same as that of Rome, that probably it was one more
          variant of the large group of Western Rites, connected by
          (Eastern?) origin, which we call Gallican, that it was probably
          really related to the old Milanese Rite and perhaps still more
          to that of Ravenna.

          In the later Middle Ages we hear of the "ritus patriarchinus" as
          yielding steadily to the Roman Rite. Ebner has published a very
          curious and important variant of our "Hanc igitur" prayer, in
          litany form, attributed to Paulinus of Aquileia (about 850). For
          the importance of this see the author's work, "The Mass"
          (London, 1912, pp. 149-150). De Rubeis in his "De sacris
          foroiuliensium ritibus" (Venice, 1754, pp. 228 sqq.) prints part
          of the Aquileian scrutiny of catechumens, of the ninth century.
          This is practically that of the contemporary Roman Ordines; so
          the Roman Rite was already replacing the other one (cf. Dom de
          Puniet, "L'année liturgique à Aquilée" in "Revue bénéd.", 1902,
          p. 1). Walafrid Strabo (ninth century) mentions "hymns" composed
          by Paulinus of Aquileia and used by him "in private Masses at
          the offering of the sacrifice" (de eccl. rerum ex. et increm.
          25). In 1250 Peter IV, Bishop of Castello in the Aquileian
          province, desired to adopt the Roman Rite. In 1308 and again in
          1418 an attempt was made to restore the Aquileian Use at Venice.
          But in 1456 Callistus III granted permission to the Patriarch of
          Grado and Aquileia to follow Rome. After the Council of Trent
          and Pius V's missal (1570) one after another of the cities which
          had kept the Aquileian Use conformed to Rome: Trieste in 1586,
          Udine in 1596. Como alone made an effort to keep the old local
          use. In 1565 and 1579 diocesan synods still insisted on this.
          But in 1597 Clement VIII insisted on Roman Use here too. Only
          the Church of St. Mark at Venice kept certain local
          peculiarities of ritual, which apparently descended from the
          "ritus patriarchinus", till the fall of the republic in 1807.
          But long before its final disappearance the Aquileian Rite in
          these local forms was already so romanized that little of its
          original character was left. Francis Bonomio, Bishop of
          Vercelli, who went to Como in 1579 to persuade its clergy to
          adopt the Roman Breviary, says that the local rite was almost
          the same as that of Rome "except in the order of some Sundays,
          and the feast of the Holy Trinity, which is transferred to
          another time". So the "Missale pro s. aquileyensis ecclesiae
          ritu", printed at Augsburg in 1494, breviaries and
          sacramentaries (rituals) printed for Aquileia, Venice, and Como
          in the fourteenth century, although still bearing the name of
          the "ritus patriarchinus" (or "patriarchalis"), are hardly more
          than local varieties of the Roman Rite (for all this, see Le
          Brun, op. cit., and Baumstark, "Liturgia romana", pp. 170-73).

          LE BRUN, Ancien rit d'Aquilee appele le Patriarchin in his
          Explication de la messe, III (Paris, 1777), 220 sqq.; BONA,
          Rerum litugicarum, II, ed. SALA (Turin, 1747), Appendix: De ritu
          antiquo Aquilejensis patriarchino nuncupato; DE RUBEIS,
          Monumenta ecclesiae Aquilejensis (Strasburg, 1740); ALTHAN, Iter
          liturgicum foroiuliense (Rome, 1749); BURN, Nicetas of Remesiana
          (Cambridge, 1905); DICHLICH, Rito veneto antico detto
          Patriarchino (Venice, 1823).

          ADRIAN FORTESCUE

   Archpriest Controversy

                             Archpriest Controversy

          This controversy arose in England on the appointment of George
          Blackwell as archpriest with jurisdiction over the secular
          clergy of England and Scotland, by the Holy See on 7 March,
          1598. The last member of the ancient hierarchy, Goldwell, Bishop
          of St. Asaph's, had died in 1585, and thenceforth Cardinal Allen
          exercised informal jurisdiction with the acquiescence of the
          pope and by common consent of the missionary priests, then
          numbering about three hundred. After Allen's death in 1594 the
          want of a superior made itself felt. For some years there had
          been trouble at the English College in Rome, resulting in
          difficulties between the Jesuits and the secular clergy, which
          were accentuated by the dissensions among the priests imprisoned
          at Wisbech. In 1597 Father Persons, who had general charge of
          the Jesuit mission in England, went to Rome, where the troubles
          at the English College had come to a head, and settled matters
          by becoming rector there himself. Some of the secular clergy,
          resenting the growing influence of the Society in the affairs of
          the English Catholics and distrusting the political views of
          Father Persons, drew up a memorial against the Jesuits to be
          presented to the pope. Others wished for concord with the
          Jesuits, and believed that the true solution of difficulties so
          deeply prejudicial to Catholic interests in England lay in the
          appointment of a bishop. Persons himself at first favoured the
          appointment of one or more bishops, preferably one to live and
          work in England and another to live in the Low Countries so as
          to organize and direct affairs while free from personal danger.
          But this plan was given up, the appointment of an archpriest
          being decided on and effected by Cardinal Cajetan,
          Cardinal-Protector of England. This absolutely new form of
          ecclesiastical government was actively resented by a small but
          influential body of secular priests, who claimed that they had
          the sympathy of a larger number of their brethren. Two of them,
          William Bishop and Robert Charnock, were sent to Rome to dispute
          the validity of the appointment and to explain their grievances,
          but on their arrival in December, 1598, they were arrested and
          confined as prisoners in the English College. On 6 April, 1599,
          a Brief was issued confirming the appointment of the archpriest,
          and the imprisoned priests were released and dismissed from
          Rome, but forbidden to return to England. In England Thomas
          Lister, a Jesuit, charged the appellant priests with schism, in
          a pamphlet which stirred up a controversy in which both sides
          employed unmeasured and violent language.

          Though the Brief confirming the archpriest was at once accepted
          by the secular clergy, Blackwell insisted that the appellant
          priests should make reparation for the guilt of schism. They
          denied that they were guilty of schism in appealing to the pope,
          and referred the question to the University of Paris, which
          decided in their favour. Blackwell issued a decree condemning
          this judgment, and renewed another decree which he had published
          in the previous January, forbidding the publication of any
          defence of the appellants' conduct under pain of suspension. On
          17 November a formal appeal to Rome was signed by thirty-three
          priests. This they supported by various pamphlets, which had
          been published early in 1601. The English Government now knew of
          the trouble, and the Protestant Bishop of London entered into
          negotiations with Bluet, one of the imprisoned priests, with the
          result that Bluet was brought before the Privy Council and
          induced them to "banish" four of the appellant priests that they
          might prosecute their appeal. Bagshaw, Champney, Bluet, and
          Barneby were chosen, but finally Mush and Cecil took the places
          of Bagshaw and Barneby. Bagshaw published a violent work called
          the "True Relation", and Watson, a priest, issued extravagant
          tirades against Blackwell and the Jesuits. On 26 January, 1602,
          Blackwell published a Brief dated 17 August, 1601, which had
          been in his possession since Michaelmas. This again confirmed
          the appointment, but condemned the archpriest's irritating
          conduct, suppressed all publications about the controversy,
          refused to admit any appeal, and urged mutual charity.

          In Rome, however, the appellants succeeded with the help of the
          French ambassador in gaining a hearing, and on 5 October, 1602,
          a new Brief was issued (text in Tierney, op. cit. infra, III,
          clxxxi) which Tierney summarizes as "condemning the conduct of
          the archpriest, and justifying the appellants from the charges
          of schism and rebellion, which had been urged against them. . .
          . It limited his jurisdiction to the priests educated in the
          foreign seminaries; forbade him, in future and for the sake of
          peace, to communicate either with the superior of the Jesuits in
          England, or with the general of the Society in Rome on the
          concerns of his office; commanded him to supply the first three
          vacancies that should occur in the number of his assistants with
          persons selected from amongst the appellant priests, and having
          ordered him to receive and transmit all appeals to the Cardinal
          Protector, concluded by condemning the past, and prohibiting all
          future publications in any manner connected with the present
          controversy". On the other hand the appellants failed to secure
          episcopal government, or the prohibition, which they sought, to
          restrain priests, whether secular or regular, from provoking the
          Government by interference in political affairs. Nor did they
          obtain their request that all Catholics should be bound to
          manifest any designs against the queen or State of which they
          should learn. Elizabeth and her ministers were disappointed at
          the tenor of the Brief and retaliated by a proclamation (5
          November, 1602) for the banishment of all Catholic missionaries.
          In reply to this thirteen of the appellants, including two
          future martyrs, drew up their famous address to the queen
          assuring her of their loyalty. (See Tierney, op. cit. infra,
          III, 55-56, and clxxxviii sqq.) The papal Brief of 5 October,
          1602, finally settled the question, but an unfortunate legacy of
          mutual distrust and sore feeling remained behind and embittered
          the relations of the parties for many years to come. Government
          by archpriest never worked well, and the secular clergy became
          unanimous in their desire for a bishop. This was granted to them
          after the death of William Harrison, the third archpriest, in
          1621, when the Holy See selected William Bishop, one of the
          leading appellants, to be the first Vicar Apostolic of England.

          TIERNEY, Dodd's Church History of England, III (London, 1840);
          LAW, The Archpriest Controversy (2 vols., Camden Society,
          1896-98); IDEM, Jesuits and Seculars in the reign of Queen
          Elizabeth (London, 1889), with a bibliography of contemporary
          pamphlets; GERARD, The Archpriest Controversy in The Month
          (January, 1897).

          EDWIN BURTON
          Trancribed by Herman F. Holbrook
          For the Rev. David Martin, of the London Oratory.

   Aulne Abbey

                                  Aulne Abbey

          (Alna).

          A former Cistercian monastery near Landelies on the Sambre in
          the Diocese of Liège. Originally it was a Benedictine monastery,
          founded by Saint Landelinus about 656. Before 974 the
          Benedictines were replaced by secular clerics leading a common
          life, who, however, embraced the Rule of St. Augustine in 1144.
          At the instance of Bishop Hnery de Leyen of Liège it came into
          the hands of Cistercian monks from Clairvaux in 1147 with Franco
          de Morvaux as its first Cistercian abbot. Henceforth it
          flourished as a Cistercian monastery until the French burned it
          at the end of the eighteenth century, only a short time after it
          had been rebuilt in larger dimensions. The library, which
          contained 40,000 books and 5000 manuscripts, was also destroyed.

          BOULMONT, L'abbaye d'Aulne, ou origines, splendeurs, epreuves,
          et ruines de la perle monastique d'Entre-Sambre-et Meuse (Namur,
          1898); CLOQUET, L'abbeye d'Aulne (Mons, 1904); LEBROCQUY,
          Histoire de l'abbaye d'Aulne (Paris, 1862).

          MICHAEL OTT

   Averbode

                                    Averbode

          A Premonstratensian abbey belonging to the circary of Brabant
          and situated near Diest in the Archdiocese of Malines. It was
          founded about 1132 by Count Arnold of Losen and continued
          without interruption till the general suppression of the Belgian
          monasteries in 1796. The abbey was restored in 1834, and
          comprises at present 82 priests, 20 clerics and novices, and 36
          lay brothers. Of these, 27 priests and 21 lay brothers are
          labouring among the Indians in Brazil, where, at the request of
          Leo XIII, they established a missionary monastery at Pirapora in
          the Diocese of São Paulo, in 1896, and a college at Jaguarao in
          the Diocese of Sao Pedro do Rio Grande do Sul in 1901. Recently
          two priests and three lay brothers from Averbode opened a
          mission house at Veile in Denmark.

          HUGO, S. ordinis Premonstratensis annales, I (Nancy, 1734-6),
          210-223; Catalogus generalis ordinis Praem. (Prague, 1900).

          MICHAEL OTT
     __________________________________________________________________

   Alexis John Augustine Bachelot

                         Alexis John Augustine Bachelot

          Prefect Apostolic of the Sandwich Islands, b. at Grand Beauchet,
          commune of St. Cyr (Orne), France, 22 Feb., 1796; d. at sea, 5
          Dec., 1837. He entered the preparatory seminary of Picpus
          (Paris) at the age of ten, and made vows in the Congregation of
          the Sacred Hearts at Cahors on 2 Feb., 1813. At the completion
          of his theological studies in the Irish College at Paris, he was
          ordained priest in 1820, and forthwith appointed its rector.
          Four years later he was made superior of the preparatory
          seminary at Tours. When in 1825 the Propaganda entrusted the
          Picpus Fathers with the establishment of a mission in the
          Sandwich Islands, Father Bachelot was created the first prefect
          Apostolic of the new mission. On 20 Nov., 1826, he embarked at
          Bordeaux in company with Fathers Patrick Short and Abraham
          Armand and three lay brothers. They arrived off Honolulu, July,
          1827, and though they were refused residence in the Islands,
          they landed while the matter was still under discussion by the
          chiefs. As matters remained in suspense for some time and no
          formal permission was forthcoming, the missionaries rented an
          enclosure containing three huts, removed their baggage from the
          vessel on 13 July, and Father Bachelot offered the first Mass in
          the Hawaiian Islands on the following morning. A fortnight after
          their arrival, La Plassard, captain of La Comete, was ordered
          before the queen, and commanded to re-embark the priests. This
          he refused to do, and departed before the missionaries could be
          forcibly put on board. The members of the Protestant mission
          which had been established in the Sandwich Islands seven years
          earlier saw with displeasure the arrival of the missionaries of
          a rival creed, and persuaded the chiefs to expel them. As a
          result Fathers Bachelot and Short (Father Armand having left for
          France in November, 1829) were forcibly embarked on the brig
          Waverly on 24 Dec., 1831. They landed at San Pedro Bay,
          California, on 21 Jan., 1832, and were received by the
          Franciscan Father then in charge of San Gabriel Mission. Father
          Short went to Monterey, where, conjointly with an English
          convert, Mr. Edw. Hartnell, he started a college; Father
          Bachelot remained at San Gabriel. After the death of the old
          Franciscan the Californian authorities offered Father Bachelot
          an annual net income of $3000 if he would consent to take charge
          of the mission. He agreed to remain, but refused the salary in
          order to be free to leave at any time.

          On 28 March, 1837, Father Bachelot, having received information
          which seemed to warrant a fresh attempt to return to the
          Sandwich Islands, embarked with Father Short for them, and
          landed unmolested at Honolulu, 17 April. The missionaries
          obtained a provisional permission from the governor, Kekuanaoa,
          to remain on shore for some time; but on 29 April the king
          issued a proclamation stating that he would not permit papal
          missionaries to remain in his dominions, and ordered them to
          depart on the same vessel on which they had come. Father Short
          left Honolulu for Valparaiso on 30 October. Father Bachelot
          remained behind, intending to embark on a schooner, the near
          arrival of which had been announced. Meantime another priest of
          the same society, Father Maigret, arrived off Honolulu. The
          authorities forbade his landing. The vessel for which Father
          Bachelot was waiting having failed to appear, it became
          imperative to extricate both Father Maigret and the captain, who
          brought him, from a difficult situation. Father Bachelot decided
          therefore to purchase a small schooner, then lying in port. They
          rechristened the vessel the Notre-Dame de Paix, and sailed on it
          on 23 November. Father Bachelot, who was very ill at the time of
          embarkation, died during the voyage. On 13 Dec., the vessel
          arrived off Ponape, and on the following day the remains of the
          first Apostle of the Sandwich Islands were interred in the
          little island of Na, near the mouth of Metalanim harbour.

          Father Bachelot is the author of an Hawaiian grammar and
          dictionary, "Notes grammaticales sur la langue sandwichoise
          suivies d'une collection de mots de la meme langue" (Paris,
          1834), and two catechisms in the same language: "He Ninau ma ke
          Ao ana Kiritiano" (Catechism of the Christian Doctrine) and "He
          Ninauhoike no na Kakarema ahiku" (Catechism of the Seven
          Sacraments), both published at Macao in 1831; a second edition
          appeared at Paris, 1841. A prayer-book in the native tongue,
          printed together with this second edition and entitled, "Na
          Olelo Pule no ka Poe Kiritiano o ko Havaii Pae-aina" (Prayers
          for the Christians of the Hawaiian Archipelago), is also
          probably by the same author.

          Annals of the Propagation of the Faith, vol. I; Supplement to
          the Sandwich Island Mirror (15 Jan., 1840), reprinted by the
          Catholic Truth Society (San Francisco, 1897); BINGHAM, Sandwich
          Islands (Hartford, 1848).

          REGINALD YZENDOORN

   Antonio Ballerini

                               Antonio Ballerini

          Born at Medicina, near Bologna, 10 October, 1805; died in Rome,
          27 November, 1881. He entered the Society of Jesus, 13 October,
          1826. He was professor of philosophy at Ferentino, of
          ecclesiastical history at Rome and at Fermo, of moral theology
          at the Roman College. He took a prominent part in the
          controversies on the writings of Rosmini, on the moral system of
          St. Alphonsus Liguori, and on the relations between the
          hierarchy and the religious orders, especially in England. He
          contributed valuable treatises to the discussion of the subject
          of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary. He
          assisted Boero in the compilation of the "Menology" of the
          Society, and published a valuable compendium of Gury, which was
          adapted for the seminaries of the United States by Sabetti and
          later by Barrett. His chief work, the commentary on Busenbaum's
          "Medulla", was completed and published by Palmieri (q.v.). His
          brother Francis, also a Jesuit (b. 5 April, 1805; d. in Rome 18
          Aug., 1874), composed several devotional works.

          SOMMERVOGEL, Bibl. de la C. de Jesus, I (Brussels, 1890).

          JOHN J. WYNNE

   Blessed Baptista Varani

                            Blessed Baptista Varani

          (Varano).

          An ascetical writer, b. at Camerino, in the March of Ancona, 9
          Apr., 1458; d. there, 31 May, 1527. Her father, Julius Caesar
          Varano or de Varanis, Duke of Camerino, belonged to an
          illustrious family; her mother, Joanna Malatesta, was a daughter
          of Sigismund, Prince of Rimini. At baptism Baptista received the
          name of Camilla. Of the first ten and the last twenty-three
          years of her life little or nothing is known; our knowledge of
          the intervening years is derived almost entirely from her own
          writings. This revelation of herself was brought about through
          the influence of her confessor, Blessed Peter of Mogliano,
          provincial of the Franciscans in the Marches (1490). It seems to
          have been the eloquence of Mogliano that brought about the
          "conversion" of Baptista, who, for a time at least, appears to
          have been captivated by the glamour of the world. Her father did
          all in his power to force his daughter into a brilliant
          marriage, even to the extent of imprisoning her. But Baptista
          resisted his plans so firmly that after two years and a half he
          restored her to liberty, for fear, as he said, of drawing upon
          himself the Divine vengeance, and gave his consent to her
          becoming a nun. On 14 Nov., 1481, Baptista entered the monastery
          of the Poor Clares at Urbino. Not long afterwards her father
          founded a new monastery of that order at Camerino, and presented
          it to his daughter. Baptista introduced the primitive observance
          of the rule there, and thenceforth her vigorous and impressive
          personality found scope not only in the administration of this
          monastery, of which she became the first abbess, but also in the
          production of various literary works. These include the:
          "Recordationes et instructiones spirituales novem", which she
          wrote about 1491; "Opus de doloribus mentalibus D.N.J.C.",
          written during 1488-91 and first published at Camerino in 1630;
          "Liber suae conversionis", a story of her life, written in 1491,
          and first published at Macerata in 1624. These works have been
          edited by the Bollandists in connection with some of Baptista's
          letters. But most of her "Epistolae spirituales ad devotas
          personas" as well as her "Carmina pleraque latina et vulgaria"
          are still unpublished.

          As a whole the writings of Baptista are remarkable for
          originality of thought, striking spirituality, and vividly
          pictorial language. Both St. Philip Neri and St. Alphonsus have
          recorded their admiration for this gifted woman who wrote with
          equal facility in Latin and Italian, and who was accounted one
          of the most brilliant and accomplished scholars of her day.
          Baptista died on the feast of Corpus Christi, and was buried in
          the choir of her monastery. Thirty years later her body was
          exhumed and was found in a state of perfect preservation. It was
          reburied to be again exhumed in 1593. The flesh was then reduced
          to dust but the tongue still remained quite fresh and red. The
          immemorial cultus of Baptista was approved by Gregory XVI in
          1843, and her feast is kept in the Franciscan Order on 2 June.

          Acta SS., May, VII (Antwerp, 1688), 476-514; WADDING, Annales
          Minorum ad annum 1509, n. 25; IDEM, Scriptores ord. Min. (3rd
          ed., 1906), 36; SBARALEA, Supplementum, pt. I (1908), 113-114;
          LEON DE CLARY, Lives of the Saints and Blessed of the Three
          Orders of St. Francis, II (Taunton, 1886), 315-48; DE RAMBUTEAU,
          La Bienheureuse Varani, Princesse de Camerino et religieuse
          franciscaine (Paris, 1906); JORGENSEN, I det Hoje (Copenhagen,
          1908), German tr. in Excelsis (Kempten and Munich, 1911), which
          contains a charming sketch of Baptista and gives us a glimpse of
          her poetic talent. For an appreciation of her poetry see
          CRESCIMBENI, Storia della volgare poesia, I, lib. 2, cap. xiii.

          STANISLAUS WOYWOD

   Edward Barron

                                 Edward Barron

          A missionary, born at Waterford, Ireland, 1801; died at
          Savannah, Georgia, U.S.A., 12 Sept., 1854. His ecclesiastical
          studies were made at the Propaganda College, Rome, where he
          received the degree of Doctor of Divinity. Several years were
          then spent in Ireland, after which he volunteered for the
          missions in the United States, attaching himself to the Diocese
          of Philadelphia, where he became in time pastor of St. Mary's
          Church, Philadelphia, president of St. Charles Borromeo's
          Theological Seminary, and then vicar-general of the diocese.
          When in 1840 the Holy See requested the American bishops to care
          for the negro Catholics of Liberia, Africa, he offered his
          services with those of the Rev. John Kelly of New York, and left
          Baltimore, 21 Dec., 1841, for Cape Mesurado. The work there was
          successful at first, and so Barron returned to Europe and the
          United States for more help. While in Rome he was consecrated,
          22 Jan., 1842, titular Bishop of Constantia and Vicar Apostolic
          of the two Guineas. He returned to Africa, 30 Nov., 1843, with
          several missionaries of the Society of the Sacred Heart of Jesus
          and continued his labours in the mission until 1845, when he was
          forced by fever he bad contracted to resign his vicariate and to
          return to the United States. Here, as far as his impaired health
          allowed, he again took up the duties of a missionary priest and
          assisted in the work of the episcopate in Philadelphia, St.
          Louis, and Florida. He died of yellow fever at Savannah while
          helping the bishop of that see during an epidemic. (See
          LIBERIA.)

          SHEA, Hist. Cath. Ch. in U. S. (New York, 1856); CLARKE, Lives
          Deceased Bishops, U. S., II (New York, 1872), appendix; KIRLIN,
          Catholicity in Philadelphia (Philadelphia, 1909); FLYNN, Cath.
          Church in New Jersey (Morristown, 1904); Catholic Almanac, 1855;
          Freeman's Journal (New York, 1854 55), files.

          THOMAS F. MEEHAN

   Vincent Barzynski

                               Vincent Barzynski

          Born at Sulislawice, Sandomir, Russian Poland, 1838; d. at
          Chicago, 2 May, 1899. The son of Joseph and Mary (Sroczynska)
          Barzynski, in baptism he received the name Michael, but during a
          grievous illness was placed under the protection of St. Vincent
          Ferrer and henceforth called Vincent. Because of frail health he
          was educated privately. In 1856 he entered the diocesan seminary
          at Lublin and was ordained priest, 28 Oct., 1861. After six
          months illness spent at the home of his father, he was appointed
          vicar at Horodlo, member of the chapter of the collegiate church
          of the Zamojscy, and later transferred to Tomaszew, which was
          the scene of great military activity during the uprising of
          1863. As organizer, appointed by the secret Polish national
          Government, he provided the insurrectionists with military
          supplies. Compelled soon after to flee to Cracow, he found
          refuge with the Franciscan fathers in that city. After fifteen
          months of wandering he received his passport enabling him to
          leave for Paris in 1865. Here he fell under the influence of
          that remarkable band of mystics, Semenenko, Kajsewicz,
          Jelowicki, and Mickiewicz, the poet, who dreamed of Poland's
          resurrection through the spiritual regeneration of the Poles.
          Going to Rome, he joined the newly founded Congregation of the
          Resurrection and soon after receiving the special blessing of
          Pius IX set out for America (1866). After several years' labour
          in the Diocese of San Antonio, Texas, he was appointed pastor of
          St. Stanislaus parish, Chicago, in 1874. The parish then
          comprised about 450 families; in 1881 the number of baptisms was
          988, and in 1887 reached 1700.

          Vincent Barzynski became the dominant influence throughout the
          most critical period of Polish immigration. He first gave the
          American Poles a class consciousness, amalgamated the various
          units into a compact working phalanx, and despite seemingly
          insurmountable difficulties crushed the forces that threatened
          the faith of Polish immigrants. Criticized for centralizing
          within his own person all authority, it must be recalled that he
          had to deal single-handed with every difficulty, that in large
          part the Polish American clergy of his day were deserving of
          little confidence, that the mass of Polish immigration was from
          the petty artisan and peasant class, and that the small number
          of brighter minds coming to America had left an unsavoury past
          behind them. It is clear that there was no alternative. The
          spirit of rebellion, "independence", schism was fanned by the
          Polish National Alliance, and this organization Father Barzynski
          so successfully combated that it was only after his death that
          the Alliance grew in members.

          St. Stanislaus parish, divided again and again, seemed never to
          decrease; Father Barzynski there organized nearly forty
          societies, confraternities, and sodalities. He assisted in the
          organization of nearly every Polish parish in Chicago
          established before his death. He built the magnificent St.
          Stanislaus Church and the great school (since destroyed by fire
          and rebuilt), where seventy nuns teach nearly five thousand
          children; gave the Poles an orphanage; founded St. Stanislaus
          College; introduced the Sisters of the Holy Family of Nazareth
          into the United States; formed with very raw material a corps of
          Polish teachers in his own school; interested the School Sisters
          of Notre Dame in Polish immigration. Largely due to his
          influence, 800 Polish women entered this community. He founded
          the first Polish Catholic paper, the "Gazeta Katolicka", his
          personal organ for many years, and established the first Polish
          daily Catholic paper in America, the "Dziennik Chicagoski",
          which for nearly twenty-five years has been a valiant defender
          of the Faith against the inroads of the liberal press,
          particularly the "Zgoda", the insincerely "neutral" organ of the
          Polish National Alliance. To him are due the first Polish
          American text-books, and the first Sunday-school papers. He saw
          the necessity of organizing the Poles along strictly Catholic
          lines, and founded the Polish Roman Catholic Union. His greatest
          enemies admit him to be the most commanding figure in the brief
          but dramatic history of the American Poles. Despite constant
          criticism from both clergy and laity, he remained indefatigable.
          He was a man of genuine piety and deep faith, strict with
          himself alone, considerate of others. He was humble,
          resourceful, daring, and patriotic and was possessed of real
          genius for organization. The noblest monument he has left is the
          faith that abides in three million Poles.

          FELIX THOMAS SEROCZYNSKI

   Alexander Baumgartner

                             Alexander Baumgartner

          Poet and writer on the history of literature, b. at St. Gall,
          Switzerland, 27 June, 1841; d. at Luxemburg, 5 Sept., 1910. His
          father was Gallus Jakob Baumgartner, a prominent statesman. At
          the abbey school of Maria Einsiedeln in Switzerland, where
          Alexander when fourteen years old began his higher studies, a
          decisive influence was exercised over the impressionable spirit
          of the pupil by the well-known poet and scholar, Father Gall
          Morel. The intellectual bent there first developed was confirmed
          at the Jesuit school at Feldkirch, where the boy spent his last
          two gymnasial years. After passing an excellent examination he
          entered the Society of Jesus in 1860. After his studies in 1874
          he was assigned to the editorial staff of the periodical
          "Stimmen aus Maria-Laach", which had been founded three years
          before. For thirty-six years he devoted his pen to this journal
          as a loyal collaborator, so that scarcely a number appeared
          without some article from him. Owing to the expulsion of the
          Jesuits from Germany, he repeatedly changed the place of
          publication of the periodical. He also took two long journeys.
          In 1883 he went to Iceland, the Faroe Islands, Scandinavia, and
          the provinces of the Baltic as far as St. Petersburg. Three
          years later he visited Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. Both tours
          are commemorated in the well-known books of travel, "Nordische
          Fahrten" (1889 and 1890). Other and shorter vacation trips had
          more for their object the physical and intellectual relaxation
          of the over-strained powers which, however, gave way at too
          early an age. He was buried in the cemetery at Luxemburg near
          his old friend and countryman, Father Joseph Spillman, S.J.

          Father Baumgartner was born with a poetic nature. His talent was
          best evidenced in his poems for special occasions. His best work
          of this kind is his "Festspiel zur Calderonfeier" (1881), which
          appeared first in the "Stimmen aus Maria-Laach", but was soon,
          owing to repeated requests, published in book form with a brief
          biography of the Spanish poet. A translation into Spanish by
          Orti y Lara of the artistic work soon followed. His
          "Lauretanische Litanei" in fifty-nine sonnets was also written
          for a special occasion and was printed for the first time in
          1883 and translated into Dutch in 1890. His talent for poetry
          was shown no less brilliantly in his fine translations of
          foreign poetry. In 1884 appeared, as a small book, the
          translation of an Icelandic poem of the fourteenth century to
          the Virgin, "Die Lilie".

          Baumgartner's fame rests on his writings on the history of
          literature. His numerous articles in the "Stimmen aus
          Maria-Laach", which were collected and issued in 1912 as a
          supplementary volume to his "Geschichte der Weltliteratur", were
          all written with the intent that they should form part of his
          larger history and life work. In earlier years, as preparatory
          writings, he had issued "Lessings religiosen Entwicklungsgang"
          (1877), "Longfellow" (1887), an appreciation of the poems of the
          American poet which passed into a second edition ten years
          later, "Joost van den Vondel" (1882), a biography of the great
          Dutchman translated four years later into Dutch, and lastly the
          celebrated biography of Goethe in three volumes (1879). In
          addition he published two works as expressions of gratitude and
          piety: "Erinnerungen an Bischof Greith" (1884), and "Gallus
          Jakob Baumgartner" (1892). Two years previously he had issued
          the unfinished work of his father, "Die Geschichte des Kantons
          St. Gallen", in three volumes. The six volumes of his hitory of
          the literature of the world are well known: "Westasien und die
          Nillander" (1897); "Indien und Ostasien" (1897); "Die klassische
          Literatur der Griechen und Römer" (1900); "Die lateinische und
          griechische Literatur der christlichen Volker" (1900); "Die
          französische Literatur" (1905); and lastly "Die italienische
          Literatur" (1911), during the writing of which he died.

          It is hardly necessary to say that a man of such spirit was also
          a fine critic. The thoroughly Catholic point of view in all his
          works is also self-evident. His strong religious convictions led
          him to take part in the dispute over Catholic literature by the
          publication of the pamphlet "Die Stellung der deutschen
          Katholiken zur neueren Literatur". Father Baumgartner, however,
          was not contentious by nature; he was rather a lover of peace,
          although a harmless love of mischief showed itself a times in
          his writings. As a loyal son of his Order he always felt that
          with the pen he exercised a sacred office for the defence of
          truth and the honour of God.

          Stimmen aus Maria-Laach, LXXIX (1910), 349-372; SCHEID,
          Baumgartner, ein Gedenkblatt seines Lebens und Wirkens (Hamm,
          1911).

          N. SCHEID

   Giovanni Battista Beccaria

                           Giovanni Battista Beccaria

          A physicist, born at Mondovi, 3 October, 1716; died at Turin, 27
          May, 1781. At the age of sixteen he entered the Order of Clerks
          Regular of St. Joseph Calasanctius, and successively taught in
          the Scuole Pie of Palermo and Rome. His ability as instructor
          being soon recognized, he was appointed by royal authority
          professor of physics in the University of Turin (1748). Here be
          ardently devoted himself to researches on atmospheric
          electricity, in which he made liberal use of kites, rockets, and
          iron wire for the purpose of exploring the electrical conditions
          of the atmosphere. Henley's pith-ball electroscope was his
          recording instrument. In broken or stormy weather, positive and
          negative electrification were detected; whereas in calm, serene
          weather "the excessive or positive was always found". The
          sinuous or forked character of lightning was attributed to the
          resistance of the air; and the rupture of the shoes of a man
          struck by a flash, to the "moisture of the feet flying into
          vapour". Beccaria confirmed the observation of Andrew Gordon
          that water evaporates more rapidly when electrified; also the
          conclusion of Abbés Nollet and Menon that animals (cats,
          pigeons, chaffinches) lose weight when subjected to prolonged
          electrification, the loss being ascribed to increased
          "transpiration" under electrical stimulus. He was also among the
          first to recognize and clearly state that the electrical charge
          on a conductor is confined to the surface. An experimental
          demonstration of this law of electrostatics was devised by
          Cavendish in 1775 and independently by Coulomb in 1788 and
          popularized in 1816 by Biot, whose name it usually bears.
          Beccaria adopted the two-fluid theory of Franklin as well as the
          views of the American philosopher on the preventive and
          protective functions of lightning conductors.

          In 1755 Beccaria was elected Fellow of the Royal Society, and in
          1766 he contributed a paper to the "Philosophical Transactions",
          in which he describes (in Latin) five of the more important of
          his experimental researches. In 1770 he contributed a second
          paper (also in Latin) in which he expounds five theorems
          followed by fifteen corollaries in electrostatics. His principal
          work is his treatise "Dell' elettricismo artificiale e naturale"
          (1753), which was translated into English in 1778. Other works
          are "Lettere sull' elettricismo" (1758); "Experimenta atque
          observationes quibus electricitas vindex late constituitur"
          (1769); and "Dell' elettricita terrestre atmosferica a cielo
          sereno" (1775).

          TANA, Elogio del P. Giov. Batta. Beccaria (1781); EANDI, Memorie
          storiche intorno agli studii del P. Beccaria (1783).

          BROTHER POTAMIAN

   Ancient See of Bergen in Norway

                        Ancient See of Bergen in Norway

          (BERGA, BERGENSIS.)

          The diocese included the Provinces of Nordre and Sondre
          Bergenhus, and the district of Sondmor in the Province of
          Romsdal. The discovery at Selo in 996 of the supposed remains of
          St. Sunniva and her companions led King Olaf Trygveson to build
          a church there. It was not, however, till 1068 that a bishopric
          and a monastery were founded at Selo by King Olaf Kyrre. Bernard
          the Saxon was the first bishop, but later on he removed to the
          newly founded city of Bergen, where he died as its first bishop
          about 1090. In 1152 Bergen became a suffragan bishopric of the
          new metropolitan See of Trondhjem, and a cathedral chapter was
          set up there. Bishop Paul (1156-94) saw the completion of the
          Cathedral of Christ Church in time for the holding of a
          provincial council there and for the coronation of King Magnus
          Erlingsön, the first coronation of a Norwegian king, in 1164. In
          1170 the relics of St. Sunniva were translated to the cathedral.
          During the episcopate of Bishop Arne (1226-56), namely on 29
          July, 1247, Cardinal Wilhelm of Sabina crowned King Haakon
          Haakonssön. In 1271 the Royal Chapel of the Holy Apostles at
          Bergen was made collegiate. From 1275 to 1302 King Magnus built
          a great church (the finest in Norway), as his new royal chapel,
          to receive a relic of the Crown of Thorns. The dean took the
          title of Master of the (fourteen) Royal Chapels and was granted
          the right to use the episcopal ornaments. Bishop Arne Sigurdssön
          (1305-14) regarded the privileges of the Chapel Royal at Bergen
          as an encroachment upon the rights of his see. He could not,
          however, deprive the dean, Finn Haldorssön, of his
          semi-independent position, as the latter had the support of the
          Holy See. Arne also asserted in vain his claim that the bishops
          of the Færöe Islands should be chosen amongst the clergy of the
          Diocese of Bergen. He was, however, successful in compelling the
          German merchants at Bergen to pay tithe. Bishop Thorstein
          (1342-49) died of the Black Death, as did nearly all the
          Norwegian bishops. To his successor, the Englishman Gisbrith
          (1349-69), we owe the Bergen Manuscript (Björgynjar kálfskinn).
          Aslak Bolt, Bishop of Bergen from 1408, was translated to the
          See of Trondhjem in 1430. Bishop Thorleif Olafssön (1430-50),
          having joined Olaf Nilssön at the Brigittine Convent of
          Munkalif, was killed there by the Germans of the Hansa on 1
          September, 1455. The last Catholic bishop, Olaf Thorkelssön
          (1523-35) allowed the Cathedral of Christ Church, the Royal
          Chapel of the Apostles, the Dominican convent, and other
          ecclesiastical buildings at Bergen to be destroyed, when the
          fortress of Bergenhus was enlarged. His successor, Geble
          Pederssön, became a Lutheran.

          Eighteen provincial councils were held at Bergen. The most
          important were the following: The council of 1164 confirmed
          arrangements made in 1152 by the legate Cardinal Nicholas
          Breakspear [afterwards Pope Adrian IV], with regard to the
          Norwegian Church. Their object was the establishment of the
          hierarchy by the following means: (1) the establishment on a
          firm basis of the Archbishopric of Trondhjem; (2) the foundation
          of cathedral chapters; (3) the assertion of the right of the
          Church to inherit property by will; (4) the enforcement of
          clerical celibacy. The council of 1190 decreed the
          excommunication of all of guilty sacrilege, violence towards
          clerks, rape, or of unlawful bearing arms in church and at
          public assemblies. King Sverre's Christian Law (Christenret) was
          published at this council. The council held in 1273 decided that
          parish churches in Iceland should belong to the bishop of the
          diocese and not to the landowners. A number of articles were
          also framed with a view to a reconciliation between Church and
          State, but they were never accepted either by pope or king. In
          1280 many rules with regard to excommunication were made but not
          carried into effect, as the quarrel between Church and State
          broke out with renewed violence. At the council of 1320 a large
          number of regulations were made with regard to discipline. In
          1327 the canons adopted at the provincial synod dealt with the
          relations between Church and State. The last provincial synod at
          Bergen was held in 1435. It dealt with the collection of money
          for the maintenance of the Council of Basle, the superstitious
          observance of Saturday, which was forbidden, and unauthorized
          begging on the part of religious.

          Among the religious institutions in the Diocese of Bergen before
          the Reformation, were the following: The cathedral with a
          chapter of 3 prelates and 12 canons, the Collegiate Church of
          the Apostles (Chapel Royal), 12 canons and a dean; priories of
          Dominicans (from at least 1240) and Franciscans (dating from the
          same period). There were also at St. Mary's, Bergen, Cistercian
          nuns from 1150- 1507 and Canons Regular of St. Anthony of Vienne
          from 1507-28. At St. John's, Bergen, there were Canons Regular
          of St. Augustine from about 1180 to 1489. The Hospitals of St.
          Catharine (for women) and of All Saints (for men) provided for
          the sick. Finally, the great Abbey of St. Michael's, Munkalif
          (Benedictine monks, 1108-1426; Brigittines, 1426-70 and
          1479-1531; Cistercian nuns, 1470-79), lay close to Bergen. The
          city and its suburbs contained in all no less than 26 churches.
          Elsewhere there were the Cistercian Abbey of Lyse, colonized
          from Fountains Abbey, Yorkshire, in 1146, and the Hospital of
          the Holy Spirit at Halsnö (about 1200-1539).

          PENROSE, The Legend of St. Sunnefa in The Antiquary, V (London,
          1882), 18-23; Diplomatarium norvegicum (Christiania, 1849-1903);
          Norges gamle Love (Christiania, 1846-1895); KEYSER, Den norske
          Kirkes Historie under Katholicismen (Christiania, 1856-8);
          NIELSEN, Bergen (Christiania, 1877); LANGE, De norske Klostres
          Historie i Middelalderen (Christiania, 1856); MUNCH, Registrum
          praediorum et redituum ad ecclesias diocesis bergensis saeculo
          p. C. XIVto pertinentium, Björgynjar Kálfskinn (Christiania,
          1843); Codex diplomatarius monasterii St. Michaelis Bergensis
          (Munkalif) (Christiania, 1845).

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Gustav Bickell

                                 Gustav Bickell

          Orientalist, b. at Cassel, 7 July, 1838; d. at Vienna, 15 Jan.,
          1906. His father, Johann Wilhelm Bickell, was professor of canon
          law at the University of Marburg, and died (1848) as minister of
          justice of Hesse-Cassel. In 1862 Gustav became Privatdozent of
          Semitic and Indo-Germanic languages at Marburg, but the
          following year he went in the same capacity to the University of
          Giessen. The finding of a clear testimony in favour of the
          Immaculate Conception in the hymns of St. Ephraem, which he was
          transcribing in London, led him to enter the Catholic Church, 5
          Nov., 1865. After his conversion he entered the seminary of
          Fulda, where he was ordained priest, 22 Sept., 1865. He then
          taught Oriental languages at the Academy of Münster, and in 1871
          was appointed extraordinary professor. At this period he became
          widely known by his vigorous defence of papal infallibility. In
          1874 he went to the University of Innsbruck as professor of
          Christian archaeology and Semitic languages, which position he
          held till 1891, when he was called to the chair of Semitic
          languages at the University of Vienna.

          He was an enthusiastic student and one of the foremost Semitic
          scholars of modern times. Besides numerous contributions to
          different reviews he published the following works: "De indole
          ac ratione versionis Alexandrinae in interpretando libri Jobi"
          (Marburg, 1862); "S. Ephraemi Syri Carmina Nisibena", with
          prolegomena fixing the laws of Syriac metre (Leipzig, 1866);
          "Grundriss der hebräischen Grammatik" (ib., 1869-70), translated
          into English by Sam. I. Curtiss under the title "Outlines of
          Hebrew Grammar" (ib., 1877); "Gründe für die Unfehlbarkeit des
          Kirchenoberhauptes" (Münster, 1870); "Conspectus rei Syrorum
          litterariæ" (ib., 1871); "Messe und Pascha" (Mainz, 1872), tr.
          W. F. Skene, "The Lord's Supper and the Passover" (Edinburgh,
          1891); "Schriften und Gedichte syrischer Kirchenväter" (vols. 71
          and 72 of the "Sammlung der Kirchenväter" of Kempten); "S.
          Isaaci Antiocheni opera omnia" (2 vols., Giessen, 1873-77);
          "Kalilag und Damnag" (Leipzig, 1876); "Metrices biblicae regulæ
          exemplis illustratae" (Innsbruck, 1879); "Synodi brixinenses
          saec. quindecimi" (ib., 1880); "Carmina V. T. metrice" (ib.,
          1882); "Dichtungen de Hebraer" (3 vols., ib., 1882-84); "Der
          Prediger (Koheleth) über den Wert des Dasiens" (ib., 1886); "Das
          Buch Job" (Vienna, 1894).

          F. BECHTEL

   Diocese of Bismarck

                              Diocese of Bismarck

          (BISMARCKIENSIS).

          In North Dakota, this diocese was erected on 31 December, 1909,
          and is suffragan to the Archdiocese of St. Paul, Minnesota. It
          comprises the counties of Adams, Billings, Bowman, Burke,
          Burleigh Divide, Dunn, Emmons, Hettinger, McKenzie, McLean,
          Mercer, Morton, Mountrail, Oliver, Renville, Stark, Ward, and
          Williams, -- an area of 42,316 square miles. Mgr. Vincent Wehrle
          was elected its first bishop on 9 April, and was consecrated at
          St. Paul, 19 May, 1910. Born at Berg, Switzerland, 20 December,
          1855, Bishop Wehrle made his profession at the Benedictine
          Monastery of Einsiedeln, 3 December, 1876, and was ordained
          priest on 23 April, 1882. Appointed to the American apostolate
          shortly afterwards, he founded numerous missions and parishes in
          North Dakota. In 1884 he erected the Priory of St. Gall, and in
          1901 St. Mary's Abbey at Richardton, of which he was elected
          abbot in 1903. The diocese receives its name from the city of
          Bismarck (5443 inhabitants), the capital of the state. The early
          Catholic history of the territory has been treated in the
          article NORTH DAKOTA. According to the latest statistics the
          diocese contains: 1 bishop; 25 secular and 28 regular
          (Benedictine) priests; 34 churches with resident priests (3 for
          Indians); 53 missions with churches (5 for Indians); 43 stations
          without churches (2 for Indians); 8 parochial schools; 3
          Catholic hospitals; 2 Catholic Indian boarding-schools; about
          27,000 Catholics (1200 Indians). In 1911 there were 2596
          confirmations and 1912 baptisms (83 of adults). The Sisters of
          St. Benedict (48 in all) have houses at Bismarck, Dickinson,
          Fort Yates, Glen Ullin, Richardton, and Elbow Woods. The
          Ursuline Sisters (11) have a convent at St. Anthony, and the
          Franciscan Sisters (4) have charge of the hospital at Minot.

          Catholic Directory (New York, 1912); and bibliography to NORTH
          DAKOTA.

          MOIRA K. COYLE

   Eugene Bore

                                 Eugène Boré

          Orientalist, b. at Angers, 15 Aug., 1809; d. at Paris, 3 May,
          1878. From the college of Angers he went to the Collège
          Stanislas in Paris, where at eighteen he won the prize in
          philosophy in a competition of all the colleges of France, one
          rival being Alfred de Musset. After a year at law he devoted
          himself to the study of languages, In 1829 with his brother
          Léon, also a linguist and a noted translator, he joined the
          coterie of the Abbé Félicité de Lamennais, to which he
          introduced his college-mate, Maurice de Guérin. With
          Montalembert he tried to persude Lamennais to submit and did not
          give up hope of the latter's return to the Church until 1851.

          Member of the Asiatic Society in 1833, he won fame in the
          "Journal Asiatique". He was professor of Armenian (1833-34) at
          the Collège de France. Sent to Venice, he published the results
          of his literary labours there in the convent of the
          Mechitarists. Spending six months of 1837 in study at
          Constantinople, he went with Father Scaffi, C.M., to Erzerum in
          Armenia. At Tauris he started a school as an opening wedge for
          Christianity, whose service was always his chief concern. The
          Shah of Persia honoured him for the excellence of his school. In
          addition to many learned studies sent to France, his interesting
          letters were published as "The Correspondence of a Traveller in
          the Orient". In 1841 he secured Lazarist missioners for Persia.
          For services to France in that land he was given the cross of
          the Legion of Honour. Gregory XVI made him a Knight of the
          Golden Militia in 1842 and Knight of St. Gregory the Great in
          1843. Knowing forty Oriental idioms, most of them thoroughly, he
          published in some of these tongues excellent controversial
          works. He was eager for the return of the schismatics to the
          Church and was aided in his apostolate by his wide acquaintance
          with the most learned and influential men of France and Italy.
          He published an illuminating report of the condition of the Holy
          Land whither he was sent by France to investigate in 1847.
          Entering the Congregation of the Mission in Jan., 1849, at
          Constantinople, he was ordained there, 7 April, 1850, and made
          his vows in Paris in Jan., 1851. Sent to Constantinople, as head
          of the College of Bebek, he remained fifteen years doing zealous
          work for the Mussulmans as well as Christians especially on the
          battlefield during the Crimean War. In Paris in 1866 he was made
          secretary general, and was elected superior general of the
          Congregation of the Mission, 11 Sept., 1874. His incumbency of
          the latter office was cut short at the end of four years by a
          sudden illness.

          DE LA RALLAYE, Eugene Bore et les origines de la question
          d'orient (Paris et Lyons, 1894); Eugene Bore: Notice
          biographique suivie d'extraits de son journal et de sa
          correspondance; Annals of the Cong. of the Mission, no. 68
          (Emmitsburg, Md., 1910).

          B. RANDOLPH

   Ancient See of Borglum

                            Ancient See of Börglum

          (BURGLANUM, BURGLANENSIS.)

          The ancient See of Börglum, in Denmark, embraced the ancient
          districts of Vendsyssel and Thy, that is, the whole of the
          extreme north of Jutland beyond the Limfjord. The see was first
          at Vestervig, the diocese having been formed out of that of
          Viborg, which then included the whole of Jutland, on the death
          of Bishop Val in 1059. Magnus, first Bishop of Vestervig, was
          drowned in the Elbe about 1060, when returning home after his
          consecration by Adalbert I, Archbishop of Hamburg. Albrik, Dean
          of Bremen, was the second bishop (1066-85). Vestervig was the
          residence of St. Thoger, a missionary from Thuringia and
          chaplain to St. Olaf. After that king's death in 1030 Thoger
          retired to Vestervig, where he built a church of thatch and
          wattle, and preached Christianity to the inhabitants of the
          surrounding district. He died on 24 June, 1067, and was
          canonized in spite of the opposition of King Svend Estridsen and
          Bishop Albrik. Eventually St. Thoger became the patron saint of
          the diocese. Albrik's successor, Bishop Henry, was chaplain to
          King St. Canute, and was with him during his stay in Vendsyssel
          in June, 1086. Bishop Sylvester (1134-36) transferred the see to
          the Premonstratensian Abbey of Börglum. It became the cathedral
          of the new diocese, and its canons formed the diocesan chapter
          with power to elect the bishop. The last two bishops led very
          inconsistent lives. Their names were Niels Stygge (Rosenkrantz)
          and his nephew, Stygge Krumpen. Niels Stygge (b. 1455) was
          Bishop of Börglum from 1486-1533. Stygge Krumpen became
          coadjutor bishop in 1519, and diocesan bishop in 1533. He made
          some efforts to stay the progress of Protestantism, but he was
          imprisoned from 1536 to 1542. He was then endowed with the
          property of the nunnery of Asmild near Viborg, though obliged to
          maintain the nuns; he died there in 1551. In the territory of
          the former diocese of Börglum there are fine old churches at
          Vestervig and Börglum, the former dating from the beginning of
          the twelfth century. Besides the Abbey of Börglum (founded 1128)
          the diocese contained the following Benedictine nunneries:
          Vreilef (1268-1554), Hundslund (1268-1536), and Oekloster
          (1160-1542). There were also the Abbey of Vestervig (Augustinian
          canons), which lasted from 1110 to 1526, the Commandery of the
          Knights of St. John at Dueholm (1351-1539), and the Carmelite
          Priory at Saeby (Maristed), which lasted from about 1460 to
          1536.

          JORGENSEN, Den nordiske Kirkes Grundlaeggelse, II (Copenhagen,
          1878); NIELSEN, Kirke-leksikon for Norden, I (Aarhus, 1900),
          438-39; DAUGAARD, Danske Klostre (Copenhagen, 1830); TRAP,
          Danmark, IV (Copenhagen, 1902); Scriptores rerum Danicarum, VI
          (Copenhagen, 1786), 545-51; Aarboger for nordisk Oldkyndighed,
          XI (Copenhagen, 1876), 1-55; BRICKA, Dansk biografisk Leksikon
          (Copenhagen, 1887- 1905), IX, 555-57, XIV, 276, 277; GERTZ,
          Vitae sanctorum danorum, pt. I (Copenhagen, 1900), 1-26.

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Ulick Joseph Bourke

                              Ulick Joseph Bourke

          Irish scholar and writer, b. 29 Dec., 1829, at Castlebar, Co.
          Mayo; d. there, 22 Nov., 1887; son of Ulick Bourke and Cecilia
          Sheridan, a cousin of John MacHale, Archbishop of Tuam. He was
          educated first at an academy in Castlebar by Matthew Archdeacon,
          the author of "Connaught in '98"; next at Errew Monastery near
          Castlebar, where he studied Irish under the eminent Irish
          scholar and historian, James Hardiman. He entered St. Jarlath's
          College, Tuam, in May, 1846, and Maynooth in 1849. He was
          ordained on 25 March, 1858, at Tuam by Archbishop MacHale. While
          a student at Maynooth he wrote the "College Irish Grammar" for
          his fellow students in that college and the students of the then
          recently founded Catholic University of Ireland. On leaving
          Maynooth he was appointed Professor of Irish, logic, and
          humanities at St. Jarlath's College, which subjects he continued
          to teach there from 1859 to 1877. He was President of St.
          Jarlath's from 1865 to 1877; was elected a member of the Royal
          Irish Academy in 1866; and was made a canon of the Cathedral of
          Tuam in 1872. During his stay at St. Jarlath's he acted for some
          time as private secretary to Archbishop MacHale. He was a member
          of the Society for the Preservation of the Irish Language, but
          seceded from it with its original founders, and in March, 1880,
          established the Gaelic Union, which afterwards developed into
          the Gaelic League. In 1878 he was named Parish Priest of
          Kilcolman (Claremorris). He was one of the Commissioners
          appointed to inquire into the alleged apparitions of the Blessed
          Virgin at Knock, Co. Mayo, 1879. Canon Bourke died at Castlebar,
          and was buried at Bearnacarrol, 25 Nov., 1887.

          His writings are as follows:

          "The College Irish Grammar" (Dublin, first edition, 1856; fifth
          edition, 1868); "Easy Lessons or Self-instruction in Irish",
          which appeared first in "The Nation", and was reprinted in book
          form (Dublin, 1860), and which went through seven or eight
          editions during the lifetime of the author; "The Bull
          Ineffabilis Deus" (The Definition of the Immaculate Conception)
          in four languages, Latin, Irish, French, and English, printed in
          parallel columns (Dublin, 1868), containing a dissertation on
          the art of illuminating in the past and present; "The Aryan
          Origin of the Gaelic Race and Language, containing Essays on the
          Round Towers, Brehon Laws, etc." (London, 1875; 2nd edition,
          1876). In this work he defends the pagan origin of the Round
          Towers of Ireland; "Seventeen Sermons in Irish Gaelic by the
          Most Rev. James O'Gallagher, Bishop of Raphoe (1725-1737) and of
          Kildare (1737-1752), with an English translation and an
          Irish-English vocabulary" (edited, Dublin, 1877). This work
          contains a life of the bishop and an interesting account of the
          arrest and killing of the Rev. O'Hegarty, P. P. of Killygarran,
          1734. "The Life and Labours of St. Augustin, Bishop of Hippo
          Regius, with an account of the Canons Regular and of the
          Augustinian Friars in Ireland" (Dublin, 1879); "The Doctrine of
          the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary" (Dublin,
          1880); "The Dignity, Sanctity and Intercessory Power of the
          Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God" (Dublin, 1881); "The Life
          and Times of the Most Rev. Dr. MacHale, Archbishop of Tuam"
          (Dublin, 1882); "Beatha Sheaghain Mhic Heil, Airdeaspoig Thuama"
          (Life of John MacHale, Archbishop of Tuam), edited for the
          Gaelic Union in the "Gaelic Journal", I, II (1882-1886). This
          Irish Life of Dr. MacHale is a different work from the English
          Life of the Archbishop. Nine chapters of it were written before
          the English Life was begun, but it was never completed. Only
          twenty-four chapters had appeared at the time of the author's
          death, and they were never published in book form; "A Plea for
          the Evicted Tenants of Mayo" (Dublin, 1883), addressed to
          William Ewart Gladstone; "Prechristian Ireland, a treatise on
          Early Irish History, Ethnology, the origin of the Round Towers,
          etc., with the Portrait of the Author" (Dublin, 1887); "A
          Complete Irish Dictionary", on which he was engaged for years,
          but it was not completed when his last illness came. The
          beginning of it was published in "The Nation." In 1868 Canon
          Bourke established the "Keltic Journal" at Manchester, under the
          editorship of James Ronan; only nine numbers of this periodical
          appeared. He brought out an edition of the catechism in Irish,
          and in collaboration with Father John Nolan and David Comyn
          wrote three elementary Irish grammatical works, published under
          the auspices of the Society for the Preservation of the Irish
          Language. He acted as editor of "The Last Monarch of Tara"
          (Dublin), and it was under his supervision that all the Irish
          works of Archbishop MacHale were published or republished. He
          also wrote a "Life of St. Jarlath", which appeared in the "Tuam
          News".

          Canon Bourke's works popularized the results of the philological
          researches of Continental scholars, such as Pictet, Bopp, Zeuss,
          and Ebel, and did much to keep alive the interest of Irish
          studies in Ireland. His "Easy Lessons" and "College Irish
          Grammar" are in some respects still the most complete handbooks
          of Modern Irish. Though several of his theories are now
          antiquated, his English works, written in an easy flowing style,
          still form a popular introduction to Irish philology and
          archaeology.

          Irish Catholic Directory (1860-1888); J. G[LYNN], a sketch in
          Dublin Journal (March, 1887), republished in the Tuam News (6
          May, 1887); Catholic Fireside (London, January, 1888); Freeman's
          Journal (23-26, Nov., 1887), and the various works of the
          author, and information supplied by John Glynn, Esq., Tuam, Co.
          Galway.

          JOHN MACERLEAN

   Boycotting

                                   Boycotting

          The name of boycotting was first aplied to a practice which had
          its origin in Ireland during the most stirring days of the land
          agitation. It was comparatively easy to arouse popular
          enthusiasm, and to elicit a general readiness for self-sacrifice
          for a cause which touched the people so closely and so vitally.
          But the slightest remissness or backsliding would be fatal to
          the entire project. An insignificant number who refused to abide
          by the common understanding would be sufficient to render all
          the efforts of the Land League futile. If landlords could count
          on finding tenants for their vacant farms, they might afford to
          laugh at the schemes of agitators. And it was inevitable that a
          number of "grabbers" should appear on the scene at that time.
          The land hunger was always proverbially strong in Ireland, and
          the opportunity of acquiring farms on easy terms was a
          temptation too strong to be resisted by ambitious self-seekers
          such as are to be found in all classes of society. The
          difficulty of dealing with "grabbers", therefore, was acute from
          the very commencement of the Land League. Agrarian outrages had
          been well-known in Ireland for some years previously and there
          was serious danger of a more violent and widespread outbreak
          now. This the leaders of the new agitation knew and feared for
          various reasons.

          At a public meeting in 1880 Parnell put the question to his
          audience: "What are we to do with a tenant who bids for a farm
          from which his neighbour has been evicted?" The more violent
          spirits recommended shooting, but Parnell himself had a proposal
          to offer which he rightly believed could be made far more
          effective. He expounded it at length, clearly, and emphatically.
          In substance it was, that such a person should "be left severely
          alone, put into a moral Coventry, isolated from his kind as if
          he was a leper of old". This was the weapon which he put into
          the hands of the Land Leaguers, and which was destined to be
          used with such drastic effect throughout the various
          vicissitudes of the land agitation in Ireland and to be
          introduced into disputes that were not agrarian and into
          countries other than Ireland. It is pertinent to observe that
          from its first adoption, this severe isolation, this consignment
          to a moral Coventry affected not only the prime offender but
          equally anyone convicted of violating the common understanding
          of having no social intercourse with him. It was put in motion
          immediately against Captain Boycott of Connemara, agent of Lord
          Erne, who sent a process server to serve ejectment notices on a
          number of tenants for non-payment of rent. All his servants were
          induced to leave him, tradesmen were prevented from working for
          him, and shopkeepers from supplying him with goods.

          From this case the practice received the name of "boycotting"
          and immediately the word became current in the language. The
          practice spread rapidly through every part of the country. The
          Government found itself utterly unable to deal with organized
          boycotting. The powerlessness of the common law was demonstrated
          by the failure of the Government to convict a number of the
          leaders of the Land League for unlawful conspiracy, when in
          January, 1881, the jury declared themselves unable to agree and
          the defendants were acquitted. Thereupon followed a succession
          of coercion and special Crimes Acts, the only effect of which
          was to render the people more determined and more lawless.
          Violence and outrages increased or diminished with the hostility
          of the Government. After a temporary abatement disorder began to
          rage fiercely again in 1886, when the Plan of Campaign was
          established and met by a new Crimes Act. On 23 April, 1888, the
          Congregation of the Holy Office declared that it was not lawful
          to make use of the Plan of Campaign and boycotting. A short time
          afterwards the Plan of Campaign was perceived to be a failure
          and boycotting was gradually discontinued. It had a brief
          revival about the year 1899. In 1902 boycotting was practically
          destroyed in Ireland, when a number of defendants were convicted
          in a civil action and damages to the amont of £20,000 were given
          against them by a jury presided over by Chief Baron Pallas.

          Boycotting, therefore, in its strict, original sense, means a
          complete ostracism. It operates by leaving the obnoxious party
          severely alone and its effectiveness is increased enormously by
          the threat that anyone who violates its terms will be regarded
          as sharing in the offence and will be made to share also in the
          ostracism of the prime offender. In a wider, but still
          legitimate, sense of the word it is used of every attempt,
          through the denial of one or more of the advantages or amenities
          of ordinary social intercourse, to compel an individual or group
          of individuals to do something which they are legally entitled
          not to do, or to abstain from doing something which they are
          legally entitled to do. In this latter sense it may be used of
          the efforts of a trust, for instance, to compel a particular
          railroad to use only coal from a mine in which it is interested,
          by the threat that, unless this is done, this railroad will not
          be allowed any share in the business of carrying the trust's
          products. A combination or conspiracy is commonly assumed to be
          of the essence of boycotting. But, although it is true that
          boycotting generally operates through a combination, the
          combination does not appear to be at all essential to it. An
          iron trust or even an iron king may be as well able to exert
          pressure of the kind peculiar to boycotting as any combination
          of Irish tenant farmers. At present there is a growing tendency
          to use the word boycotting in a wider sense still. It is now
          very generally used of any discrimination in social or business
          matters against individuals or sects because of prejudice as to
          character, tenets, or practices.

          The lawlessness and outrages which accompanied boycotting in
          Ireland in the eighties seem to have impressed it with certain
          features which distinguish it from other forms of social
          ostracism, and these features coupled with the condemnation by
          the Holy Office have caused boycotting to be regarded as
          affected with a moral taint. For a long time to brand a practice
          as boycotting was tantamount to labelling it immoral. The ethics
          of boycotting was discussed at considerable length in a number
          of articles in "The Irish Theological Quarterly" in the years
          1907 and 1908. The conclusions of the contributors of the
          articles differed very widely. As a result if may at least be
          safely held that boycotting cannot under all circumstances be
          pronounced immoral. The condemnation by the Holy Office may
          certainly be taken as applying only to the concrete situation as
          it existed at the time in Ireland. Since, therefore, we cannot
          declare off-hand that boycotting is either moral or immoral, and
          since moreover different instances of boycotting will be found
          to present very different moral considerations, in practice each
          case will have to be decided strictly on its merits according to
          the ordinary moral principles that are applicable to it.

          Mere discrimination in social or business matters, however much
          it may savour of bigotry or narrow-mindedness in certain
          circumstances, cannot be called immoral. It is only what
          everyone does to a certain extent; the most conscientious of men
          prefer to deal and dine with those whom he knows best or with
          whom he has most interests in common. As for the element of
          compulsion, the attempt to compel a person to do something in
          itself moral, which he is legally entitled not to do, that too,
          in certain circumstances, is perfectly lawful. It is constantly
          being done in everyday life by people whom no one thinks of
          accusing of immorality. But there are other points substantial
          in the matter of morality, the restraint put on the ordinary
          liberty of citizens, the use of combination for this purpose,
          and the liability of the practice to grave abuse. These must be
          considered in every case of boycotting; but they should be
          considered without prejudice, precisely as they are considered
          in understandings amongst business men or professional etiquette
          amongst lawyers and doctors.

          There is no denying that boycotting constitutes a grave menace
          to social equity and peace. It may sometimes be used to resist
          oppression, but unfortunately it is an instrument that may be
          made to cut more effectively in the other direction. It is
          moreover a most powerful instrument in the hands of discontented
          and vindictive demagogues for producing social turmoil and
          indulging private spleens. Although these facts do not make a
          particular case of boycotting immoral, where there is a good to
          be grained great enough to outweigh the evils and sufficient to
          justify the danger of abuses, still, from the point of view of
          public welfare, they might render it necessary for the
          legislature to prohibit the practice altogether. The boycotting
          that once prevailed in Ireland has now happily disappeared with
          the conditions in which it had its origin. It is not likely that
          any of the English-speaking Governments will be called on ever
          again to take action in connection with it. The undue advantage
          taken of their economic strength by certain trusts and companies
          is much more likely to produce inequity and to call for
          legislative action.

          O'BRIEN, The Life of Charles Stewart Parnell (London, 1898);
          MORLEY, The Life of William Ewart Gladstone (London, 1905); The
          Irish Theol. Quar., I, II (Dublin, 1907-08); LEMKUHL, Theol.
          mor. (Freiburg, 1910); VERMEERSCH, Questiones de Justitia
          (Bruges, 1901).

          JOHN KELLEHER

   Reform of the Roman Breviary

                          Reform of the Roman Breviary

          By the Apostolic Constitution "Divino Afflatu" of Pius X (1
          November, 1911), a change was made in the psalter of the Roman
          Breviary. Instead of printing, together with the psalms, those
          portions of the Office which specially require rubrics, such as
          the invitatory, hymns for the seasons, blessings, absolutions,
          chapters, suffrages, dominical prayers, Benedictus, Magnificat,
          Te Deum, etc., these are now all in due order printed by
          themselves under the title Ordinary. The psalms, under the title
          Psaltery, are printed together, so arranged that the entire
          psalter may be chanted or recited each week, and so distributed,
          or, when too long, divided, that approximately there may be the
          same number of verses for each day's Office. This change has
          been made with a view to restoring the original use of the
          liturgy, which provided for the chant or recitation of the
          entire Psaltery each week. It became necessary by the fact that
          as the saints' days, with common or special Offices, grew more
          numerous, the ordinary Sunday and week-day or ferial Offices,
          and consequently certain of the psalms, were rarely recited. In
          making the change, occasion was taken to facilitate the reading
          of the Office by the separation of the Ordinary and Psaltery
          proper, but chiefly by allotting about the same number of verses
          for each day. It is only a first step in the revision of the
          entire Breviary, as agreed upon at the Vatican Council. It was
          proposed by a committee of liturgists appointed by Pius X,
          adopted by the Congregation of Rites, and sanctioned by the pope
          to go into effect on 1 January, 1913, in accordance with the new
          rubrics regulating thenceforth the reading of the Divine Office.

          Each day, therefore, has its own psalms, as arranged in the new
          Psalter, except certain feast days, about 125 in number, viz.,
          all those of Christ and their octaves, the Sundays within the
          octaves of the Nativity, Epiphany, Ascension, Corpus Christi,
          the vigil of the Epiphany, and the day after the octave of the
          Ascension, when the Office is of these days; the Vigil of the
          Nativity from Lauds to None and the Vigil of Pentecost; all the
          feasts of the Blessed Virgin, of the angels, St. John the
          Baptist, St. Joseph, and the Apostles, as well as doubles of the
          first and second class and their entire octaves. Theirs is the
          Office to be read as appointed either in the Breviary, or in the
          Ordo of a diocese or institute, the psalms for Lauds, the Hours
          and Complin to be taken from Sunday; those for Matins and
          Vespers from the Common of the Office, unless others specially
          be assigned. The Office for the last three days of Holy Week
          remains unchanged, except that the psalms for Lauds are from the
          corresponding days of the week in the Psalter, and for Complin
          those of Sunday. For all other feasts and for ferias in Paschal
          time the psalms are those of the new Psalter; the rest of the
          Office is from the Proper or Common. When a feast has special
          antiphons for any of the major hours, it retains them with its
          own psalms. Except for certain feasts the lessons of the first
          Nocturn are to be the current lessons from Scripture, though the
          responsories are to be taken from the Common or Proper. Any
          feast that has its own proper lessons retains them; for feasts
          with their own responsories, those with the common lessons are
          to be read.

          The criteria given to regulate the precedence of feasts are:
          gradation of rite, classification, as primary or secondary,
          personal dignity of the one honoured, external solemnity, local
          importance or privilege. Provision is made for the transfer of
          feasts that must make way for others more important occurring,
          whether occasionally or perpetually, on the same day, especially
          for the Sundays. The suffrages of the saints are now invoked in
          the one prayer "A cunctis". The Athanasian Creed is to be said
          only on Trinity Sunday and the Sundays after the Epiphany and
          Pentecost when the Office is of the Sunday; but even on these
          days, when there is a commemoration of a duplex, or of an octave
          or day within an octave, the suffrages, prayers and symbol and
          the third Collect are not to be said. The week-day and other
          votive Offices granted by the general indult of 5 July, 1883,
          are no longer allowed. Nor is there now the obligation of
          reciting in choir the Little Office of the Blessed Virgin, the
          Office of the Dead, the Gradual, and the Penitential Psalms. The
          feasts of the dedication of a church, of a cathedral, and of the
          patrons of dioceses, are to be observed as doubles of the first
          class, and the feast of the Lateran Basilica and its titular
          feast of the Transfiguration, as doubles of the second class.
          Directions are given for conforming the Missal with the
          Breviary, especially for the Masses of Sundays, Lenten ferias,
          Collects, and also for conventual Masses. On All Souls' Day, the
          Office and Mass of the current day are to be omitted, and the
          Office and Mass of the Dead only are to be recited; on All
          Saints' Day, the Vespers of the day, and of the Dead, are to be
          recited as hitherto.

          The members of the Revisory Commission were: Mgr. P. La
          Fontaine, titular Bishop of Carystos, Secretary of the
          Congregation of Rites (President), Mgr. Scipio Tecchi, Mgr. P.
          Piacenza, Mgr. J. Bressan (Private Secretary to the Pope), Mgr.
          A. Gasparri, Father P. Brugnani, O.M., Father L. Fonck, S.J.,
          Father J. d'Isengard, C.M., and Rev. F. Brehm. The complete
          reform of the Breviary, committed to another commission,
          involves a reform of the calendar; the revision of the
          historical lessons; the omission of lessons not authenticated;
          the correction of texts; the new general rubric; the Common of
          certain classes of saints, as of confessors, holy women, and
          others, in order to commemorate them on one day instead of
          assigning a day for each.

          PIACENZA, In Constitutionem `Divino Afflatu' et in rubricas
          commentarium (Rome, 1912); IDEM, Guida practica per la recita
          del divino Officio (Rome, 1912); BURTON AND MYERS, The New
          Psalter and Its Use (London, 1912); BOUDINHON, Le Psalterium
          Breviarii Romani et les nouvelles rubriques (Paris, 1912);
          WELSH, The New Rubrics (Edinburgh, 1912); HETHERINGTON, Notes on
          the New Rubrics and the Use of the New Psalter (London, 1912);
          Am. Eccl. Rev. (February and April, 1912).

          JOHN J. WYNNE

   Institute of the Brigidines

                          Institute of the Brigidines

          (SISTERS OF ST. BRIGID.)

          The Institute of the Brigidines was established by Most Rev. Dr.
          Delaney, Bishop of Kildare and Leighlin, at Tullow, Co. Carlow,
          Ireland, in 1807. Bishop Delaney, keenly alive to the lamentable
          state to which religion had been reduced by the Penal Laws and
          by the disastrous effects of the Rebellion of 1798, began to
          remedy the evil by applying himself to secure the proper
          observance of the Lord's Day, and the religious instruction of
          the children and adult women of his parish and diocese. He
          resided at Tullow, and to inaugurate his work there he formed
          catechism and reading classes to be held in the church on
          Sundays. To carry out this purpose he selected a number of
          exemplary young women to form a religious community. He allowed
          them to make vows, and thus laid the foundation of the Brigidine
          Institute, one of the first of the kind founded in Ireland since
          the Reformation.

          The sisters immediately opened schools for the poorer and higher
          classes of children in the neighbourhood. This work proving
          successful, a building was erected for the accommodation of
          boarders who presented themselves, but who had until then to
          lodge in the town. Soon many came to avail themselves of the
          advantages of religious and secular education afforded by the
          Brigidine Sisters. The institute, although several times
          sanctioned by the Holy See, continued a diocesan congregation
          until 1892, when Pope Leo XIII, on being solicited to place all
          the houses of the institute under a mother-general, issued a
          Decree approving of change in government for five years by way
          of experiment, and in 1907 Pope Pius X confirmed, in perpetuity,
          the constitution of the new regime. Before and since that date
          several foundations have been made in Australia and New Zealand,
          where there are at present fourteen houses of the institute.
          There are five convents in Ireland: at Tullow, Mountrath,
          Abbeyleix, Goresbridge, and Ballyroan, all in the Diocese of
          Kildare and Leighlin.

          The pupils of the Brigidines (boarding and benefit schools) are
          prepared for the Intermediate, University, Senior Oxford, and
          Kensington Examinations, for those of the Incorporated Society
          of Music, and the technical courses.

          MOTHER DE CHANTAL FENNELLY

   General Sir William Francis Butler

                       General Sir William Francis Butler

          Born at Suirville, Co. Tipperary, Ireland, 31 October, 1838;
          died 7 June, 1910, was the son of Richard and Ellen Butler. His
          family had been settled on their estates in Tipperary since
          Thomas Butler, tenth Earl of Ormonde, had received grants of
          land from Queen Elizabeth after the suppression of the Desmond
          rebellion in 1584. The great famine of 1847 and scenes of
          suffering and eviction were amongst his earliest recollections.
          He was educated chiefly by the Jesuits at Tullabeg College,
          King's Co. In 1858 he received a commission in the 69th
          Regiment, which he joined at the depot at Fermoy, and after two
          years he was sent to Madras. The regiment returned to England in
          1864, and on the way Butler visited the Island of St. Helena,
          led thither by his profound veneration for Napoleon. In 1867 he
          visited Canada for the first time, and went back there again
          after a brief visit to Ireland, with a mission from Colonel
          Wolseley to find out the true state of feeling in the Red River
          settlement. In October, 1870, he was intrusted with a fresh
          mission to report on the need of troops, the fur trade, the
          Indians etc., in Saskatchewan, following the course of the
          Saskatchewan River from Carlton to the Rocky Mountains. The
          story of this winter journey and his share in the Red River
          expedition is told in "The Great Lone Land", first published in
          1872.

          Sir Garnet Wolseley made his famous expedition to Ashanti in
          West Africa in 1873. To Butler he entrusted the task of
          intercepting the Ashanti Army whilst retreating across the River
          Prah. This proved impossible, for though he induced 1400 Akims
          to move forward with him to within 20 miles of Coomassie they
          took alarm at the last moment and went home. The full story of
          his share in the Ashanti War is given in "Akim-foo, the History
          of a Failure" (London, 1875). Wolseley reported of him: "He has
          effected a most important diversion in favour of the main body
          and has detained before him all the forces of one of the most
          powerful Ashanti chiefs." He was now promoted major and made a
          Companion of the Bath. The opening months of 1875 saw him start
          for Natal on the staff of Sir Garnet Wolseley, who had been sent
          out as governor and high commissioner. Butler was named
          protector of Indian immigrants and had to report on the land
          system then existing in the colony. To the insight then gained
          into South African problems he attributes, to a great extent,
          the accuracy of certain warnings of his a quarter of a century
          later before the outbreak of the Boer War.

          At the close of 1875 he joined the staff of the War Office, and
          in 1877 he married Miss Elizabeth Thompson, the painter of the
          "Roll Call", "Quatre Bras", and other famous battle scenes.
          After the disaster of Isandula in the Zulu War, he was sent
          again to Natal, but through ill luck was kept at the base and
          saw no fighting. Promotion to lieutenant-colonel followed on his
          return to England, for services in Natal, and the Marquis of
          Ripon, Viceroy of India, proposed him for his private secretary,
          but Gladstone refused his sanction on the score of Butler's
          being a Catholic. In the Egyptian campaign of 1882 he saw much
          hard service, and was present at the engagements of El Magfar,
          Tel-e-Mahouta, Kassassin, and the night attack on the Egyptian
          lines at Tel-el-Kebir.

          After the campaign he returned to England and started once again
          for "the great prairies and the pine forests" of Canada. He
          visited many of the scenes of his earlier travels, but within a
          few months was back in London, and was discussing with Lord
          Wolseley the various routes by which the garrisons at Khartoum
          might be reached, and General Gordon saved. To Butler were
          entrusted, when at last the relief expedition was a certainty,
          the procuring of 400 boats, and the getting of these boats, with
          their troops and provisions, up the cataracts of the Nile. This
          was effected by almost superhuman efforts against time and the
          unfavourable state of the Nile, then rapidly falling. His task
          accomplished, he was sent on under General Earle, who led the
          river column of advance upon Khartoum. He took part in the heavy
          fighting at Kirbekam, and indeed the success of that action has
          always been attributed to his foresight. After the fall of
          Khartoum, he was left in command at Meroe, and brought the
          troops stationed there in safety to Dongola. In September, 1885,
          he was in command at Wady Halfa, and successfully kept the
          forces of the Mahdi at bay till re-enforcements arrived from
          England. He commanded the division of Gen. Stephenson's army
          engaged in the action at Ginniss and was mentioned in the
          highest terms in despatches. Finding no appointment open to him
          in England on his return, he betook himself to Brittany with his
          family, where he wrote "The Campaign of the Cataracts" (1887)
          and "The Life of General Gordon" (1889), and subsequently to
          Ireland, where he made the acquaintance of Parnell. During his
          stay in Brittany he was made K.C.B. (Knight Commander of the
          Bath) for his services in Egypt and the Sudan. In 1890 he
          returned to Egypt to take command at Alexandria, and was
          promoted major-general in 1892. During the intervals of leave
          from his duties at Alexandria he travelled a great deal,
          visiting, amongst other places, the sacred sites of Palestine,
          which had always had a deep interest and attraction for him.
          From 1893 to 1896 he commanded a brigade at Aldershot, being
          transferred in the latter year to the command of the
          South-Eastern district of England. In the autumn of 1898 he went
          to South Africa as commander-in-chief and high commissioner
          during the absence of Sir Alfred Milner. In the latter capacity
          he strove to avert a war which he saw was bound to result in
          calamity both for England and South Africa, and as
          commander-in-chief he tried to show the Government the
          inadequacy of their preparations and what a war with the
          Transvaal would really mean. His attitude did not find favour at
          home and he was severely criticised for having stated in his
          capacity as high commissioner that he considered South Africa in
          need of "no surgical operation".

          In September, 1899, he resigned his command and came home. He
          saw no active service during the war, remaining in command of
          the Western District of England. He also commanded at Aldershot
          and in the Southern District. In 1903 he headed the commission
          of enquiry into the scandals connected with stores and supplies
          during the war, and in October, 1905, having reached the age
          limit of sixty-seven, he was placed on the retired list. The few
          years of life which remained to him he spent in Ireland, devoted
          chiefly to the cause of education. He was a frequent lecturer
          both in Dublin and the provinces on historical, social, and
          economic questions. He was a member of the senate of the
          National University of Ireland, and a commissioner of the Board
          of National Education. In June, 1906, he was appointed Knight of
          the Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, and in 1909 he was
          made a member of the Irish Privy Council. He died fortified by
          the rites of the Church, and was buried with full military
          honours at Killardrich, Co. Tipperary. Besides the books already
          mentioned, Sir William Butler was the author of several
          important works, chief among which are the military biographies
          of Sir Charles Napier (1890) and Sir George Colley (1899). The
          latter appeared a few months before the outbreak of the Boer
          War. He was working at the last chapters of his autobiography at
          the time of his death.

          Sir William Butler, an Autobiography (London, 1911); WOLSELEY,
          Story of a Soldier's Life (2 vols., London, 1906); COLVILLE,
          History of the Sudan Campaign (London, 1887).

          R. URBAN BUTLER
     __________________________________________________________________

   Leopoldo Marco Antonio Caldani

                         Leopoldo Marco Antonio Caldani

          Anatomist and physiologist, b. at Bologna, 21 Nov., 1725; d. at
          Padua, 20 Dec., 1813. He studied medicine in his native city,
          and received a medical degree there in 1750. He was appointed
          professor of practical medicine at Bologna in 1755 on condition
          that he was to study anatomy under Morgagni's direction for five
          years more. Caldani left Bologna apparently on account of
          enemies and went to Padua, where, as one of Morgagni's best
          pupils, he was later made professor of theoretical medicine, and
          in 1771, after Morgagni's death, was made professor of anatomy.
          He retained this latter professorship until he retired in 1805.
          Caldani was a zealous champion of Haller's theory of
          irritability; he is noted for his experimental studies on the
          function of the spinal cord and for the introduction of
          electricity in the physiology of the nerves. His most celebrated
          work is his anatomical atlas, in which he was aided by his
          nephew Floriano. His works are: "Sull' intensività et
          irritabilità di alune parti degli animali" (Bologna, 1757);
          "Lettera sopra l'irritabilità et insensività Halleriana"
          (Bologne, 1759); "Lettera sull'uso del muschio nella idrofobia"
          (Venice, 1767); "Esame del capitolo settimo dell'ultima opera di
          Antonio de Haen" (Padua, 1770); "Innesto felice del vajuolo"
          (Padua, 1768); "Institutiones pathologicae" (Padua, 1772, 1776;
          Leyden, 1784; Venice, 1786; Naples, 1787), translated into
          German by Reuss (1784), and issued at Prague (1793), in
          connection with "Institutiones physiologicae"; "Dialoghi di
          fisiologia e di pathologia" (Padua, 1778, 1793); "Institutiones
          physiologicae" (Padua, 1773, 1778; Leyden, 1784; Venice, 1786;
          Naples, 1787); "Institutiones semeioticae" (Padua, 1808);
          "Icones anatomicae" with 5 vols. of "Explicatio iconum" (Venice,
          1801-13).

          WERNICH-HIRSCH, Biographisches Lexikon der Arzte, I, 643.

          LEOPOLD SENFELDER

   Diocese of Cali

                                Diocese of Cali

          (Caliensis).

          Founded in Colombia, South America, on 7 July, 1910. Cali is a
          city, district, and province in the Department of Valle. The
          Province of Valle is bounded on the north by the Province of
          Arboleda, on the south by Santander (Department of Cauca), on
          the east by Palmira, and includes the districts of Cali,
          Jamundi, Pavas, Dagua, Vijes, and Yumbo. Its area is about 4175
          square miles, and its chief products are gold, sugar, cacao,
          coffee, and cattle. The city of Cali, the seat of the new
          diocese, is situated on a small river of the same name, and
          possesses a population of about 35,000. It was founded by
          Captain Miguel Lopez Munoz by order of the Spanish conqueror
          Sebastian de Belalcazar on 25 July, 1536. Although many of its
          important buildings were destroyed by an earthquake in 1885, the
          city quickly recovered, and the recently built railroad
          connecting it with the port of Buenaventura and the Pacific
          Ocean has greatly increased its commercial importance and that
          of the surrounding country. The immense plantations of cacao and
          coffee, which encircle the city, and its charming suburbs render
          it a delightful place of residence. It celebrated the centenary
          of its national independence by an industrial and artistic
          exhibition on 20 July, 1910. Among its numerous modern buildings
          of importance the beautiful churches of San Francisco (Ionian
          style) and San Pedro call for special mention. Notable also are:
          the magnificent convent of the Franciscan Friars; the Colegio
          Superior de Santa Librada for women; the Presentation School for
          girls; the asylum for honest, indigent women; and a splendid
          hospital. The Catholic population of the new diocese is about
          150,000. Mgr. Aladio Perlaza, formerly Vicar-General of Cali,
          was elected its first bishop on 11 August, 1911.

          MOIRA K. COYLE

   Tomas Camara y Castro

                            Tomás Cámara y Castro

          Bishop of Salamanca, Spain, born at Torrecilla de Cameros,
          Logroño, 19 September, 1847; died at Villaharta, 17 May, 1904.
          His father, D. Leonardo Cámara, was a physician in this town.
          Tomás studied Humanities at Burgos, and at the age of fifteen
          took the habit of the Augustinians at Valladolid, where he
          finished his theology and was appointed professor in the
          college. His activity was inexhaustible, and among the many
          works which he accomplished during his episcopate were the
          foundation in Salamanca of the Colegio de Calatrava for the
          promotion of ecclesiastical courses, the erection of a handsome
          church to San Juan de Sahagún, patron of the city, and of six
          smaller churches in other cities. Bishop Cámara was primarily a
          polemicist and orator. His great learning, extraordinary
          talents, varied interests, and untiring activity made him one of
          the most prominent figures of the Spanish episcopate during the
          nineteenth century. No great work was undertaken for the Church
          in which he did not figure in the foremost rank, in posts of
          danger and enterprises of the greatest importance, making him
          beloved by the Catholics and feared by the enemies of the
          Church. In congresses, assemblies, the Senate, the press, and in
          every situation where noble and sacred interests were to be
          safeguarded, he was to be found. His Lenten conferences,
          preached in 1884 and 1885, were attended by a representative
          audience of the most distinguished men of letters, politics,
          sciences, and arts.

          Among the numerous works of Bishop Cámara the following are the
          most important: "Contestación á la historia del conflicto entre
          la religión y la ciencia de Juan Guillermo Draper" (3 editions);
          "Vida y escritos del Beato Alonso de Orozco, del Orden de San
          Agustín, Predicador de Felipe II"; "Conferencias y demás
          discursos hasta hoy publicados del Ilmo. P. Cámara, Obispo de
          Salamanca"; "Vida de S. Juan de Sahagún, del Orden de S.
          Agustín, Patrón de Salamanca"; "La Venerable Sacramento,
          Vizcondesa de Jorbalán, Fundadora de las Señoras Adoratrices."

          DEL MORAL, La Cuidad de Dios: Biografía del Exmo. é Ilmo. Sr. D.
          Fr. Tomás Cámara y Castro; MUIÑOS SAENZ, Semblanza del Ezmo. é
          Ilmc. Sr. D. Fr. Tomás Cámara y Castro.

          TEODORO RODRÍGUEZ

   James Campbell

                                 James Campbell

          Born at Philadelphia, 1 Sept., 1812; died there, 27 Jan., 1893.
          His father was Anthony Campbell, and his grandfather George
          Campbell, a native of Fintona, County Tyrone, Ireland. James was
          educated at the private school of Geraldus Stockdale, studied
          law with Hon. Robert D. Ingraham, was admitted to the Bar on 14
          Sept., 1833, was made a commissioner of the district of
          Southwark the day after his admission, and served until his
          appointment to the board of education. He offered, 16 Apr.,
          1840, the resolution which established the Girls' High School of
          Philadelphia. He served on the board of education until 1840,
          when he was appointed, by Governor David R. Porter, judge of the
          courts of common pleas, orphan's court, and courts of oyer and
          terminer, which position he filled until 1 Jan., 1851, when the
          judicial positions in Pennsylvania became elective. Nominated
          for judge of the supreme court, at a period when Knownothingism
          and anti-Catholic feeling was rife, he was defeated, although
          his four colleagues on the Democratic ticket were elected.
          Governor William Bigler appointed him Attorney-General of
          Pennsylvania, in which office he served until 4 Mar., 1853, when
          he entered President Pierce's Cabinet as postmaster-general,
          serving until 4 Mar., 1857. In 1861 he was a candidate for the
          United States senate against Charles R. Buckalew but was
          defeated by one vote. In 1873 he was elected a member of the
          Constitutional Convention of Pennsylvania, but declined to serve
          owing to the condition of his health. For twenty-five years he
          was president of the board of trustees of Jefferson Medical
          College, and for forty-five years was Vice-president of Saint
          Joseph's Orphan Asylum, the oldest incorporated Roman Catholic
          asylum in the United States, chartered in 1807. On 3 Sept.,
          1869, he was appointed by the judges of Philadelphia County a
          member of the board of city trusts, which has under its care 42
          city trusts, including Girard College and Wills' Eye Hospital.
          He served in these positions until his death. Judge Campbell
          looked upon his obligations, whether as public official or as
          trustee, as duties of the highest order and of great value to
          society, and he was a just and severe judge upon himself as to
          the manner and the faithfulness with which these duties were
          discharged. Even with all the cares that surrounded him, he was
          always ready to respond to the slightest call from any of the
          refuges of the poor and the ill. He made visits almost daily to
          St. Joseph's Orphan Asylum, to Girard College, and to the
          hospital, examining conditions in detail, and considering them
          with as much care as if they referred to his own life or to the
          lives of those of his own household.

          JOHN M. CAMPBELL

   Alfonso Capecelatro

                              Alfonso Capecelatro

          Cardinal, Archbishop of Capua, and ecclesiastical writer; b. at
          Marseilles, 5 Feb., 1824; d. 14 Nov., 1912. He was descended
          from the family of the dukes of Castel Pagano. His father served
          with distinction under Murat, adopted the political principles
          of the Napoleonic period, and voluntarily exiled himself to
          Malta and Marseilles, when Ferdinand of Naples, after his
          restoration by the Congress of Laibach, set about the repression
          of political Liberalism. The family returned to Italy in 1826
          and to Naples in 1830. At sixteen Alfonso entered the Oratory of
          St. Philip Neri at Naples. Ordained priest in 1847, he zealously
          devoted himself to the confessional, preaching, and various
          charitable enterprises, without, however, neglecting his
          ecclesiastical studies, and giving especial attention to
          ecclesiastical history. He was more particularly drawn to St.
          Peter Damian, St. Catherine of Siena, St. Philip Neri, and St.
          Alphonsus Liguori, the great figures who at various times
          represented religious revival in Italy, and whose biographies he
          wrote. He refuted Renan's "Life of Christ" then widely
          circulated in Italy, and afterwards himself published a "Life of
          Jesus Christ", wherein without entering into details of
          criticism and polemics, he gathered the results of modern
          researches on the topography and the contemporary history,
          customs, usages, and opinions of the Hebrews. He devoted three
          volumes to an exposition of Catholic doctrine and two to the
          Christian virtues, and published several volumes of sermons.

          Meanwhile he maintained personal relations with various persons,
          particularly priests and religious at Naples, among them the
          Franciscan Ludovico da Casovia, whose biography he wrote, and
          two priests Persico and Casanova, with whom he often discussed
          methods of catechetical instruction. He corresponded with other
          Liberal Catholics, among them Manzoni, Cesare Cantu, Dupanloup,
          and Montalembert. These friendships indicated that he was
          tending towards "Catholic Liberalism". His own family
          antecedents better explained both this and Capecelatro's
          "conciliatorist" tendencies after 1870. These tendencies were
          not unknown to Leo XIII, who, one year after his elevation to
          the papacy, summoned the learned Oratorian to Rome, together
          with Padre Luigi Tosti, and made him assistant librarian,
          wishing thereby not only to honour a learned man, but also to
          make use of him for the work of reconciliation which occupied
          his mind until 1887. In 1880 Capecelatro was appointed
          Archbishop of Capua. There he passed his life in the
          administration of his diocese, literary labours, and works of
          charity. He was made a cardinal by Leo XIII in 1885. In the
          pastoral letters and other minor works published in the last
          years of his life he treats the great questions of modern times,
          especially those relating to public life in Italy. His writings
          are distinguished by purity and simplicity of style. He received
          some votes in the conclave of 1903. He had no influence in
          ecclesiastical politics; but his correspondence will
          unquestionably supply valuable material for the
          politico-religious history of Italy in his time. Cardinal
          Capecelatro, particularly in recent years, was overwhelmed by
          the course of events and by that Modernist crisis which had long
          been preparing and so violently burst out in the Church. He
          remained immured in his old ideal of "God and Liberty", in the
          old dream of "the pope arm-in-arm with the King of Italy". He
          did not understand the new movement and the hard lessons which
          it brought with it. But that did not prevent Pius X from calling
          him with reason, on the occasion of his cardinalitial jubilee,
          "a learned theologian, an elegant and prolific writer, a
          scrupulous haiographer, and, as a bishop, a tender and
          compassionate father".

          U. BENIGNI

   Gaetano Capocci

                                Gaetano Capocci

          Musical composer and maestro, b. in Rome, 16 Oct., 1811; d.
          there, 11 Jan., 1898. As a boy he studied the organ under Sante
          Pascoli, organist of St. Peter's, Rome, and he completed his
          musical studies under Valentino Fioravanti and Francesco
          Cianciarelli. In 1831 he was granted a diploma as organist by
          the Academy of St. Cecilia, and, in 1833, he received a diploma
          in the art of composition. Almost immediately he was appointed
          organist of the Church of Sta Maria Maggiore, in 1839. So
          successful was he that in 1855 he was appointed maestro
          direttore of the Cappella Pia of the Lateran, where he laboured
          with conspicuous distinction during the remainder of his life.
          Solely devoted to church music, Capocci composed numerous masses
          and motets. He also wrote two oratorios, "Battista" and
          "Assalonne". His chief fame rests on his "Responsori" for Holy
          Week. His son Filippo (b. 11 May, 1840) has even eclipsed the
          fame of his father, whom he succeeded as maestro at the Lateran
          in 1898. Both as an organist and composer he ranks high.

          GROVE, Dict. of Music and Musicians, I (London, 1904), s.v.;
          DUNSTAN, Cyclopaedic Dict. of Music (London, 1909).

          W.H. GRATTAN-FLOOD

   Cardinals (In 1913)

                                    Cardinal

          Members of the College of Cardinals, 1913:

          + Agliardi, Antonio, Bishop of Albano;
          + Aguirre y Garcia, Gregorio Maria, Archbishop of Toledo;
          + Almaraz y Santos, Enrique, Archbishop of Seville;
          + Amette, Leon-Adolphe, Archbishop of Paris;
          + Andrieu, Paulin-Pierre, Archbishop of Bordeaux;
          + Arcoverde de Albuquerque Cavalcanti, Joaquin, Archbishop of
            Rio de Janeiro;
          + Bacilieri, Bartolomeo, Bishop of Verona;
          + Bauer, Franz von Sales, Archbishop of Olmutz;
          + Billot, Louis, S.J.;
          + Bisleti, Gaetano;
          + Bourne, Francis. Archbishop of Westminster;
          + Boschi, Giulio, Archbishop of Ferrara;
          + Cagiano de Azevedo, Ottavio;
          + Cassetta, Francesco di Paola, Bishop of Frascati;
          + Cavallari, Aristide, Patriarch of Venice;
          + Cos y Macho, Jose Maria de, Archbishop of Valladolid;
          + Dubillard, Francois- Virgile, Archbishop of Chambery;
          + Falconio, Diomede, O.F.M.;
          + Farley, John Murphy, Archbishop of New York;
          + Ferrari, Andrea, Archbishop of Milan;
          + Ferrata, Domenico;
          + Francica-Nava di Bontife, Giuseppe Maria, Bishop of Catania;
          + Gasparri, Pietro;
          + Gennari, Casimiro;
          + Gibbons, James, Archbishop of Baltimore;
          + Gotti, Girolamo Maria, O.C.C.;
          + Granito Pgnatelli di Belmonte, Gennaro;
          + Hornig, Karl Baron von, Bishop of Veszprem;
          + Katschthaler, Johann Baptist, Archbishop of Salzburg;
          + Kopp, George, Prince-Bishop of Breslau;
          + Lai, Gaetano de, Bishop of Sabina and Abbot of Farfa;
          + Logue, Michael, Archbishop of Armagh;
          + Lorenzelli, Benedetto;
          + Lualdi, Alessandro, Archbishop of Palermo;
          + Lucon, Louis-Henri-Joseph, Archbishop of Reims;
          + Lugari, Giambattista; Maffi, Pietro, Archbishop of Pisa;
          + Martin de Herrera y de la Iglesia, Jose Maria, Archbishop of
            Compostela;
          + Martinelli, Sebastiano, O.S.A.;
          + Mercier, Desire-Felicien-Francois-Joseph, Archbishop of
            Mechlin;
          + Merry del Val, Raffaele, Papal Secretary of State;
          + Netto, Jose Sebastiao, O.F.M.;
          + O'Connell, William, Archbishop of Boston;
          + Oreglia di Santo Stefano, Luigi, Bishop of Ostia;
          + Pietro, Angelo di;
          + Pompilj, Basilio; Prisco, Giuseppe, Archbishop of Naples;
          + Rampolla del Tindaro, Mariano, Archpriest of the Vatican;
          + Richelmy, Agostino, Archbishop of Turin;
          + Rinaldini, Aristide;
          + Roverie de Cabrieres, Francois-Marie-Anatole de, Bishop of
            Montpellier;
          + Skrbensky-Hriste, Leo von, Archbishop of Prague;
          + Vannutelli, Serafino, Archbishop of Porto and Santa Rufina;
          + Vannutelli, Vincenzo, Bishop of Palestrina;
          + Van Rossum, Willem, C.SS.R.;
          + Vaszary, Claudius, O.S.B., Prince-Archbishop of Gran;
          + Vico, Antonio;
          + Vives y Tuto, Calasanz, O.F.M.Cap.;
          + Volpe, Francesco Salesio della.

   Celestine Order

                                Celestine Order

          (Also called the HERMITS OF ST. DAMIAN or HERMITS OF MURRONE).

          This Benedictine congregation must not be confused with the
          Franciscan congregation of the same name. The order was founded
          in 1254 by Pietro di Murrone, afterwards Celestine V. At first
          the saint gave no written rule to his monks, but by his own life
          he provided an ideal for them to strive after. In 1264 Urban IV
          confirmed the order, and gave to it the Rule of St. Benedict. It
          was again confirmed by Gregory X in 1274. Celestine himself
          confirmed the constitutions drawn up by Abbot Humphrey, and also
          granted many privileges to his order. Among other things he
          ordered the general chapter to be held every year, thus
          departing from the Decrees of the Fourth Lateran Council. The
          administration of the order was carried on somewhat after the
          pattern of Cluny, that is all monasteries were subject to the
          Abbey of the Holy Ghost at Sulmona, and these dependent houses
          were divided into provinces. The ruling body of the congregation
          or, as it was called, "The Definitorium", was chosen as follows:
          all the priors of the province and a delegate from each house
          elected the provincial and five definitors, the provincial and
          the five definitors chose the priors of the various houses. The
          Celestines had 96 houses in Italy, 21 in France, and a few, most
          of which unfortunately joined the Reformers, in Germany. The
          order became extinct in the eighteenth century. The choir dress
          of the monks was a black cowl and hood; the working habit
          consisted of a white tunic with a black scapular and hood, the
          lay brothers wore a brown habit with the badge of the order -- a
          cross with the letter "S" entwined round the foot -- embroidered
          on the scapular.

          BEURRIER, Histoire du monastere de Paris (1634); Constitutiones
          . . . Coelestinorum (1590); Constitutiones . . . Coelestinorum
          provinciae franco-gallicae (Paris, 1670); HEIMBUCHER, Orden u.
          Kongregationen, I (Paderborn, 1907).

          PAUL BROOKFIELD

   Celestines

                                   Celestines

          The name given to certain extreme "Spiritual" Franciscans of the
          Marches, because they were taken by Celestine V under his
          special protection. These Franciscan Celestines are not to be
          confounded with the Order of Celestine hermits, a branch of the
          Benedictine Order, which the same pope founded about 1254 before
          his accession to the papacy. It was in the autumn of 1294 that
          Pietro da Macerata, Pietro da Fossombrone, and some other
          "Spiritual" Franciscans who had lately returned from Armenia
          made their way to the Papal Curia, then at Aquila, and obtained
          from Celestine V leave to live as hermits under the Rule of St.
          Francis, but as a separate fraternity and without dependence
          upon the superiors of the Minorite Order. They were to obey
          Celestine V and, under him, Pietro da Macerata, who changed his
          name to Liberato, while his companion Pietro da Fossombrone took
          the name of Angelo Clareno, by which he is better known (see
          ANGELO CLARENO DA CINGOLI). Liberato, when placed at the head of
          the new fraternity, was given full power by the pope to receive
          new members. Celestine, moreover, appointed Cardinal Nicholas
          Orsini, protector of the Pauperes Heremitae Domini Coelestini
          (Poor hermits of the Lord Celestine), as Liberato, Angelo, and
          their followers were called, and he charged the abbot of his own
          order of (Benedictine) Celestines to put some hermitages at
          their disposal. The statutes of the new foundation were somewhat
          peculiar. Strictly speaking, these "Poor Hermits" could not be
          called either Celestines or Minorites for they did not depend
          upon the authority of either order and, although professing the
          Rule of the Friars Minor, they lived in hermitages like the
          Celestines.

          After the "great renunciation" of Pope Celestine (13 Dec., 1294)
          the Poor Hermits lost their protector, and his successor
          Boniface VIII revoked and nullified in 1295 all the concessions
          made in their favour by Celestine unless the same were approved
          anew by himself. Thereupon Liberato, Angelo, and some others --
          for not all of their followers seem to have accompanied them --
          betook themselves to the Island of Trixoma in the Gulf of
          Corinth and later to Thessaly. After many vicissitudes they
          returned to Italy in 1303 and attempted a vindication of their
          rights. In 1307 Liberato died and Angelo became the head of the
          Fraternity, which was suppressed by John XXII in 1317. The
          subsequent history of the "Poor hermits of the Lord Celestine"
          is merged in that of the Fraticelli (see FRATICELLI; FRIARS
          MINOR; SPIRITUALS).

          HOLZAPFEL, Manuale historiae Ord. Frat. Minorum (Freiburg,
          1909), 45 sqq.; RENE, Histoire des spirituels dans l'ordre de S.
          Francois (Paris, 1909), iv-vi; TOCCO, Studii francescani
          (Naples, 1909), XI: I Fraticelli o poveri eremite di Celestino
          secondo i nuovi documenti, 239-310.

          PASCHAL ROBINSON

   The Centre Party

                                   The Centre

          (THE CENTRE PARTY).

          This name is given to a political party in the German Reichstag
          and to a number of parties in the diets of the various states of
          the German Empire. The oldest party which bears this name is
          that in the Prussian Chamber of Deputies (Abgeordnetenhaus); the
          Centre Party of the German Reichstag was formed on 21 March,
          1871. From the beginning both these parties have stood in close
          relation to each other, since both parliaments have their seats
          in Berlin and a number of the members usually belong to both
          assemblies, and finally because, Prussia being the leading state
          of the German Empire, the leading statesmen of the German Empire
          are also Prussian ministers and the governmental policies of
          both parliaments are in their fundamental principles the same. A
          predecessor of both parties is found in the Catholic Party in
          the Prussian Chamber of Deputies, which in 1859 had adopted the
          name of the "Party of the Centre". In view of the hostile
          attitude of the Prussian Government towards the Church (the
          Raumer Decrees) this party was formed in 1852 for the defence of
          the freedom guaranteed in the Constitution and of the
          independence of the Church. Under the guidance of distinguished
          leaders (e.g. the brothers Reichensperger, August and Peter;
          Hermann von Mallinckrodt; Bishop von Ketteler; etc.), the party
          proved of vast service to the Catholic cause, but the
          denominational principle on which it rested was found too narrow
          and unsuitable for a parliamentary party in a constitutional
          state. The Catholic Party, which at its height never numbered
          more than fifty members, voluntarily dissolved, and after 1867
          its last members allied themselves with others of the regular
          political parties.

          Meanwhile Liberalism had secured an outspoken parliamentary
          representation in Prussia and other German states. As a
          counterpoise to the anti-Catholic Liberals a new party was
          needed. The more immediate cause of the formation of the present
          Centre were the attacks on the monasteries at Moabite (Berlin,
          1869), the anti-Catholic measures proposed in the Prussian
          Chamber of Deputies by the well-known professor of public law
          Gneist in connection with these attacks, and the fierce attacks
          made on the Church and the pope which followed the Vatican
          Council and the declaration of papal infallibility. On 11 June,
          1870, Peter Reichensperger in the columns of the "Kölnische
          Volkszeitung" called upon Catholics to unite by drawing up a
          common programme for the elections then approaching. The
          cardinal point of this programme, Reichensperger maintained, was
          the maintenance of the independence of the Church in the
          arrangement and administration of its affairs (especially with
          regard to the formation and development of religious
          associations), which was guaranteed by the Prussian
          Constitution. A convention of the Catholic societies of the
          Rhine Provinces and Westphalia declared its entire adhesion to
          these proposals, but proposed that the societies should work
          simultaneously for the removal of social grievances and the
          promotion of all the interests of the labouring classes by sound
          Christian legislation. The Soester Programm of 28 October, 1870,
          sketched in clear and concise terms a comprehensive programme.
          On 13 December, 1870, the eve of the opening of the
          newly-elected Prussian Diet, at the suggestion of Peter
          Reichensperger, Karl Friedrich von Savigny, and Friedrich von
          Kehler the Centre Party of the Prussian Chamber of Deputies was
          formed (Zentrumsfraktion des preussischen Abgeordnetenhauses);
          this was immediately joined by forty-eight members. On 21 March,
          1871, sixty-three of the newly-elected members of the first
          German Reichstag united and formed the Centre Party of the
          German Reichstag (Zentrumsfraktion des deutschen Reichstags).

          The programmes of both Centres, which include men from every
          part of the empire and of the most different stations, are the
          same even to-day, more than forty years after the foundation of
          the parties. The statutes of both parties are identical (except
          for unessential differences), and both reject enforced party
          allegiance, that is the obligation of the member to vote
          according to the direction of the party as a whole. "Justitia
          fundamentum regnorum" and "Für Wahrheit, Recht, und Freiheit"
          (For truth, justice and liberty) are the mottoes which the
          Centre has always placed at the head of its programme. The
          programme declares the guiding-stars of its activity to be: (1)
          the preservation of the constitutional principle of the empire
          as a confederation of states, viz. unity only in essentials and
          in everything else the free decision by the individual states;
          (2) the promotion of the moral and material welfare of all
          classes of the population, the securing of constitutional
          guarantees for the civil and religious freedom of all subjects
          of the empire, and especially the defence of the rights of
          religious bodies against the attacks of the legislature.

          From the first the Centre has been accused by its adversaries
          (who did not become extinct with Bismarck) of furthering only
          religious and exclusively Catholic interests and with being an
          exclusively Catholic and not a political party; consequently it
          was claimed that its existence was not justified in a state
          founded on the principle of parity; that even in
          non-ecclesiastical questions the Centre received instructions
          from the papal Curia, etc. The programme of the Centre, the
          adherence of a large number of Protestant members, and its
          parliamentary activity throughout the last forty years refute
          these accusations. In 1909, when various disputes broke out
          concerning the character of the party, its leaders again
          declared: "The Centre is essentially a political,
          non-denominational party; it takes its stand on the constitution
          of the German Empire, which requires of the deputies that they
          regard themselves as the representatives of the whole German
          people." True however to its programme, the Centre has regarded
          as its first and most urgent task the defeat of all legislative
          measures directed against the Catholic section of the community;
          and, just as during the Kulturkampf, so also to-day the
          preservation of the civil equality of the Catholic minority is
          considered the chief duty of the party. Apart from its
          programme, the fact that almost all the deputies of the Centre
          and their electors belong to the Catholic Church furnishes a
          sufficient guarantee that the party will most strenuously
          represent the interests of German Catholics in every sphere of
          public life.

          Soon after its foundation the Centre was compelled by Chancellor
          Bismarck to engage in a long and difficult struggle for the
          liberty and independence of the Church (see KULTURKAMPF). By
          this heroic defence of the flouted rights of the Church and of
          the Catholic population, by its struggle for the restoration of
          religion as the principle of both public and private life in
          legislation and administration, by its devotion to
          constitutional liberty, and by its respect for its own rights
          and the rights of others, the party performed the most valuable
          services. The era of the open Kulturkampf passed. Bismarck was
          reasonable enough to lay aside a policy which he saw had been
          wrecked by the unity of the Catholic people. The year 1879
          brought the great development of the economic politics of the
          German Empire. The place of a Liberalism which refused
          co-operation was taken by the Centre, whose assistance had a
          decisive effect in initiating the new era of economic
          development based on protection. With the influential co-
          operation of the Centre the financial basis of the empire was
          simultaneously laid. Early in the eighties the Empire devoted
          its attention to great social measures. With the eager and
          encouraging assistance of the same party the great German scheme
          of social insurance, the comprehensive law for the protection of
          labourers (1890), and later the law for the protection of
          workmen were placed on the statute book. From 1895 to 1906 the
          Centre held the balance of power between the parties of the
          German Reichstag. During this period the uniform civil code for
          the German Empire was drawn up, the German colonial polity was
          guided into sounder channels, and foreign respect for the empire
          ensured by the creation of a strong fleet and by the development
          of military resources. Finally, a new law for the protection of
          home industries by the tariff was passed in 1902; the beneficial
          effect which this measured has exercised on agriculture,
          industry, and commerce is to-day beyond all doubt. Nevertheless,
          through hatred of the Catholics, the Liberals especially have
          not ceased their accusations against the Centre and its
          supporters of want of patriotism, of treachery towards their
          native land, and of showing allegiance to the pope to the
          detriment of Germany. When the Centre refused to meet an
          unimportant demand of the Government connected with the German
          war in South-West Africa, the Reichstag was dissolved (13
          December, 1906), and a vindictive campaign against the Centre
          initiated. The adherents of the Centre did not waver in their
          allegiance to the party. The Liberal-Conservative Block, then
          formed and animated with hostility to the Centre, collapsed in
          1909. With the help of the Centre the German Empire was then set
          on a sounder financial basis (Imperial Finance Reform of 1909).
          The great slanders of the united Liberals and Social Democrats
          did little damage to the Centre in the elections of 1912.
          Although it does not possess quite its old strength, it is still
          powerful and feared and hated by its adversaries. In 1912 it
          took a prominent part in the strengthening of the German army.

          Especially important in the history of the Centre are the years
          1887 and 1892. In both years the German Government sought to
          influence the Centre in favour of new military laws with the
          assistance of the Holy See. On both occasions, however, the
          Centre deprecated the intervention of the Vatican in purely
          political affairs, on the ground that its position would be
          prejudiced and that its adversaries (who are for the most part
          also the adversaries of the Catholic Church) would seize the
          opportunity for reproaching the Centre with its dependence on
          foreign powers. In view of the peculiar nature of the German
          Constitution, the defence of the liberty and the legal position
          of the Catholic Church is the task less of the Centre in the
          Reichstag than of the corresponding parties in the state diets,
          since religious and educational questions are, fundamentally
          considered, not within the competence of the empire. Not alone
          in the Prussian Chamber of Deputies, however, but also in the
          German Reichstag, the Centre has always found it necessary to
          represent Catholic interests (even since the close of the
          Kulturkampf). Even during the last few years this was again the
          case, when the Liberals in union with the Evangelical League
          (Evangelischer Bund) and the adherents of Monism sought to make
          the measures of the Vatican (the Borromeo Encyclical, the Oath
          against Modernism, etc.) a pretext for a war against German
          Catholics and the Holy See, and when a new secret Kulturkampf
          against Catholicism and against every positive view of life is
          gradually growing in strength. While the Kulturkampf legislation
          in Prussia, at least in so far as its most oppressive features
          are concerned, has been long repealed, the Jesuit Law still
          remains in force, forbidding the members of this order (even
          though they are subjects of the empire) to settle in Germany. So
          far the Centre has been able to secure a mitigation of this law
          (the removal of #2), but not its complete repeal. Vain have been
          its previous efforts to carry the so-called "Tolerance Law",
          which aims at securing full religious liberty for Catholics in
          all the states of the German Empire. The Centre has to wage a
          constant warfare against the slighting of Catholics in public
          life. Even to-day complete equality with the Protestant
          fellow-citizens is withheld from Catholics. This is especially
          seen in the exclusion of Catholics from the higher offices in
          the state, for only very rarely is a practical Catholic
          entrusted with such an office, although more than one-third of
          the population of Germany belongs to the Catholic Church. Since
          the end of the Kulturkampf an additional and most important task
          of the Centre Party in the Prussian Chamber of Deputies has been
          the defence of Christian and Catholic principles in public
          education, while it has also had to fight constantly against the
          difficulties placed in the way of the foundation of religious
          institutions, etc.

          The chairmen of the Centre were: (a) in the Reichstag: Karl
          Friedrich von Savigny (1871-75); Freiherr von und zu
          Franckenstein (1875-90); Franz Graf von Ballestrem (1890-93);
          Alfred Graf von Hompesch (1893-1909); Freiherr von Hertling
          (1909-11); President of the High Court of Appeal, Dr. Spahn
          (1911-); (b) in the Prussian Chamber of Deputies: Karl Friedrich
          von Savigny (1870-75); Freiherr von Schorlemer-Alst (1875-89);
          Freiherr von Heeremann (1889-1901); Sheriff (Landrat) Fritzen
          (1901-03); Councillor of Justice Dr. Porsch (1904-). The most
          celebrated leaders of the Centre were Dr. Ludwig Windthorst and
          Dr. Ernst Maria Lieber. From 1879 to 1912 -- with the exception
          of the Cartel and the Block periods (1887-90; 1907-09) -- the
          Centre was always represented in the presidency of the
          Reichstag. In the Reichstag elected in 1912 the Centre renounced
          its claim to a presidential position on account of the alliance
          between the Liberals and Socialists. In 1879-87 the Centre
          secured the appointment of Freiherr von Franckenstein as first
          vice-president; in 1890-93 of Count Ballestrem; in 1893-95 of
          Freiherr von Buol-Berenberg. When in 1895 the Conservative
          president resigned because the majority of the Reichstag refused
          to vote for the official congratulation of Prince Bismarck on
          the occasion of his eightieth birthday, a member of the Centre
          (Freiherr von Buol-Berenberg) for the first time occupied the
          presidential chair. This honour remained with the Centre until
          the dissolution of the Reichstag in 1906, and the exceptional
          skill with which Count Bellestrem conducted the business of the
          Reichstag was universally recognized. In 1910-11 the leader of
          the Centre, Dr. Spahn, was first vice-president. In the Prussian
          Chamber of Deputies the Centre has appointed the first
          vice-presidents since 1882; since 1903 Dr. Porsch has filled
          this position. An "Imperial Committee of the German Centre
          Party" (15 members), to deal with all the interests of the party
          throughout the empire, was founded in 1911. Previous to that
          date there were only the still existing national committees for
          the different states. In important affairs representatives of
          the other states of the confederacy are invited to the sessions
          of the Prussian national committee. Of the 397 members of the
          German Reichstag, the Centre claimed 63 in 1871; 93 in 1877; 94
          in 1878; 100 in 1881; 99 in 1884; 98 in 1887; 106 in 1890; 96 in
          1893; 102 in 1898; 100 in 1903; 109 in 1907; 92 in 1912. Of the
          433 (since 1906, 443) members of the Prussian Chamber of
          Deputies the Centre numbered 54 in 1870, 86 in 1873, and since
          that date always over 90 (since 1909, 104).

          (a) BAVARIA

          In 1869 the "Bavarian Patriotic Party" was founded in Bavaria.
          It was called into existence by the strong opposition to the
          surrender of the Bavarian claims to the sovereignty in favour of
          Prussia (i.e. of the North German Confederacy), and also for the
          purpose of opposing the anti-religious policy of Liberalism,
          which found expression especially in the Bavarian School Bill of
          1868. The first leader of the Patriotic Party was Dr. Edmund
          Joerg (1819-1901), who performed such valuable service during
          his long occupancy of the editorial chair (1853-1901) of the
          Catholic periodical "Historisch-politische Blatter." Through
          their affection for and sympathy with neighbouring Austria,
          whose people were descended from the same stock and were kindred
          in their ideas, and through their dislike and suspicion of
          Prussia, which was little friendly towards Catholics, Joerg and
          a section of the Patriotic Party opposed the union of Germany
          under the leadership of Prussia in 1870-71. They voted against
          the war appropriation moved by the Bavarian Government on the
          outbreak of the Franco- German War, supported only the armed
          neutrality of Bavaria, and voted against the Treaty of
          Versailles. The Patriotic Party, however, later acquiesced in
          the reorganization of the relations of the German states, and
          did not refuse its consent to the extension of the competence of
          the German Empire.

          From 1871 to 1875 the party waged a vigorous warfare against the
          Bavarian Government in view of the anti-Catholic legislation
          introduced after the Prussian model and of its extensive support
          of the Old Catholic movement. Even in 1875, when the party had
          the majority in the Chamber, the Government continued the
          Kulturkampf (Minister of Public Worship von Lutz), although now
          in an underhand manner. Only since 1890 have the Old Catholics
          no longer been officially considered as Catholics, and in that
          year was passed the vote for the recall of the Redemptorist
          Fathers (expelled in 1872). The attempt of Dr. Johann Sigl
          (editor of the extravagantly particularistic daily paper "Das
          bayrische Vaterland") to found a "Catholic Popular Party" in
          1876, because in the minds of individuals the Patriotic Party
          had not been sufficiently energetic in ecclesiastical questions,
          proved unsuccessful. In 1887 the Patriotic Party adopted the
          name of the "Bavarian Centre Party". In 1890, owing to the
          growth of the Bavarian Peasants' League, the party lost its
          majority in the diet. The quarrel between Church and State
          having ceased, the Centre inserted in its programme a systematic
          policy in favour of agriculture and small industries (1893), and
          in the elections of 1899 again secured a majority. This they
          still (1912) retain in spite of the attacks of the united
          Liberal and Social Democratic parties. During this period the
          Party took the lead in the constitutional development of the
          Bavarian legislation and administration as regards both
          education and economics. In 1912 a member of the Centre was for
          the first time appointed president of the Bavarian Ministry
          (Freiherr von Hertling). The most celebrated leaders of the
          party, after the retirement of Joerg, were: Councillor of the
          High Court of Appeal Geiger (1833-1912) and Dr. von Daller,
          gymnasial rector and professor of theology (1835-1911). The most
          prominent leaders of to-day (1912) are Dr. von Orterer (b.
          1849), gymnasial rector and councillor for higher studies, Dr.
          Pichler (b. 1852), provost of the cathedral of Passau, and Dr.
          Heim (b. 1865), leader of the Peasants. The leader of the
          Bavarian Centre in the German Reichstag is Dr. Schadler (b.
          1852), cathedral dean of Bamberg. Of the 159 (since 1905, 163)
          members of the Bavarian Chamber the Patriotic Party (i.e. the
          Centre) claimed 80 in 1869; 79 in 1875; 68 (83) in 1881; 79 in
          1887; 74 in 1893; 84 in 1889; 102 in 1905; 98 in 1907; and 87 in
          1912.

          (b) WÜRTEMBERG

          The Centre Party of Wurtemberg was founded on 11 July, 1894, to
          contest the diet elections of 1895. In 1895 and 1900 the Centre
          secured 20 deputies; in 1906 they numbered 25 deputies (out of a
          total of 92 deputies). Before 1894 the Catholic deputies had
          been allied either with the regular "National Party" or with the
          so-called "Left". An alliance of all the deputies who defended
          the rights and liberties of the Catholic Church was less
          necessary during the seventies and eighties in Wurtemberg than
          in other German states, since Wurtemberg was spared a
          Kulturkampf, thanks to the good sense of the Government and the
          benevolence of the Protestant king. It was only in the last
          decades that denominational differences began to play a more
          prominent part in public life. The first leader of the
          Wurtemberg Centre and of the Catholics of Wurtemberg was Rudolf
          Probst (1817-99), Director of the Life Insurance Bank; the most
          prominent leaders of the present day (1912) are Adolf Grober,
          Provincial Court Director, Johann von Kiene, President of the
          Senate in the High Court of Appeal, and the brothers Alfred and
          Viktor Rembold (both barristers). The Centre of the German
          Reichstag received one deputy from Wurtemberg in 1871; since
          1880 it has received always four deputies as members.

          (c) BADEN

          A fierce war between State and Church broke out in Baden in the
          early sixties. Although two-thirds of the population of Baden
          were Catholics, the Diet of Baden contained no champions of
          Catholic rights, partly owing to the unjust state of the
          franchise and partly because the majority of the Catholics,
          influenced by the anti-Roman theologian Ignaz von Wessenberg,
          inclined towards Liberal ideas and a national Church. The anti-
          religious attitude of the Government and of the Liberal Party,
          however, gradually awakened the Catholic conscience. In 1867 the
          "Catholic Popular Party" was formed, its first, and for some
          time its only, representative being the merchant Jacob Lindau
          (1833-98). In 1869, however, four Catholic deputies were
          elected. Although originally the Catholic Popular Party favoured
          union with Austria, it expressed in 1870-71 its entire adhesion
          to the treaties which laid the foundation of the German Empire.
          The deputies elected in Baden on the programme of the Catholic
          Popular Party for the German Reichstag joined the German Centre
          Party as early as 1871. In the seventies, while the Kulturkampf
          raged in Baden, the Party defended with great boldness, and not
          without some success, in the Diet of Baden the rights of the
          Church. In 1881, when the party had twenty-three mandates, it
          adopted a new constitution, and recognized in their entirety the
          principles of the Centre Party of the German Reichstag as its
          own. In the middle of the eighties a serious crisis within the
          party was occasioned by the question whether the policy of the
          party was to be friendly to the Government or strictly defensive
          of Catholic interests. The number of deputies of the Catholic
          Popular Party fell from 23 to 9. In 1888 the party was
          reorganized under the name of the Badische Zentrumspartei
          (Centre Party of Baden). To terminate the swamping of the
          political life of Baden by the anti-religious policy of the
          National Liberals was declared to be its most important task.
          Since then the party has been almost unceasingly gaining ground,
          and has performed notable services in furthering the welfare of
          the country and in defending the rights of the Church. It is
          bitterly opposed by the Liberals and Social Democrats, who have
          been united in the Grossblock (Great Block) since 1905. Of the
          73 members of the Chamber the party claimed 28 in 1905 and 26 in
          1909. The reorganizer and able leader of the Centre of Baden is
          Theodor Wacker, pastor of Zähringen. He is assisted by
          Konstantin Fehrenbach, a barrister, and Johann Zehnter,
          President of the National Court.

          (d) ALSACE-LORRAINE

          The Centre Party of Alsace-Lorraine was formed in 1906 from the
          "Catholic National Party", which had in turn been formed in 1903
          from the "Elsasser" and the "Lothringer" (the "Alsatians" and
          the "Lorrainians"). Although the Centre of Alsace-Lorraine
          joined the Centre in the Reichstag, various causes prevented a
          complete understanding being arrived at, especially because the
          Centre Party in the Reichstag was opposed to the particularistic
          and separationist ideals of a portion of the Centre of
          Alsace-Lorraine. The leader of the separationist division is
          Abbé Wetterlé. As the Centre in the Reichstag accepted the new
          Constitution for Alsace-Lorraine in a form unacceptable to the
          Centre of these states, all relations between these two bodies
          were broken off. Since 1912, however, attempts have been made to
          re- establish unity. The chairman of the Centre of
          Alsace-Lorraine is Karl Hauss, editor-in-chief of the "Elsässer
          Boten" (a daily paper). In the Diet of Alsace-Lorraine the Party
          had 27 deputies in 1911 (out of a total of 60); in the German
          Reichstag it numbered 7 out of the 397 members in 1912.

          (e) HESSE

          A Catholic Popular Party was formed in the Grand Duchy of Hesse
          as early as the forties. Shortly after the formation of the
          Centre in the Reichstag, this party also took the name "Centre".
          While the Kulturkampf raged in Hesse during the seventies, the
          party energetically championed the interests of the oppressed
          Catholics. In 1911 the party claimed 9 deputies out of a total
          of 50. Its leader is the counsel, Dr. Schmitt-Mainz. The Grand
          Duchy sends 9 deputies to the German Reichstag, but none of
          these belongs to the Centre Party.

          (f) OLDENBURG

          Until 1910 there was no organized Centre Party in the Grand
          Duchy of Oldenburg. The Catholics, who constitute about
          one-fifth of the population of Oldenburg, live to the south in
          the district known as the Münsterland, which until 1803 was
          under the rule of the Prince-Bishop of Münster. Since the
          introduction of the Constitution this Catholic section has
          chosen representatives of its own religion -- at first 6, but
          later, with the increase of the population, 8. From the
          beginning these representatives have stood for the principles of
          the Centre in the German Reichstag, and championed the Christian
          outlook in public life. The Catholic deputies have performed a
          specially useful service in recent years by their firm advocacy
          of a movement to introduce new school laws, based on a Christian
          and denominational foundation, for the three divisions of
          Oldenburg. Until recently party politics did not play any
          prominent part in the Diet of Oldenburg, as such tactics did not
          appeal to even the non-Catholic deputies. Since about 1870 the
          Government has showed a benevolent attitude towards the Catholic
          ecclesiastical authorities, and the Kulturkampf obtained no
          footing in Oldenburg. The need of a definite party organization
          first arose when the Social Democrats captured some seats in the
          diet, and the direct franchise was introduced in 1909. The
          organization of the Centre was therefore adopted in 1910, and on
          this programme 9 deputies (out of a total of 45) were elected in
          1911. The able leader of the Catholic deputies of Oldenburg and
          of the Centre is Dr. Franz Driver, counsel to the administrative
          high court. The grand duchy sends three deputies to the
          Reichstag; one of these, elected by the Catholic south, has been
          from the first a member of the Centre in the Reichstag.

          (g) SAXE-WEIMAR-EISENACH

          Among the twenty-three deputies elected to the Diet of this
          grand duchy the Centre has one deputy, elected by the Catholic
          section of the Oberland in Eisenach.

          (h) The other diets of the German federal states have no Centre
          deputies, inasmuch as the states are almost entirely Protestant.
          In the Kingdom of Saxony, however, there is a well-organized
          Centre Party which devotes attention to the elections to the
          Reichstag and the national Diet. Owing to the relatively small
          number of its adherents in this almost purely Protestant state
          (95% Protestant), the party cannot secure the election of any
          candidate of its own; still the votes of its members in
          individual constituencies are decisive in the case of second
          ballots.

          In very recent times (since about 1910) alliances between the
          councillors of various municipalities and towns, who have been
          elected on the Centre programme (or who favour that programme),
          have developed or been formed immediately into "Communal Centre
          Parties". Almost everywhere in the cities and larger communities
          of the German federal states and provinces a great prejudice
          against the Catholic section of the community may be noticed.
          Apart from the inaction of the Catholics, the cause of this
          injustice may be traced to the plutocratic franchise, which
          almost everywhere places great power in the hands of the few
          wealthy people, who for the most part hold Liberal views. As the
          communal franchise gradually becomes more democratic, however,
          the representation of the Catholics who take their stand on the
          Centre programme also increases. This increase is indeed
          accompanied by a growth in the number of Social Democrats, with
          whom the Liberals in very frequent instances ally themselves in
          opposition to Catholics and the Centre. For the introduction of
          the principles of the Centre Party into communal administration,
          the formation of the communal representatives who favour the
          Centre into Communal Centre parties has been effected. Regular
          unions of the Centre members of the communal bodies in the
          larger areas (counties, provinces, states) have also been formed
          in many places, e.g. in Bavaria, the Rhine Provinces,
          Westphalia, and Upper Silesia; these unions bear the name of
          "Communal Conferences of the Centre". In Prussia attempts have
          also been made to elect adherents of the Centre to county and
          provincial diets to counteract the decisive influence of the
          higher state officials, whose views are mostly National Liberal
          or Free Conservative.

          VON KETTELER, Die Zentrumsfraktion (Mainz, 1872); Das Zentrum im
          Landtag u. Reichstag, von einem rheinischen Juristen (Cologne,
          1874); ANON., Die Zentrumsfraktion an der Jahrhundertwende
          (Cologne, 1900); SPAHN, Das deutsche Zentrum (Mainz, 1907);
          ERZBERGER, Das deutsche Zentrum (Amsterdam, 1910), Eng. tr.
          (ibid., 1912); VON KRUCKEMEYER, Zentrum und Katholizismus
          (Amsterdam, 1913); BERGSTRASSER, Studien zur Vorgesch. der
          Zentrumspartei (Tubingen, 1910); SCHNABEL, Der Zusammenschluss
          des polit. Katholizismus in Deutschland im Jahre 1848
          (Heidelberg, 1910); DONNER, Die kathol. Fraktion in Preussen
          1852-58 (Leipzig, 1909); HOEBER, Das Streit um den
          Zentrumscharakter (Cologne, 1912).
          Die Zentrumspolitik im Reichstag is treated by ERZBERGER (6
          vols., Berlin, 1911); Die Tatigkeit der Zentrumsfraktion des
          preuss. Abgeordnetenhauses has been treated since 1904; the
          sessions 1904- 09 (5 vols.) are edited by VON SAVIGNY, and the
          Reports of the later sessions by the Secretariate of the
          National Committee of the Prussian Centre Party (Berlin); Die
          Zentrumspolitik auf dem badischen Landtage has been treated
          since 1905-06 by SCHOFER (3 vols., Baden-Baden); ECKHARD, Die
          Tatigkeit der Zentrumsfraktion in Wurttemberg (4 vols.,
          Stuttgart); SCHRODER in Am. Cath. Quart. Rev. (1890), 390;
          (1891), 515.

          HERMANN SACHER

   Thomas Ceva

                                  Thomas Ceva

          Mathematician, born at Milan, 21 December, 1648; died there, 23
          February, 1737. In 1663 he entered the Society of Jesus. He was
          a prolific writer on a variety of subjects, especially
          mathematics and poetry. He is known to-day only for the theorem
          in geometry which bears his name. Ceva's Theorem is: three
          concurrent lines drawn through the vertices of a triangle divide
          the opposite sides so that the product of the three
          distance-ratios is equal to unity. Ceva published this important
          proposition in 1678. It is the dual of the theorem of Menelaus.

          Bibliotheque de la Compagnie de Jesus, II, 1015-1023.

          J. MCGIVNEY

   Baron Athanase-Charles-Marie Charette de la Contrie

              Baron Athanase-Charles-Marie Charette de la Contrie

          Born at Nantes, 3 Sept., 1832; died at Basse-Motte
          (Ille-et-Vilaine), 9 Oct., 1911. His father was a nephew of the
          famous General Charette who was shot at Nantes, 29 March, 1795,
          during the rising of the Vendee. His mother, Louise, Countess de
          Vierzon, was the daughter of the Duc de Berry and Amy Brown. As
          the Duchesse de Berry was at that time in hiding at Nantes, and
          Charette's father was being sought by the police, the child's
          birth was concealed; he was secretly taken from Nantes on 17
          Sept. and was registered in the commune of Sainte-Reine as born
          18 Sept. Unwilling, by reason of his legitimist antecedents, to
          serve in France under Louis Philippe, young Charette, in 1846,
          entered the Military Academy of Turin; he left in 1848 to avoid
          serving Piedmont, the revolutionary policy of that kingdom being
          evident to him. In 1852 the Duke of Modena, the Comte de
          Chambord's brother-in-law, appointed Charette sub-lieutenant in
          an Austrian regiment stationed in the duchy. He resigned in 1859
          when the French were on the eve of a campaign against Austria.
          In May, 1860, when two of his brothers, like him eager to fight
          the Italian revolutionaries, offered their services to the King
          of Naples, he went to Rome and placed himself at the service of
          Pius IX, who had commissioned Lamoriciere to organize an army
          for the defence of the Papal States. Charette was appointed
          captain of the first company of the Franco-Belgian Volunteers,
          known after 1861 as the Pontifical Zouaves, and was wounded at
          the battle of Castelfidardo (Sept., 1860). After the taking of
          Rome by the Piedmontese, Charette negotiated with Gambetta for
          the employment of the French Zouaves in the service of France
          against Germany; he was permitted to organize them as
          "Volunteers of the West". Wounded at Loigny, Charette was made
          prisoner; but he escaped, and on 14 Jan., 1871, the Provisional
          Government of France made him a general. He was elected to the
          National Assembly by the Department of Bouches-du-Rhône, but
          resigned without taking his seat. Thiers proposed his entering
          the French army with his Zouaves, but Charette declared his
          intention of remaining at the pope's disposal. On 15 Aug., 1871,
          his Zouaves were mustered out of the French army. Retiring into
          private life, Charette passed his last thirty years serving the
          cause of religion and hoping for the restoration of the
          monarchy. He was, in the nineteenth century, a superb type of
          the valiant knight, devoted heart and soul to the defence of the
          pope's temporal sovereignty, and consecrated himself to that
          cause in the same spirit which actuated the Crusades of the
          Middle Ages.

          MEURVILLE, Correspondant (10 Dec., 1911).

          GEORGES GOYAU

   Chorepiscopi

                                  Chorepiscopi

          (Greek Chorepiskopoi = rural bishops.)

          A name originally given in the Eastern Church to bishops whose
          jurisdiction was confined to rural districts. The earliest
          chorepiscopus of whom we have any knowledge was Zoticus, whom
          Eusebius designates as bishop of the village Cumana in Phrygia
          in the latter half of the second century. In the beginning the
          chorepiscopi seem to have exercised all episcopal functions in
          their rural districts, but from the second half of the third
          century they were subject to the city bishops. The thirteenth
          canon of the Synod of Ancyra (314) and the tenth canon of the
          Synod of Antioch (341) forbade them to ordain deacons or priests
          without the written permission of the bishop; the sixth canon of
          the Synod of Sardica (343) decreed that no chorepiscopus should
          be consecrated where a priest would suffice; and the
          fifty-seventh canon of the Synod of Laodicea (380) prescribed
          that the chorepiscopi should be replaced by periodeutai, i.e.,
          priests who have no fixed residence and act as organs of the
          city bishops. Thus the chorepiscopi in the Eastern Church
          gradually disappeared. The Second Council of Nicaea (787) is the
          last to make mention of them. Among the Nestorians they existed
          till the thirteenth century, and they still exist among the
          Maronites and Jacobites. In the Western Church they are of rare
          occurrence before the seventh century, and, as a rule, have no
          fixed territory or see, being mere assistants of the bishops.
          Their ever-increasing influence during the Carlovingian period
          led to repeated synodical legislations against them (Synods of
          Paris in 829, Aachen in 836, Meaux in 845), so that despite such
          able defenders of their cause as Rabanus Maurus ("De
          chorepiscopis", in P.L., CX., 1195-1206) they gradually
          disappeared in the tenth and eleventh centuries, and were
          replaced by the archdeacons.

          BERGERE, Etude historique sur les choreveques (Paris, 1905);
          GILLMANN, Das Institut der Chorbischofe im Orient (Munich,
          1903); PARISOT, Les choreveques in Revue de l'Orient chretien,
          VI (Paris, 1901), 157-171, 419-443; GRISAR in Civilta Cattolica
          (Rome, 15 Oct., 1904; 25 Jan., 1905; 18 March, 1905); LECLERCQ,
          La legislation conciliaire relative aux choreveques in his tr.
          of HEFELE, Conciliengeschichte, III (Paris, 1908), 1197-1237;
          WEIZACKER, Der Kampf gegen den Chorepiscopat des frankischen
          Reichs (Tubingen, 1859).

          MICHAEL OTT

   Christopher Numar of Forli

                           Christopher Numar of Forli

          Minister general of the Friars Minor and cardinal, date of birth
          uncertain; d. at Ancona, 23 Mar., 1528. In his youth he studied
          at Bologna and, after joining the Friars Minor, was sent to
          complete his studies at Paris. In 1507 he was elected vicar
          provincial of his order at Bologna, in 1514 vicar general of the
          Cismontane Franciscan families, and in 1517 he became minister
          general of the whole order of Friars Minor. Less than a month
          later he was raised, in spite of his protests, to the
          cardinalate by Leo X, who in presence of the Sacred College paid
          a splendid tribute to Christopher's great learning and prudence
          and to his still greater holiness of life. In 1520 he became
          Bishop of Alatri and Isernia in Italy, and in 1526 of Riez in
          Provence. He subsequently fulfilled with eminent success the
          office of Apostolic legate to the King of France, and later
          became Apostolic nuncio and commissary for the construction of
          the Vatican Basilica, being then invested with the temporal
          dominion of Bertinoro. During the siege of Rome by the soldiers
          of the Duke of Bourbon in 1527 Christopher suffered many
          hardships and insults, on account of which he received letters
          of condolence from Clement VII, Francis I of France, and Henry
          VIII of England. His remains were transferred from Ancona, where
          he had taken refuge, to Rome, and placed in the Church of Ara
          Coeli. Besides an "Exhortatio ad Galliarum regem Franciscum I in
          Turcas" and a number of letters addressed to that king and the
          other rulers concerning the liberation of Clement VII,
          Christopher is said by Wadding and others to have written
          several treatises on theological and ascetical questions, all of
          which appear to have perished during the sacking of Rome.

          WADDING, Annales Minorum ad annum 1517, XVI, nn. xxiv and xxxv;
          SBARALEA, Supplementum, Pt. I (1908), 207; PICCONI, Cenni
          biografice sugli uomini illustri della francescana provincia di
          Bologna, I (1894), 380.

          PASCHAL ROBINSON

   Cistercians in the British Isles

                        Cistercians in the British Isles

          St. Stephen Harding, third Abbot of Cîteaux (1109-33), was an
          Englishman and his influence in the early organization of the
          Cistercian Order had been very great. It was natural therefore
          that, when, after the coming of St. Bernard and his companions
          in 1113, foundations began to multiply, the project of sending a
          colony of monks to England should find favourable consideration.
          In Nov., 1128, with the aid of William Giffard, Bishop of
          Winchester, a settlement was made at Waverly near Farnham in
          Surrey. Five houses were founded from here before 1152 and some
          of them had themselves produced offshoots. But it was in the
          north that the order assumed its most active developments in the
          twelfth century. William, an English monk of great virtue, was
          sent from Clairvaux by St. Bernard in 1131, and a small property
          was given to the newcomers by Walter Espec "in a place of horror
          and dreary solitude" at Rivaulx in Yorkshire, with the hearty
          support of Thurston, Archbishop of York. By 1143 three hundred
          monks had entered there, including the famous St. Aelred, known
          for his eloquence as the St. Bernard of England. Among the
          offshoots of Rivaulx were Melrose and Revesby. Still more famous
          was Fountains near Ripon. The foundation was made in 1132 by a
          section of the monks from the great Benedictine house of St.
          Mary's, York, who desired to lead a more austere life. After
          many struggles and great hardships, St. Bernard agreed to send
          them a monk from Clairvaux to instruct them, and in the end they
          prospered exceedingly. The great beauty of the ruins excites
          wonder even to- day, and before 1152 Fountains had many
          offshoots, of which Newminster and Meaux are the most famous.
          Another great reinforcement to the order was the accession of
          the houses of the Savigny foundation, which were incorporated
          with the Cistercians, at the instance of Eugenius III, in 1138.
          Thirteen English abbeys, of which the most famous were Furness
          and Jervaulx, thus adopted the Cistercian rule. By the year 1152
          there were fifty-four Cistercian monasteries in England, some
          few of which, like the beautiful Abbey of Tintern on the Wye,
          had been founded directly from the Continent. Architecturally
          speaking the Cistercian monasteries and churches, owing to their
          pure style, may be counted among the most beautiful relics of
          the Middle Ages. To the wool and cloth trade, which was
          especially fostered by the Cistercians, England was largely
          indebted for the beginnings of her commercial prosperity.

          After the overthrow of monastic foundations at the Reformation
          the Cistercian habit was not seen in the British Isles until
          some monks of the austere reform of La Trappe (hence often
          called Trappists), driven out by the French Revolution, came to
          England intending to proceed to Canada. This intention was
          accidentally frustrated and in 1794 they were received at
          Lulworth in Dorsetshire by Thomas Weld. Most of them afterwards
          aided in restoring the great Abbey of Mount Melleray in Brittany
          and still later in establishing a new Mount Melleray in Ireland.
          This flourishing house at Cappoquin, Co. Waterford, now has a
          community of nearly 70, of them 29 are priests. Another and more
          recent foundation at Roscrea, Co. Tipperary, in the Diocese of
          Killaloe, numbers 66 monks with 28 priests. In England, St.
          Bernard's Abbey, Coalville, Leicestershire, founded in 1835, is
          on a smaller scale and numbers only 7 priests. The only convent
          of Cistercian nuns in the British Isles is at Stapehill near
          Wimborne, Dorsetshire. It has a community of 42 members.

          COOKE in The English Historical Review (London, 1893), 625-76;
          DALGAIRNS, Life of St. Stephen Harding, ed. THURSTON (London,
          1898); Concise History of the Cistercian Order by a Cistercian
          monk (London, 1852); FOWLER, Cistercian Statistics (London,
          1890); MURPHY, Triumphalia Monasterii S. Crucis (Dublin, 1891);
          COGNASSO, Acta cisterciensia in Romische Quartalschrift (1912).

          HERBERT THURSTON

   Ven. Antonio Maria Claret y Clara

                      Ven. Antonio María Claret y Clará

          Spanish prelate and missionary, born at Sallent, near Barcelona,
          23 Dec., 1807; d. at Fontfroide, Narbonne, France, on 24 Oct.,
          1870. Son of a small woollen manufacturer, he received an
          elementary education in his native village, and at the age of
          twelve became a weaver. A little later he went to Barcelona to
          specialize in his trade, and remained there till he was twenty.
          Meanwhile he devoted his spare time to study and became
          proficient in Latin, French, and engraving; in addition he
          enlisted in the army as a volunteer. Recognizing a call to a
          higher life, he left Barcelona, entered the seminary at Vich in
          1829, and was ordained on 13 June, 1835. He received a benefice
          in his native parish, where he continued to study theology till
          1839. He now wished to become a Carthusian; missionary work,
          however, appealing strongly to him he proceeded to Rome. There
          he entered the Jesuit novitiate but finding himself unsuited for
          that manner of life, he returned shortly to Spain and exercised
          his ministry at Valadrau and Gerona, attracting notice by his
          efforts on behalf of the poor. Recalled by his superiors to
          Vich, he was engaged in missionary work throughout Catalonia. In
          1848 he was sent to the Canary Islands where he gave retreats
          for fifteen months. Returning to Vich he established the
          Congregation of the Missionary Sons of the Immaculate Heart of
          Mary (16 July, 1849), and founded the great religious library at
          Barcelona which bears his name, and which has issued several
          million cheap copies of the best ancient and modern Catholic
          works.

          Such had been the fruit of his zealous labours and so great the
          wonders he had worked, that Pius IX at the request of the
          Spanish sovereign appointed him Archbishop of Santiago de Cuba
          in 1851. He was consecrated at Vich and embarked at Barcelona on
          28 Dec. Having arrived at his destination he began at once a
          work of thorough reform. The seminary was reorganized, clerical
          discipline strengthened, and over nine thousand marriages
          validated within the first two years. He erected a hospital and
          numerous schools. Three times he made a visitation of the entire
          diocese, giving local missions incessantly. Naturally his zeal
          stirred up the enmity and calumnies of the irreligious, as had
          happened previously in Spain. No less than fifteen attempts were
          made on his life, and at Holguin his cheek was laid open from
          ear to chin by a would-be assassin's knife. In February, 1857,
          he was recalled to Spain by Isabella II, who made him her
          confessor. He obtained permission to resign his see and was
          appointed to the titular see of Trajanopolis. His influence was
          now directed solely to help the poor and to propagate learning;
          he lived frugally and took up his residence in an Italian
          hospice. For nine years he was rector of the Escorial monastery
          where he established an excellent scientific laboratory, a
          museum of natural history, a library, college, and schools of
          music and languages. His further plans were frustrated by the
          revolution of 1868. He continued his popular missions and
          distribution of good books wherever he went in accompanying the
          Spanish Court. When Isabella recognized the new Government of
          United Italy he left the Court and hastened to take his place by
          the side of the pope; at the latter's command, however, he
          returned to Madrid with faculties for absolving the queen from
          the censures she had incurred. In 1869 he went to Rome to
          prepare for the Vatican Council. Owing to failing health he
          withdrew to Prades in France, where he was still harassed by his
          calumnious Spanish enemies; shortly afterwards he retired to the
          Cistercian abbey at Fontfroide where he expired.

          His zealous life and the wonders he wrought both before and
          after his death testified to his sanctity. Informations were
          begun in 1887 and he was declared Venerable by Leo XIII in 1899.
          His relics were transferred to the mission house at Vich in
          1897, at which time his heart was found incorrupt, and his grave
          is constantly visited by many pilgrims. In addition to the
          Congregation of the Missionary Sons of the Heart of Mary
          (approved definitively by Pius IX, 11 Feb., 1870) which has now
          over 110 houses and 2000 members, with missions in W. Africa,
          and in Chocó (Columbia), Archbishop Claret founded or drew up
          the rules of several communities of nuns. By his sermons and
          writings he contributed greatly to bring about the revival of
          the Catalan language. His printed works number over 130, of
          which we may mention: "La escala de Jacob"; "Maximas de moral la
          más pura"; "Avisos"; "Catecismo explicado con láminas"; "La
          llave de oro"; "Selectos panegíricos" (11 vols.); "Sermones de
          misión" (3 vols.); "Misión de la mujer"; "Vida de Sta. Mónica";
          "La Virgen del Pilar y los Francmasones"; and his
          "Autobiografia", written by order of his spiritual director, but
          still unpublished.

          AGUILAR, Vida admirable del Venerable Antonio María Claret
          (Madrid, 1894); BLANCH, Vida del Venerable Antonio María Claret
          (Barcelona, 1906); CLOTET, Compendio de la vida del Siervo de
          Dios Antonio María Claret (Barcelona, 1880); Memorias ineditas
          del Padre Clotet in the archives of the missionaries of Aranda
          de Duero; VILLABA HERVAS, Recuerdos de cinco lustros 1843-1868
          (Madrid, 1896); Estudi bibliografich de los obres del Venerable
          Sallenti (Barcelona, 1907).

          [ Note: Antonio María Claret was canonized by Pope Pius XII in
          1950.]

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   St. Claude de la Colombiere

                         Ven. Claude de la Colombière

          Missionary and ascetical writer, born of noble parentage at
          Saint-Symphorien-d'Ozon, between Lyons and Vienne, in 1641; died
          at Paray-le-Monial, 15 Feb., 1682. He entered the Society of
          Jesus in 1659. After fifteen years of religious life he made a
          vow, as a means of attaining the utmost possible perfection, to
          observe faithfully the rule and constitutions of his order under
          penalty of sin. Those who lived with him attested that this vow
          was kept with great exactitude. In 1674 Father de la Colombière
          was made superior at the Jesuit house at Paray-le-Monial, where
          he became the spiritual director of Blessed Margaret Mary and
          was thereafter a zealous apostle of the devotion to the Sacred
          Heart of Jesus. In 1676 he was sent to England as preacher to
          the Duchess of York, afterwards Queen of Great Britain. He lived
          the life of a religious even in the Court of St. James and was
          as active a missionary in England as he had been in France.
          Although encountering many difficulties, he was able to guide
          Blessed Margaret Mary by letter. His zeal soon weakened his
          vitality and a throat and lung trouble seemed to threaten his
          work as a preacher. While awaiting his recall to France he was
          suddenly arrested and thrown into prison, denounced as a
          conspirator. Thanks to his title of preacher to the Duchess of
          York and to the protection of Louis XIV, whose subject he was,
          he escaped death but was condemned to exile (1679). The last two
          years of his life were spent at Lyons where he was spiritual
          director to the young Jesuits, and at Paray-le-Monial, whither
          he repaired for his health. His principal works, including
          "Pious Reflections", "Meditations on the Passion", "Retreat and
          Spiritual Letters", were published under the title, "Oeuvres du
          R. P. Claude de la Colombière" (Avignon, 1832; Paris, 1864). His
          relics are preserved in the monastery of the Visitation nuns at
          Paray-le-Monial.

          SEQUIN, Vie du P. de la Colombière (Paris, 1876), tr. in
          Quarterly Series (London, 1883); LUBEN, Der ehrwurdige Diener
          Gottes P. Claudius de la Colombière (Einsiedeln, 1884);
          LETIERCE, Le Sacre Coeur, ses apotres et ses sanctuaires (Nancy,
          1886); Lettres inedites de la bienheureuse Marguerite Marie
          (Toulouse, 1890); CHARRIER, Histoire du V. P. Claude de la
          Colombière (Paris, 1894); BOUGAUD, Histoire de la bienheureuse
          Marguerite Marie (Toulouse, 1900); Oeuvres completes du R. P. de
          la Colombière (Grenoble, 1901); HATTLER, Lebensbild der
          ehrwurdige P. Claudius de la Colombière (1903); POUPLARD, Notice
          sur le serviteur de Dieu, le R. P. Claude de la Colombière.

          [ Note: Claude de la Colombière was beatified in 1929, and
          canonized by Pope John Paul II in 1992.]

          GERTRUDE DANA STEELE

   Colonia

                                    Colonia

          A titular see in Armenia Prima. Colonia should be identified
          with Kara Hissar, chief town of a sanjak of the vilayet of
          Sivas. It has about 10,000 inhabitants, all Mussulmans,
          excepting 700 Greeks, and 2500 Armenians (1500 Gregorian, 700
          Protestant, and 300 Catholic). It trades in agricultural
          products and alum from the neighbouring mines. Colonia retained
          its importance under the Seljukian Turks and even under the
          Ottomans, who captured it in 1473. In the present city there are
          the curious ruins of the citadel built by Justinian, and rebuilt
          and enlarged during the Middle Ages. Colonia was one of the
          centres of the Paulician heresy.

          For the identification of Colonia see RAMSEY, Asia Minor, 57,
          267; F. AND E. CUMONT, Studia Pontica (Brussels, 1906), 296-302.
          For the modern city see CUINET, La Turquie d' Asie, I, 779.

          S. PÉTRIDÈS

   Antonio Comellas y Cluet

                            Antonio Comellas y Cluet

          A philosopher, born at Berga, in the Province of Barcelona, 16
          Jan., 1832; died there, 3 June, 1884. Comellas studied
          philosophy and theology at Vich, and entered the diocesan
          seminary at Solsona. After his ordination (17 May, 1856) he
          continued to teach Latin at Solsona until 1862, when he was
          appointed professor of theology. During his stay there he
          published two pamphlets, in which he gave ample evidence of his
          learning. The first was a discourse, delivered at the opening of
          the scholastic term, 1866-67, in which he essayed to explain in
          a new manner the procession of the Three Divine Persons, and the
          second a translation, accompanied by prologue and interesting
          notes, of a work by Reginald Baumstark, "Pensamientos de un
          protestante sobre la invitación del papa á la reconciliación con
          la Iglesia católica romana" (Barcelona, 1869). To be able to
          devote himself to his chosen line of work, a few months after
          the appearance of his philosophic, he resigned his chair of
          theology in 1871, and withdrew to Berga. Before 1880 he
          published "Demostración de la armonía entre la religión católica
          y la ciencia", a work of an apologetic nature, written to refute
          William Draper's "Conflict Between Science and Religion". In
          1883 he wrote his philosophic work, "Introducción á la
          filosofía, ó sea doctrina, sobre la dirección al ideal de la
          ciencia" (Barcelona). Gómez Izquierdo, his biographer, says,
          that "as a philosopher, he [Comellas] was the only thinker who
          obeying the impulse of his scientific inquisitiveness, rather
          than the influence and stimulus of those about him, devoured all
          the most interesting philosophical literature of Europe of his
          time" and that "in his active mind the echoes of the
          spiritualism of the Catalonian School and the first murmurs of
          the Thomistic revival reverberated". One of the distinguishing
          features in the career of Comellas is that he is to be
          considered as one of the precursors of the neo-Scholastic
          movement in Spain.

          GÓMEZ IZQUIERDO, Un filosófo catalán, Antonio Comellas y Cluet
          in Cultura española (Madrid, 1907); ORTÍ Y LARA in La ciencia
          cristiana (Madrid, 1883); SARDÁ Y SALVANY in Revista popular
          (Barcelona, 26 March, 1885); CASALS in La Dinastía (Barcelona, 2
          August, 1890); DE MOLINS in Diccionario biográfico y
          bibliográfico de escritores y artistas catalanes del siglo XIX,
          I, 487; MENÉNDEZ Y PELAYO, Historia de los heterodoxos
          españoles, III, 824.

          R. BOLOS

   Flavius Julius Constantius

                           Flavius Julius Constantius

          Roman emperor (337-361), born in Illyria, 7 Aug., 317; died at
          the Springs of Mopsus (Mopsokrene near Tarsus), 3 Nov., 361. He
          was the son of Constantine the Great and his first wife Fausta.
          On 8 Nov., 324, he was made Cæsar. After the death of the father
          (337) he received the Provinces of Egypt, Oriens, Asia, and
          Pontus, and became the sole ruler of the Roman Empire after the
          death of his brothers Constantine II (340) and Constans I (350)
          and of Magnentius (353). He was not successful in his wars, in
          which the Persians were his chief foe. As regards his religious
          policy he commanded in 353 the closing of the heathen temples
          and the abolishment of sacrifices under penalty of death, but
          these edicts were not rigidly executed. Even less logical were
          his actions in leaving the higher schools and the instruction of
          the higher classes of society in the hands of the pagan
          philosophers, and in continuing to fill the positions in the
          priesthood in the ancient manner. Won over to Arianism by the
          Eusebians, he acted as its protector, persecuted the orthodox
          Catholic bishops, and used violence against the synods. He
          showed especial hatred towards St. Athanasius. For a time,
          however, he assumed a friendly manner towards the saint, because
          after the murder of his brother Constans by the usurper
          Magnentius he had to exercise caution in order to maintain his
          position, and he was glad to make use of the influence of
          Athanasius over the common people. But, after the overthrow of
          Magnentius the emperor at once altered his conduct, and listened
          willingly to the accusation of the Eusebians against Athanasius.
          Pope Liberius called the Synod of Arles (353) to adjust the
          matter, but Constantius terrified the bishops, so that
          Athanasius was declared guilty and deposed.

          At another synod held at Milan in 355 the emperor was present
          behind a curtain and finally rushed into the assembly with drawn
          sword. Consequently this synod also passed such decrees as he
          desired. Whoever was not compliant was exiled or thrown into
          prison. Pope Liberius, however, had not confirmed these decrees,
          and as he resolutely refused to give his approval he was
          banished to Ber a in Thrace; several Italian bishops, as well as
          Hosius of Córdova and Hilary of Poitiers, were also exiled.
          Athanasius fled into the wilderness. From this time Constantius
          deposed bishops according to his whims, and appointed in their
          stead others who were his tools. He was a mouthpiece for the
          most contradictory dogmas and formulæ; for example, he favoured
          both the Anomæans and the Semi-Arians. It is true that at the
          Synod of Constantinople (360) he avoided showing himself an open
          partisan of the strict Arians, but soon after, when Meletius of
          Antioch was deposed, he openly accepted their confession of
          faith. He seemed to have clearly in mind only one aim: the
          destruction of Catholic doctrine.

          Hilary of Poitiers is not unjust when he describes Constantius
          ("Contra Constantium imperatorem", P. L., X, 578 sqq.) as
          excessively presumptuous, ruthless towards God and the Church,
          and, although apparently a Christian, yet an enemy of Jesus
          Christ; one who drew up confessions of faith yet who lived
          contrary to the faith, like an "impious person who does not know
          what is sacred, who drives the good from the dioceses in order
          to give these to the wicked, who by intrigues encourages
          discord, who hates yet wishes to avoid suspicion, who lies but
          wishes no one to see it, who is outwardly friendly but within
          lacks all kindness of heart, who in reality does only what he
          wishes yet wishes to conceal from everyone what it is that he
          wishes". Constantius died of an illness while engaged in a
          campaign against his nephew Julian; shortly before his death he
          had been baptized by the Arian Bishop Euzoios.

          DE BROGLIE, L'Eglise et l'empire romain aux siècles III et IV;
          HERGENRÖTHER, Handbuch der allgemeinen Kirchengeschichte, I
          (Freiburg, 1911), 360 sq.; DURUY, Histoire des Romains, VII
          (Paris, 1885), 214-327.

          KLEMENS LÖFFLER

   Coptic Literature

                               Coptic Literature

          Since the publication of the article EGYPT, under which Coptic
          literature was treated, important discoveries of entirely new
          Sahidic material have taken place, and considerable portions of
          the Sahidic Version from manuscripts known already have been
          given to the public by very competent scholars.

  THE MORGAN COLLECTION

          The most important of these discoveries was undoubtedly that of
          the library of the Monastery of St. Michael in the Fayûm
          (Spring, 1910). Most of the fifty-eight volumes of which it
          consisted found their way to Paris, where they were purchased by
          J. Pierpont Morgan (Dec., 1911), in whose library (at New York)
          they are now preserved. 5000 volumes remained in Egypt, and,
          with a few fragments of the same origin, are kept in the
          Egyptian Museum at Cairo. With the exception of one Fayûmic and
          one Bohairic manuscript the whole collection is in the Sahidic
          dialect. This had its home in Upper Egypt, but evidently it had
          spread in the Fayûm as a literary language as early as the
          eighth century, for some of our manuscripts are dated in the
          first quarter of the following century. The numerous colophons,
          however, all in the local Fayûmic idiom, show that the latter
          still obtained as a spoken language. One of the most important
          features of the Morgan collection is that it consists of
          complete volumes, while other collections, yet reputed so
          valuable, those of Rome, Paris, and London (see below under
          British Museum Collection), to name the principal ones, consist
          mostly of fragments. It is an inveterate habit with the Arabs of
          Egypt to tear the manuscripts they discover or steal, so as to
          give each member of the tribe his share of the spoils, and also
          in the hope of securing higher prices by selling the manuscripts
          piecemeal, a process fatal to literature, for while some leaves
          so treated will be scattered throughout the public or private
          collections of Europe and America, a good many more will either
          meet destruction or remain hidden indefinitely by the individual
          owners. Most of the manuscripts of the Monastery of St. Michael
          had already been divided into small lots of leaves and
          distributed among a number of Arabs when they were rescued at
          the cost of untold toil and expense.

          Mr. Morgan's collection is no less remarkable as a group of
          dated manuscripts of absolutely certain provenance. We had a
          number of much older volumes or fragments, the ages of which,
          however, could not be determined with sufficient approximation,
          for lack of points of comparison, chronologically not too
          distant. The only points of comparison, so far, were two
          manuscripts dated a.d. 1006 (British Museum Or. 1320) and 1003
          (Naples, Zoega, XI). There are indeed a few colophons in Paris
          with dates almost 100 years earlier but those colophons are
          generally separated from the manuscripts to which they belonged
          and consequently are of little or no use, the script of
          colophons being as a rule different from that in the body of the
          manuscript. Now the Morgan collection contains eighteen dates
          ranging from a.d. 832 to 914, so that our point of comparison is
          thrown practically 200 years nearer the older manuscripts in
          question. Many of the manuscripts are still in their original
          bindings, which are possibly the oldest, and certainly the
          best-authenticated, specimens of the art of bookbinding in that
          remote period. They consist of thick boards made of layers of
          papyrus sheets taken from older manuscripts. The covering is
          brown or deepened leather stamped with geometrical patterns, or
          cut though so as to show pieces of the same material, but of
          different colours (generally red or gold), slipped between the
          board and cover. In one case the decoration, exceedingly
          elaborate, was obtained by means of narrow strips of red
          parchment delicately stitched on the gilded cover of the boards
          and on the inner face of one of the boards, the name of the
          monastery is reproduced in the same manner on the turned-in edge
          of the leather covering. A dozen of the volumes are adorned with
          full-page miniatures representing the Virgin with her Divine Son
          at her breast or sitting in her lap, angels, martyrs,
          anchorites, and other saints. A wealth of decorations from the
          vegetable and animal realms runs along the margins and around
          the titles of the individual treatises, in almost all the
          volumes. It is the earliest and most complete attempt at
          illustrating and decorating yet discovered in Sahidic
          manuscripts.

          The library of the Monastery of St. Michael was clearly a
          liturgical library, that is all its books were used in church.
          The following classified list of contents will give a fair idea
          of what a Coptic monastic library of that time was while it will
          also show the 1acunæ with which it has come down to us.

          Bible

          (1) Old Testament

          Six complete books of the Sahidic version, namely, Leviticus,
          Numbers, Deuteronomy, I and II Kings (Samuel), and Isaias,
          excepting i, 1-19, and vii, 7-viii.

          (2) New Testament

          The Four Gospels (excepting Luke, iv, 33-ix, 30; ix, 62-xiii,
          17), the fourteen Epistles of St. Paul, and the seven Catholic
          Epistles (I and II Peter, I-III John, James, and Jude). There is
          also a manuscript of the Bohairic Version of the Four Gospels,
          fragmentary, unfortunately, and without indication of provenance
          or date, and it remains to decide whether it belonged to the
          Monastery of St. Michael. Still it is probably older than any of
          the manuscripts so far known of that version and on that account
          it may prove of considerable value for textual criticism.

          Liturgy

          + (1) A complete Lectionary containing much valuable information
            as to the liturgical, sanctoral, and the general run of the
            ecclesiastical year, and explaining several popular names for
            the various Sundays which, so far, were either unknown or
            obscure and liable to misinterpretation.
          + (2) A Breviary and
          + (3) an Antiphonary, two books of which we had nothing but a
            few fragments that challenged all attempts at reconstruction.
            The sanctoral of the antiphonary is the oldest document of
            that kind in the Coptic literature.

          Synaxary

          Over 100 homilies, discourses, eulogies, Acts of martyrs, lives
          of saints, and miscellaneous treatises, to be read in church on
          the various Sundays and feasts of the liturgical year. These
          have been recently classified by categories of feast, retaining,
          however, in each category, the order of the calendar.

          + (1) Feasts of Our Lord: Nativity (Choiac 29=25 Dec.),
            discourse by Demetrius, Archbishop of Antioch; Epiphany (Tybi
            11=6 Jan.), two discourses by St. Epiphanius of Constance
            (Cyprus), and St. Peter of Alexandria; Passion, discourse by
            St. Athanasius of Alexandria; Resurrection (Holy Saturday,
            Easter Sunday, Easter Wednesday, and Whitsunday), one
            discourse by Evodius, Archbishop of Rome (probably error for
            Antioch), one by St. John Chrysostom, and five discourses by
            St. Cyril of Jerusalem; Pentecost, discourse by St. Athanasius
            of Alexandria; Feast of the Holy Cross (Thoth 17=14 Sept.),
            discourse by St. Cyril of Jerusalem, also a discourse by
            Theophilus of Alexandria on the Cross and the Good Thief, not
            assigned to any date.
          + (2) Feasts of the Blessed Virgin Mary: Nativity and Death
            (Tybi 21=16 Jan.), discourse by St. Cyril of Jerusalem;
            Assumption (Mesori 16=15 Aug.), discourse by Theophilus of
            Alexandria.
          + (3) Feasts of Angels: St. Gabriel (Choiac 22=18 Dec., Feast of
            the Annunciation?), discourse by Archelaus, Bishop of
            Neapolis; St. Gabriel's Investiture in Heaven, by St. Stephen;
            St. Michael, patron saint of the monastery (Athyr 12=8 Nov.),
            two discourses by Macarius, Bishop of Tkôou and Severus of
            Antioch; St. Michael's 1nvestiture in Heaven, by St. John the
            Evangelist; three discourses by St. Athanasius of Alexandria,
            Severianus, Bishop of Gabala, and Timothy of Alexandria. There
            are also discourses without mention of date in the titles, but
            very likely pronounced also on Athyr 12: two by St. Basil,
            five by St. Athanasius, Eustathius of Thrakê, Severianus, St.
            John Chrysostom, and St. Gregory the Theologian, also one by
            St. Athanasius on St. Michael and St. Gabriel.
          + (4) Feasts of Apocalyptic Spirits: The Four Incorporeal
            Animals (Athyr 8=4 Nov.), discourse by St. John Chrysostom;
            The Twenty-four Elders (Athyr 24=20 Nov.), discourse by
            Proclus of Cyzicus.
          + (5) Feasts of Patriarchs and Prophets: Isaac (Mesôri 24=17
            Aug.), dormitio; Joseph (without date), his history by Ephrem
            the Anchorite; Jeremias (without date), Paralipomena.
          + (6) Feasts of Saints of the Gospels and Acts: St. John the
            Baptist (Thoth 2=30 Aug) discourse by Theodore, Archbishop of
            Alexandria; Sts. Peter and Paul (Epiphi 5=29 June), discourse
            by Severianus of Gabala; the Twelve Apostles, St. Mark, and
            St. Luke (same day), Eulogy of the Twelve Apostles and Life of
            St. Mark (acephalous; author unknown. In Cairo); St. Stephen
            [no date in the Lectionary (see above)], Stoning of St.
            Stephen (Thoth 15=12 Sept.), Life (politeia).
          + (7) Feasts of Martyrs: Shnûfe and Brothers (Phaôphi 7=4 Oct.),
            Acts of martyrdom; Cyprian [and Justina] (Phaôphi 20=17 Oct.),
            Conversion of Cyprian, his Acts of martyrdom; Menas (Athyr
            10=6 Nov.), Acts of martyrdom, eulogy by John, Archbishop of
            Alexandria, miracles; Cosmas and Damianus (Athyr 22=18 Nov.),
            Acts of martyrdom (acephalous); Mercurius (Athyr 25=21 Nov.),
            Acts of martyrdom, two eulogies by Acacius of Neo-Cæsarea and
            St. Basil of Cæsarea; Paêse and Thecla (Choiac 8=4 Dec.), Acts
            of martyrdom; Ptelemê (Choiac 11=7 Dec.), Acts of martyrdom;
            Psote (Choiac 27=23 Dec.), Acts of martyrdom; Leonitius the
            Arab and Publius (Tybi 1=27 Dec.), Acts of martyrdom; Theodore
            the Anatolian, Leonitius the Arab and Panegyris (Tybi 12=7
            Jan.), Acts of martyrdom; Philotheus (Tybi 16=11 Jan.), Acts
            of martyrdom; Apa Ioule and Ptelemê (Tybi 21=16 Jan.), Acts of
            martyrdom; Apa Elia (Pharmouthi 16=11 April), Acts of
            martyrdom, eulogy by Stephen of Huês (both in Cairo); Victor,
            son of Romanos (Pharmouthi 27=22 April), eulogy by
            Theopemptos, Archbishop of Antioch; Coluthus (Pachôn 24=19
            May), Acts of martyrdom, eulogy by Isaac, Bishop of Antinôou;
            Phoibamôn (Payni 1=26 May), Acts of martyrdom, miracles;
            Claudius (Payni 11=5 June), Acts of martyrdom, eulogy by
            Severus of Antioch, two eulogies by Constantine of Siout;
            Epiana (Epiphi 8=2 July), Acts; Nabra (same date), Acts (in
            Cairo); Theodore Stratelatês (Epiphi 20=14 July), Acts of
            martyrdom, narrative by Anastatius, Bishop of Euchaitos; The
            Seven Sleepers (Mesôri 20=13 Aug.), Acts of martyrdom,
            Isidorus, his mother Sophia, and his sister Euphêmia (no date
            legible), Acts of martyrdom (Cairo).
          + (8) Feasts of Anchorites and Cenobites: Phib (Phaôphi 20=17
            Oct.), life by Papohe; Samuel of Kalomôn (Choiac 8=4 Dec.),
            life; Archellitês (Tybi 13=8 Jan.), life by Eusebius "the
            historiographer of Rome"; Maximus and Dometius (Tybi 14 and
            17=9 and 12 Jan.), lives by Pohoi; Hilaria (Tybi 21=16 Jan.),
            life by Pambô; St. Anthony (Tybi 22=7 Jan.), life by St.
            Athanasius, eulogy by John, Bishop of Ashmûnein; Longinus and
            Lucius (Mechior 2=27 Jan.), lives, eulogy by Basil, Bishop of
            Pemje; Pachomius (Pachôn 14=9 May), life (acephalous);
            Onuphrius (Payni 16=10 June), life; Apollô (Payni 20=14 June),
            eulogy by Stephen, Bishop of Huês.
          + (9) Feasts of Bishops: Macarius of Tkôou (no date, Phaôphi
            21=18 Oct., more probably, however, on the same day as
            Dioscorus of Alexandria, Thoth 7=4 Sept.), eulogy by
            Dioscorus, Archbishop of Alexandria (when in exile at Gangra);
            St. Athanasius of Alexandria (Pachôn 7=2 May), two eulogies by
            Constantine, Bishop of Siout.
          + (10) Miscellaneous. it has as yet been impossible to assign
            the following treatises to any special days of the liturgical
            year, but it is very likely that they, too, were once part of
            the Synaxary; some of them may have been read on ordinary
            Sundays: from St. John Chrysostom, homily on the sinning woman
            who repented (Luke, vii, 34 sqq.); from St. Athanasius, two
            homilies, one on the parable of the man who borrowed three
            loaves from his friend (Luke, xi, 5 sqq.) and another on the
            resurrection of Lazarus; from St. Cyril of Alexandria, homily
            on some passages of the Apocalypse from John, Archbishop of
            Alexandria, answers on various questions of theology, put to
            him by one of his priests, Theodore by name; from Shenute, a
            volume on indifference in church-going. It is needless to say
            here that almost every one of the treatises under sections 1
            to 6 of the Synaxary is either downright apocryphal or at
            least based on apocryphal literature.

          An official and detailed catalogue of this rich collection is in
          course of preparation and there is every prospect that the
          editing and translating of these venerable relics will begin
          without unavoidable delay.

  THE BRITISH MUSEUM'S RECENT ACQUISITIONS

          The British Museum acquired of late a number of valuable Sahidic
          manuscripts. Three of these, Or. 5000, Or. 5001 (both found
          together in a ruined monastery of Upper Egypt), and Or. 7594
          (bought from a native antiquarian at Ghizer, Cairo) are on
          papyrus, and bear the appearance of high antiquity, especially
          Or. 7594, which the authorities of the British Museum date in
          the middle of the fourth century. The others, Or. 6780-6784,
          6799-6804, 6806, 7021-7030, are on parchment, excepting a few on
          paper, and their dates of writing, so far as they are given,
          vary from a.d. 979 to 1053. These probably all come from the
          Monastery of St. Mercurius in the desert west of Edfû (Upper
          Egypt). The following is a summary of contents of the
          twenty-five manuscripts:

          Bible

          (1) Old Testament

          Deuteronomy (excepting ii, 20-iv, 48; viii, 3-ix, 6; xiii,
          17-xiv, 17; xviii, 11-xix, 1; xx, 6-xxii, 2; xxvi, 11-xxvii, 26,
          and a number of smaller lacunæ); Jonas (complete), Or. 7594 The
          Psalter (complete, including the uncanonical Ps. cli, Or. 5000,
          assigned to beginning of the seventh century).

          (2) New Testament

          The Acts of the Apostles (excepting xxiv, 16-xxvi, 31), and a
          number of verses lacunous or entirely missing [Or. 7594]; The
          Apocalypse of St. John (excepting i, 1-8; xxii, 15-21), Or.
          6803, paper, eleventh or twelfth century.

          Liturgy

          Lections and antiphons for the feasts of St. Michael [Or. 6781],
          St. Mercurius [6801], and St. Aaron, cenobite [7029].

          Synaxary

          + (1) Our Lord: discourse of Demetrius, Archbishop of Antioch,
            on the Nativity of Our Lord [Or. 7027], an account of the
            Descent of Our Lord to Hell, by the Apostle Bartholomew [*Or.
            6804], discourse of St. Cyril of Jerusalem on the Cross [Or.
            6799];
          + (2) The Blessed Virgin Mary: discourse of Theophilus of
            Alexandria on the Blessed Virgin Mary [Or. 6780], discourse of
            St. Cyril of Alexandria on the same [Or. 6782], twenty-first
            exegesis of St. Cyril of Jerusalem on the same [Or. 6784].
          + (3) Angels: discourse of Theodosius, Archbishop of Alexandria,
            on St. Michael [Or. 6781 and Or. 7021], another discourse on
            the same subject by Timothy of Alexandria [Or. 7029],
            discourse of Celestine of Rome on St. Gabriel [begins Or.
            7028, continues on a fragment in the collection of Mr. Freer
            of Detroit, ends on Or. 6780], discourse by St. John
            Chrysostom on St. Raphael [Or. 7023], the investiture of
            Raphael, a discourse by Severus of Antioch [Or. 7028, two
            folios only], discourse by Timothy of Alexandria on Abbaton,
            the angel of death [Or. 7025].
          + (4) Apocalyptic: Apocalypse (? acephalous) "written by Timothy
            and Mark at the request of St. Paul" [Or. 7023].
          + (5) Saints in Gospel and Acts: discourse of St. John
            Chrysostom on St. John the Baptist [Or. 7024], death of St.
            John the Apostle [*Or. 6782], the Mysteries of John the
            Apostle learned by him in Heaven [Or. 7026].
          + (6) Martyrs: martyrdom of Eustathius and Placidus [*Or. 6783],
            martyrdom of Mercurius [Or. 6801], fragments of the same [*Or.
            6802], miracles by St. Mercurius [ibid.], eulogy of the same
            by Acacius of Cæsarea [ibid.], eulogy of Theodore, Archbishop
            of Antioch [Or. 7030].
          + (7) Anchorites and cenobites: Life of Cyrus by Pambo of Scete
            [*Or. 6783], Life of John Calybites [ibid.], Life of Onuphrius
            [Or. 7027], eulogy of the same by Pisenthios of Coptos [Or.
            6800].
          + (8) Bishops: eulogy of Demetrius, Archbishop of Antioch, by
            Flavius of Ephesus [*Or. 67831; Life of Pesynthius of Coptos
            [Or. 7026].
          + (9) Miscellaneous: "Asceticon" of St. Ephrem the Syrian [*Or.
            6783], epistle of the same [ibid.]; three homilies of St.
            Athanasius -- on mercy and judgment [*Or. 5001, 3], on the
            parable of the man who went out early on the morning to hire
            workmen for his vineyard [ibid., 5], and on the soul and the
            body [ibid, 9]; discourse of St. John Chrysostom on repentance
            and temperance [ibid., 1], exegesis of the same on Susanna
            [ibid., 2]; homily of St. Basil on the dissolution of the
            world and the temple of Solomon and on death [ibid., 8];
            discourse of Theophilus of Alexandria on repentance and
            temperance, also that man must not put off repentance until
            surprised by death [ibid., 4]; homily pronounced by Proclus of
            Cyzicus in the great church of Constantinople, the Sunday
            before Lent, on the doctrine of Nestorius, who was present
            [ibid., 7]; homily of the same pronounced in the church of
            Anthemius, in Constantinople, on Easter Sunday, when he was
            installed, while Nestorius was present [ibid., 6); discourse
            of Eusebius of Cæsarea on the Chanaanite woman [ibid., 10].
            See also: VERSIONS OF THE BIBLE, COPTIC, in this volume, and
            EGYPT, COPTIC LITERATURE, in Vol. V, 356-362.

          On Or. 5000 and Or. 5001 cf. CRUM, Catalogue of the Coptic
          Manuscripts of the Brit. Museum (London, 1905), Nos. 940, 171;
          WALLIS BUDGE, The earliest known Coptic Psalter in the Dialect
          of Upper Egypt from the unique Papyrus oriental 5000 in the
          Brit. Museum (London. 1908); IDEM, Coptic Homilies in the
          dialect of Upper Egypt (from Or. 5001 text and English tr.,
          London 1910). On Or. 7594 and Or. 6803 cf. WALLIS BUDGE Coptic
          Biblical Texts of Upper Egypt, with ten plates (London, 1912),
          with contributions by KENYON and BELL. On the St. Mercurius
          (Edfû) collection cf. RUSTAFJAELL, Light of Egypt, in which
          several of the Manuscripts are described and illustrated. The
          above account, however, is based on the writer's personal,
          though cursory inspection of most of the manuscripts. For those
          marked with an asterisk (*) he had to depend on the list kept in
          the Oriental Room of the British Museum.

          H. HYVERNAT

   Francis Marion Crawford

                            Francis Marion Crawford

          Novelist, b. of American parents at Bagni di Lucca, Italy, 2
          Aug., 1854; died at his home near Sorrento, Italy, 9 April,
          1909. In early manhood he became a convert to the Catholic
          Faith. His father, Thomas Crawford, was a distinguished
          sculptor; his mother, Louisa Ward, was a sister of Mrs. Julia
          Ward Howe. The greater part of his youth was passed at Rome,
          and, after having studied in various colleges in America,
          England, and Germany, he terminated his studies in the Roman
          University, where he attended the lectures in Sanskrit and
          comparative philology given by the learned Professor Lignana. At
          the same time he was already occupied with English literature.
          He afterwards passed four years and a half in the East Indies
          and the United States as journalist, critic, and finally
          novelist, up to the time of his marriage in 1884, when he took
          up his residence at the villa he had bought and remodelled for
          himself near Sorrento on the Bay of Naples.

          With the publication in 1882 of "Mr. Isaacs", his first and in
          some respects most characteristic novel, he suddenly leaped into
          fame. While it was running through the press Crawford began a
          more carefully composed novel, "Dr. Claudius" (1883), which more
          than repeated the success of "Mr. Isaacs". His third novel, "A
          Roman Singer", ran serially through the pages of the "Atlantic
          Monthly" and was published in 1884. It was this third novel
          which opened out to Mr. Crawford his true field, the description
          of Italian life and character with its many cosmopolitan, and
          especially its American and English, affiliations. He was the
          author of some forty novels and one play, "Francesca da Rimini",
          and his publications commanded a larger sale than those of any
          contemporary writer of fiction in England or in the United
          States. Besides those mentioned his principal works of fiction
          are the following: "Zoroaster" (1885); "A Tale of a Lonely
          Parish" (1886); "Saracinesca" (1887); "Marzio's Crucifix"
          (1887); "Paul Patoff" (1887); "Greifenstein" (1889); "Sant'
          Ilario" (1889); "A Cigarette Maker's Romance" (1890); "The Witch
          of Prague" (1891); "Don Orsino" (1892); "Pietro Ghisleri"
          (1893); "The Ralstons" (1895); "Corleone" (1897); "Via Crucis"
          (1899); "In the Palace of the King" (1900); "Marietta, A Maid of
          Venice" (1901); "The Heart of Rome" (1903); "Whosoever Shall
          Offend" (1904); "Soprano, A Portrait" (1905); "Fair Margaret"
          (1905); "The Primadonna" (1907); and "The Diva's Ruby" (1908).
          Crawford did not confine his attention to fiction. History,
          biography, and description are represented in his:
          "Constantinople" (1895); "Ave, Roma Immortalis" (1898); "The
          Rulers of the South" (1900) -- renamed "Sicily, Calabria and
          Malta" (1904); "The Life of Pope Leo XIII" (1904); and
          "Gleanings From Venetian History" (1905). In 1904 he published
          an essay entitled "The Novel: What it is", in which he gives his
          views upon the art of which he was a master.

          While Marion Crawford in his public life always professed
          himself a Catholic, he can scarcely be called a Catholic
          novelist, and his treatment of Catholic subjects in several of
          his works does not recommend itself to his coreligionists. In
          his Philip II, for example, he follows the traditional
          Protestant view and unjustly represents that monarch as a brutal
          bully, cruel, sensual, and base. During his last illness, Marion
          Crawford received all the comforts of religion. He chose the
          neighbouring chapel of the Franciscans for the ceremonies of his
          requiem.

          FRASER, A Diplomatist's Wife in Many Lands, I (New York, 1910),
          ix; Career of Crawford in Outlook (17 April, 1909);
          Chronological list of Crawford's Works in Nation (15 April,
          1909); Crawford's Influence on Literature in Forum (May, 1909);
          EGAN, Francis Marion Crawford in The Ave Maria (29 Sept., 1900).

          E.P. SPILLANE

   Daughters of the Cross

                             Daughters of the Cross

          A Belgian religious congregation founded in 1833 at Liège, by
          Jean-Guillaume Habets, curé of the Holy Cross, and Mlle. Jeanne
          Haze (later Mere Marie-Thérèse). The institute is under the
          protection of the Blessed Virgin and St. Teresa, and its rules
          are based on those of St. Ignatius. The nuns, who received papal
          recognition on 1 Oct., 1845, and had their statutes approved by
          the Holy See on 9 May, 1851, recite the Office of the Blessed
          Virgin daily. They make perpetual vows, which are renewed
          annually on 8 Sept. The chief end of the institute is to honour
          Christ in His weak and suffering members and to cultivate
          devotion to Our Lady of Sorrows. The main work of the Sisters is
          the education of poor girls, but they have also established
          orphanages, and homes for the poor; they nurse the sick, and
          have shown their devotion on the battlefield in the German wars
          of 1866 and 1870. At present they have 40 establishments in
          Belgium, 18 in the German Empire, 12 in India, and 16 in
          England, whither they first went in 1863. In April, 1899, they
          opened a new English novitiate at Carlshalton, Surrey. Mère
          Marie-Thérèse was born at Liège on 27 February, 1782 and died
          there on 8 Feb., 1876, having passed forty-three years in
          religion. The process of her beatification has been commenced
          and the decree for the "Commissio Introductionis Causae" was
          signed by Pius X on 13 Dec., 1911.

          STEELE, Convents of Great Britain (London, 1902), 232-5;
          HEIMBUCHER, Die Orden und Kongregationen, III, 387.

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   Daughters of the Cross

                             Daughters of the Cross

          A French institute.

          The first steps towards the foundation of this society were
          taken in 1625 at Roy, Picardy, by Père Pierre Guérin, Françoise
          Unalet, and Marie Fannier to provide for the Christian education
          of girls. The members were not bound by vows. After a happy
          beginning the organization was almost wrecked by a series of
          civil misfortunes. A few years later, however, some of its
          adherents came in contact with Mme. Marie l'Huillier de
          Villeneuve, who became interested in their work and was
          encouraged to assist in it by St. Vincent de Paul. She
          established a house near Paris, in 1651, and with the approval
          of Archbishop Jean-François de Gondi of Paris, introduced the
          obligation of making vows. This innovation was opposed by the
          older houses, and led to the formation of two branches of the
          society, one secular, and the other religious; papal approbation
          was obtained for the latter in 1668. Both institutes spread
          rapidly throughout France, under diocesan control, and
          noteworthy constitutions were drawn up by Mgr. de Rochebonne,
          Bishop of Noyon, in 1728. During the French Revolution the
          sisters were utterly dispersed. A community was established
          again at St. Quentin on 23 March, 1828; it continued, however,
          to languish, till Mgr. Simony, Bishop of Soissons, reorganized
          the institute in 1837, basing his rules partly on those of St.
          Ignatius, and partly on the old regulations. These were approved
          by the Holy See on 15 April, 1847. Thereafter the organization
          spread widely and branches were established eventually at La
          Louviere, Belgium, and in England at Boscombe, Southsea, and
          Ryde.

          BAHEZRE, Filles de la Croix de Paris pendant la Revolution
          (Paris, 1908); HEIMBUCHER, Die Orden und Kongregationen, III
          (Paderborn, 1908), 542; HELYOT, Dict. des ordres religieux, IV
          (Paris, 1859), 335-42; STREBER in Kirchenlexikon, VII, 1090-1.

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   Daughters of the Holy Cross

                          Daughters of the Holy Cross

          (Also called the Sisters of St. Andrew).

          The aim of this congregation is to instruct poor country girls,
          to provide refuges for the young exposed to temptation, to
          prepare the sick for death, and to care for churches. The
          sisters make yearly vows for five years, after which the vows
          are perpetual. The congregation, which is subject to diocesan
          control, was established at Guinnetiere, near Béthines, in the
          Diocese of Vienne, France, in 1806. In Dec., 1811, the
          mother-house was erected at Maillé, and six years later the
          constitutions were approved by Mgr. de Beauregard, Bishop of
          Montauban. Government recognition was granted in 1819 and
          renewed in 1826. In 1820 the foundress purchased the ancient
          abbey at La Puye, which then became the headquarters of the
          institute. In 1839 Pius VIII granted many indulgences and
          spiritual favours to the members. The establishment of a branch
          at Issy, near Paris, in 1817 under the protection of the royal
          family, helped to develop the congregation, which spread
          rapidly, and foundations were made at Parma in 1851 under ducal
          patronage, and at Rome in 1856. At the time of the dispersion of
          the French orders in 1905, the Sisters of St. Andrew had 400
          houses in France, 9 in Italy, and 9 in Spain, with a membership
          of over 3000 nuns. The two founders of the congregation were:
          André-Hubert Fournet, Vicar-General of Poitiers, b. at Maillé on
          6 Dec., 1752; educated at Chatelleraud and Poitiers; ordained
          1778; who died at La Puye on 13 May, 1834; and
          Jeanne-Marie-Elizabeth-Lucie Bichier des Ages, born near Le
          Blanc, Indre, on 3 July, 1772; she had been a prisoner for the
          Faith during the Revolution, and died at La Puye on 26 Aug.,
          1838.

          [ Note: Andrew Fournet was canonized by Pope Pius XI in 1933,
          Elizabeth Bichier des Ages by Pope Pius XII in 1947.]

          HEIMBUCHER, Die Orden und Kongregationen, III (Paderborn, 1908),
          380; HELYOT, Dict. des ordres religieux, IV (Paris, 1859),
          342-64.

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   Virgin of Cuyo

                                 Virgin of Cuyo

          (At Mendoza, Argentine Republic).

          Historians tell us that the statue of the Virgin of Cuyo, styled
          Nuestra Señora de Cuyo or Nuestra Señora del Carmen de Mendoza,
          was venerated from the times of the earliest Spanish settlers.
          Though it origin is uncertain, its antiquity admits of no doubt.
          According to V. Gambon this statue is probably the one which,
          together with the church in which it stood, was given to the
          Franciscans when the Jesuits were expelled (1767) from the
          country by Charles III. In 1864 the church was ruined by an
          earthquake, and in its place the Franciscans erected the new
          church where the statue is now venerated.

          The celebrity of the shrine has resulted more from national
          gratitude for one great favour than for the countless miracles
          connected with it. José de San Martin (1778-1850), to whom more
          than to any other single person the South American republics owe
          their independence, had great devotion to Our Lady of Cuyo.
          After confronting Napoleon in Spain, San Martin returned to his
          native country at the outbreak of the War of Independence to
          organize the forces of his country. Well fitted to command, and
          possessing the full confidence of his countrymen, he soon
          gathered about him a little army, which he led to invariable
          success in battle, until his good fortune was checked by the
          Viceroy of Peru. Withdrawing to the Province of Cuyo (the
          territory which now includes the three Provinces of San Luis,
          San Juan, and Mendoza), San Martin soon strengthened his forces
          previous to his invasion of Chile. Before crossing the Andes he
          ordered the statue of Our Lady of Cuyo to be brought from the
          church and placed in a conspicuous position. As his troops
          passed in review before the statue, every man jubilantly
          proclaiming Our Lady as his especial patron in the campaign, San
          Martin, confident of victory, led his army across the Andes; the
          Spaniards gave way before him. The inhabitants of Chile flocked
          to his standard, and with colors flying followed their liberator
          into the capital, Santiago. The famous victories of Chacabuco,
          12 Feb., 1817, and of Maypú, 5 Apr., 1818, followed. From the
          scene of his victories, San Martin sent his commander's staff,
          the insignia of his position, as a votive offering of
          thanksgiving to Our Lady; and to the superior of the Franciscans
          there he addressed the following letter under date of 12 Aug.,
          1812 [sic, i.e., 1818]:

     The remarkable protection granted to the Army of the Andes by its
     Patron and General, Our Lady of Cuyo, cannot fail to be observed. I
     am obliged as a Christian to acknowledge the favour and to present
     to Our Lady, who is venerated in your Reverence's church, my staff
     of command which I hereby send: for it belongs to her and may it be
     a testimony of her protection to our Army.

          Three years later San Martin, accompanied by Bernardo O'Higgins,
          marched into Peru, entered Lima, drove the resisting Spaniards
          into the interior, and declared Peru independent. San Martin
          died in France, but his body was brought back to the Argentine
          Republic and placed in a mausoleum in the cathedral at Buenos
          Aires. His love for Our Lady of Cuyo has made the statue famous
          throughout the country. At the suggestion of Leonardo M.
          Maldonado, O.S.F., the Argentinos asked the pope's permission to
          crown the statue. Pius X readily gave his consent, and, in
          accordance with the pontifical decree of 21 Dec., 1910, the
          solemn coronation took place 8 Sept., 1911. The ceremony was
          attended by the most eminent men of the country. The crown of
          gold is said to be worth more than $75,000.

          MITRE, Historia de San Martin y de la emancipacion sud-americana
          (Buenos Aires, 1890), abbr. tr. by PILHING (London, 1893), xii;
          ESTRADA, Lecciones de historia argentina, II (Buenos Aires,
          1898), 183; ESPEJO, Vida de San Martin: El paso de los Andes
          (Buenos Aires, 1882); OTERO, Maria y la Republica Argentina:
          Academia de la Plata (Buenos Aires, 1904); Cath. Reading Circ.
          Rev. (June, 1893); YANI, OTERO, and GAMBON in La Semana (Buenos
          Aires, Sept. 1911); CURRIER, Lands of the Southern Cross
          (Washington, 1912), 141-2.

          WILLIAM FURLONG
     __________________________________________________________________

   Joseph Dabrowski

                                Joseph Dabrowski

          Founder of the Sts. Cyril and Methodius Seminary, Detroit,
          Michigan, b. at Zoltance, Russian Poland; d. at Detroit, 15
          Feb., 1903. He studied at the Gymnasium of Lublin and at the
          University of Warsaw. During the Polish Rebellion of 1863 he
          participated in many engagements, and in 1864 fled to Dresden;
          thence to Lucerne and Berne where he continued his studies in
          mathematics. Going to Rome, he came under the direction of the
          famous Resurrectionist, Father Semenenko, and was ordained
          priest, 1 August, 1869. In 1870 he went to America, and in a
          letter dated 22 Jan., from St. Francis Seminary, Milwaukee, to
          Father Semenenko he betrays a remarkable grasp of the
          demoralized conditions among the Poles in the United States, of
          whom he had actually seen so little. He urged the
          Resurrectionists to come to Chicago or Milwaukee and there
          establish schools of higher education whence they might send out
          missionaries to the scattered Poles. In 1870 he was appointed
          pastor of Polonia, Wisconsin, where for five years he fought
          against the unfortunate conditions existing in one of the oldest
          Polish communities in the United States. Unable to close the
          demoralizing inns about the church he obtained by gift from an
          Irishman twenty acres of land for the erection of new parish
          buildings and abandoned the old site. In 1879 the rectory was
          destroyed by fire and in 1880 fire totally destroyed the church
          and the new rectory. Undismayed, Father Dabrowski rebuilt all.
          In 1882 failing health forced him to resign and leave for
          Detroit, Michigan. In 1874 he introduced into the United States
          the Felician Sisters from Cracow, whose community multiplied its
          branches throughout the country, welcoming the immigrants,
          teaching thousands of Polish children, and caring for a
          multitude of Polish orphans and working girls.

          At the suggestion of Cardinal Ledochowski, who was unable to
          meet the constant appeals of American bishops for Polish priests
          and ecclesiastical students, Father Leopold Moczygemba, a
          Franciscan who had laboured in America and was then penitentiary
          of St. Peter's, Rome, went, with papal approval, to America and
          collected funds ($8000) for a Polish seminary. Being advanced in
          years Father Moczygemba felt unable to prosecute the work with
          vigour, and entrusted the task to Father Dabrowski. The latter
          began the building of the seminary in 1884, and on 24 July,
          1885, Bishop Ryan of Buffalo in the presence of Bishop Borgess
          of Detroit blessed the cornerstone. The seminary was opened in
          1887, and for nineteen years Father Dabrowski was its rector. In
          1902 it was enlarged, and in 1909 was removed to Orchard Lake,
          Michigan. Always the champion of authority, his counsel was ever
          gentle and calm. He was simple, quiet, and retiring, and
          entirely devoted to the promotion of God's glory and the welfare
          of his fellowmen. A few days before his death Father Dabrowski
          was compelled to expel from the seminary twenty-nine students
          for open rebellion. On 9 Feb., 1903, he suffered a paralytic
          stroke and died, grieved by the ingratitude of those whom he had
          served so nobly and so long.

          FELIX THOMAS SEROCZYNSKI

   Diocese of Dax

                                 Diocese of Dax

          An ancient French diocese which was suppressed by the Concordat
          of 1801, its territory now belonging to the Diocese of Aix and
          Bayonne. It is not certain that the patron of the diocese, the
          martyr St. Vincent, was a bishop. His cult existed in the time
          of Charlemagne, as is proved by a note of the Wolfenbuttel
          manuscript of the "Hieronymian Martyrology". The oldest account
          of his martyrdom is in a breviary of Dax, dating from the second
          half of the thirteenth century, but the author knows nothing of
          the martyr's period. Excavations near Dax proved the existence
          of a Merovingian seminary on the site of a church dedicated to
          St. Vincent by Bishop Gratianus. Gratianus, present at the
          Council of Agde (506), is the first historically known bishop.
          Among the other bishops of the see were St. Revellatus (early
          sixth century), St. Macarius (c. 1060), Cardinal Pierre Itier
          (1361), Cardinal Pierre de Foix (1455), founder of the
          University of Avignon and the Collège de Foix at Toulouse. The
          synodal constitutions of the ancient Diocese of Dax, published
          by the Abbe Degert, are of great historical interest for the
          study of the ancient constitutions and customs of the thirteenth
          and fourteenth centuries. M. Degert in the course of this
          publication has succeeded in rectifying certain errors in the
          episcopal lists of the "Gallia christiana". About 1588 St.
          Vincent de Paul made his first studies with the Cordeliers of
          Dax, but good secondary education at Dax dates only from the
          establishment of the Barnabites in 1640.

          Gallia christiana, nova, I (1715), 1035-62; instr., 173-75;
          DUCHESNE, Fastes episcopaux, II, 97, 140-42; DUFOURCET, Les
          eveques de Dax in Bulletin de la societe de Borda, IV (1879),
          205-30; LAHARGOU, Le college de Dax (Paris, 1909); IDEM, Le
          grand seminaire de Dax (Paris, 1909); DEGERT, Constitutions
          synodales de l'ancien diocese de Dax (Dax, 1898); IDEM, L'ancien
          college de Dax (Paris, 1909).

          GEORGES GOYAU

   Henri and Jules Desclee

                            Henri and Jules Desclée

          Henri (1830-); Jules (1828-1911).

          Natives of Belgium, founders of a monastery and a printing
          establishment. Among the religious orders, which at the close of
          the nineteenth century were driven out of Germany by the
          Kulturkampf and sought refuge in Catholic Belgium, were the
          Benedictines of a congregation established by the Wolter
          brothers, two German monks of St.-Paul's-without-the-Walls. With
          Dom Hildebrand de Hemptinne, a Belgian monk of that congregation
          (now Abbot Primate of the Benedictine Order), Jules Desclée had
          been a captain of the Pontifical Zouaves. Baron John Béthune,
          inspired by the same motive as the Desclée brothers for the
          restoration of Christian art, had attached his school of St.
          Luke to the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools;
          it was therefore natural for the Desclée brothers to look to a
          religious order for the realization of their plan, and the
          traditions of the Benedictine Order fitted in perfectly with
          their designs. Moreover, a Count de Hemptinne had been amongst
          the founders of the first school of St. Luke (1862). Accordingly
          the brothers chose a picturesque site on an estate of Henri
          Desclée's in the Province of Namur, for the erection of a
          monastery in which to establish the monks of Beuron. The
          monastery of Maredsous, constructed in the purest Gothic style
          of the thirteenth century after the plans of Baron Béthune, is
          one of the finest and most remarkable masterpieces produced in
          Belgium by the movement for the restoration of the architectural
          art of the Middle Ages. Its 120 monks devote their lives to the
          liturgy, study, and education. Maredsous has thus become an
          important centre of religious influence and the practice and
          teaching of Christian art. A college or abbey school and a
          technical school were added to the monastery in 1882 and 1902.
          The monks have also taken an active part in the reform of the
          religious chant.

          In 1882 the Desclée brothers also founded an important printing
          establishment at Tournai, under the title of the Society of St.
          John the Evangelist, their object being to restore Christian art
          in liturgical publications. The aesthetic principles by which
          their enterprise was to be directed were those of the Middle
          Ages. Here also Baron John Béthune assisted them. At first the
          society relied upon English workmen, compositors, and printers,
          England being the country in which the old traditions had been
          best preserved. The first publications attracted the attention
          of connoisseurs, and the technical perfection of the work soon
          earned for the house a world- wide reputation. The Society,
          following first the work of the Rev. Dom Pothier, and afterwards
          the studies of the Benedictines of Solesmes, issued the first
          publications for the re-establishment of the liturgical chant,
          commonly called "plain chant". These editions served as a basis
          for the edition brought out by the Vatican printing press, and
          imposed by Pius X on the universal Church. About 1880 the
          Desclée brothers resolved to apply to other branches of Catholic
          literature the same principles of artistic restoration which had
          met with such success in the liturgical domain. Under the title
          of the Society of St. Augustine they founded a separate
          business, devoted to the publication of all kinds of books
          relating to ecclesiastical studies, ascetic theology, religious
          history and literature, hagiography, art, archaeology,
          education, etc. The production of religious images forms also an
          important part of the work of the society, which possesses two
          establishments, one at Bruges in Belgium, and the other at Lille
          in France.

          A. VERMEERSCH

   John Devereux

                                John C. Devereux

          Born at his father's farm, The Leap, near Enniscorthy, Co.
          Wexford, Ireland, 5 Aug., 1774; died at Utica, New York, on 11
          Dec., 1848. He came from a patriotic and pious family, and was a
          son of Thomas Devereux and Catherine Corish. His brother Walter
          was in several battles in the Rebellion of '98, and a price was
          set on his head; while his brother James was killed in the
          battle of Vinegar Hill. His sister Catherine became Superioress
          of the Presentation Convent, Enniscorthy. John C. Devereux
          landed at New York about 1797, gave dancing lessons in
          Connecticut, and in 1802 opened a store in Utica, New York. He
          was successful and became wealthy; was public spirited and
          enterprising. He was elected the first mayor of Utica in 1840.
          He and his brother Nicholas founded the Utica Savings Bank. Dr.
          Bagg in "The Pioneers of Utica" says, "a settler of 1802 and a
          very prince among his fellows was John C. Devereux whose
          honourable career and many deeds of charity left behind him a
          memory as verdant as that of the green isle whence he came". He
          loved his Church and its institutions, and in 1813 was a trustee
          of St. Mary's, Albany. Visiting missionary priests always stayed
          at Devereux's home, where local Catholics heard Mass on Sundays.
          He and his brother Nicholas brought the Sisters of Charity to
          Utica to open an orphanage and each gave $5,000 towards the
          object. He was twice married but had no children; he was buried
          in the grounds of the Sisters of Charity.

          THOMAS P. KERNAN

   Nicholas Devereux

                               Nicholas Devereux

          Born near Enniscorthy, Ireland, 7 June, 1791; died at Utica, New
          York, 29 Dec., 1855, was the youngest brother of John C.
          Devereux. Nicholas reached New York in 1806; on the first Sunday
          following his arrival he attended Mass in St. Peter's, Barclay
          Street, and put on the plate one of his last three gold coins.
          God blessed his generosity; when he died fifty years later he
          had amassed as a merchant half a million dollars. He purchased
          from the Holland Land Company four hundred thousand acres of
          land in Allegheny and Cattaraugus counties, New York, and
          started there an Irish settlement. He gave largely towards the
          foundation of churches, colleges, and charitable institutions.
          He visited Rome in 1854 accompanied by his wife, his daughter
          Mary, and Rev. Michael Clarke. He brought to America six
          Franciscan Fathers and gave them $10,000 towards building a
          monastery at Allegheny, N.Y., which has now become the
          Franciscan college and seminary of St. Bonaventure. On his
          return from Italy he wrote a letter to the New York "Freeman's
          Journal" offering to be one of one hundred persons who would
          each give $1,000 towards founding a seminary at Rome, for the
          education of American priests. He had, moreover, several
          conversations with Cardinal Wiseman who promised to use his
          influence with Pius IX to carry out the project. After his death
          his widow carried out his wishes and thus was begun the
          foundation of the American College, Rome.

          Nicholas Devereux was a lover of the Holy Scriptures and read
          the entire Bible through seventeen times. To circulate the New
          Testament he had an edition of it printed at Utica at his own
          expense. The plates of this edition were afterwards purchased by
          Messrs. Sadlier, of New York, and about 40,000 copies printed.
          He taught Sunday-school in St. John's Church, Utica, and gave a
          copy of the New Testament to any boy or girl who memorized the
          Gospel of St. John. In 1817 he married Mary D. Butler. His
          daughter Hannah married United States Senator Francis Kernan;
          his daughter Mary became a Sister of Mercy and laboured for
          thirty years in the convents in Houston and 81st streets, New
          York. Nicholas Devereux was very charitable and hospitable -- a
          cultured, pious, progressive Irish-American. He was proud of his
          nationality and of his faith, and this pride was expressed in
          action whenever and wherever the opportunity arose. He was
          always glad to help the Church, deeming it a privilege to give
          and thus to be the instrument used by Providence in establishing
          and building up our Catholic institutions. A noted instance of
          his spontaneous generosity refers back to the early days of the
          Church in Connecticut. Happening to be at Hartford one Sunday he
          learned that owing to the bigotry and Knownothing sentiment in
          the town, it was impossible for the parishioners to obtain a
          certain piece of property for their church, as they were too few
          and too poor to provide the ready cash demanded. Devereux,
          though a stranger, did not need to be appealed to, he
          immediately advanced the required sum of $10,000, without asking
          or receiving any assurance that the money would ever be returned
          to him, though the grateful pioneer Catholics did in fact repay
          him later.

          THOMAS P. KERNAN

   Diego Deza

                                   Diego Deza

          Theologian, archbishop, patron of Christopher Columbus, b. at
          Toro, 1444; d. 1523. Entering the Order of St. Dominic in his
          youth, he became successively: professor of theology at St.
          Stephen's, Salamanca; tutor to Prince John, son of Ferdinand and
          Isabella; Bishop of Zamora, of Salamanca, of Jaen, of Palencia;
          Archbishop of Seville (1505). In 1523 he was appointed
          Archbishop of Toledo and Primate of Spain, but died before he
          had taken possession of that see. He left several theological
          works, the principal one being a "Defensorium Doctoris Angelici,
          S. Th. Aquinatis" (Seville, 1491). Historians generally have not
          emphasized the importance of Deza's friendship for Columbus and
          the bearing of this friendship and patronage on the discovery of
          America. In a letter dated 21 Dec., 1504, Columbus wrote to his
          son Diego: "The Lord Bishop of Palencia (Diego Deza) has always
          favoured me and has desired my glory ever since I came into
          Castile." Then he added this most significant declaration: "He
          is the cause of their Highnesses' possessing the Indies, and of
          my remaining in Castile, when I was already on the road with the
          intention of leaving it."

          MANDONNET, Les Dominicains et la decouverte de l'Amerique
          (Paris, 1893); O'NEIL, The Columbian Celebration (Louisville,
          1892); IRVING, Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus (New
          York, 1868); TARDUCCI, The Life of Christopher Columbus, tr.
          BROWNSON (Detroit, 1890); THATCHER, Christopher Columbus (New
          York, 1903); TOURON, Hist. des hommes illust. de l'ordre de S.
          Dom., III (Paris, 1746), 722; QUETIF AND ECHARD, Scriptores Ord.
          Praed., I (Paris, 1721), 51.

          D.J. KENNEDY

   Dioceses (Supplemental List)

                          Dioceses (supplemental list)

          Pope Pius X recognizing how necessary it is for the Church to
          develop in proportion to the opening up of new regions through
          greater facilities for communication, and the consequent wave of
          emigration, has continued the policy of Leo XIII, and erected
          each year a number of new sees or vicariates. As a result many
          dioceses have come into being since this encyclopedia was begun.
          The following list gives a brief account of the dioceses not
          described above, and in a few instances notes changes of
          boundaries of sees already described (see PREFECTURE APOSTOLIC
          and VICARIATE APOSTOLIC, infra).

          Diocese of Aimer (Aimerensis)

          On 22 May, 1913, the Prefecture Apostolic of Rajpootana (q. v.)
          was erected into a diocese, suffragan to Agra. The see was fixed
          at the town of Aimer, which gives its name to the new diocese;
          the ecclesiastical boundaries are unchanged. Mgr. Henri Caumont,
          Capuchin, in religion R. P. Fortunatus a Turone, was appointed
          first bishop, 22 May, 1913.

          Diocese of Akera (Akerensis)

          In Kurdistan, a Chaldean see united to that of Amadia on 23
          April, 1895, from which it was separated on 24 Feb., 1910. It
          has been entrusted temporarily to the government of Mgr. Joseph
          Emmanuel Thomas, Patriarch of Babylon, who is empowered to
          appoint a vicar removable ad nutum to rule the diocese, which
          has 8 priests, 7 stations, 2 schools, and a Catholic population
          of 1500.

          Diocese of Alexandria, U.S.A. (Alexandrinensis)

          See NATCHITOCHES, DIOCESE OF.

          Diocese of Alexandria in Ontario (Alexandrinensis in America)

          To prevent ambiguity owing to the existence of the Diocese of
          Alexandria in the U.S.A., the official name of the Canadian see
          was changed on 15 Nov., 1910, to Alexandria in Ontario.

          Diocese of Andros (Andrensis)

          Administered by the Bishop of Tinos and Mykonos (q.v.).

          Diocese of Aracayu (Aracayuensis)

          In Brazil, suffragan of São Salvador de Bahia, erected on 15
          Dec., 1909. It comprises the State of Sergipe (area 15,000 sq.
          miles), with 550,000 inhabitants in 28 parishes. It was
          previously part of the Archdiocese of São Salvador de Bahia.
          Mgr. Jose Thome Gomes da Silva, b. at Martino, Rio Grande do
          Norte, Brazil, 4 Aug., 1873, ordained, 15 Nov., 1896, appointed
          to the see, 12 May, 1911, is the first bishop.

          Diocese of Barquisimeto

          Also called Carabobo (q. v. infra).

          Diocese of Bismarck (Bismarkiensis)

          See this volume supra, s.v.

          Diocese of Botucatu (Botucatuensis)

          In Brazil, suffragan of São Paolo, erected 7 June, 1908; it
          comprises 52 parishes in the southwestern part of the State of
          São Paolo, previously part of the Archdiocese of São Paolo. Its
          cathedral is dedicated to Our Lady of Sorrows. Mgr. Lucio
          Antunes da Souza, b. at São Sebastiao de Rio Verde, Minas
          Geraes, 13 April, 1863; ordained, 21 Dec., 1891; appointed to
          the see, 17 Oct., 1908, and consecrated at Rome, 15 Nov., 1908,
          is the first bishop.

          Diocese of Cajamarca (Cajamarcensis)

          In Peru, suffragan of Lima, erected in 1909; it comprises the
          Department of Cajamarca (area 12,400 sq. miles), with a
          population of 442,000, which was previously part of the Dioceses
          of Chachapoyas and Trujillo. The town of Cajamarca (population
          12,000) is situated in the Andes, 8700 feet high. It was there
          Atahualpa was captured by Pizarro. The town contains 6 churches,
          that of Santa Catalina being the cathedral, and has 6 primary
          schools for boys with 900 pupils, and 4 for girls with 300
          pupils; there are 150 students in the secondary school of San
          Ramon, an old Bethlehemite convent. Mgr. Francisco de Paula
          Grosso, b. at Cajamarca, 8 March, 1852; ordained in 1875;
          nominated to the see, 21 March, 1910; consecrated at Lima, 10
          July, 1910, is the first bishop.

          Diocese of Calbayog (Calbayoganae)

          In the Philippine Islands, suffragan of Manila, erected on 10
          April, 1910; it comprises Capul, Leyte, Samar, Biliran, and some
          smaller islands, and was previously part of the Diocese of Cebu.
          It contains 49 secular priests, 35 religious (chiefly
          Franciscans in Samar), 75 parishes, 195 missions, and 812,148
          Catholics. The diocesan seminary is under the care of the
          Lazarists; the Sisters of Charity have the College of the
          Miraculous Medal for girls; both these institutes are at
          Calbayog. Mgr. Pablo Singzon de la Anunciacion, b. in the
          Philippine Islands; appointed to the see on 12 April, 1910;
          consecrated on 12 June following in the Church of San Francisco,
          Manila, is the first bishop. He resides at Calbayog in Samar.

          Diocese of Cali (Caliensis)

          In Colombia, see this volume supra, s. v.

          Diocese of Calgary (Calgariensis)

          In Canada, suffragan of Edmonton, erected on 30 Nov., 1912; it
          was previously in the southern portion of the Diocese of St.
          Albert. Its boundaries are: east, the Provinces of Alberta and
          Saskatchewan; south, the Canadian and United States frontier;
          west, British Columbia; north, the line separating the series of
          townships XXX and XXXI. On 1 June, 1913, Right Rev. John Thomas
          MacNally, D.D., ordained on 4 April, 1896, parish priest of
          Almonte, Lanark, Ontario, in the Diocese of Ottawa, was
          consecrated at Rome, first Bishop of Calgary.

          Diocese of Camaguey (Camagueyensis)

          In Cuba, suffragan of Santiago de Cuba, erected on 10 Dec.,
          1912. It comprises the Province of Camaguey (area 10,400 sq.
          miles), with a population of 121,000, which was previously part
          of the Diocese of Santiago de Cuba. The town of Camaguey
          contains 35,000 inhabitants, a Piarist college, several
          convents, and an ancient Catholic hospital, San Lazaro.

          Diocese of Campanha (Campanhensis)

          In Brazil, suffragan of Marianna, erected in 1907; it lies in
          the State of Minas Geraes, and is bounded on the north and east
          by the Rio Grande, on the west by the Rio Furvo and Rio
          Sapucalvy, and on the south by the former limits of the Dioceses
          of São Paolo and Pouso Alegre. It contains 30 parishes and was
          previously part of the Diocese of Pouso Alegre. Mgr. Joao
          d'Almeida Ferrao, born at Campanha, 14 Aug., 1853; ordained, 25
          June, 1876; appointed to the see, 29 April, 1909; and
          consecrated on 12 Sept. following is the first bishop.

          Diocese of Campinas (Campinensis)

          In Brazil, suffragan of São Paolo, erected on 7 June, 1908. It
          has 35 parishes formerly part of the Archdiocese of São Paolo.
          The town of Campinas contains 16,000 inhabitants. Mgr. Joao
          Baptista Correa Nery is the first bishop. He was born at
          Campinas, 6 Oct., 1863; ordained, 11 April, 1886; appointed to
          the See of Spirito Santo, 22 Aug., 1896; consecrated on 1 Nov.
          following; transferred, 18 May, 1901, to the See of Pouso
          Alegre, and to Campinas on 9 Aug., 1908.

          Diocese of Carabobo (De Carabobo)

          In Venezuela, suffragan of Caracas, erected on 4 May, 1847. It
          was formerly called the Diocese of Barquisimeto (q. v.), but by
          a Decree of 12 Feb., 1907, the episcopal residence was changed
          to Valencia, the capital of the State of Carabobo, and the name
          of the see was changed to Carabobo. The present bishop is Mgr.
          Aguedo Felipe Alvarado, b. at Bobara, 5 Feb., 1845; appointed 16
          Aug., 1910. (See XV, 333.)

          Diocese of Catamarca (Catamarcensis)

          In the Argentine Republic, erected on 21 Jan., 1910; it
          comprises the Province of Catamarca (area, 47,530 sq. miles),
          with 107,000 inhabitants, and the Territory of the Andes (area,
          35,100 sq. miles), with 2500 inhabitants (mostly Indians). See
          TUCUMAN, XV, 85.

          Diocese of Corpus Christi (Corporis Christi)

          In Texas, U.S.A., suffragan of New Orleans, erected on 23 March,
          1912, before which it had formed the Vicariate Apostolic of
          Brownsville (q. v.). At the beginning of the year 1913 there
          were in the diocese 73 churches and chapels, 35 priests, 19 of
          whom are Oblates of Mary Immaculate, 9 parochial schools and 5
          academies with 1150 pupils, and a Catholic population of 82,400
          out of 116,850 inhabitants. Rt. Rev. Paul J. Nussbaum, C.P. (b.
          Philadelphia, 1870), was consecrated first bishop on 20 May,
          1913.

          Diocese of Corrientes (Corrientensis)

          In the Argentine Republic, suffragan of Buenos Aires, erected on
          21 Jan., 1910; it comprises the Provinces of Corrientes (area,
          31,800 sq. miles), with 322,000 inhabitants, and Misiones (area,
          8500 sq. miles), with 44,000 inhabitants, which were formerly
          part of the Diocese of Parana (q. v.). At the time of the
          separation Corrientes was a vicariate forane, with 20 parishes,
          while Misiones had 1 parish and 3 chaplaincies. Mgr. Luiz A.
          Niella, b. at Corrientes, 24 April, 1854; ordained, 2 Feb.,
          1879; appointed 3 Feb., 1911; consecrated, 4 June, 1911, is the
          first bishop.

          Diocese of Corumba (Corumbensis)

          In Brazil, suffragan of Cuyaba, erected on 10 March, 1910. It
          was formerly part of the Diocese of Cuyaba. The town of Corumba,
          situated on the Rio Paraguay, in the southwest of the State of
          Matto Grosso, is strongly fortified and contains about 15,000
          inhabitants. The principal churches are those of Nossa Senhora
          de la Candelaria and Nossa Senhora de los Remedios. The first
          bishop is Mgr. Cirillo de Paula Freitas, who was born at
          Capellinha, Matto Grosso, 15 March, 1860; ordained, 30 May,
          1885; appointed coadjutor Bishop of Cuyaba and titular Bishop of
          Eucarpia, 27 March, 1905; he was consecrated on 7 Jan., 1906,
          and transferred to Corumba on 13 March, 1911.

          Diocese of Crookston (Crookstonensis)

          In Minnesota, U.S.A., suffragan of St. Paul, erected on 31 Dec.,
          1909. It was formerly part of the Archdiocese of St. Paul and
          comprises the following counties: Becker, Beltrami, Clay,
          Clearwater, Hubbard, Kittson, Marshall, Mahnomen, Norman,
          Pennington, Polk, Red Lake, and Rosseau, having an area of
          16,598 sq. miles. In the diocese there are 34 priests, of whom
          19 are secular; 21,147 Catholics; 52 churches, 12 stations and 4
          chapels; 7 parochial schools with 995 pupils; 2 orphan asylums;
          2 Indian industrial schools with 260 pupils, and 2 hospitals.
          The Sisters of St. Benedict have charge of the industrial
          schools and the hospitals; the Sisters of St. Joseph have 2
          academies for girls with 310 pupils; the Benedictine Fathers
          have 9 missions among the Chippewa Indians. Right Rev. Timothy
          Corbett, b. at Mendotta, Minnesota, in 1861; ordained, 12 June,
          1886; appointed to the see, 9 April, 1910; and consecrated at
          St. Paul on 19 May following, is the first bishop.

          Archdiocese of Cuyaba (Cuyabensis)

          In Matto Grosso, Brazil, was raised to the archiepiscopal rank,
          10 March, 1910, when the Diocese of San Luiz de Caceres and
          Corumba were separated from it. The present occupant of the see,
          Mgr. Carlos Luiz d'Amour, was born at San Luiz de Maranhao, 3
          July, 1836; consecrated, 28 April, 1878, and made archbishop on
          5 April, 1910.

          Diocese of Des Moines (Des Moinensis)

          Suffragan of Dubuque, erected on 12 August, 1911. It comprises
          the 23 counties previously forming the western half of the
          Diocese of Davenport. The diocese contains 60 secular priests, 3
          Benedictine Fathers, 4 communities of Sisters of St. Benedict, 3
          of the Sisters of Charity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, 9 of the
          Sisters of Mercy, who have an hospital at Des Moines, and two at
          Council Bluffs, 3 of the School Sisters of St. Francis, 2 of the
          Sisters of the Holy Humility of Mary, 1 of Franciscan Tertiary
          Sisters, and 1 of Franciscan Sisters of Perpetual Adoration.
          There are also 79 churches, 3 stations, 6 chapels, 17 parish and
          mission schools with 2437 pupils, 2 girls' academies and about
          25,000 Catholics. The first bishop is the Right Rev. Austin
          Dowling, ordained, 24 June, 1891; appointed to the see, 31 Jan.,
          1912; and consecrated on 25 April, 1912.

          Archdiocese of Edmonton (Edmontonensis)

          In Canada. On 30 Nov., 1912, when the southern half of the
          Diocese of St. Albert was erected into a new diocese, Calgary,
          the remaining portion, was erected into an archdiocese and the
          episcopal residence transferred from the town of St. Albert to
          Edmonton, which gives its name to the new metropolitan see. The
          suffragans of Edmonton are the Diocese of Calgary, and the
          Vicariates Apostolic of Athabaska and Mackenzie. Mgr. Emile
          Joseph Legal, O.M.I., born at St. Jean de Boiseau, France, on 9
          Oct., 1849, is the first archbishop.

          Diocese of Floresta (Florestensis)

          In Brazil, suffragan of Olinda, erected on 5 Dec., 1910,
          comprises 18 parishes lying beyond the Rio Maxato and previously
          part of the Diocese of Olinda. Mgr. Augusto Alvaro Alvares da
          Silva, b. at Recife, 8 April, 1876; ordained in 1900; and
          appointed to the see on 12 May, 1911, is the first bishop.

          Diocese of Gibraltar (Gibraltariensis)

          In Spain, was raised from being a Vicariate Apostolic to the
          rank of a diocese on 19 Nov., 1910. It is immediately subject to
          the Holy See, and has been entrusted to the care of the
          Benedictines of the Monte Cassino Congregation. Right Rev. Henry
          Gregory Thompson, O.S.B., born at Mold, Wales, 27 March, 1871;
          professed, 15 Aug., 1896; appointed to the see, 10 Nov., 1910,
          and consecrated at Ramsgate, England, on 21 Nov., 1910, is the
          first bishop. Gibraltar contains about 16,000 Catholics; 46
          priests, of whom 19 are secular; and 7 churches and chapels.

          Diocese of Hajdu-Dorogh (Hajdu-Doroghensis)

          Greek Rite, erected on 8 June, 1912, for the Catholics of pure
          Greek Rite scattered through Hungary. The diocese has been
          endowed by the Hungarian Government, and is under the
          jurisdiction of the Propaganda. It comprises 8 parishes in
          Eperies, 70 in Munkacs, 35 in Fogaras, 1 in Gran, 44 in
          Grosswardein (Greek), and 4 in Szamos-Ujvar. After three years
          the sole liturgical language is to be ancient Greek.
          Hajdu-Dorogh is suffragan to the Latin See of Gran. See "Acta
          Apost. Sedis", IV (1912), 429-35.

          Diocese of Lipa (Lipensis)

          Suffragan of Manila, erected on 10 April, 1910, comprises the
          Provinces of Batangas, Laguna, Mindoro, Tayabas, with the
          districts of Infanta and Principe having an area of 12,208 sq.
          miles. Tayabas was formerly part of the Diocese of Nueva
          Caceres. The diocese contains 75 priests, of whom several in
          Mindoro are Augustinians, and a few in Laguna, Minims; 72
          churches and a number of mission chapels, and about 650,000
          Catholics. The first bishop is Mgr. Giuseppe Petrelli, born in
          the Diocese of Fermo, Italy, 1871; appointed 12 Apr., 1910;
          consecrated 12 June, 1910.

          Lourdes (Lapurdensis)

          As the sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes is situated in the
          Diocese of Tarbes, the name of Lourdes, by a Decree of 29 March,
          1912, has been added, merely ad honorem, to that of Tarbes in
          the official title of the see.

          Diocese of Matanzas (Matanzensis)

          In Cuba, suffragan of Santiago de Cuba; erected on 10 Dec.,
          1912, comprises the Province of Matanzas formerly part of the
          Diocese of San Cristobal de la Habana. The town of Matanzas lies
          54 miles east of Havana and has a population of 36,000. The
          first bishop is the Right Rev. Charles Warren Currier, born in
          St. Thomas, West Indies, 22 March, 1857, ordained 24 Nov., 1880,
          at Amsterdam, Holland, and consecrated at the Collegio Pio
          Latino Americano, Rome, on 6 July, 1913.

          Diocese of Montesclaros (Montesclarensis)

          In Brazil, suffragan of Marianna, erected on 10 Dec., 1910. It
          was separated from the Diocese of Diamantina, and comprises the
          northern portion of the old diocese, lying beyond the rivers
          Jacquetahy, Jequitinbonha, Machubas, São Francisco, and Urucuja.
          The first bishop is Mgr. Joao Antonio Pimenta, b. at Capellinha,
          Minas Geraes, 12 Dec., 1859; ordained, 10 June, 1883;
          consecrated, 20 May, 1906, as coadjutor Bishop of São Pedro do
          Rio Grande do Sul and titular Bishop of Pentacomia. He was
          transferred to Montesclaros on 7 March, 1911.

          Diocese of Mont Laurier

          Canada, erected 1 Aug., 1913, comprises the former northern part
          of the Diocese of Ottawa, with 30,000 inhabitants, 50 priests,
          and 36 churches. Mgr. F.-X. Brunet is the first bishop.

          Diocese of Natal (Natalensis)

          In Brazil, suffragan of Olinda; erected on 11 Nov., 1909. It
          comprises the State of Rio Grande do Norte, having an area of
          22,196 sq. miles and a population of 407,000 inhabitants. The
          territory was formerly part of the Diocese of Parahyba. The town
          of Natal is a seaport, lying about 150 miles north of
          Pernambuco, and contains 13,700 inhabitants. The first bishop is
          Mgr. Joaquim Antonio de Almeida, b. at Goyaninha, Rio Grande do
          Norte, 17 Aug., 1868; ordained, 12 Dec., 1894; consecrated
          Bishop of Piauhy, 4 Feb., 1906; and transferred to Natal on 23
          Oct., 1910.

          Archdiocese of Olinda (Olindensis)

          In Brazil. On 5 Dec., 1910, the Diocese of Olinda (q. v.) was
          raised to the archiepiscopal rank. Its suffragan sees are
          Floresta, Fortaleza, Natal, and Parahyba. Mgr. Luiz Ramon da
          Silva Britto is the first archbishop.

          Diocese of San Miguel (Sancti Michaelis)

          In Salvador, suffragan of San Salvador, erected on 11 Feb.,
          1913. It is bounded on the north by Honduras, on the east by
          Honduras and the Bay of Fonseca, on the south by the Pacific
          Ocean, and on the west by the Rio Lempa; thus it comprises the
          Provinces of San Miguel, La Union, Morazan, and Usulutan,
          formerly part of the Diocese of San Salvador. The town of San
          Miguel has a population of 25,000. SAN SALVADOR, ARCHDIOCESE OF
          (SANCTISSIMI SALVATORIS).

          By a Decree of 11 Feb., 1913, the Diocese of San Salvador (q.
          v.), was withdrawn from the metropolitan jurisdiction of
          Guatemala, and its territory divided into three parts; the
          western portion becoming the Diocese of Santa Ana, the eastern
          that of San Miguel, and the central retaining the name of San
          Salvador. Santa Ana and San Miguel were made suffragans to San
          Salvador. The archdiocese now comprises the Provinces of
          Cabanas, Chalatenanco, Cuscatlan, La Libertad, La Paz, San
          Salvador, and San Vicente. The first archbishop is Mgr. Antonio
          Adolfo Perez, b. at San Salvador on 20 March, 1839.

          Diocese of Santa Ana (Sanctae Annae)

          In Salvador, suffragan of San Salvador, erected on 11 Feb.,
          1913; it comprises the western portion of the old territory of
          the Diocese of San Salvador, thus including the Provinces of
          Ahuachapan, Santa Ana, and Sonsonate. The town of Santa Ana has
          a population of 48,000, Sonsonate has 17,000.

          Abbey Nullius of Santissima Conceicao do Araguaya (Sanctissimae
          Conceptionis de Araguayana)

          In Brazil, erected on 11 July, 1911. On 26 Aug., 1912, Mgr.
          Raymond-Dominique Carrerot, O.P., prior of the Convent of
          Conceicao from 1900, was appointed first prelate. He was born at
          Pamiers, France, on 1 Jan., 1863, studied at Salamanca, was
          ordained in 1885; in 1887 he went to Brazil to evangelize the
          Indians. He was consecrated at Toulouse on 10 Oct., 1912. The
          boundaries assigned to the new prelature are: on the S. the Rio
          Tapirape, on the E. the Araguaya from the mouth of the Tapirape
          to the town of São Joao, where the Araguaya meets the Tocatins;
          on the N. the Tocatins as far as Jaraba thence a right line
          drawn to Alta Mira on the Xingu; on the W. the Xingu as far as
          the mouth of the Fresco, thence to the source of the Fresco, and
          then a right line to the source of the Tapirape. This comprises
          the southeast corner of the State of Para and the northeast of
          the State of Matto Grosso, and roughly lies between 5 degrees
          and 13. S. lat. and 49 degrees and 53 degrees W. long. The
          population consists mainly of Cayapos, Caraja, Taraja, and
          Chavante Indians. This mission was begun in 1896 and the town of
          Conceicao founded by the Dominicans. There is a convent of
          Dominican Sisters at Conceicao.

          Archdiocese of Simla (Simlensis)

          In India. When this see was raised to the archiepiscopal rank in
          1910, the Holy See postponed the designation of its suffragan
          sees. On 22 May, 1913, the new ecclesiastical province was
          completed and the Diocese of Lahore, and Prefecture Apostolic of
          Kafiristan and Kashmir were made suffragans of Simla.

          A.A. MacERLEAN

   Giovanni Dupre

                                Giovanni Dupré

          Sculptor, b. of remote French ancestry at Siena, 1 Mar., 1817;
          d. at Florence, 10 Jan., 1882. Dupré was in youth a woodcarver,
          and taught himself the art of sculpture. In 1836 he married. In
          a contest opened by the Academy he won first prize with his
          "Judgment of Paris", took his rank as a sculptor with the
          life-size recumbent figure of the dead "Abel" in marble (c.
          1839), Pitti Palace, Florence, and followed this with the "Cain"
          (1840), also in the Pitti, the "Giotto", "Pius II" for the
          Church of S. Domenico, Siena, and the "S. Antonino", Florence. A
          period of ill-health was followed by renewed vigour, which
          resulted in the brooding "Sappho", considered one of his best
          subjects (1857), the so-called "Tazza", surrounded by figures in
          relief; the Ferrari monument in S. Lorenzo, Florence (1859); the
          "Putti dell'Uva" (the Grape Children); the "Addolorata" for Sta
          Croce, Florence (1860), and the much discussed relief of the
          "Triumph of the Cross" over the entrance to the same church. In
          1863 Dupré touched high-water mark with the noblest of all his
          creations, the "Pietà", for the family tomb of the Marchese
          Bichi-Ruspoli in the cemetery of the Misericordia, Siena. This
          group was awarded the Grande medaille d'honneur at the
          International Exhibition in Paris. The "San Zanobi" for the
          facade of the Duomo, the "Risen Christ" for the Dupré memorial
          chapel, the Cavour monument in Turin, the bronze bust of
          Savonarola in his cell at the monastery of S. Marco, Florence,
          and a number of minor works complete the list of Dupré's
          productions. His last work, the "St. Francis" inside the
          Cathedral of S. Rufino, Assisi, was finished by his eldest
          daughter and pupil, Amalia. Time failed him to execute the
          crowning figure of the Madonna for Sta Maria del Fiore. The
          sculptor left a volume of memoirs of great interest to artists
          and critics: "Pensieri sull'arte e ricordi autobiografici"
          (Florence, 1884-1906), tr. by F. Peruzzi (Edinburgh, 1886).

          FRIEZE, Giovanni Dupré (London, 1886); CONTI, Del bello nel vero
          e dialoghi sull'arte (Florence, 1880); POWERS, Giovanni Dupré
          and his Pieta in Ave Maria (Feb., 1912).

          M.L. HANDLEY

   Thomas Dwight

                                 Thomas Dwight

          Anatomist, b. at Boston, 1843; d. at Nahant, 8 Sept., 1911. The
          son of Thomas Dwight and of Mary Collins Warren, with his mother
          he became a Catholic in 1856. He attended Harvard College and
          graduated from its medical school in 1867. After studying
          abroad, he was appointed in 1872 instructor in comparative
          anatomy at Harvard, lectured also at Bowdoin, and in 1883
          succeeded Oliver Wendell Holmes as Parkman professor of anatomy.
          Dr. Dwight's talent for organization enabled him to effect a
          needed reconstruction of the Harvard Medical School. In 1872 he
          published his "Frozen Sections of a Child", and in 1907 "A
          Clinical Atlas of Variations of the Bones of the Hands and
          Feet". He was also a frequent contributor to scientific
          journals. In the Warren Museum of Anatomy Dr. Dwight arranged a
          section of osteology which is considered the best in existence,
          and he enjoyed an international reputation as an anatomist. Long
          a zealous member of a conference of St. Vincent de Paul, he died
          president of the central council. In 1883 Dr. Dwight married
          Miss Sarah C. Iasigi of Boston and eight children were born to
          them. His "Thoughts of a Catholic Anatomist" (New York, 1911) is
          a valuable work of Christian apologetics, for neither in his
          life nor in his writings had Dr. Dwight any difficulty in
          reconciling faith and science.

          The American Catholic Quarterly Review (Jan., 1912); America (30
          Sept., 1911); Boston Medical and Surgical Journal (4 Jan.,
          1912); Anatomical Record (Nov., 1911).

          WALTER DWIGHT
     __________________________________________________________________

   Juan Jose Eguiara y Eguren

                          Juan José Eguiara y Eguren

          Born in Mexico towards the close of the seventeenth century;
          died 29 January, 1763. He received his education in the Jesuit
          College of San Ildefonso of Mexico and later was named rector of
          the University of Mexico. His learning was extensive, covering
          theology, canon law, philosophy, mathematics, and letters, to
          which was added an exceptional gift of oratory. Resenting the
          levity with which the famous Dean of Alicante, Manuel Martí, had
          characterized the attainments of the men of letters of the New
          World in his "epistolas latinas" printed in Madrid in 1735,
          denying them any merit, Eguiara, determined to vindicate the
          honour of his compatriots, began his work "Biblioteca Mexicana".
          He gave it this name because of his love of Mexico and thereby
          incurred the ill-will of the other Spanish-American provinces.
          He published the first volume, which comprised the letters A, B,
          and C, and left in manuscript many biographies down to J. In the
          preface he refutes the charges of Dean Martí with much spirit
          and patriotism. The "Biblioteca Mexicana" is written in Latin
          and, besides the fact that it is incomplete, a certain pomposity
          of style detracts from its merits. Notwithstanding this it has
          been extremely valuable, being the first work of its kind
          published in Mexico and perhaps in the whole of Spanish-America.
          Eguiara was elected Bishop of Yucatan, but resigned the dignity
          to continue his literary work. Besides the work already
          mentioned, the complete title of which is "Biblioteca Mexicana
          sive eruditorum historia virorum qui in America Boreali nati,
          vel alibi geniti, in ipsam domicilio aut studiis asciti, quavis
          lingua scripto aliquid tradiderunt. Ferdinando VI Hispaniarum
          Regi Catholico, Nuncupata Mexici 1755", he published
          "Panegiricos", printed separately in Mexico (1727-57); "Elogios
          fúnebres" (1755-66); "Praelectiones" (Mexico, 1746); fourteen
          volumes in theological and juridical questions; twenty volumes
          of sermons and instructions; and several other treatises.

          BERISTAIN, Biblioteca hispano-americana (Amecameca, 1883);
          Diccionario enciclopedico hispano-americano (Barcelona, 1893).

          CAMILLUS CRIVELLI

   Benjamin Elbel

                                 Benjamin Elbel

          A first-class authority in moral theology, b. at Friedberg,
          Bavaria, in 1690; d. at Söflingen in 1756. He belonged to the
          Strasburg Franciscan province, was lector of theology, and held
          high positions in the order. His classical work, "Theologia
          moralis decalogalis et sacramentalis" (Venice, 1731), passed
          rapidly through several editions, and has recently been brought
          up to date by Irenaeus Bierbaum, O.F.M., under the title
          "Theologia moralis per modum conferentiarum auctore clarissime
          P. Benjamin Elbel. . ." (3 vols., Paderborn, 1891-92). Elbel
          advocates probabilism. His doctrine is sound and solid; his
          style simple and unassuming. He shows admirable facility in
          giving exact and lucid expression to abstract principles, and in
          applying them to strikingly practical cases. The eminent
          qualities of his work have elicited praise from all theologians.
          It is constantly referred to by St. Alphonsus, and has been
          largely copied by modern writers.

          HURTER, Nomenclator lit., IV (3rd ed.), 1635; EUBEL, Geschichte
          der oberdeutschen Minoritenprovinz (Wurzburg, 1886); see also
          preface to Bierbaum's edition (mentioned above).

          THOMAS PLASSMANN

   Reorganization of the English Hierarchy

                    Reorganization of the English Hierarchy

          On 29 September, 1850, by the Bull "Universalis Ecclesiae", Pius
          IX restored the Catholic hierarchy in England which had become
          extinct with the death of the last Marian bishop in the reign of
          Elizabeth. Westminster became the metropolitan see and its
          occupant the lawful successor of the Catholic archbishops of
          Canterbury.

          The suffragan sees were Southwark, Hexham (changed to Hexham and
          Newcastle in 1861), Beverley, Liverpool, Salford, Shrewsbury,
          Newport and Menevia, Clifton, Plymouth, Nottingham, Birmingham,
          and Northampton. In 1878 Beverley was divided into the two new
          Dioceses of Leeds and Middlesborough. And in 1895 Wales, except
          Glamorganshire, was separated into the Dioceses of Newport and
          Menevia, and of Shrewsbury, and formed into the Vicariate of
          Wales. The vicariate was erected into the Diocese of Menevia in
          1898. The Diocese of Portsmouth was formed in 1882, by the
          division of the Diocese of Southwark into the Dioceses of
          Southwark and Portsmouth. Thus, the province of Westmister
          having fifteen suffragan sees was numerically the largest in the
          world. By letters Apostolic, "Si qua est", of 28 October, 1911,
          Pius X erected the new provinces of Birmingham and Liverpool.
          With Westminster remained the suffragan Sees of Northampton,
          Nottingham, Portsmouth, and Southwark; to Birmingham were
          assigned those of Clifton, Newport, Plymouth, Shrewsbury, and
          Menevia; and to Liverpool, Hexham and Newcastle, Leeds,
          Middlesborough, and Salford.

          It had for many years been felt that some such division would
          have to be made, but there had always been the fear of causing
          disunion thereby, especially if it meant as in pre-Reformation
          times a division between north and south. Such a result was
          obviated by ignoring the precedent of York and Canterbury, and
          arranging for three instead of two provinces; and also by the
          grant in the Apostolic Constitution of

     "certain new distinctions of preeminence, for the preservation of
     unity in government and policy, to the archbishop of Westminster for
     the time being, comprised under the following three heads: He will
     be permanent chairman of the meetings of the Bishops of all England
     and Wales, and for this reason it will be for him to summon these
     meetings and to preside over them, according to the rules in force
     in Italy and elsewhere. (2) He will take rank above the other two
     Archbishops, and will throughout all England and Wales enjoy the
     privilege of wearing the pallium, of occupying the throne, and of
     having the cross borne before him. (3) Lastly, in all dealings with
     the Supreme Civil Authority, he will in his person represent the
     entire Episcopate of England and Wales. Always, however, he is to
     take the opinion of all the Bishops, and to be guided by the votes
     of the major part of them."

          Thus, though the Archbishop of Westminster was vested with more
          powers and privileges than primates usually enjoy, unity of
          action has been safeguarded.

          The grouping of the dioceses is rather curious. Instead of the
          natural division into a northern, a midland, and a southern
          province, formed by drawing a line from the Humber to the
          Mersey, and another from the Wash to the Bristol Channel, the
          Westminster or eastern province and the Birmingham or western
          province reach from the south-east and south-west to the Humber
          and Mersey respectively. In this way the northern province is
          contiguous to the other two, bringing all three into closer
          intercommunication. It is interesting to note that in 787 an
          attempt was made to have a third province with the metropolitan
          at Lichfield, but in 803 it was abandoned and the bishops of
          central England were again made subject to Canterbury.

          The English hierarchy was reorganized to "promote the greater
          good of souls and the development of the Catholic religion". And
          before new sees could be formed it was felt necessary to erect
          more ecclesiastical provinces out of the already abnormal
          extensive province of Westminster. That this was the object in
          view seems clear from the concluding words of the Bull: "We have
          reserved to ourselves the taking of further measures in this
          matter of the reconstitution of the English dioceses, as shall
          seem opportune, and as experience may suggest and the good of
          souls require." In accordance with the instructions of the
          Constitution the present Archbishop of Westminster, Francis
          Cardinal Bourne, executed these new ordinances by Decree dated 1
          December, 1911, which was ordered to be read at the meetings of
          the metropolitan and other cathedral chapters throughout England
          and Wales.

          The Catholic Directory (1851-1912), passim.

          ARTHUR JACKMAN

   Vicariate Apostolic of Ernakulam in India

                   Vicariate Apostolic of Ernakulam in India

          In May, 1887, the churches of Syrian Rite in Malabar were
          separated from those of the Latin Rite and formed into the
          Vicariates of Trichur and Kottayam under European prelates. In
          response, however, to the petitions of the Syrian Catholics
          desirous of obtaining bishops of their own race and rite, Leo
          XIII by his brief "Quae Rei Sacrae" (28 July, 1896) divided the
          territory anew into three vicariates: Trichur, Changanacherry,
          and Ernakulam. The last comprises all the churches of Syrian
          Rite between the Chalakudy River and Lake Vempanatu, excluding
          the Suddhist churches of Bramangalam, Caringoth, and Chumkam.
          The Suddhists are Syro-Malabar Christians, descended from the
          fourth-century Syrian immigrants; they were formed into a
          distinct ecclesiastical unit on 29 Aug., 1911, when the
          Vicariate Apostolic of Kottayam was revived for them. The
          Vicariate of Ernakulam contains about 814,000 inhabitants, of
          whom 101,400 are Catholics; the chief language spoken is
          Malayalam. Mgr. Aloysius Pareparambil, titular Bishop of Tio (b.
          on 1 Aug., 1848, named first vicar Apostolic on 11 Aug., 1896),
          was consecrated at Kandy, Ceylon, on 25 Oct., 1896, and resides
          at Ernakulam. On 29 Aug., 1911, Mgr. Augustine Kaudatkil was
          appointed coadjutor bishop. There are 81 parish churches, 20
          chapels with resident pastors, 112 secular priests, 32 divinity
          students at Puthenpally and 11 at the Papal Seminary, Kandy,
          Ceylon; 6 convents, 116 native Carmelite Tertiary nuns and 28
          postulants; 2 catechumenates; 1 orphanage with 25 orphans; 7
          boarding-schools with 267 pupils, 201 primary and secondary
          school with 12,386 pupils; 412 converts in 1911; 39 Jacobite
          churches with 32,000 members; 1 industrial school. In the
          print-press attached to this school there are published the
          "Messenger of the Sacred Heart" (monthly) and "Sathianadam"
          (weekly), both in Malayalam; "Eucharist and Priest", an English
          monthly periodical of the Priests' Eucharistic League, and
          "Promptuarium Canonico- Liturgicum", a Latin monthly for the
          missionary clergy. There is a Lazarist community of 3 Fathers
          and 1 lay brother at Thotacam. The Syro-Chaldaic Carmelite
          Congregation of Malabar has 4 convents and 31 members in the
          vicariate; this institute, the first of its kind in India, was
          begun at Mannanam in 1831. The first priests were professed on 8
          Dec., 1855, and on 1 Oct., 1860, the congregation was affiliated
          to the Discalced Carmelites. Its rules and constitutions were
          approved by the Holy See tentatively on 1 Jan., 1895, and
          definitively on 12 March, 1906.

          Catholic Directory of India (Madras, 1913).

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   Eugenics

                            The Church and Eugenics

          Eugenics literally means "good breeding". It is defined as the
          study of agencies under social control that may improve or
          impair the racial qualities of future generations either
          physically or mentally. Both the word and the definition were
          fixed by Sir Francis Galton, the founder of the movement. The
          science has two chief divisions, namely, heredity and
          environment. Galton believed that heredity was by far the more
          important. He derived his main idea from the breeding of the
          race-horse. Just as we can breed horses for points, so also, it
          is contended, can we breed men for points. The eugenics
          movement, however, consists of more than study. It includes
          public action in the way of legislation, administration, and the
          influencing of human conduct.

          Galton was born in 1822. His parents were people of means, and
          so he was enabled to receive a very liberal education and to
          devote his life to scientific research. He was educated at King
          Edward's School, Birmingham, and Trinity College, Cambridge. He
          traveled in Syria and Central Africa. Charles Darwin was his
          cousin, both being grandsons of Dr. Erasmus Darwin. As early as
          1865 Galton began his work of measuring the human faculties and
          of tracing similarities and differences in definite families
          through several generations. He founded several anthropometric
          laboratories. The chief of these is now carried on under
          Professor Karl Pearson at University College, London. Galton was
          much impressed by the hereditary phenomena of the Fellows of the
          Royal Society. From the information which he collected
          concerning their families he formed the basis of his future
          research. He also made use of the stud-book of the basset-hounds
          belonging to Sir. J.E. Millais. His earlier studies led him to
          formulate what he called the ancestral law. According to this,
          the contribution to the making of any one individual is by each
          parent one quarter, by each grandparent, one sixteenth, and so
          on. In 1869 he published his "Hereditary Genius, and Inquiry
          into its Laws and Consequences". In this he essayed to show a
          law of distribution of ability in families. In each group of ten
          illustrious men who have illustrious relations, there are three
          or four eminent fathers, four or five eminent brothers, and five
          or six eminent sons. Hence it is inferred that by mating eminent
          people with eminent people, we can produce eminent people.

          It has been objected, however, that such breeding would make the
          race unbalanced. All the good, few in number, would be at the
          top, and all the bad, many in number, at the bottom. Galton
          replied to this criticism with his "law of regression towards
          mediocrity". A lower stratum, he said, would produce an
          offspring, on the whole, superior to itself. This in turn would
          produce a still better offspring, and so on until mediocrity was
          reached. Then more careful artificial selection would be needed.
          During the last ten years, through the work of Professors
          Bateson and Biffen of Cambridge, the principles of Mendelism
          have been brought into the question. These threaten to modify
          Galton's law of regression towards mediocrity, and indeed to
          nullify his ancestral law. The permanence of dominant qualities
          and the disappearance of recessive qualities (see MENDEL,
          MENDELISM) show that experiments are of little value which have
          not been spread out over at least three generations. Mendelian
          experiments, however, on human beings have not yet been
          conspicuously successful. Owing to disturbing and amplifying
          factors only few normal characters, eye-colour for instance,
          have been demonstrated to follow Mendelian laws. Abnormal
          characters can be more easily verified. Deaf-mutism, for
          instance, acts as a recessive. Selection implies rejection. Thus
          the science is divided into positive eugenics and negative. The
          one encourages parenthood of the fit or worthy, whilst the other
          discourages parenthood of the unfit or unworthy. Thus eugenics
          concerns itself largely with selection in marriage and with the
          exercise of the marital function. Negative eugenics also seeks
          to eradicate the racial defects of alcohol, venereal disease,
          lead poisoning, feeble-mindedness, and consumption. But the
          Church, too, has a doctrine concerning marriage and its use, and
          also a doctrine and a method of dealing with racial defects. The
          Church therefore has no fault to find with race culture as such.
          Rather does she encourage it. But she wishes it carried out on
          right lines.

          The root difference between Catholic teaching and that of modern
          eugenics is that the one places the final end of man in eternal
          life, whilst the other places it in civic worth. The effectual
          difference is that the Church makes bodily and mental culture
          subservient to morality, whilst modern eugenics makes morality
          subservient to bodily and mental culture. But we must admit that
          modern eugenics shows a growing tendency to acknowledge the
          claims of religion. Dr. Saleeby is an advance on Galton, and
          Professor Whetham is an advance on Saleeby. In dealing with
          racial poisons, the Church provides the most radical remedies.
          Against alcohol she sets the virtue of temperance, against
          white-lead the virtue of justice, against venereal disease the
          virtue of purity. She provides for proper selection in marriage
          by setting impediments against unworthy marriages. The spirit
          life of the married pair and of the children is protected by the
          prohibition of mixed marriages. The proclamation of banns
          protects the parties against possible fraud or mistake. The
          requirement of consent of parents tends to promote prudent
          marriages. The impediment of a previous engagement unreleased is
          a safeguard against rash promises and heartless breach of
          promise. The impediments of consanguinity and affinity are
          universally acknowledged to have a great eugenic value.
          Moreover, since the most necessary and most difficult eugenic
          reforms consist in the control of the sex appetite, the practice
          of celibacy is an important factor in race culture. It is the
          standing example of a Divinely aided will holding the sensual
          passion in check.

          The crux of the eugenic question is in the proposals for
          segregation and sterilization. Both may be either voluntary or
          compulsory. The aim is to prevent defectives from propagating
          their kind. Segregation means not only the separation of
          defectives from the rest of the community but also separation of
          the sexes from each other amongst the defectives themselves.
          Sterilization is a surgical operation by which the subjects are
          made incapable of procreation. Formerly it consisted of
          castration in men, and excision of the ovaries in women. But
          recently two much simpler operations have been discovered,
          namely, vasectomy for men and ligature of the Fallopian tubes
          (Kehrer's method) for women. They are not grave when considered
          as dangerous operations, but they are grave as regards their
          moral effects. Herein lies the difficulty of judging them. The
          Holy Office has not yet given any decision concerning them.
          Speculatively speaking, therefore, the question is open. The
          following, however, may be taken to be the prevalent teaching of
          Catholic theologians and physicians. Vasectomy or ligature of
          the Fallopian tubes is no remedy against concupiscence; and even
          if it were, mutilation could not be permitted as a means of
          avoiding temptation. The operation would open the door to
          immoral practices which would constitute a worse evil than the
          one avoided. Being in itself slight and almost painless, it
          would be useless as a punishment for criminals or as a deterrent
          for others. If the principle were admitted it would encourage
          the abuse of matrimonial relations. The welfare of the State, if
          seriously threatened by the degenerate, could be better
          protected by segregation. Therefore the operation is not
          permissible, except as a necessary means to bodily health, and
          consequently except for this necessity may not be performed even
          with the patient's consent. The Church has never regarded the
          marriage of degenerates as unlawful in itself: they cannot be
          deprived of their right without a grave reason. Even eugenists
          like Dr. Saleeby and Dr. Havelock Ellis disapprove of compulsory
          surgery. As for compulsory segregation it seems to be both right
          and good, provided that all due safeguards are taken in respect
          of the grades of feebleness. The spirit of the Church is to
          extend rather than curtail the freedom of the individual. The
          Catholic conscience guards against the State being unduly
          exalted at the expense of the family. The latest activity of the
          eugenics movement was the First International Congress held in
          London in 1912. It was divided into four chief divisions: (1)
          the bearing upon eugenics of biological research, (2) the
          bearing upon eugenics of sociological and historical research,
          (3) the bearing upon eugenics of legislation and social customs,
          (4) the consideration of the practical applications of eugenic
          principles. See MARRIAGE; MENDEL, MENDELISM.

          GALTON, Hereditary Genius (London, 1869, and 1892); IDEM, Record
          of Family Faculties (London, 1884); IDEM. Natural Inheritance
          (London 1889); GALTON and SCHUSTER, Noteworthy Families (London,
          1906); GALTON, Essays in Eugenics (London, 1909); IDEM, Memories
          of My Life (London, 1908); SALEEBY, Parenthood and Race Culture
          (London, 1909); IDEM, The Methods of Race Regeneration (London,
          1911); THOMPSON, Heredity (London, 1908); BATESON, The Methods
          and Scope of Genetics (London, 1908); IDEM, Mendel's Principles
          of Heredity (London, 1909); PEARSON, National Life from the
          Standpoint of Science (London, 1905); IDEM, The Scope and
          Importance to the State of the Science of National Eugenics
          (London, 1907); CRACKENTHORPE, Population and Progress (London,
          19097); RENTOUL, Race-Culture or Race-Suicide (London, 1906);
          ELLIS, The Problem of Race Regeneration (London, 1911);
          NEWSHOLME, The Declining Birth Rate (London, 1911); FOREL, Die
          sexuelle Frage (Munich, 1907), tr. MARSHALL, (London, 1910);
          DAY, Marriage, Divorce and Morality (London, 1912); GERRARD,
          Marriage and Parenthood (New York, 1912); IDEM, The Church and
          Eugenics (London and New York, 1912); IDEM in Catholic World
          (June, 1912); SLATER in Irish Theol. Quart. (October, 1911); De
          liceitate vasectomiae in American Eccl. Rev. (1910-13); The
          Eugenics Review.

          THOMAS J. GERRARD
     __________________________________________________________________

   Vicariate Apostolic of Fiji

                          Vicariate Apostolic of Fiji

          Comprising the islands belonging to the Fiji Archipelago. This
          archipelago forms the central portion of Western Polynesia, and
          extends between 15 and 20 degrees South latitude and between 170
          and 180 degrees West longitude. It includes about 250 islands,
          of which some 90 are inhabited; its total land area is 7435
          square miles, while the population in 1911 was 139,541 (3707
          Europeans; 87,096 Fijians; 4286 Indians; the remainder of other
          eastern races). The islands were discovered by Captain Cook in
          1773. There was, however, little European intercourse with them
          until the arrival of Wesleyan missionaries in 1835, and the
          first thorough survey was that of the United States Exploring
          Expedition of 1840. After long internecine troubles the
          government of the islands was unconditionally ceded by the
          native chiefs to Great Britain in 1874. The Fijians belong to
          the Melanesian (Papuan) stock, much crossed with Polynesian
          strains, and are in many ways superior (physically and mentally)
          to other branches of the same family. Their religion, which is
          being rapidly displaced by Christianity, is a species of
          ancestor-worship; the spirits of their chiefs, heroes, and other
          ancestors are included among the gods of subordinate rank,
          although they are esteemed to be still liable to human passions
          and even to death. Besides the malicious deities (of whom there
          are many), the natives have four classes of gods. While the most
          widely worshipped deity is Ove, who is regarded as the maker of
          all men, Ndengei undoubtedly occupies the most impressive place
          in the native pantheon. This deity is worshipped under the form
          of a serpent, and to him spirits proceed immediately after death
          for purification or to receive sentence. To reach the judgment
          seat of Ndengei, however, the spirit must pass an ever- vigilant
          giant armed with a mighty axe, and if wounded it may not present
          itself before Ndengei. Whether the spirit escapes unscathed or
          not is unfortunately ascribed to a stroke of luck (not to
          previous conduct during life), and to this want of any just
          notion of religious or moral obligation may be traced the many
          revolting practices which were until late years almost
          universally cultivated among the unchristianized natives
          (cannibalism, the putting to death of parents when they were
          advanced in years, suicide, immolation of wives at the funerals
          of their husbands, human sacrifices, etc.).

          The Fiji Islands were included in the territory of the old
          Vicariate Apostolic of Central Oceania, created by Propaganda in
          1842. The first Catholic mission in Fiji was founded in 1844,
          and on 10 March, 1863, the territory was erected into a
          prefecture Apostolic. On 5 May, 1887, the present vicariate was
          established and entrusted to the Marist fathers. The first and
          present vicar Apostolic is the Right Rev. Julian Vidal, D.D.,
          S.M., titular Bishop of Abydos (consecrated 27 Dec., 1887).
          Catholic missions have been already established on the islands
          Viti Levu, Ovalau, Vanua Levu, Tavenui, Kavavu, and Rotuma, the
          official residence of the vicar Apostolic being at Suva on the
          first mentioned island. The latest statistics for the vicariate
          show: 30 priests (Marist fathers), who tend 18 central stations
          and 273 villages; 11 Little Brothers of Mary (Marist brothers),
          who have charge of a boarding and day school at Suva, of a
          seminary and college at Cawaci, and of an English school for
          natives at Rewa; 24 European and 31 native Sisters of the Third
          Order of Mary (with 14 houses; novitiate at Solevu), who conduct
          the majority of schools for girls; 8 sisters of St. Joseph of
          Cluny (2 houses), who conduct the parochial school at Suva; 10
          Sisters of the Holy Name of Mary (Marist Sisters), who have
          charge of the school and orphanage at Levuka, a school at Ba,
          and assist the Marist brothers in the seminary and college at
          Cawaci; 12 native brothers (novitiate at Loretto) in 4
          communities. The English college at Cawaci for the the training
          of catechists and the children of the chiefs has on its roll 42
          catechists, 80 boys, and 12 girls. In the central stations the
          Marist brothers and sisters teach reading, writing, etc., as
          well as religion, to 500 boys and 450 girls, while in the
          villages 315 catechists give elementary instruction to about
          2000 children. The churches and chapels number 65, and the total
          Catholic population is about 12,000 (300 Europeans). A station
          for lepers is conducted on Makogai Island by one Marist father
          and two sisters of the Third Order of Mary.

          Australasian Catholic Directory (Sydney, 1912); THOMSON, The
          Fijians (London, 1908); PIOLET, Missions cath. franc., IV
          (Paris, 1902), 183-220.

          MOIRA K. COYLE

   Antonius Fischer

                                Antonius Fischer

          Archbishop of Cologne and cardinal, b. at Julich, 30 May, 1840;
          d. at Neuenahr, 30 July, 1912. The son of a professor, he was
          educated at the Friedrich Wilhelm Gymnasium at Cologne, making
          his theological studies at the University of Bonn and the
          Academy of Munster. Ordained priest, 2 Sept., 1863, he was for
          twenty-five years professor of religion at the Gymnasium at
          Essen. In 1886 he received his doctorate at the University of
          Tübingen, his thesis being "De salute infidelium". He was
          preconized titular Bishop of Juliopolis, 14 Feb., 1889, and was
          thenceforth associated in the administration of the Diocese of
          Cologne as assistant to the auxiliary Bishop Baudri, then very
          old. When Baudri died (29 June, 1893), Fischer succeeded him; in
          1901 the See of Cologne became vacant by the death of Mgr.
          Theophilus Simar, and Fischer was appointed archbishop (26 Nov.,
          1902). On 23 June, 1903, Pius X made him a cardinal. During the
          ten years of his episcopate Cardinal Fischer consecrated in the
          diocese several hundred churches and more than one thousand
          altars. He was a most devoted protector of the religious orders,
          and the confidence placed in him by the Government was
          singularly beneficial to the spread of Catholic life. On several
          occasions during religious or national celebrations he spoke of
          William II in very warm terms, which caused much comment.
          Greatly attached to the interests of workingmen, at the Congress
          of Liege in 1890 he called for the intervention of the State in
          matters of labour legislation. Addressing himself to the
          workingmen, he declared "Aspiration towards progress, towards
          the betterment and preservation of earthly well-being is deeply
          enrooted in human nature and does not contradict the Christian
          moral laws." On 13 Nov., 1905, he advised the Catholic miners
          assembled in Congress at Essen to co-operate with non-Catholic
          workmen in the discussion of common economic questions. He was
          likewise the defender with the Holy See of Christian
          interdenominational syndicates, whose headquarters were at
          München-Gladbach, and he exerted himself to counterbalance the
          influence brought to bear in behalf of purely sectarian
          syndicates by the Catholics of Berlin, the Bishop of Trier, and
          the Cardinal-Bishop of Breslau.

          Kolnische Volkszeitung (August, 1912); Germania (August, 1912).

          GEORGES GOYAU

   Henry Foley

                                  Henry Foley

          Born at Astley in Worcestershire, England, 9 Aug., 1811; died at
          Manresa House, Roehampton, 19 Nov., 1891. His father was the
          Protestant curate in charge at Astley. After his early education
          at home and at a private school at Woodchester, Henry was
          articled to a firm of solicitors in Worcester, and, in course of
          time, practised as a solicitor, at first in partnership with
          another, then by himself. Under the influence of the Oxford
          Movement he was led to embrace the Catholic Faith in 1846, and
          five years later, on the death of his wife Anne, daughter of
          John Vezard of Gloucestershire, he sought admission as a lay
          brother into the Society of Jesus. Urged to enter as a
          scholastic and to prepare for the priesthood, he said it was Our
          Lady's wish that he should be a lay brother. For thirty years he
          occupied the post of lay brother socius to the English
          provincial, during which time he produced his gigantic work,
          "The Records of the English Province of the Society of Jesus" (8
          octavo volumes), a compilation of immense labour and original
          research and an invaluable store of historical detail put
          together with a persevering assiduity rarely found even in the
          most painstaking of historians. Brother Foley deserves to share
          with Father Henry More the title of historian of the Society. He
          also wrote "Jesuits in Conflict", a work describing the
          sufferings of some of the English Jesuit confessors of the
          Faith. As a religious, Brother Foley was a model of every
          virtue. His bodily austerities were remarkable, while his spirit
          of prayer led him at all free moments to the chapel.

          Letters and Notices of the English Province, S.J., XXI, 282
          sqq.; Litterae annuae prov. anglic. S.J. (1892).

          P.J. CHANDLER
     __________________________________________________________________

   Gloria, Laus Et Honor

                             Gloria, Laus et Honor

          A hymn composed by St. Theodulph of Orléans in 810, in Latin
          elegiacs, of which the Roman Missal takes the first six for the
          hymn following the procession on Palm Sunday (the use to which
          the hymn was always dedicated). The first couplet,



          Gloria, laus et honor tibi sit Rex Christe, Redemptor,

          Cui puerile decus prompsit hosanna pium,

          is sung by chanters inside of the church (the door having been
          closed), and is repeated by the processional chorus outside of
          the church. The chanters then sing the second couplet, the
          chorus responding with the refrain of the first couplet, and so
          on for the remaining couplets until the subdeacon strikes the
          door with the staff of the cross, whereupon the door is opened,
          the hymn ceases, and the procession enters the church. The words
          of the refrain ("puerile decus") suggested the assignment of the
          hymn in the Middle Ages to boy chanters (thus at Salisbury,
          York, Hereford, Rouen, etc.). The hymn is founded on Psalm xxiii
          (Vulgate), 7-10; Psalm cxvii, 26; Matt. xxi, 1-16; Luke xix,
          37-38.

          MEARNS in JULIAN, Dict. of Hymnology (2nd ed., London, 1907),
          s.v. To this list of trs. add: DONAHOE, Early Christian Hymns
          (New York, 1908); Missal for the Use of the Laity (London,
          1903). For the legend concerning its origin, see MEARNS, loc.
          cit.; KAYSER, Beitrage z. Gesch. u. Erklarung der alten
          Kirchenhymnen (Paderborn, 1886), 313-322, full text and much
          comment.

          H.T. HENRY

   Zeferino Gonzalez

                               Zeferino González

          Dominican, cardinal, theologian, and philosopher, b. at Villoria
          in the Province and Diocese of Oviedo, Spain, 28 Jan., 1831; d.
          at Madrid, in the Dominican Convent of La Pasion, 29 Nov., 1894.
          On 28 Nov., 1844, in the College of Ocania González entered the
          Dominican Order, and a year later took his solemn vows. He was
          sent to Manila in 1848 to complete his studies, and in Jan.,
          1853, he was made a lector of philosophy. The following year he
          was ordained priest. After teaching philosophy and theology for
          many years in the University of Manila, he returned to Spain in
          1867, where, the year following, he was elected rector of Ocania
          College, discharging the duties of this office for three years.
          In 1874 he was named Bishop of Malaga, but, before taking charge
          of this diocese, he was consecrated bishop of the Diocese of
          Cordova in Oct., 1875. Eight years later he was removed to the
          archiepiscopal See of Seville, and in Nov., 1884, he was created
          cardinal by Pope Leo XIII, with Santa Maria sopra Minerva as his
          titular church. In May, 1885, Cardinal González was appointed to
          the primacy of Spain, was made Patriarch of the Indies,
          vicar-general of the army, and major-chaplain to the royal
          chapel. After many years of splendid service González, in Dec.,
          1889, resigned all his offices and dignities, except that of the
          cardinalate, and retired from active life. The remaining five
          years of his life were spent in study and prayer. He was
          honoured with medals of Isabella the Catholic and Charles III,
          he was appointed chancellor of Castile, was chosen as royal
          adviser, made a member of the Royal Academy of Languages, of
          History, of Political and Moral Sciences, and of the Roman
          Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas. Among his several works are:
          "Estudios sobre la filosofia de Sto Tomas"; "Estudios
          religiosos, politicos y sociales"; "Philosophia elementaria";
          "Historia de la filosofia"; "La Biblia y la ciencia"; "La
          infalibilidad pontificia" (pamphlet); "Discurso de recepcion en
          la Academia Espanola" (pamphlet); "Discurso de recepcion en la
          Academia de Ciencias politicas y morales" (pamphlet).

          Acta Cap. Ord. Praed. (Rome, 1885); HURTER, Nomencl. lit., III
          (Innsbruck, 1895), 1499; VIGIL, La orden de praedicatores
          (Madrid, 1884), 297.

          CHAS. J. CALLAN

   Vincent Louis Gotti

                              Vincent Louis Gotti

          Cardinal and theologian, b. at Bologna, 5 Sept., 1664; d. in
          Rome, 18 Sept., 1742. He received part of his early education
          from the Jesuits, and at the age of sixteen entered the
          Dominican Order. He so excelled others in the study of
          philosophy that his superiors sent him to Salamanca, Spain, for
          the best possible training in the sacred sciences. Having
          completeed his studies with great success he returned to Italy
          in 1688, and was sent to Mantua to teach philosophy in the
          convent of the order there. Hardly had he undertaken his duties
          when he was recalled to Rome by the master general to fill the
          chair of philosophy in the Minerva convent. Next he was ordered
          to establish a new course of philosophy at Bologna, where in
          1695 he was made public professor of theology by the senate of
          the university. In 1708 he was elected prior of the Dominican
          convent at Bologna; re-elected in 1714; and, two years later,
          made superior of that entire province. In 1715 Clement XI
          appointed him general inquisitor of the Faith in the city of
          Milan. Although most unwilling to receive this appointment,
          Gotti zealously discharged its arduous duties for two years,
          when, after repeated requests, the pope released him from the
          office. Returning to Bologna, he was given the chair of
          polemical theology in the university, and in 1720 was, for the
          third time, elected prior of the convent there. On 30 April,
          1728, Benedict XIII made him cardinal-priest, and appointed him
          Patriarch of Jerusalem. He was then made a member of nine
          different congregations, to all of which he gave his unremitting
          attention. With his many duties as cardinal, he never relaxed in
          the religious observances of his life, and found, moreover,
          ample time for much private study. He was present at the
          conclaves of Clement XIII and Benedict XIV.

          Cardinal Gotti possessed an acuteness of intellect and a
          solidity of judgment altogether uncommon. A tireless student, he
          amassed a fund of knowledge, and acquired a facility of
          expression which placed him in the foremost ranks of the
          greatest minds of his time. Special tributes to his ability and
          sanctity of life were repeatedly paid by Popes Clement XI and
          XII, and Benedict XIII and XIV, by various members of the Sacred
          College, by Victor Amadeus II, and his son Emmanuel, and by the
          Princess Maria Clementine Sobieski.

          Among the best known works of Gotti are: (1) "La vera chiesa di
          G. Christo dimonstrata dai segni et dai dogmi contro i due libri
          di Giacomo Picenino" (4 vols., Bologna, 1719), translated into
          Latin with added notes by Vincent Thomas Covi, O.P., and
          published at Milan (1734) and Bologna (1750); (2) "Concordia
          matrimonii cum ministro", which was published at Bologna in 1727
          under the title, "Colloquia theologica polemica in tres classes
          distributa"; (3) "Theologia scholastico-dogmatica juxta mentem
          Divi Thomae Aquinatis" (Bologna, 1727-35), which filled eight
          volumes and was divided into sixteen parts: the first part
          comprises the prolegomena and loci theologici, and all the rest
          follow the order of the "Summa" of St. Thomas, except the last
          part, which deals with the state of the soul after death, the
          end of the world, general judgment, etc.; this same work was
          again published at Venice in 1750. (4) "Veritas religionis
          christianae et librorum, quibus innititur contra atheos,
          polytheos, idololatras, mohammedanos et judaeos demonstrata" (3
          vols., Rome, 1735-36); (5) "Veritas religionis christianae ex
          genere, conceptu, ortu, gestis, mysteriis ac prodigiis Jesu
          Christi, necnon Virginis Deiparae confirmata" (4 vols., Rome,
          1737); ". . .ex mirabili ejus propagatione per apostolos et
          eorum gesta comprobata" (5 vols., Rome, 1737); ". . .ex
          prodigiis eius inter paganorum persecutiones augmento et
          mirabili constantia martyrum" (6 vols., Rome, 1738); ". . .ex
          devictis haeresibus directe eius veritatem impugnantibus" (7
          vols., Rome, 1738-40).

          HURTER, Nomenclator, II (Innsbruck, 1893), 1291 sqq.; ECHARD,
          Script. Ord. Praed., II, 814; TOURON, Hist. des homm. illust.,
          VI (Paris, 1749), 640.

          CHAS. J. CALLAN

   Martin Ignatius Joseph Griffin

                         Martin Ignatius Joseph Griffin

          Journalist, historian, b. at Philadelphia, 23 Oct., 1842; d.
          there, 10 Nov., 1911. In early manhood he was associated as
          contributor and editor with various Catholic publications.
          Appointed in 1872 secretary of the Irish Catholic Benevolent
          Union he founded and edited its organ from 1873 to 1894, first
          with the title the "I.C.B.U. Journal", and then as "Griffin's
          Journal". His articles on local Catholic history printed in this
          "Journal" led to the founding, 22 July, 1884, of the "American
          Catholic Historical Society" of Philadelphia, of which he was
          librarian at his death. In January, 1887, he began the
          publication of the "American Catholic Historical Researches",
          which he continued to edit till he died. An indefatigable delver
          into the byways of the past, he collected a large amount of
          original data that will be of much value and assistance to the
          historian of the development of the Church in the United States.
          His most important publications are the "History of Commodore
          John Barry" (Philadelphia, 1903), and "Catholics and the
          American Revolution" (3 vols., Philadelphia, 1907-1911).
          Monographs on the history of old St. Joseph's and several other
          Philadelphia churches (1881-1882), on Bishop Michael Egan,
          O.S.F. (1885), Thomas FitzSimons (1887), and "The trial of John
          Ury" (1899) preserve many details otherwise neglected. Mr.
          Griffin was also very active in the promotion of the cause of
          total abstinence, and of the building and loan associations that
          did so much good in the industrial community of his native city.

          American Catholic Historical Researches (Philadelphia, April,
          1912); American Catholic Who's Who (St. Louis, 1911); Catholic
          Standard and Times (Philadelphia), files.

          THOMAS F. MEEHAN

   Diocese of Guadix

                               Diocese of Guadix

          (GUADICENSIS)

          The Diocese of Guadix, in Spain, comprises the greater part of
          the Province of Granada and a portion of the Province of
          Almeria. Acci (Accitum) was the name of the old city situated in
          the region of the Bastetanos, the capital of which was Baza. It
          is not known for certain whether it is of Phoenician or of early
          Spanish origin. According to Macrobius, the primitive
          inhabitants paid homage to Mars under the name of Neton. Julius
          Caesar established the Roman colony called Julia Gemella. The
          legend of the Seven Apostolic men preserved in the Mozarabic
          Missal places the episcopal see of St. Torquatus in Guadix, and
          names him as one of the seven. The matron Luparia built a
          baptistery and primitive church. From then until 303, when Felix
          presided at the Council of Elvira, there is no record preserved
          of the Accitanian bishops. Liliolus attended the Third Council
          of Toledo in 589, and the names of the Accitanian bishops are to
          be found among those who attended the other Toletan councils;
          Clarencius at the fourth and fifth; Justus at the sixth; Julian
          at the eighth; Magnarius at the ninth and tenth; and Ricila, the
          last bishop whose name has come down to us before the Mohammedan
          invasion, at subsequent ones. In the Mozarabic period the
          diocese of Guadix continued to exist. Isidorus Pacensis mentions
          Frodoarius, who presided seven years over the See of Guadix.
          Quiricus assisted at the Council of Córdoba before 839. The
          Almohades, in the twelfth century, destroyed this together with
          the other Andalusian sees; it was not restored until the time of
          the Catholic sovereigns. Cardinal Pedro González de Mendoza,
          Archbishop of Toledo, erected the new see on 21 May, 1492, in
          virtue of the Apostolic commission of Innocent VIII granted on 4
          August, 1486, restoring, by right of postliminium, the Apostolic
          rank possessed by the see previous to the Mohammedan invasion.
          The See of Baza, founded in 1306, was united to the See of
          Guadix in 1493. The modern cathedral, on the site occupied by
          the principal mosque, was commenced in 1710 and completed in
          1796. The Seminary of St. Torquatus was founded by Bishop Juan
          José Fonseca in 1595; Charles IV founded an hospice in 1803, and
          the present hospital occupies the ancient Jesuit college. The
          present Bishop of Guadix is Mgr. Timotes Hernández Mulas, b. at
          Morales del Vino, in the Diocese of Zamora, 22 Aug., 1856,
          ordained in 1882, consecrated at Cuenca, 26 April, 1908,
          succeeded Mgr. Maximiano Fernandez del Rincon y Soto Davila in
          the See of Guadix. The diocese contains about 116,000 Catholics,
          62 parishes, 87 churches, 87 chapels, and 162 priests. There is
          a Franciscan friary at Baza, homes of the Little Sisters of the
          Poor at Guadix and Baza, Presentation, Franciscan,
          Conceptionist, and Poor Clare nuns at Guadix.

          PEDRO SUAREZ, Hist. del obispado de Guadix; FLOREZ, Espana
          sagrada, III, IV, VII; Espana, sus monumentos y artes: Granada
          (Barcelona, 1885).

          RAMON RUIZ AMADO
     __________________________________________________________________

   Francis Xavier Haberl

                             Francis Xavier Haberl

          An historian of sacred music, editor, born at Oberellenbach,
          Lower Bavaria, 12 April, 1840; died at Ratisbon, 5 Sept., 1910.
          He made his classical and theological studies at Passau, Bavaria
          where he was ordained priest, 12 August, 1862. Showing decided
          aptitude for music, be was given every opportunity for study of
          the art, and was entrusted with the direction of music in the
          seminary. From 1867 to 1870 Haberl resided in Rome, where he was
          active as choirmaster at the German national church, Santa Maria
          del Anima, and also made historical and archæological
          researches. From 1871 to 1882 he directed the choir at the
          Ratisbon cathedral, his incumbency forming one of the most
          brilliant periods in the history of this famous institute. In
          1874 Haberl founded a school for church musicians at Ratisbon,
          thus realizing the desire of his predecessors and co-workers in
          the cause of church music reform. This school, which began with
          three professors, Dr. Haberl, Dr. Jacob, and Canon Haller, and
          only three pupils, has since become the centre whither priests
          and laymen from every country in Christendom have gone to equip
          themselves with the necessary knowledge to execute reform
          measures in their dioceses. By his foresight and practical
          wisdom Haberl not only secured permanency for the school in the
          shape of endowment, but he built next to it a church, dedicated
          to St. Cecilia, where pupils are given opportunities for
          practising the knowledge they have acquired in theory. In 1868
          Haberl re-edited the Medicæa version of the Gregorian chant, and
          the Holy See declared his edition authentic and official for the
          universal Church. This form of the chant has since been
          superseded by the traditional version now in course of
          publication under the name of "Editio Vaticana".

          As president of the St. Cecilia Society, which position he held
          from 1899 until his death, as editor of "Musica Sacra" and
          "Fliegende Blätter für Kirchenmusik", the official organ of the
          society, as the author of "Magister Choralis", now in the
          twelfth edition, and of innumerable articles on historical,
          theoretical, and scientific subjects, but especially as director
          of the school which he founded, Dr. Haberl was always the
          champion of the spirit and authority of the Church in musical
          matters and a bulwark against the modernizing tendencies of the
          present day. For thirty years he gathered data and material for
          a critical edition of the works of Palestrina, completed in 1908
          in thirty-three volumes, the first ten of which were prepared by
          the joint labour of Th. de Witt, J.N. Rauch, Fr. Espagne, and
          Fr. Commer. A similar edition of the works of Orlando Lasso,
          undertaken by him in company with Dr. Sanberger, he left
          unfinished. In a time of frequent and vehement controversies, of
          which he was often the object, Dr. Haberl was always a model of
          charity.

          Musica sacra (Ratisbon, 1910); Fliegende Blätter für
          Kirchenmusik (Ratisbon, 1910); RIEMANN, Musiklexikon (Leipzig,
          1908).

          JOSEPH OTTEN

   Hamar

                              Ancient See of Hamar

          (HAMARCOPIA; HAMARENSIS).

          Hamar in Norway, embraced Hedemarken and Christians Amt, and was
          formed in 1152 out of that of Oslo, when Arnold, Bishop of
          Gardar, Greenland (1124-52), was appointed first Bishop of
          Hamar. He began to build the now ruined cathedral of Christ
          Church, which was completed about the time of Bishop Paul
          (1232-52). Bishop Thorfinn (1278-82) was exiled and died at Ter
          Doest in Flanders. Bishop Jörund (1285-86) was transferred to
          Trondhjem. A provincial council was held in 1380. The last
          Catholic bishop, Mogens (1513-37), was taken prisoner in his
          castle at Hamar by Truid Ulfstand, a Danish noble, and sent to
          Antvorskov in Denmark, where he was mildly treated until his
          death in 1542. There were at Hamar a cathedral chapter with ten
          canons, a school, a Dominican Priory of St. Olaf, and a
          monastery of the Canons Regular of St. Anthony of Vienne.

          HANSEN, Hamar og dets Biskopper (Hamar, 1866); RAMSETH, Hamars
          Bys Historie (ibid., 1899); LANGE, De norske Klostres Historie
          (Christiania, 1856), 374-77, 389-91; Historisk Tidsskrift, 3rd
          series, I (Christiania, 1890), 113-40, 244-69, 277-334; III
          (Christiania, 1895), 379-411.

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Henry Harland

                                 Henry Harland

          Novelist, b. of New England parentage, at St. Petersburg, 1
          Mar., 1861; d. at San Remo, 20 Dec., 1905. His father, Thomas
          Harland, of Norwich, Conn., was a New York lawyer of great
          ability. Henry attended the College of the City of New York. In
          1881 he went to Harvard, where he studied theology for a year.
          The next year was spent in Italy, chiefly in the best social and
          artistic circles of Rome. Returning a Catholic at heart, he did
          not join the Church out of regard for his wife. Due at nine at
          his desk in the Surrogate's Court of New York, he rose at four
          a.m. and worked till eight on his first novel "As It Was
          Written" (New York, 1885). "Mrs. Peixada" and "The Yoke of the
          Thorah" followed. They form a sort of Jewish trilogy. His
          interest in the race grew out of his friendship for a young
          Hebrew. These and seven other successful novels were signed
          "Sidney Luska", a name and books which Harland, now a fastidious
          stylist, wished to sink into oblivion. Going to Paris in 1887,
          Harland and his wife soon settled in London. Their experiences
          he parodied in a play, "The Light Sovereign" (1889). Henry
          Harland for years wrote only short stories of exquisite
          workmanship for various reviews. Some of them are over-redolent
          of the Latin-Quarter: they have been collected in "Mademoiselle
          Miss" (London, 1893), "Grey Roses" (London, 1895), and "Comedies
          and Errors" (London, 1898).

          The centre of a coterie of littérateurs, Harland projected a
          quarterly for them, the black and white work being done by
          Aubrey Beardsley. Appearing in Jan., 1894, "The Yellow Book"
          made Harland and Beardsley the lions of the hour, and the vogue
          continued till Harland's failing health stopped the publication
          in 1897. In this year Harland and his wife were received into
          the Church. In 1898 appeared "The Cardinal's Snuff Box", a
          delightfully buoyant novel of Italian life. It is so pervaded
          with the beauty of the Catholic Faith (as are all of Harland's
          writings from this on) that it has made converts. In 1902 was
          published his masterpiece, "The Lady Paramount", likened by John
          Oliver Hobbes to a Shakesperian comedy. In 1904 came "My Friend
          Prospero", in the same charming vein. "The Royal End" (1909) was
          incomplete when Harland died. His wife finished it according to
          his notes. Despite ill health, Harland, always whimsically
          joyous, was, still more than Beardsley, a "boy who never grew
          up". At thirty his physician gave him two years to live, but he
          prolonged them to fourteen most fruitful ones. In sight of the
          home built by the family at Norwich, Conn., before 1776, Henry
          Harland lies buried near his people, but in consecrated ground,
          with a Roman cross at his head.

          GLASTONBURY (MRS. HENRY HARLAND), The Life and Works of Henry
          Harland in Irish Monthly (Dublin, April, 1911), this, the only
          accurate account of Harland, is reprinted from The Redwood
          (Santa Clara, California); BURKE, Novels of Mr. Henry Harland in
          Cath. World (New York, April, 1903); JAMES, The Story Teller at
          Large in The Fortnightly Rev., LXIX (London); Athenaeum (London,
          30 Dec., 1905); The Times (London, 22 Dec., 1905); The Bookman,
          XXII (New York, 1905-6), XXIX (1909); The Lamp, XXVI (New York);
          Current Literature, XL.

          REGINA RANDOLPH JENKINS

   Ernest Hello

                                  Ernest Hello

          French philosopher and essayist, b. at Lorient, Brittany, 4
          Nov., 1828; d. at Kéroman, near Lorient, 14 July, 1885. His
          father belonged to the French judiciary and was at the time of
          his death councilor at the Court of Cassation in Paris. He
          bequeathed to his son, besides a share in the little ancestral
          patrimony, Kéroman, an honourable name and an invincible
          veneration and love for the truth. Ernest Hello was from infancy
          extremely frail of physique, and this delicacy of health,
          pursuing him through life, was a great obstacle in his labours
          and undoubtedly the source of the tinge of melancholy which
          underlies his writings. From his earliest years Hello manifested
          unusual power of intellect. At school at Rennes and later at the
          College Louis-le-Grand, in Paris, whence he graduated at the age
          of fifteen, he was first in his classes. In accordance with his
          father's wishes he read law, and was admitted after the most
          brilliant examinations, but refused to embrace the profession
          because of a decision of his comrades to the effect that a
          lawyer might not in conscience defend an unjust cause.
          Influenced by his admiration for Gratry and Lacordaire, he was
          attracted to theology and was instructed in this science by Abbé
          afterwards Bishop Baudry, then a professor at St-Sulpice. The
          thorough knowledge of principles which Hello thus acquired
          enabled him later to use his own powers of perception with
          perfect freedom and orthodoxy. In 1857 he married Zoë Berthier,
          daughter of an army officer and herself a writer of some
          ability. In the same year in conjunction with Georges Seigneur,
          he founded "Le Croisé", a daily paper devoted to the Catholic
          cause. Among his collaborators were Léon Gautier, Louis
          Veuillot, Pere Ventura, Dubosq de Pesquidoux, Oscar Haward, and
          Numa Boudet. The success of the journal was almost immediate,
          but after two years it was abandoned, owing to some disagreement
          between the two founders. This was the great disappointment of
          Hello's life. Thereafter he wrote for the press at large in
          France, Belgium, and even the United States, "Le Propagateur" of
          New Orleans receiving some of his contributions.

          Hello's first book, "Renan, l'Allemagne et l'Atheisme" (1858),
          was a refutation of Renan, who had just published his "Études
          d'histoire religieuse". The book was received with acclaim and
          recognized as accomplishing the defeat of the famous apostate,
          but, yielding to the temper of the times, Frenchmen continued to
          read Renan and soon forgot Hello. An enlarged edition of this
          work under the title "Philosophie et atheisme" appeared shortly
          after the author's death. It is, perhaps, the greatest of his
          works, exhibiting the full powers of his great mind, his
          remarkable grasp of basic truths, his perfect control of the
          instruments of philosophy and his own striking style. Hello made
          masterly translations of the writings of Bl. Angela of Foligno
          and of the mystic Ruysbroeck. Besides these his published works
          are: "L'Homme", "Physionomies des saints", "Contes
          extraordinaires", "Paroles de Dieu", "Plateaux de la balance",
          and "Le Siècle". "L'Homme" is looked upon by his critics as his
          chief work. It is a collection of essays arranged under the
          three heads, life, science, art, and united by the Catholic
          standpoint of their author and their bearing upon the different
          departments of human activity. Since his death his works have
          passed through several editions, the seventh edition of
          "L'Homme" appearing in 1905. Disdaining the spirit of compromise
          characteristic of his times Hello rejected the method
          inaugurated by Descartes and generally adopted in the systems of
          that day, making use, instead, of the principles of theology and
          philosophy as found in Scripture. His clear perception of
          fundamental principles joined to his simple, lofty style won for
          him a small but intelligent and appreciative audience through
          whom his influence has spread. The "Physionomies des saints" has
          been translated into English under the title "Studies in
          Saintship" (London, 1903). Translations of some of the essays in
          "Plateaux de la balance" appeared some years ago in "The
          Catholic Review" (St. Louis), but the individuality of his style
          defies successful translation.

          TERRE, Ernest Hello (Paris, 1895); LASERRE, Preface to L'Homme
          and Le Siecle (Paris, 1905); CRAWFORD, Introduction to Studies
          in Saintship (London, 1903); BARBEY D'AUREVILLY in Les critiques
          ou les juges jugés (Paris, 1885).

          SUSAN TRACY OTTEN

   Lady Elizabeth Herbert of Lea

                         Lady Elizabeth Herbert of Lea

          Authoress, and philanthropist, b. in 1822; d. in London 30 Oct.,
          1911. Lady Herbert was the daughter of General Charles A'Court,
          who was a member of Parliament as well as a soldier, while her
          uncle, who afterwards became Lord Heytesbury, was British
          Ambassador at St. Petersburg. At the age of twenty-four
          Elizabeth A'Court, who moved in the best circles of early
          Victorian society, married one of the most promising and
          independent of the young politicians of the day, Sidney Herbert,
          the second son of the Earl of Pembroke. Naturally the wife made
          herself the sharer of her husband's interests. In the forties
          she was an ardent Peelite and, when young Herbert was made
          Secretary of War during the Crimean campaign, she became the
          ally and ardent helper of Florence Nightingale. In 1861 Sidney
          Herbert, shortly after being created Baron Herbert of Lea, died,
          leaving her a widow with four sons and three daughters. Two of
          her sons succeeded to the Earldom of Pembroke, but only one of
          her children, who afterwards became by marriage Lady Mary von
          Hügel, followed Lady Herbert in her change of faith. This took
          place at Palermo in 1866 and was largely due to the influence of
          Manning, who had been the friend both of herself and of her
          husband. From the time of her conversion Lady Herbert became the
          centre and most zealous promoter of all Catholic charities and
          interests. The pen more especially was consecrated to the cause,
          and for many years she produced a large number of books in rapid
          succession, partly original and partly translations, which found
          for the most part a ready sale. Among the best known of these
          may be mentioned: "Impressions of Spain" (1866); "Cradle Lands",
          i.e. Egypt and Palestine (1867); "Wives and Mothers of the Olden
          Time" (1871); "Wayside Tales" (1880). Besides these there
          several stories, some of them autobiographical and a number of
          Lives, mostly translated or abbreviated from French originals,
          e.g. those of St. Monica, St. John Baptist de Rossi, Mgr.
          Dupanloup, Garcia Moreno, Mgr. de Merode, etc. Lady Herbert was
          a familiar figure in Rome, which she visited annually until
          almost the close of her long life.

          Apart from many autobiographical details incidentally included
          in her writings, see also The Tablet (4 and 11 Nov., 1911).

          HERBERT THURSTON

   Miguel Hidalgo

                                 Miguel Hidalgo

          Born on the ranch of San Vicente in the district of Guanajuato,
          8 May, 1753; executed at Chihuahua, 30 July, 1811.

          Hidalgo studied in the city of Valladolid, the present Morelia,
          and was ordained priest in 1778. He occupied the chair of
          theology and was later named rector of the College of San
          Nicholas, and finally appointed parish priest of Dolores in the
          state of Guanajuato. The town is now known as Dolores Hidalgo.
          He was a good French scholar and had read Rousseau, Beccaria,
          and Montesquieu. Manuel Abad y Queipo, afterwards canon and
          Bishop-elect of Michoacan, also an admirer of the French
          writers, was his warm friend, and, owing to their partiality for
          these writers, the Inquisition instituted secret proceedings
          against them in 1800, but they were not pressed. While Hidalgo
          was parish priest of Dolores he encouraged the cultivation of
          the grape vine and silk worm.

          In 1810 a general wave of unrest swept over the whole of New
          Spain. Napoleon's invasion of Spain had fired the patriotism of
          the Spaniards, revealing to the creoles the meaning of
          patriotism and love of country. The taxes levied on the colonies
          for the benefit of the mother country also bred discontent.
          These were the impelling forces that led to Mexican
          independence. A committee was organized under the name of
          Academia Literaria, whose secret plan was to work to obtain
          independence from Spain, and after some hesitation on his part
          the Cura Hidalgo was induced to join it. Through the treachery
          of one of the members the committee and its workings were
          exposed to the colonial Government and the order was issued to
          seize all those connected with the plot. Hidalgo was warned by
          Doña Josefa Ortiz of the betrayal of the committee, and without
          further delay he declared openly for independence on 16 Sept.,
          1810, the day upon which Mexico celebrates the anniversary of
          the Declaration of Independence. Augmenting his forces by
          recruits, mostly Indians, who joined him along the line of
          march, and selecting the banner of the Virgin of Guadalupe for
          his standard, Hidalgo marched to the important city of
          Guanajuato. After a brief struggle, the Alhóndiga de Granaditas,
          where the municipal authorities and the Spanish citizens had
          taken refuge, was captured. Acts of violence and unwarranted
          pillage were committed which will ever remain a stain upon the
          memory of the perpetrators. Hidalgo then turned toward
          Valladolid. Manuel Abad y Queipo, Bishop-elect of Michoacán and
          former friend of Hidalgo, published an edict of excommunication
          against him and threatened with the same penalty, ipso facto
          incurred, all those who should follow him. Several of the
          bishops followed his example. The historian, Miguel Miguélez,
          O.S.A., remarks that "the intention was to discredit Hidalgo by
          whatever means possible, and if the latter erred in making use
          of religion to further the work of independence, the former were
          equally guilty in employing the same means to suppress it". The
          fact remains that these edicts were most unfavourably received,
          as the official deposition of Fray Simon de Mora, Mercedarian,
          made before the Inquisition, 20 Dec., 1810, amply bears witness.

          From Valladolid Hidalgo turned his army towards the capital, and
          vanquished the colonial forces, commanded by Trujillo and
          Iturbide (the future emperor), on the mount of Las Cruces, a
          short distance from the City of Mexico. Notwithstanding this
          victory Hidalgo did not dare march on to the capital, but
          returned to Querétaro. He was overtaken and vanquished at Aculco
          by Calleja, who had come from San Luis Potosi at the urgent call
          of the Viceroy Venegas. The movement he had initiated had,
          however, spread throughout a greater part of the colonial
          possessions. After the defeat of Aculco Hidalgo went first to
          Valladolid and then to Guadalajara, where he established his
          headquarters. On 14 Jan. he was defeated by Calleja in the
          battle of Puente Grande near Guadalajara, and he surrendered the
          command of the army and retired to Zacatecas, and afterwards to
          Saltillo. He was captured on the charge of treason at Acatita de
          Baján and taken to Chihuahua with his followers, the principal
          ones being Allende, Aldama, and Jimenez, and after being
          degraded was shot.

          MIGUELEZ, La independencia de Mexico (Madrid, 1910); ALAMAN,
          Historia de Mexico (Mexico, 1849); PEREZ VERDIA, Compendio de la
          historia de Mexico (Mexico, 1911); ZARATE, Mexico a traves de
          los siglos, III (Barcelona).

          CAMILLUS CRIVELLI

   Gerard Manley Hopkins

                             Gerard Manley Hopkins

          Jesuit and poet, born at Stratford, near London, 28 July, 1844;
          died at Dublin, 8 June, 1889.

          His early education was received at Cholmondeley School,
          Highgate, where he gave evidence of fine intellectual
          endowments, scholarly tastes, and poetical gifts above the
          ordinary. The numerous conversions from Anglicanism to the
          Catholic Church in the middle of the nineteenth century together
          with the spirit of the Oxford Movement were not without their
          effect on the young student, and in October, 1866, he was
          received into the Church. In the following year he entered
          Balliol College, Oxford, having been prepared for his classical
          course by Walter Pater. Very soon his religious vocation
          manifested itself and he left the university, going to the
          Birmingham Oratory, where he spent a short time with Father
          Newman. In 1868 he entered the Society of Jesus. After
          ordination he was sent to Liverpool where his work lay among the
          poor of the slums of that city. His next post was that of
          preacher in London, after which he was stationed at St.
          Aloysius' Church, Oxford, where the Baron and Baroness de
          Paravicini have erected a memorial to him. In 1884 he was
          elected fellow of of the Royal University of Ireland and
          appointed classical examiner at Dublin, where he died of a
          contagious fever.

          While still at school he had written verses of distinctive merit
          but in his ardour as a novice he destroyed his poems, a single
          fragment surviving, and he wrote no more for nearly ten years.
          The poetry which he subsequently wrote at various periods until
          the year of his death is of a very high quality. It resembles
          the poetry of Crashaw in its exuberance of language, its lyric
          qualities, and its daring metaphors. The poems have never been
          collected, but many of them have been published in various
          anthologies such as Beeching's "Lyra Sacra" and Miles' "Poets
          and Poetry of the Century".

          BRÉGY, The Poets' Chantry (London, 1912), 70-88. [Note: Hopkins'
          collected poems were published first by Robert Bridges in 1918,
          and in an enlarged second edition in 1930. Volumes of his
          correspondence appeared in 1935 and 1938, his Notebooks and
          Papers in 1937.]

          BLANCHE M. KELLY
     __________________________________________________________________

   Illuminati

                                   Illuminati

          (Alumbrados.)

          The name assumed by some false mystics who appeared in Spain in
          the sixteenth century and claimed to have direct intercourse
          with God. They held that the human soul can reach such a degree
          of perfection that it contemplates even in the present life the
          essence of God and comprehends the mystery of the Trinity. All
          external worship, they declared, is superfluous, the reception
          of the sacraments useless, and sin impossible in this state of
          complete union with Him Who is Perfection Itself. Carnal desires
          may be indulged and other sinful actions committed freely
          without staining the soul. The highest perfection attainable by
          the Christian consists in the elimination of all activity, the
          loss of individuality, and complete absorption in God (see
          QUIETISM).

          The peasant girl known as La Beata de Piedrahita (d. 1511) is
          cited among the early adherents of these errors; but it is not
          certain that she was guilty of heresy. At Toledo, which was one
          of the main centres of Illuminism, Isabella of the Cross is said
          to have carried on an active propaganda. More celebrated was
          Magdalen of the Cross, a Poor Clare of Aguilar near Cordova,
          who, however, in 1546, solemnly abjured the heresy. So rapidly
          did the errors gain ground that the Inquisition proceeded with
          relentless energy against all suspects, even citing before its
          tribunal St. John of Avila and St. Ignatius of Loyola. In spite
          of this determined action, however, the heresy maintained itself
          until the middle of the seventeenth century and some of its
          features reappear in the Quietism of the Spaniard Michael de
          Molinos.

          MENENDEZ Y PELAYO, Historia de los heterodoxos espanoles
          (Madrid, 1880), II, 521-585; III, 403-408; SCHUTZ in
          Kirchenlexikon, s.v. Erleuchtete; MORONI, Dizionario di erud.
          stor.-ecclesiastico.

          N.A. WEBER

   Jan Ingen-Housz

                                Jan Ingen-Housz

          Investigator of the physiology of plants, physicist, and
          physician, b. at Breda in North Brabant, 8 Dec., 1730; d. at
          London, 7 Sept., 1799. He attended the Latin school at Breda,
          studied at Louvain, and later at Leyden, medicine, physics, and
          chemistry, and received the degree of Doctor of Medicine,
          although when and where the degree was obtained is unknown.
          Originally (from 1757) he practised medicine at Breda, but after
          the death of his father and on the invitation of the royal
          physician John Pringle he settled in London (1765), where he
          became acquainted with William Hunter, Alexander Monro, and
          George Armstrong. He studied the inoculation of children for
          small-pox, then a new theory, under Armstrong, and became a
          zealous advocate of it. In the spring of 1768 he was called to
          Vienna to inoculate the imperial family, a task which he
          accomplished successfully, notwithstanding the hostility of the
          Viennese physician Anton de Haen. In 1780 he travelled from
          Vienna to Paris in order to make the acquaintance of Benjamin
          Franklin. The great veneration he felt for Franklin caused
          Ingen-Housz to determine to settle in America, but unexpected
          occurrences, a long illness, and the death of Franklin in 1790
          prevented the carrying out of this plan. He returned, therefore,
          to London to regain his health, and to await the restoration of
          political peace before returning to Vienna. The remainder of his
          life was spent at London. In 1775 he married Agatha Maria
          Jacquin, sister of the Viennese botanist Nicholas Jacquin; the
          marriage was childless.

          To Ingen-Housz is due the discovery of the exchange of gas in
          plants under the influence of light. The green parts of plants,
          especially the leaves, exhale oxygen and absorb carbonic acid.
          In the dark the green parts exhale carbonic acid. The latter
          process goes on almost continuously in the parts of plants that
          are not green, as well as in the flowers and fruits. Before this
          Joseph Priestly (1733-1804) had explained the exhalation of
          oxygen as a result of the growth of plants, but later he adopted
          the views of Ingen-Housz, without mentioning the latter; the
          same course was followed by Jean Senebier (1742-1809).
          Ingen-Housz discovered the vegetable character of algae and
          introduced in microscopics the use of the cover glasses
          (mica-scales). Fired by Franklin's discoveries he devoted
          himself as early as 1757 to the study of electricity; the plate
          electrical machine is his invention. He supported the theory of
          Franklin's lightning conductor with a pointed tip, while in
          England a metal ball was used at the tip. Under his direction
          the palace and the powder-magazine at Vienna were equipped with
          Franklin's lightning-conductor. Mention should be made of his
          proposals concerning the construction of the ship's compass, the
          discovery that platinum is paramagnetic, the experiments begun
          with Franklin on the conduction of heat by metals, the discovery
          of oxy-hydrogen gas, and the invention of an air pistol with
          electrical ignition. Besides introducing inoculation for
          small-pox into Austria Ingen-Housz proposed the inhalation of
          oxygen in diseases of the lungs.

          His most important works are, in botany: "Experiments upon
          Vegetables Discovering Their Great Power of Purifying the Common
          Air in the Sunshine" (London, 1779; German, 1780, 1786-1790;
          Dutch, 1780; French, 1780, 1785); "An Essay on the Food of
          Plants and the Renovation of Soils" (London, 1796; German, 1798;
          Dutch, 1797); in physics: treatises in "Philosophical
          Transactions": "Easy Methods of Measuring the Diminution of
          Bulk, taking place upon the mixture of common and nitrous air,
          together with experiments on platina" (1776); "Electrical
          Experiments to Explain how far the Phenomena of the
          Electrophorus may be accounted for by Dr. Franklin's Theory"
          (1778); "On Some New Methods of Suspending Magnetic Needles"
          (1779); "Account of a New Kind of Inflammable Air or Gas".
          "Vermischte Schriften physisch-medizinischen Inhaltes",
          translated by Niklas Karl Molitor (Vienna, 1782; 2nd ed., 2
          vols., 1784), contains all the papers which appeared in the
          "Philosophical Transactions". The same miscellany appeared in
          Franch and Dutch in 1785; "Miscellanea physico-medica", ed. Jo.
          Andreas Scherer (Vienna, 1795). Manuscript collections of
          letters are privately owned, excepting the letters to Franklin
          which belong to the "American Philosophical Society" of
          Philadelphia; 27 letters written by Ingen-Housz are in the
          Imperial Library at Vienna; Franklin's letters, verbally in
          part, are to be found in the "Auktionskatalog VIII" of 11 Mar.,
          1901, issued by Gilhofer and Ranschburg of Vienna.

          Old biographies by M.J. GODEFROI (1875) and TREUB (1880), in De
          Gids, No. 9, both in Dutch. The latest biography and an
          exhaustive one is by WIESNER, Jan Ingen-Housz, Sein Leben und
          sein Wirken als Naturforscher und Arzt (Vienna, 1905).

          LEOPOLD SENFELDER
     __________________________________________________________________

   Arnold Janssen

                                 Arnold Janssen

          Founder and first superior-general of the Society of the Divine
          Word, b. at Goch in the Rhine Province, Germany, 5 Nov., 1837;
          d. at Steyl, Holland, 15 Jan., 1909. At a very tender age he
          manifested an inclination for the priesthood. After completing
          his Classical studies at the diocesan college of Gaesdonck in
          the northern Rhine Province, he took up the study of philosophy
          at the Academy of Munster, and then entered the University of
          Bonn. Having completed his theological studies at Bonn and at
          Munster, he was ordained, 15 Aug., 1861. He devoted some years
          to pastoral work and the teaching of Christian doctrine, in 1873
          becoming chaplain and director at the Ursuline convent of
          Kempen. As diocesan president of the Apostleship of Prayer he
          laboured for the propagation of that association, and in this
          capacity felt called to found a missionary centre for Germany.
          The result was the establishment of the Mission House of St.
          Michael at Steyl, Holland, 8 Sept., 1875. Out of this grew the
          Society of the Divine Word, which received canonical approbation
          in 1901. The congregation now has flourishing missions in all
          parts of the world, and, besides that at Steyl, has four mission
          houses in Germany and Austria and two in the United States. The
          institution at Techny, Ill., called St. Mary's Mission House,
          was opened 2 Feb., 1909, and was followed by another mission
          house, opened September, 1912, at Girard, Pa., the object of
          both institutions is to educate priests for the heathen missions
          in charge of the society. The spirit of the founder lives also
          in the many educational institutions conducted by the members of
          the Society of the Divine Word. In conjunction with his
          missionary work Father Janssen in 1889 founded the congregation
          of the Servant Sisters of the Holy Ghost, who assist the priests
          in their missionary undertakings. This congregation numbers some
          600 sisters, who have a home for the aged at Techny, Ill. In
          1912 Father Janssen's society numbered 625 priests, 1250
          students for the priesthood, and 800 lay brothers.

          [ Note: Arnold Janssen was beatified by Pope Paul VI in 1975.]

          HERM. RICHARZ

   Jesu Dulcis Memoria

                              Jesu Dulcis Memoria

          A poem ranging from forty two to fifty three stanzas (in various
          manuscripts), to form the three hymns of the Office of the Holy
          Name: "Jesu dulcis memoria" (Vespers), "Jesu rex admirabilis"
          (Matins), "Jesu decus angelicum" (Lauds). A feature of the long
          poem is the single rhymic scheme for a stanza, e.g.:



          Jesu dulcis memoria,

          Dans vera cordis gaudia,

          Sed super mel et omnia

          Ejus dulcis præsentia.

          The ascription of authorship to St. Bernard is general and,
          thinks Mearns, (Dict. of Hymnology, 1892), probable -- a view
          which he is still inclined to in the second edition of the
          "Dictionary" (1907). Guéranger thought that certain manuscripts
          "prove beyond a doubt" that it was composed in the fourteenth
          century by a Benedictine abbess -- a view contradicted by the
          manuscript cited by Mearns, of about 1200. Blume (see Hymnody
          and Hymnology) denies its authorship by St. Bernard, and Dom
          Pothier (Revue bénédictine, X, 147) found it in a manuscript of
          the eleventh century ascribed to a Benedictine abbess (St.
          Bernard was born in 1090).

          Mearns in Dictionary of Hymnology (2nd ed., London, 1907), 585,
          1536, 1656; to the list should be added trs. by Bagshawe,
          Breviary Hymns and Missal Sequences (London, 1900); Donahoe,
          Early Christian Hymns, series I (New York, 1908); Henry in
          American Ecclesiastical Review (Jan., 1900), Latin text, tr.,
          and comment, and (Feb., 1900), comment on authorship.

          H.T. HENRY

   Lionel Pigot Johnson

                              Lionel Pigot Johnson

          Born at Broadstairs on the Kentish coast, 15 Mar., 1867; died 4
          Oct., 1902. He was the youngest son of Captain William Victor
          Johnson, of the 90th Light Infantry, and his wife Catharine
          Delicia, only daughter of Robert Walters, Esq.,
          barrister-at-law. The family is that of the Johnsons of Bath,
          Baronets, allied to many well-known houses. Lady Johnson,
          Lionel's paternal grandmother, was a Philipse of Rhual in
          Flintshire, daughter of the landowner who gave his name to
          Philipsburg, New York. Her father-in-law, General Sir Henry
          Johnson, was Governor of Ross Castle, Ireland, in 1798, and
          remorselessly active in putting down the patriot insurrection of
          that year. He married Rebecca, daughter of David Franks, a
          wealthy Hebrew citizen of Philadelphia. These direct ancestral
          details throw light upon Lionel Johnson's equitable and liberal
          spirit, and point the natural origin of his love for Wales, his
          understanding of American ideals, and his intense enthusiasm for
          Ireland, which in his later years flamed far above his feeling
          for his own country. Only by courtesy can he be called an
          Irishman. As a convert Catholic Nationalist, he stood as the
          obverse of the Anglo-Irish Protestant Tory of his blood just
          mentioned. In all branches of this family and as far back as the
          pedigree goes, its men were and are officers in the British
          army; and a certain soldierliness, elements of order, strength,
          and authority, are evident under Lionel Johnson's literary
          fabric. He was educated at Winchester College, always dear to
          him, and at New College, Oxford, where he graduated with honors
          in 1890. On St. Alban's Day, 1891, he was received into the
          Catholic Church by Fr. Lockhart, at St. Etheldreda's, Ely Place,
          London. From 1891 to 1901 he wrote constantly, living alone in
          Gray's Inn Square, Lincoln's Inn Square, and Clifford's Inn
          respectively. He never married. He died from the results of a
          slight fall, and was buried in St. Mary's Cemetery, Kensal
          Green. There is a lovingly inscribed tablet to his memory in
          Winchester College cloisters.

          Lionel Johnson published only three books: "The Art of Thomas
          Hardy", a singularly ripe essay and study (1894); his "Poems"
          (1895); and a second collection, "Ireland and Other Poems"
          (1897). Besides these, many of his critical papers and fugitive
          reviews, with a brief memoir, have been gathered by an American
          editor, and issued by Elkin Mathews, London, under the title of
          "Post Liminium" (1911). There have been three small imprints of
          his selected verse, one of these (1912) containing a partly
          biographical study of the poet from "The Atlantic Monthly". He
          was a small, frail, young-looking man, with a fine head and
          brow, quick of foot, gentle of voice, and with manners of grave
          courtesy. He greatly loved his friends in a markedly spiritual
          way, always praying for them, absent or present. His sound
          Catholic principles, his profound scholarship, his artistic
          sensitiveness, his play of wisdom and humor, his absolute
          literary honour, with its "passion for perfection" from the
          first, show nobly in his prose work. His lyrics are full of
          beauty and poignancy, but perhaps have in them something taxing.

          L.I. GUINEY
     __________________________________________________________________

   Diocese of Kearney

                         Diocese of Kearney (Nebraska)

          (KEARNEYIENSIS).

          By Decree of the Sacred Consistorial Congregation of 8 March,
          1912, Pius X divided into two parts the territory of the Diocese
          of Omaha, erecting the western part into a new and distinct
          diocese with its see at Kearney. The first Bishop is Right Rev.
          James Albert Duffy, ordained, 27 May, 1893, appointed to the
          see, 25 January, 1913. He resides at Kearney. The diocese
          comprises an area of 38,000 square miles, and includes the
          following counties: Keyapaha, Rock, Garfield, Valley, Sherman,
          Buffalo, Cheyenne, Kimball, Banner, Scotts Bluffs, Sioux, Dawes,
          Box Butte, Morrill, Garden, Sheridan, Cherry, Grant, Hooker,
          Thomas, McPherson, Logan, Custer, Blane, Loup, Brown, and part
          of the counties of Dawson, Lincoln, Keith, and Deuel. The new
          diocese was made suffragan to Dubuque. The Catholic population
          is about 15,200. There are 58 churches, 21 parishes, 35
          missions, 34 stations (without churches), 1 academy, and 3
          parochial schools with over 680 pupils. The Sisters of St.
          Francis have schools at Ashton and Alliance, and an hospital at
          Alliance. (See NEBRASKA; OMAHA, DIOCESE OF).

          MOIRA K. COYLE

   Geoffrey Keating

                                Geoffrey Keating

          Irish theologian, historian, and poet, b. at Burgess in the
          parish of Tubbrid, Co. Tipperary, about 1569; d. at Tubbrid
          about 1644. He studied first at a Latin school near Cahir, and
          afterwards frequented various Irish schools in Munster and
          Leinster. In accordance with the custom which prevailed in
          Ireland during the period of Protestant persecution he was
          ordained a Mass-priest at the age of twenty-four and then sent
          abroad for his philosophical and theological studies. He formed
          one of the band of forty students who sailed in November, 1603,
          under the charge of the Rev. Diarmaid MacCarthy to Bordeaux to
          begin their studies at the Irish College which had been founded
          in that city by the Archbishop of Bordeaux, Cardinal Francois de
          Sourdis, in that same year. On his arrival in France he wrote a
          poetical "Farewell to Ireland", and a "Lament on the Sad State
          of Ireland", when the news of the Flight of the Earls (14 Sept.,
          1607) reached him. After obtaining the degree of Doctor of
          Divinity at the University of Bordeaux he returned about 1610 to
          Ireland and was appointed to the cure of souls at Uachtar
          Achaidh in the parish of Knockraffan, near Cahir, where he put
          down the then prevalent abuse of delaying Mass until the
          neighbouring gentry arrived.

          In 1613 a spy reported "Dr. Keating in the Countie of
          Tiperarie", and in 1615 another spy reported that there was "in
          the diocese of Lismore Father Geoffrey Keating, a preacher and
          Jesuit, resorting to all parts of the diocese". About 1620, his
          fearless preaching aroused the anger of a lady of rather loose
          morals, Ellinor Laffan, wife of Squire Mockler. She invoked the
          aid of her relative, Donough O'Brien, Earl of Thomond, President
          of Munster, then residing at Limerick. The penal laws were put
          in force against Keating and he had to take refuge in a cave,
          Poll Granda, in Gleann Eatharlach in the recesses of the
          Galtees. When the storm had abated somewhat, he resolved to
          devote himself to literary work and he travelled through the
          country in disguise under an assumed name. During the next six
          years he collected materials for his historical and theological
          works, visiting Leinster, Connaught, and Ulster. In spite of all
          obstacles he finished the preface to his history in 1629, the
          first part in 1631, and the second part in 1632 or somewhat
          later. The same year, 1631, also saw the completion of his "Tri
          Biorghaoithe an Bhais" (The Three Shafts of Death), a series of
          moral reflections on death and the conduct of human life, and
          his "Eochairsciath an Aifrinn" (The Key-Shield of the Mass), a
          defence of the Mass against heretics and an explanation of it
          for the faithful. A small silver chalice bearing the following
          inscription: "Dominus Galfridus Keatinge, Sacerd(os) Sacrae
          Theologiae Doctor me fieri fecit 23 February 1634", is still
          preserved in the parish church of Cappoquin, Co. Waterford. He
          composed a poetical elegy on Edmund Butler, third Lord Dunboyne,
          17 March, 1640, and another on Thomas and John Butler, sons of
          Lord Dunboyne, who fell in battle. He had already written
          elegies on James Butler, son of the Earl of Knocktopher, 1620,
          John óg Fitzgerald, Lord of the Decies, 1 March, 1626, and
          Thomas Butler, fourth Lord Cahir, 1627.

          In 1644 during the supremacy of the Catholic Confederation a
          small oratory, called Teampul Chiarain, was built in the
          north-east corner of the graveyard of Tubbrid, his native
          parish, and a slab over the door of it bears an inscription
          which seems to indicate that Keating was dead at that time. The
          few poems of later date ascribed to him in some manuscripts are
          probably the work of Pádraigín Haicéad, a contemporary poet. In
          addition to his poems and the three great prose works above
          mentioned, "Eochairsciath an Aifrinn", "Trí Biorghaoithe an
          Bháis", and "Forus Feasa ar Eirinn", Keating also wrote two
          smaller devotional treatises, "Psaltair Mhuire" (The Psalter of
          Mary), a series of meditations on the Rosary of the Blessed
          Virgin, published for the first time in the "Irish Rosary"
          (Dublin) August, 1908-August, 1909, by Richard Foley, and a
          similar work still unpublished, "Coróin Mhuire" (The Crown of
          Mary). Geoffrey Keating was proficient in the Irish, Latin, and
          English languages and his writings prove him a consummate master
          of Catholic theology, Irish style, native history, and legendary
          lore. His history has been undeservedly criticized. It has been
          blamed for the inclusion of legends, which is in fact one of its
          greatest merits and has earned for him the title of the Irish
          Herodotus. But besides legends he has also preserved us some
          important early ecclesiastical records which would otherwise
          have been lost, such as the Acts of the Synod of Rath Breasail
          at the beginning of the twelfth century when Ireland was first
          divided into its modern dioceses. Eugene O'Curry remarks that:
          "It would be more becoming those who have drawn largely and
          often exclusively on the writings of these two eminent men
          (Father John Colgan and Dr. Geoffrey Keating) and who will
          continue to draw on them to endeavour to imitate their industry
          and scholarship than to attempt to elevate themselves to a
          higher position of literary fame by a display of critical
          pedantry and what they suppose to be independence of opinion in
          scoffing at the presumed credulity of those whose labours have
          laid in modern times the very groundwork of Irish history."

          The following is a list of the first complete editions of each
          of Keating's works: -- "Trí Biorghaoithe an Bháis" (The Three
          Shafts of Death), ed. Robert Atkinson, LL.D., for the Royal
          Irish Academy (Dublin, 1890); "Eochairsciath an Aifrinn", ed.
          Patrick O'Brien (Dublin, 1895); "Dánta, Amhráin is Caointe"
          (Poems, Songs and Elegies), ed. Rev. John C. MacErlean, S.J.,
          for the Gaelic League (Dublin, 1900); "Forus Feasa ar Éirinn"
          (The History of Ireland), text and translation, ed. David Comyn,
          vol. I (London, 1902), and Rev. Patrick S. Dineen, vol. II and
          III (London, 1908), for the Irish Texts Society (London);
          "Psaltair Mhuire", ed. Richard Foley, serially in the "Irish
          Rosary" (Dublin), August, 1908-August, 1909. None of these works
          has been translated into English except the "History", of which
          three different complete English translations have been
          published: by Dermod O'Connor (London, 1723), frequently
          reprinted; by John O'Mahony (New York, 1886), second edition,
          and by David Comyn and Rev. P. S. Dineen (London, 1902-1908).

          Calendar of State Papers: Ireland (1619); G. F. [JOHN ROCHE],
          Vindiciae Hiberniae, etc. (Antwerp, 1621); the anonymous
          Dissertation prefixed to the Clanrickarde Memoirs (London,
          1722); MacGEOGHEGAN, Histoire de l'Irlande ancienne et moderne
          (Paris, 1758), 63; Ordinance Survey Letters, Co. Derry (1835);
          BURKE in Journal of the Waterford Archaeological Society
          (1895-1907). For Lives of Geoffrey Keating see HENEGAN in
          MORERI, Dictionnaire historique (Paris, 1759); HALLIDAY, preface
          to Forus Feasa ar Eirinn (Dublin, 1811); MacERLEAN, preface to
          Dánta, Amhrain, is Caointe Sheathruin Ceitinn (Dublin, 1909);
          FOLEY, Saoghalre Sheathruin Ceitinn (Dublin, 1908).

          JOHN MACERLEAN

   Vicariate Apostolic of Keewatin

                        Vicariate Apostolic of Keewatin

          The Vicariate Apostolic of Keewatin includes the northern half
          of the Province of Saskatchewan, and is bounded on the north by
          the Arctic regions, on the south by the Archdiocese of St.
          Boniface, on the east by Temiskaming Vicariate, and on the west
          by the Diocese of St. Albert and the Vicariate of Athabaska. The
          country in general is barren and uninteresting, though
          possessing some timber and mineral resources; it is sparsely
          inhabited by Indians, half- breeds, and a few whites. It was
          first visited by pioneer missionaries in the nineteenth century,
          when Mgr. Provencher, Bishop of St. Boniface, sent Abbé Thibault
          to Ile-à-la-Crosse (1845), Abbé Laflèche (later Bishop of Three
          Rivers) to explore the Cumberland district (1846), and Father
          Taché, O.M.I. (later Archbishop of St. Boniface), to join
          Lafleche at Ile-à-la-Crosse (1846), and thence visit Lake
          Caribou (1847). These and surrounding missions were subsequently
          served by Oblates of the Manitoba or Alberta-Saskatchewan
          Provinces. Prominent among these since 1887 has been the Rev.
          Ovide Charleboix whose administrative capacities, proved during
          sixteen years' ministry at Fort Cumberland, led in 1900 to his
          nomination as Visitor of the Cumberland District Indian
          Missions, in 1903, to his appointment as director of Duck Lake
          Indian Industrial school, and, in 1910, to his preconization as
          titular Bishop of Berenice and Vicar Apostolic of Keewatin, with
          residence at Le Pas. There are in the vicariate: 15 Oblate
          Fathers of Mary Immaculate, 8 Oblate Brothers of Mary
          Immaculate, 12 Grey Nuns (Montreal), 16 Oblate Sisters of the
          Sacred Heart and Mary Immaculate (St. Boniface), 4 Grey Nuns
          (St. Hyacinth), 10 churches with 16 out-stations; 11,000
          Indians, Montagnais, Cree, and Esquimaux, of whom 7000 are
          Catholics and 5000 non-Catholics or pagans (chiefly Esquimaux).
          Indian boarding schools at Norway House (Oblate Sisters, 20
          pupils), Lac Laplonge [Grey Nuns (Montreal), 50 pupils], a
          general hospital at Le Pas [Grey Nuns (St. Hyacinth), 25 beds],
          a Catholic (French-English) school at Le Pas [Grey Nuns (St.
          Hyacinth)].

          TACHE, Vingt annees de missions; BENOIT, Vie de Mgr. Tache, I
          (Montreal), passim; CHARLEBOIS, Debuts d'un eveque missionnaire
          (Montreal).

          J.E. DANIEL

   Charles Joseph Kickham

                             Charles Joseph Kickham

          Patriot, novelist, and poet, b. at Mullinahone, Co. Tipperary,
          Ireland, 1828; d. at Blackrock, Co. Dublin, 22 Aug., 1882. He
          was the son of John Kickham, a wealthy draper of Mullinahone,
          and Anne O'Mahony, lovingly described in his novel "Sally
          Cavanagh", a kinswoman of the Fenian chief, John O'Mahony. When
          he was about fifteen years old, his sight and hearing were
          permanently injured by the explosion of a flask of damp
          gunpowder which he was drying. He took part in the Young Ireland
          Movement in 1848, and helped to found the Confederate Club at
          Mullinahone. After the failure of the rising at Ballingarry,
          near his home, he was forced to hide for a time. A little later
          he joined the Tenant Right League, and when it failed he lost
          faith in legal agitation. He joined the Fenians about 1860, and
          was appointed one of the editors of "The Irish People", the
          organ of the Fenian Party, along with John O'Leary and T. C.
          Luby. Arrested at Fairfield House, Sandymount, Dublin, 11 Mar.,
          1865, he was tried for treason felony at Dublin, 5 Jan., 1866,
          and sentenced by Judge Keogh to fourteen years' penal servitude.
          On his way to his cell he picked up a piece of paper from the
          ground. It was a picture of the Blessed Virgin. He kissed it
          reverently, saying to the warder: "I have been accustomed to
          have the likeness of the Mother of God morning and evening
          before my eyes since I was a child. Will you ask the governor if
          I may keep this?" His health, always weak, gave way in prison,
          but he bore up bravely. The question of his ill-treatment in
          prison was raised in Parliament (7-26 May, 1867) by John Francis
          Maguire, M.P. for Cork, and, from solitary confinement at
          Pentonville, Kickham was removed to the invalid prison at
          Woking, and finally released in March, 1869, when his health had
          been shattered and he had practically lost his eyesight. He was
          returned as member of Parliament for Co. Tipperary (1869), but
          defeated upon a scrutiny, 26 Feb., 1870. Thenceforth he confined
          himself to literary work.

          Kickham contributed largely to Irish national periodicals, such
          as "The Nation" (1848), "The Irishman" (1849-50), "The Celt"
          (1857), another paper called "The Irishman" (1858), "The Irish
          People" (1865), "The Shamrock", "The Irish Monthly" (1881). His
          articles in these papers appeared over various sigantures, e.g.
          "K. Mullinahone", "C.J.K.", "Slievenamon", "J.", "Momonia". His
          best known poems are: "The Priest and his People"; "Rory of the
          Hill"; "The Irish Peasant Girl", who like himself "lived beside
          the Anner at the foot of Slievenamon"; and "Patrick Sheehan".
          Among his shorter prose writings are his "Memoir of Edward
          Walshe"; "Poor Mary Maher"; "Annie O'Brien"; "Never Give Up";
          "Joe Lonergan's Trip to the Lower Regions". During his
          imprisonment he wrote his first novel, "Sally Cavanagh or the
          Untenanted Graves" (published in 1869 with a portrait of the
          author), a simple tale of love among the small farmer class,
          describing the tragic results of landlordism and emigration but
          enlivened with touches of humour. "Knocknagow or the Homes of
          Tipperary" (1879) is his masterpiece, and is considered by many
          the greatest of Irish novels. It consists of a series of
          pictures of life in a village in Co. Tipperary so true to nature
          that they could not have been written but by one who knew and
          loved the people. He left behind another novel, "For the Old
          Land or a Tale of Twenty Years ago" (published in 1886),
          treating also of the small farmers under the old land system.
          His serial "Elsie Dhu" began in the "Shamrock" of 24 June, 1882,
          shortly before his death. No writer has produced more faithful
          pictures of Irish country life. He had wonderful powers of
          observation and delicate analysis of character. He wrote with
          restrained simplicity, and was skilful in intermingling humour
          and pathos. No other novels give a truer insight into the
          character and Catholic spirit of the Irish peasantry.

          M.R., Introduction to Knocknagow, ed. DUFFY (Dublin, 1879);
          HAMILTON in Dict. Nat. Biog., s. v.; O'DONOGHUE, The Poets of
          Ireland (Dublin, 1912), s. v.; O'LEARY, Recollections of Fenians
          and Fenianism (Dublin, 1896); Irish Book Lover, II, III
          (1910-1912); BROWN, Reader's Guide to Irish Fiction (Dublin,
          1910).

          JOHN MACERLEAN

   Vicariate Apostolic of Kottayam

                        Vicariate Apostolic of Kottayam

          Located on the Malabar Coast, India. This vicariate forms part
          of the territory of the ancient Church of Malabar, which was
          founded by St. Thomas and was governed by Syro- Chaldean bishops
          until the end of the sixteenth century. In 1600 the Portuguese
          authorities substituted Latin for the Syro-Chaldean bishops, and
          from this date until 1887 the Syro-Chaldean Catholics remained
          under the jurisdiction of the Latin bishops of Verapoly and
          Cranganore and, on the suppression of that see, of Goa. By the
          Brief "Quod jampridem" of 20 May, 1887, Leo XIII separated the
          churches of the Syrian Rite on the Malabar Coast from the Latin
          churches, and, while leaving the latter under the jurisdiction
          of the Archbishop of Verapoly and the Bishop of Cochin, erected
          the Syrian churches into two vicariates Apostolic for Northern
          and Southern Malabar, styling them the Vicariates of Trichur and
          Kottayam and declaring them independent of the jurisdiction of
          the ecclesiastical province of Verapoly. By the Brief "Quæ rei
          sacræ" of 28 July, 1896, a new division of the territory was
          effected; namely, into the three Vicariates of Trichur,
          Ernakulam, and Changanacherry, Kottayam being thus suppressed.
          On 29 August, 1911, however, Pius X, by the Decree "In Universi
          Christiani" restored the Vicariate Apostolic of Kottayam for the
          section of the Syro-Malabar Christians known as the Suddhists,
          and it now includes all the Suddhist churches and chapels in the
          vicariates of Ernakulam and Changanacherry. The vicar Apostolic
          is the Right Rev. Mary Matthew Makil, D.D., Bishop of Tralles
          (b. on 27 March, 1851; consecrated on 25 Oct., 1896), who was
          transferred from Changanacherry by the Brief "Magni momenti" of
          13 August, 1911. The latest statistics for the vicariate show: 1
          bishop; 30 (secular) priests; 12 seminarists; 19 sisters in 2
          convents; 3 secondary schools for boys and 2 for girls; 35
          parochial schools; 2 boarding schools; 1 orphanage; 29,530
          Catholics.

          Catholic Directory of India (Madras, 1912).

          MOIRA K. COYLE
     __________________________________________________________________

   John Lafarge

                                  John LaFarge

          Painter, decorator, and writer, b. at New York, 31 March, 1835;
          d. at Providence, Rhode Island, 14 Nov., 1910. His parents were
          John Frederick de LaFarge, a French naval officer, and Louise
          Josephine Binsse (de St. Victor). Though his interest in art was
          aroused during his college training at Mount St. Mary's and
          Fordham University, he had only the study of law in view until
          he returned from his first visit to Paris, where he studied with
          Couture and enjoyed the most brilliant literary society of the
          day. Even his earliest drawings and landscapes, done in Newport,
          Rhode Island, after his marriage in 1861 with Margaret Mason
          Perry, show marked originality, especially in the handling of
          colour values, and also the influence of Japanese art, in the
          study of which he was a pioneer. LaFarge's inquiring mind led
          him to experiment with colour problems, especially in the medium
          of stained glass. He succeeded not only in rivalling the
          gorgeousness of the medieval windows, but in adding new
          resources by his invention of opalescent glass and his original
          methods of superimposing and welding his material. Among his
          many masterpieces are the "Battle Window" at Harvard and the
          cloisonné "Peacock Window" in the Worcester Art Museum. During
          1859-70 he illustrated "Enoch Arden" and Browning's "Men and
          Women". Breadth of observation and structural conception, and a
          vivid imagination and sense of colour are shown by his mural
          decorations. His first work in mural painting was done in
          Trinity Church, Boston, in 1873. Then followed his decorations
          in the Church of the Ascension (the large altarpiece) and St.
          Paul's Church, New York. For the State Capitol at St. Paul he
          executed, in his seventy-first year, four great lunettes
          representing the history of religion, and for the Supreme Court
          building at Baltimore, a similar series with Justice as the
          theme. In addition there are his numberless minor paintings and
          water colours, notably those recording his extensive travels in
          the Orient and South Pacific.

          LaFarge's writings include: "The American Art of Glass" (a
          pamphlet); "Considerations on Painting" (New York, 1895); "An
          Artist's Letters from Japan" (New York, 1897); "The Great
          Masters" (New York); "Hokusai: a talk about Japanese painting"
          (New York, 1897); "The Higher Life in Art" (New York, 1908);
          "One Hundred Great Masterpieces"; "The Christian Story in Art";
          and the unpublished "Letters from the South Seas"; and
          "Correspondence". His labours in almost every field of art won
          for him from the French Government the Cross of the Legion of
          Honour and membership in the principal artistic societies of
          America, as well as the presidency of the Society of Mural
          Painters. Enjoying an extraordinary knowledge of languages
          (ancient and modern), literature, and art, by his cultured
          personality and reflective conversation he greatly influenced
          all who knew him. Though naturally a questioner he venerated the
          traditions of religious art, and preserved always his childlike
          Catholic Faith and reverence.

          WAERN, John LaFarge in Portfolio Series; CORTISSOZ, John LaFarge
          (New York, 1911); New York Evening Post (15 Nov., 1910);
          BOURGET, Outre Mer; LAFARGE in America (27 May, New York, 1911).

          JOHN LAFARGE

   Louis A. Lambert

                                Louis A. Lambert

          Priest and journalist, b. at Charleroi, Pennsylvania, 13 April,
          1835; d. at Newfoundland, New Jersey, 26 Sept., 1910. Educated
          at St. Vincent's College and the Seminary of St. Louis, he was
          ordained for the Diocese of Alton in 1859. During the Civil War
          he was chaplain to the Eighteenth Regiment of Illinois Infantry
          (1861-3), and was under fire in many engagements, including the
          battle of Shiloh. From 1863 to 1868 he was on the mission at
          Cairo and Shawneetown, Illinois, and later at Seneca Falls and
          Waterloo in New York. When the Paulist Fathers established their
          house of studies at New York, Lambert was given the chair of
          moral theology. From 1890 till his death he was pastor of
          Scottsville, New York. For many years Dr. Lambert devoted his
          efforts to the upbuilding of the Catholic Press; he founded and
          edited the "Catholic Times" of Buffalo (1874-80), which was
          amalgamated with the "Catholic Union", and became chief of the
          editorial staff of the Philadelphia "Catholic Times" (1880-82),
          and New York "Freeman's Journal" (1894- 1910). When the Buffalo
          papers were amalgamated Dr. Lambert was engaged to contribute a
          series of articles to the "Catholic Union"; he selected as his
          theme the teachings of Robert Ingersoll, the leading American
          agnostic. Ingersoll, though quite ignorant of even natural
          theology or the principles of logic, wild in his assertions, and
          badly informed, was, notwithstanding, gifted with an eloquent,
          witty tongue and facile pen and had wrought great havoc among
          the younger generation of Americans, and the learned attempts of
          non-Catholic writers to silence him were unavailing. In his
          series of articles, published later in book form as "Notes on
          Ingersoll", Dr. Lambert pointed out in familiar language the
          agnostic's multitudinous errors in religion, history, science,
          and even grammar. His method was simple, suited to the mental
          capacity of his untrained readers and so to Ingersoll's. The
          latter failed to reply, and as a result his immense popularity
          waned at once. Since then, wherever the agnostic's writings have
          been propagated, the "Notes on Ingersoll" has provided an
          excellent antidote, and has been utilized largely by
          non-Catholics. Dr. Lambert wrote later his "Tactics of Infidels"
          (Buffalo, 1887), a more scientific work, exposing the methods
          resorted to by the opponents of Christianity. In addition he
          composed "Thesaurus biblicus", a handbook of Scriptural
          references, and "A Reply to Ingersoll's Christmas Sermon";
          edited "Catholic Belief" by Faa di Bruno; and translated "The
          Christian Father", and "Instructions on the Gospels of the
          Year"; but his memory is best assured by his simple and complete
          refutation of Ingersoll. In his last illness he wrote for the
          Eucharistic Congress of Montreal (1910) a paper on "Some popular
          Objections to Belief in the Real Presence", which was read in
          his absence and received the highest praise from the delegates.

          Brief biographical notice in Notes on Ingersoll (London, 1884);
          SMITH in Ave Maria, LXXI (Notre Dame, Indiana, 1910), 705-10.

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   John Lanigan

                                  John Lanigan

          Church historian, b. at Cashel, County Tipperary, Ireland, in
          1758; d. at Finglas, Dublin, 8 July, 1825. He was one of the Ui
          Langachain of Hy Coonagh, near the Crotta Cliach, and the eldest
          son of Thomas Lanigan, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Anne
          Dorkan. He received his early training from his father and in a
          private Protestant Classical school at Cashel, similar Catholic
          schools being forbidden in Ireland at that time by law. In 1776
          he went to the Irish College at Rome to study for the
          priesthood, and after a rapid and brilliant course was ordained.
          By the advice of Pietro Tamburini he left Rome and accepted the
          chair of ecclesiastical history and Hebrew in the University of
          Padua. In 1786 he refused to take part in the famous diocesan
          Synod of Pistoia, though offered the position of theologian to
          the synod. In 1793 he published his "Institutionum biblicarum
          pars prima" (Pavia), a learned work containing much valuable
          matter concerning the history of the books of the Old and New
          Testaments; the two other parts which he had planned were not
          written. On 28 June, 1794, he received the degree of Doctor of
          Divinity from his university. On the Napoleonic invasion two
          years later he returned to Ireland, arriving at Cork destitute.
          His application to Bishop Moylan of Cork for pecuniary
          assistance was unheeded, probably because the bishop suspected
          him of Jansenism owing to his association with Tamburini and the
          Pavian clergy. A similar result following his efforts to be
          accepted in his native archdiocese, he wandered on to Dublin,
          where he was taken in as an assistant priest by the
          vicar-general, Father Hamil, a fellow student of his Roman days.
          Soon afterwards he was appointed professor of Scripture and
          Hebrew in Maynooth College on the recommendation of the
          Archbishops of Armagh and Dublin. Dr. Moylan, however, raised
          difficulties; he proposed that Lanigan should first sign a
          formula used to test the Catholicity of the numerous French
          clergy who were taking refuge in Ireland at that time. Lanigan,
          seeing no justification for this proposal, refused and resigned.

          On 2 May, 1799, Lanigan accepted a position as assistant
          librarian and foreign correspondent of the Royal Dublin Society,
          and began to work on his "Ecclesiastical History of Ireland from
          the first introduction of Christianity among the Irish to the
          beginning of the thirteenth century", which was not, however,
          published till 1822 (4 vols., 8vo, Dublin). This masterly work,
          still the leading authority on its subject, did much to expose
          the inaccuracies of Archdall, Ledwich, Giraldus Cambrensis, and
          other writers on Irish church history. In it Lanigan supports
          the theory of the pagan origin of the Irish round towers. In
          1808 he assisted Edward O'Reilly, William Halliday, and Father
          Paul O'Brien in founding the Gaelic Society of Dublin, the first
          effort in recent times to save the Irish language. He wrote
          frequently to the Press in favour of religious equality for
          Catholics, and fought vigorously against the proposed Royal Veto
          in connection with Irish episcopal elections. In 1813 his health
          began to fail, and he returned to his home at Cashel; he
          recovered sufficiently to resume his duties in Dublin, but
          eventually had to enter a sanatorium at Finglas, where he died.
          His grave in the neighbouring country churchyard is marked by a
          cross, bearing an Irish and a Latin inscription, erected in 1861
          by his literary admirers.

          Besides his writings mentioned above we may cite: "De origine et
          progressu hermeneuticae sacre" (Pavia, 1789); "Saggio sulla
          maniera d'insegnare ai giovani ecclesiastici la scienza de'
          libri sacri" (Pavia), written in vigorous and eloquent language;
          "The Present State. . .of the Church of England and the Means of
          effecting a Reconciliation of the Churches", prefaced to the
          "Protestant Apology for the Roman Catholic Church" (Dublin,
          1809), by "Christianus" [Wm. Talbot]. He prepared for
          publication the first edition of the Breviary printed in
          Ireland, and edited Alban Butler's "Meditations and Discourses"
          (which appeared in 1845). That the humiliation and suffering he
          underwent as a result of Dr. Moylan's suspicions of his
          orthodoxy were undeserved is apparent from Lanigan's writings as
          well as from the testimony of his intimate clerical friends.

          FITZPATRICK, Irish Wits and Worthies (Dublin, 1873); COOPER, in
          Dict. Nat. Biog., s.v.; Dublin Review (Dec., 1847), 489.

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   George Parsons Lathrop

                             George Parsons Lathrop

          Poet, novelist, b. at Honolulu, Hawaii, 25 August, 1851; d. at
          New York, 19 April, 1898. He was educated at New York and
          Dresden, Germany, whence he returned to New York, and decided on
          a literary career. Going to England on a visit he was married in
          London, 11 September, 1871, to Rose, daughter of Nathaniel
          Hawthorne. In 1875 he became associate editor of the "Atlantic
          Monthly", and remained in that position two years, leaving it
          for newspaper work in Boston and New York. His contributions to
          the periodical and daily Press were varied and voluminous. In
          1883 he founded the American Copyright League, which finally
          secured the international copyright law. He was also one of the
          founders of the Catholic Summer School of America. In March,
          1891, he and his wife became Catholics, and were received into
          the Church at New York. After his death his widow, as Mother M.
          Alphonsa, organized a community of Dominican tertiaries, The
          Servants of Relief for Incurable Cancer Patients, who took
          charge of two cancer hospitals at New York. Among his published
          works are: "Rose and Rose-tree" (1875), poems; "A Study of
          Hawthorne" (1876); "Afterglow" (1876), a novel; "Spanish Vistas"
          (1883), a work on travel; "Newport" (1884), a novel; "Dreams and
          Days" (1892), poems; "A Story of Courage" (1894), centenary
          history of the Visitation Convent, Georgetown, D.C. He edited
          (1883) a complete, and the standard, edition of Hawthorne's
          works, and adapted "The Scarlet Letter" for Walter Damrosch's
          opera of that title, which was produced at New York in 1896.

          The Catholic Reading Circle Review (April, 1898); The Catholic
          News; The Freeman's Journal (New York), contemporary files.

          THOMAS F. MEEHAN

   The Leopoldine Society

                             The Leopoldine Society

          Established at Vienna for the purpose of aiding the Catholic
          missions in North America. When the Society for the Propagation
          of Faith was founded at Lyons, in 1822, it did not spread beyond
          the French borders for a considerable time. Other nations were
          not unwilling to cooperate, but were deliberating whether to
          start a similar society of their own or to join the one already
          in existence. At this time, in 1827, Bishop Fenwick of
          Cincinnati, Ohio, sent his vicar-general, Father Rese, to Europe
          to recruit German priests and to obtain assistance for his
          diocese. Father Rese reached Vienna in the latter part of 1828.
          He was received everywhere most cordially and inspired those
          with whom he came in contact with a great interest in the
          American missions. His graphic descriptions of the New World,
          the great possibilities for the Church, the scarcity of priests,
          and the prevailing poverty of the missions awoke a general
          public interest in the welfare of the American missions. To
          strengthen this feeling and encourage the formation of a society
          similar to the French society he published a description of the
          Diocese of Cincinnati ("Abriss der Geschichte des Bisthums
          Cincinnati in Nord-America", Vienna, 1829), an excerpt from
          Father Theodore Badin's work. The Archbishop of Vienna, Leopold
          Maximilian Graf von Firmian, was so well disposed towards the
          noble undertaking that he brought it to the notice of the
          imperial family, Father Rese was granted an audience with the
          emperor, whose brother, Archduke Rudolph, Cardinal Archbishop of
          Olmutz, assumed the protectorate of the missionary work.

          The sanction of the Church was next obtained. Leo XII in the
          Bull "Quamquam plura sint", dated 30 Jan., 1829, approved of the
          nascent society. Meanwhile the founders were busying themselves
          with the internal workings of the society. A public meeting was
          held on 13 March, 1829, at the archiepiscopal palace. Canon
          Joseph Pletz, of the Metropolitan Church of St. Stephen, spoke
          on the propagation of the Gospel and its civilizing influences
          upon the nations of the world. A month later, 15 April, 1829,
          the statutes were adopted. These were drawn up much after the
          pattern of the French society. The only divergent points which
          need be mentioned were that the society was to be known as the
          Leopoldine Society -- Leopoldinen Stiftung -- to perpetuate the
          memory of the Empress of Brazil, Leopoldina, a favourite
          daughter of Francis I and wife of Pedro I; and that the society
          should exist only in Austria-Hungary. On 13 May, 1829, the first
          executive session was held. A pamphlet was designed and in it
          incorporated the oration of Canon Pletz together with the
          statutes and the corresponding regulations. The brochure was
          translated into all the languages spoken in the monarchy. The
          head office was established in the Dominican monastery and Herr
          Anton Carl Lichtenberg became its first actuary and Dr. Caspar
          Wagner its treasurer.

          The seed was sown. Five kreutzers a week -- about two cents --
          was a small contribution; however, little by little the fund
          commenced to swell so that from July to October, 1830, the
          collection amounted to $19,930. On 30 April, 1830, a first draft
          of $10,256.04 was sent to Bishop Fenwick and four months later a
          second one of $5200, "to afford ample help and not to deal out
          the money in small bits and give relief practically to nobody"
          (Berichte der Leopoldinen Stiftung, I). The general interest
          awakened by the society for the American missions not only
          brought out funds but donations of church utensils, Mass
          paraphernalia, paintings, statuary, etc. These objects were
          often donated by members of the imperial house. Directly due to
          the society were many vocations to the missions from among the
          priesthood. First amongst these was the Rev. Frederic Baraga,
          afterwards Bishop of Marquette. His example was followed by [St.
          John] Neumann (afterwards Bishop of Philadelphia), Hatscher,
          Sanderl, Viszoczky, Belleis, Pisbach, Hammer, Kundeck,
          Cvitkovich, Schuh, Levic, Pirec, Skolla, Godec, Krutil, Veranek,
          Burg, Buchmayr, Bayer, Hasslinger, Count Coudenhove, Mrak
          (afterwards Bishop of Marquette), Skopec, Etschmann, and many
          others -- all of whom entered the missions before 1850.

          The beneficiaries of the society are principally the dioceses in
          the United States. Among the older ones Cincinnati has been most
          bountifully considered, but St. Louis, Bardstown, Charleston,
          Philadelphia, Baltimore, Mobile, Boston, Detroit, New York, New
          Orleans, Nashville, Dubuque, Natchez, Vincennes, Richmond,
          Pittsburg, Chicago, St. Paul, Hartford, Milwaukee, Marquette,
          Galveston, Little Rock, received generous support. Then, besides
          the travelling expenses of the different missionaries and
          personal aid to them, religious communities were enabled with
          the society's assistance to send workers to the New World. The
          society's fund built numerous schools and churches and enabled
          many a zealous priest to devote his life to the missions,
          kindling and keeping the light of faith in the hearts of men who
          otherwise must have lived and died without it. The Leopoldine
          Society expended upon the American Catholic missions, from 1830
          to 1910, the sum of 3,402,211 kronen (about 680,500 dollars).
          The society still exists and although its collections are small
          it continues its mission. The contributions chiefly come from
          the Austrian emperor, the Dioceses of Vienna, Sankt Pölten,
          Brun, Seckau, Prague, Königgrätz. Eighty-one official reports,
          "Berichte der Leopoldinen Stiftung", have appeared. These are
          replete with the struggles and glories of the American missions
          and missionaries and invaluable for data in the American church
          history.

          Fondazione Leopoldina (Vienna, 1829); Berichte der Leopoldinen
          Stiftung (Vienna, 1831-1910).

          ANTOINE IVAN REZEK

   Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu

                             Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu

          French publicist, b. at Lisieux, Calvados, in 1842; d. at Paris,
          15 June, 1912. After publishing in 1866 a romance entitled "Une
          troupe de[s] comediens", a kind of historical romance dealing
          with the Italian risorgimento, he directed his attention to
          political and historical studies. His articles on Napoleon III,
          Victor Emmanuel, and Pius IX, collected in 1879 in a volume
          entitled, "Un empereur, un roi, un pape, une restauration", are
          very important for the history of the second French Empire. His
          article in the "Revue des Deux Mondes" (1 Dec., 1874) on the
          restoration of historical monuments was a most original protest
          against the false tendencies which impelled Viollet-le-Duc and
          his disciples, under pretext of restoration, to rebuild the
          Gothic cathedral according to certain preconceived systems,
          instead of making the necessary repairs with conscientiousness
          and moderation. Leroy-Beaulieu's three volumes entitled
          "L'empire des tsars et les Russes" (1883-87) are an important
          work: the information they contain with regard to the Russian
          religion and the various sects scattered throughout the Slavic
          empire will long retain its value. His work on Milutin gives a
          stirring account of the emancipation of the serfs under
          Alexander II. He is likewise the author of detailed studies on
          the Liberal Catholics of France in the nineteenth century, and
          his book entitled "La papauté, le socialisme, et la democratie"
          was the first to welcome Leo XIII's Encyclical "Rerum Novarum".
          In principles he was opposed to all such doctrines which he
          called doctrines of hate; in 1897 he gave a conference against
          Antisemitism at the Institut Catholique of Paris; in 1903, when
          the policy of anticlericalism dealt a serious blow in the Levant
          to the religious influence of France and the protectorate of the
          missions he sounded an alarm in the "Revue des Deux Mondes".

          Though much attached to all ideas of liberty, Leroy-Beaulieu did
          not share the blind enthusiasm of the Liberals of the first half
          of the nineteenth century for the principles of the Revolution;
          he was able to form a critical opinion of the liberalism and
          individualism which had proceeded from the Revolution, and his
          admiration for the Declaration of the Rights of Man did not
          prevent him from asserting in his book, "La révolution et le
          libéralisme", that "the idea of duty should be restored to its
          place beside that of right". In 1906 he became director of the
          Free School of Political Science, where he had long been
          teaching, and he retained this position till his death. He had
          belonged to the Académie des Sciences Morales since 1887.

          CHARMES in Revue des Deux Mondes (1 July, 1912); FAGNIEZ in
          Reforme sociale (16 July, 1912); DE QUIRIELLE in Revue
          hebdomadaire (13 July, 1912).

          GEORGES GOYAU

   Jean-Francois Lesueur

                             Jean-François Lesueur

          Composer, b. at Drucat-Plessiel, near Abbeville, 15 Feb., 1760;
          d. at Paris, 6 October, 1837. He came of an ancient and
          illustrious family of Picardy, his great uncle being the
          celebrated painter, Eustache Lesueur. At seven he became a
          chorister at Abbeville. From 1774 to 1779 he studied music at
          the College of Amiens, then became music-master at the cathedral
          of Séez, and later assistant-master at the Church of the Holy
          Innocents at Paris, where he studied under Abbé Roze. He was
          appointed music-master at Dijon in 1781, at Le Mans in 1782, at
          Tours in 1783, and at the Holy Innocents, Paris, in 1784. In
          1786 he competed for the musical directorship of
          Notre-Dame-de-Paris and received the appointment. Allowed by the
          chapter to install a complete orchestra, he at once proceeded to
          put in practice his novel ideas concerning sacred music. It was
          his aim to arouse devotion by an appeal to the imagination, and
          he so far carried out his theories as to preface one of his
          masses with an operatic overture; this caused a stir in the
          musical world. In 1787 came an anonymous attack on his
          compositions and his methods, to which Lesueur replied in a
          pamphlet entitled "Exposé d'une musique imitative et
          particulière à chaque solennité" (Paris, 1787). At this period
          he became an abbé, but never received Holy orders. The chapter
          of Notre-Dame having reduced the orchestra because of the heavy
          expense, Lesueur was unable to produce his masses, and resigned
          his directorship in 1788. He withdrew to the country home of his
          friend M. Bochart de Champigny, where he remained four years,
          working on his compositions. In 1793 he produced a three-act
          opera, "La Caverne", at the Théâtre Feydeau, Paris. Its success
          was immediate and brilliant and it was followed at the same
          theatre by "Paul et Virginie" (13 Jan., 1794) and "Télémaque"
          (May, 1796), which latter had been accepted by the Royal Academy
          of Music.

          He was appointed professor in the Ecole de la Garde Nationale,
          21 Nov., 1793, and an inspector of instruction at the
          Conservatoire de Musique from its foundation in 1795. On the
          rejection of two of his operas, "Ossian, ou les Bardes" and "La
          mort d'Adam" (which had been accepted by the Academy), in favour
          of Catel's "Semiramis", Lesueur published anonymously a pamphlet
          entitled "Projet d'un plan général de l'instruction musicale en
          France", in which he violently attacked not only the methods of
          instruction followed at the Conservatoire, but his rival Catel
          and Catel's patron, the director of the Conservatoire. Lesueur's
          dismissal followed (23 Sept., 1802), and the cessation of his
          salary had brought him to the verge of extreme poverty when he
          was appointed maître de chapelle to the First Consul. The
          musician was now free to produce his "Ossian"; its first
          performance (10 July, 1804) was a great success and inaugurated
          the new title of the theatre as Académie Impériale. He was
          rewarded with the Cross of the Legion of Honour. For the
          emperor's coronation he composed a mass and a Te Deum. He
          collaborated with Persuis in his "L'inauguration du temple de la
          victoire" (2 Jan., 1807) and "Le Triomphe de Trajan" (23 Oct.,
          1807). On 21 March, 1809, he produced "La mort d'Adam et son
          apothéose", which proved to be lacking in dramatic action. In
          1813 Lesueur succeeded Grétry at the Institut, and in the
          following year was appointed superintendent and composer of the
          chapel of Louis XVIII, retaining this post until the suppression
          of the chapel in 1830. On 1 Jan., 1818, he was appointed
          professor of composition at the Conservatoire, his classes being
          large and numbering distinguished members, of whom the following
          gained the prix de Rome: Bourgeois, Ermel, Paris, Guiraud,
          Berlioz, Prévost, Ambroise Thomas, Elwart, Boulanger, Besozzi,
          Boisselot (who became Lesueur's son-in-law), and Gounod. Lesueur
          wrote the Te Deum and other music for the coronation of Charles
          X at Reims (29 May, 1825). His other compositions were: three
          operas which had been accepted by the Opéra but were never
          performed in his lifetime, "Tyrhée", "Artaxerse", and "Alexandre
          à Babylone"; a Christmas mass or oratorio (1826); a solemn mass
          for four voices, choir, and orchestra; two Passion oratorios
          (1829); "Rachel", an oratorio; "Super flumina Babylonis" (1833);
          "Ruth et Booz", oratorio; a cantata for the marriage of the
          Emperor Napoleon I. He also wrote "Notice sur la Melopée, la
          Rhythmopée, et les grandes caractères de la musique ancienne"
          (Paris, 1793); and an unpublished treatise on the music of the
          Greeks. Lesueur had both originality and genius, and, while it
          is impossible to rank him with Cherubini and Méhul, it is
          nevertheless true that the French school of the early nineteenth
          century is greatly indebted to his initiative and passion for
          his art.

          BERLIOZ, Les musiciens (Paris, 1870), 59, 68; CHOUQUET in Dict.
          of music and musicians (New York, 1906).

          BLANCHE M. KELLY

   Linkoping

                           Ancient See of Linköping

          (LINCOPIA; LINCOPENSIS.)

          Located in Sweden; originally included Östergötland, the Islands
          of Gotland and Öland, and Smaaland. The district of Värend in
          Smaaland was taken from Linköping and formed into the Diocese of
          Vexiö about 1160. From 990 to 1100 the Diocese of Skara embraced
          the whole country of the Goths (Gauthiod); it was then divided
          between those of Skara and Linköping. The first three bishops of
          Linköping were Herbert, Richard, and Gisle (c. 1138-48). Then
          came Stenar, who apparently resigned in 1160 and subsequently
          became Bishop of Vexiö; Kol (c. 1160-95), who was killed at
          Rotala, Esthonia, 8 August, 1220, when fighting against the
          heathen; and Benedict (1220-37), the first of a long line of
          pious and munificent prelates, who built and endowed the fine
          cathedral, which had been begun in 1150 but was not finished at
          the reformation. Among these was Blessed Nicholas Hermansson
          (1374-91); educated at the University of Orleans, he had been
          tutor to Charles and Birger, the sons of St. Bridget, whose body
          he received when it was brought to Vadstena by St. Catherine. He
          composed a beautiful Office in honour of St. Bridget, which
          included the hymn "Rosa rorans bonitatem". The last Catholic
          bishop of Linköping was Hans Brask (b. 1464; bishop, 1513-27; d.
          30 July, 1539), the valiant champion of the Old Learning, who
          was compelled to leave his diocese in 1527 owing to the adoption
          of Lutheranism as the state religion at the Diet of Westeraas.

          The cathedral of Linköping, the abbey church of Vadstena, and
          the numerous interesting churches on the Island of Gotland bear
          witness to a splendid Catholic past. Of the numerous provincial
          and diocesan synods held in the Diocese of Linköping the Council
          of Skenninge was the most important. The papal legate, Cardinal
          William of Sabina, presided and the celibacy of the clergy was
          strongly enforced. The following religious institutions were set
          up in the diocese between the twelfth and the sixteenth
          centuries: The cathedral chapter, which consisted at the time of
          the Reformation of a dean, an archdeacon, a sub-dean, nine
          canons, and fifteen other prebendaries; the Cistercians, who had
          three houses for men, the abbeys of Alvastra, the mother-house
          of the Cistercian Order in Sweden, in Östergötland, Nydala in
          Smaaland, both founded in 1143, and Gutvalla (Roma) in Gotland;
          also four nunneries, Vreta (1160), Askaby, Byarum, dissolved
          about 1250 and the nuns transferred to Sko (Upland), and
          Solberga (Gotland); the Brigittines, who had the great Abbey of
          Vadstena; the Dominicans, who possessed priories at Skenninge
          (1220?), Visby (1240), and Calmar, as well as nunneries at
          Skenninge (1260) and Calmar (1286). There were hospitals at
          Linköping, Visby (2), Söderköping (2) Skenninge (2) Calmar (2),
          Norrabygd (Uknabäck), and on the Island of Öland. Most of these
          institutions were destroyed at the Reformation.

          BUMPUS, The Cathedrals of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark (London,
          1908), 187- 96, 220-66; Scriptores rerum svecicarum, III
          (Upsala, 1876), pt. ii, 102-12, 282- 98; REUTERDAHL, Svenska
          kyrkans Historia (5 vols., Lund, 1838-66); MARTIN, Gustave Vasa
          et la reforme en Suede (Paris, 1906); SCHUCK, Rosa Rorans. Ett
          Birgitta-officium in Acta Universitatis Lundensis (Lund, 9102);
          Meddelanden fra det literatur-historiska Seminariet, 37-51;
          ARNELL, Bidrag till Biskop Hans Brasks Lefnadsteckning
          (Stockholm, 1904); LUNDQVIST, Bidrag till Kannedomen om de
          svenska Domkapitten (Stockholm, 1897); NILSSON, Klostervasendet
          inom Linköpings stift till och med aar 1344 (Linköping, 1879);
          HALL, Bidrag till Kannedomen om Cistercienserorden i Sverige
          (Gefle, 1899), school programme; REUTERDAHL, Statuta synodalia
          veteris ecclesiae Sveo-Gothicae (Lund, 1841); Skrifter utgifna
          af Kyrkohistoriska Foreningen, II; Synodalstatuter, ed. GUMMERUS
          (Stockholm, 1902).

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Lithuanians in the United States

                        Lithuanians in the United States

          The Lithuanians (Lietuvys; adjective, lietuviskas) are a people
          of Russia, occupying the territory of ancient Lithuania
          (Lietuva), now the present Governments or Provinces of Suwalki,
          Kovno, Vilna, Grodno, Vitebsk, Minsk, and Mohileff. Between 1300
          and 1600 they formed an independent kingdom, but in 1500 their
          kingdom became practically united with Poland under a common
          sovereign and in 1569 the Diet of Lublin decreed a permanent
          union of Poland and Lithuania into a single kingdom with a
          Polish elective king. After the conquest and partition of Poland
          in 1795 Lithuania became separate Russian provinces, apart from
          Poland, and so continues, with the exception of Suwalki, down to
          the present time. Although the Lithuanian people were first
          under Polish and then under Russian domination they nevertheless
          preserved their nationality and language, and in late years
          their language has had a great revival. They are not a Slavic
          people, although surrounded by the Poles and the Russians. They
          are the descendants of the original races dwelling on the shores
          of the Baltic Sea but have of course absorbed many Slavic traits
          and expressions. Their language is unlike the Polish or the
          Russian, the nouns and adjectives having but two genders
          (masculine and feminine) unlike the three in Russian and Polish;
          and unlike them it has three numbers: singular, dual, and
          plural; and has an elaborate verbal inflection instead of the
          simpler one of the Slavic tongues. It has no article, not even
          the suffix forms used in Russian and Bulgarian.

  IMMIGRATION

          The famine in Lithuania in 1867-68 drove many Lithuanians
          abroad. Some of them crossed the Atlantic and landed at New
          York. The first arrivals worked on farms around New York City or
          in brickyards along the Hudson River and in the Catskills. Later
          on they were attracted to north-eastern Pennsylvania to build
          railroads and they eventually went into the anthracite coal
          mines around Shamokin, Shenandoah, and other towns. Many of them
          went to Chicago after the great fire in that city in 1872.
          Others established themselves in the tailoring business in New
          York, Brooklyn, and Baltimore. Even at the present time
          Lithuanian tailors are comparatively numerous in large cities
          along the Atlantic coast, including Philadelphia and Boston. In
          the early eighties of the last century a permanent drop in the
          prices of Lithuanian rye and flax coupled with the
          overpopulation of the country caused an exodus of the young and
          enterprising men towards the large cities such as Riga, St.
          Petersburg, etc., but this large flow of emigration was
          immediately diverted towards America. Beginning with 1890 the
          Lithuanians began to come in large numbers, until at present it
          is estimated that nearly one-fifth of the nation is on American
          soil. Lithuanian immigration during the past decade shows the
          following yearly figures: in 1900, 10,311; 1905, 18,604; 1907,
          25,884; 1910, 22,714; 1912, 24,119; and it is probable that many
          of them have been reckoned in the immigration reports as Poles
          instead of Lithuanians. Conservative estimates place the number
          of Lithuanians in the United States in 1912 at approximately
          600,000, including the immigrants and the native-born.

          In 1909 the Lithuanians of America celebrated the fortieth
          anniversary of Lithuanian immigration to the United States. They
          are distributed over large areas of the north-eastern states,
          being settled in the industrial centres of New England, and in
          and around New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Pittsburg,
          Cleveland, and Chicago (in the latter city about 70,000). They
          are in large numbers in the anthracite coal fields of
          Pennsylvania (about 60,000), and are likewise settled in the
          soft coal regions. Small numbers of them are settled over the
          western states. Several hundred have settled in Montreal,
          Canada. Large Polish centres, such as Milwaukee, Detroit, and
          Buffalo, have had but little or no attraction for them. There
          are comparatively few Lithuanian farmers in America and these
          have not been very successful. All attempts to colonize them in
          Arkansas, Illinois, Wisconsin, and New York have failed.
          Generally speaking, the Lithuanians prefer to be employed in
          factories, closed shops, and mines, and seem to dislike work in
          the open air. They have not met with any great success in
          business enterprises and there are few rich persons among them.

  RELIGION

          In order to understand properly the development of religious
          life among the Lithuanians in America some facts in their
          national life should be recalled. The Lithuanians received their
          Christianity from Poland in 1386, through the conversion of King
          Jagello, who became Regent of Poland upon his marriage.
          Subsequent political union with Poland had a disastrous and
          depressing effect upon the national development of the
          Lithuanians. For five centuries they were more or less polonized
          by the nobility and land-owning classes and even through the
          Church, and this process is not entirely at an end but is even
          reinforced by Russian pressure. Lithuanians were made to believe
          that they were a sort of inferior race and that their language
          was fitting only for a pagan people. Attempts to awaken their
          national consciousness in 1850 and 1860 and to create a national
          literature were suddenly arrested by the Russian Government,
          which in 1864 absolutely prohibited the publication and
          distribution of Lithuanian books printed in Latin characters.
          From that time the Lithuanians were deprived for over forty
          years of literature printed in their own language, since they
          absolutely refused to adopt the Russian characters. Even
          prayer-books and other literature had to be printed abroad and
          secretly introduced into Lithuania, where they were often
          confiscated by the Government and burned. Their only avenue
          towards literary and religious development was chiefly Polish
          during that period.

          The Lithuanian national movement started in 1883 when Dr. John
          Basanavicius in conjunction with some other enthusiasts in
          Prussia began to publish a patriotic newspaper called "Ausra"
          (The Dawn). In a short time many Lithuanians -- both clergy and
          laity -- were thoroughly aroused and rallied to the support and
          ideas of the paper. This was the beginning of a national
          movement which was destined to play a distinct role even in the
          religious life of the nation. The most difficult task for the
          young patriots was to draw the Lithuanians away from the Polish
          language and Polish ideals. Unfortunately some leaders of the
          national movement who had been educated in the anti-Catholic
          Russian schools soon brought an anti-religious propaganda into
          this national movement, on the ground that everything taken from
          Polish sources, -- even the Catholic religion -- was detrimental
          to the Lithuanian nation. So hand in hand with this national
          awakening there came into play an atheistic teaching which soon
          estranged the clergy and laity. Even now when Lithuanians use
          the word "national" it is often taken to mean something which is
          non-Catholic or non-religious. And this is why Protestantism and
          the so-called "independent" movements have taken no root among
          the Lithuanians, although in a few places under peculiar local
          conditions there have been attempts to found parishes along the
          lines of the Polish "national" or "independent" churches.

          When Lithuanians began to come to America there had been no
          national awakening among them. They then leaned towards the
          Poles and built churches jointly with the Poles. The first
          purely Lithuanian congregation was organized in 1885 at New
          York, but it ceased to exist the following year owing to the
          unfavourable attitude taken by its organizer, John Szlupas, who
          was a freethinker although secretary of the parish. However
          there is now at New York the Church of Our Lady of Vilna. The
          first Lithuanian church (St. Casimir) was built by Father A.
          Burba in Plymouth, Pennsylvania, in 1889. It was undertaken when
          the Poles refused on account of his nationality to accept him as
          rector of a Plymouth church which had been built some years
          previously principally by the Lithuanians and had always
          hitherto been in charge of a Lithuanian priest. Soon afterwards
          separate Lithuanian churches were built in other places: St.
          Casimir at Pittston, Pa. (1890); St. Joseph, Mahanoy City, Pa.
          (1891); St. John Baptist, Baltimore, Md. (1891); St. George,
          Chicago, Ill. (1892); etc. At present (1913) there are in the
          United States 72 exclusively Lithuanian parishes with resident
          priests, and one (St. Casimir) in Montreal, Canada. There are
          also about 15 churches and chapels attended from adjacent
          parishes and others in the course of erection.

  SCHOOLS

          In the beginning of 1913 the Lithuanians in America had one
          academy for girls and 22 day-schools taught by the Sisters of
          St. Casimir, Sisters of the Holy Family of Nazareth, Sisters of
          the Holy Ghost, and the Dominican Sisters; some ten schools had
          lay teachers. Nearly 5000 children attend these schools. In 1907
          Bishop J. W. Shanahan of Harrisburg got permission from Rome to
          found in his diocese the Institute of St. Casimir, the object of
          which was to teach Lithuanian schools, take care of Lithuanian
          orphans and the like. The first three sisters came from
          Ingenbohl, Switzerland, to Mount St. Mary's Seminary of the
          Sisters of the Immaculate Heart at Scranton, Pa., in 1905 and
          made their profession there in August, 1907. Immediately
          afterwards they went to Mt. Carmel, Pa., where they started a
          Lithuanian school whilst other postulants were left for training
          in Scranton. In 1910 the Sisters of St. Casimir moved to Chicago
          and occupied their newly-built mother-house at the corner of
          West 67th and South Rockwell Streets. There are at present
          (1913) 17 professed sisters, 25 novices, and 25 postulants and
          aspirants. They also have in the mother-house an academy for
          girls, both a boarding- and day-school. So far they have four
          parochial schools under their care: Chicago, Waukegan,
          Philadelphia, and Mt. Carmel. The St. Casimir Institute is still
          under the general charge of the Sisters of the Immaculate Heart.
          Its finances are supervised by Father A. Staniukynas who has
          been interested in the institute since 1905, and on giving up
          parish work in 1906 he has ever since devoted all his time and
          energy to the growth of this educational institution.

  SOCIETIES

          About forty per cent of the Lithuanians belong to some kind of
          organization. Every parish has one or more Catholic beneficial
          societies; they are often Catholic only so far as the fulfilment
          of Easter duty is demanded from their members under penalty of
          expulsion from the society. The Lithuanians of America since
          1886 had a general alliance of their societies, but in 1901 it
          split into two branches, the Catholic and the National. At
          present the Catholic branch has about 6500 members, while the
          National has about 6000. In Sept., 1912, Lithuanian Catholic
          beneficial societies at their convention in Newark, N.J., formed
          still another alliance, whose membership has not yet been
          reported. In April, 1906, the Lithuanian Roman Catholic
          Federation was formed but it has not been active since 1908. In
          the New England states a Lithuanian Young People's (men and
          women) Federation is being formed. The Lithuanian Catholic
          Temperance Association was formed in 1909, but in 1911 a large
          number seceded and formed a separate Confederation of Total
          Abstainers, membership over 1000. The Lithuanian Roman Catholic
          Priests' Association, established 5 May, 1909, devotes its
          energy to the publication of Catholic literature. It issues a
          weekly paper "Draugas" (The Companion) in Chicago. "The
          Apostleship of Prayer" under the direction of Rev. P.
          Saurusaitis of Waterbury, Conn., circulates in many parishes.
          There is also a Lithuanian Catholic Educational Society,
          "Motinele", which was founded in 1900. There are other societies
          which are socialistic, atheistic in their aims, or devoid of any
          religious character whatever.

  PERIODICALS

          There are more than twenty-five Lithuanian periodicals published
          in America, but only two weeklies, "Draugas" in Chicago and
          "Zvaigzde" (The Star) in Philadelphia, and one monthly, "Sviesa"
          (The Light) in Waterbury, are strictly speaking Catholic
          publications. The Lithuanian publications of the largest
          circulation are "Lietuva" (Lithuania) of Chicago, "Keleivis"
          (The Wanderer) of Boston, and "Vienybe Lietuvniku" (Lithuanian
          Union) of Brooklyn, but these are all non-Catholic. Five of
          these Lithuanian journals are more or less anticlerical, six are
          rabidly atheistic and socialistic, one free-thought, whilst the
          remainder of the non-Catholic ones are "national", permeated
          with irreligion, although not openly antagonistic to the faith.

          JONAS, Lietuviai Amerikoje (Chicago, 1897); KAUPAS, The
          Lithuanians in America in Charities (New York, 1905); AN-KA, Is
          Amerikos lietuviu gyvenimo in Vilniaus Zinios (Vilna,
          1905-1907); Reports of the Commissioner of Immigration
          (1900-12).

          A.B. KAUPAS

   Luis de Lossada

                                Luis de Lossada

          Philosopher, b. at Quiroga, Asturias, Spain in 1681; d. at
          Salamanca, in 1748. He entered the Society of Jesus in 1698,
          and, after completing his studies, taught theology, Scripture,
          and philosophy with great success at Salamanca. His first
          publication was the "Vida y virtudes del P.G. Dutari" (1720).
          One year later he published his "Institutiones dialecticae",
          commonly styled "Summulae". This book was a worthy introduction
          to his "Cursus philosophici Regalis Collegii Salmanticensis, in
          tres partes divisus", which he published in 1724 (last edition,
          10 vols., Barcelona, 1883). It discusses all the branches of
          philosophy with great erudition and clarity. Lossada generally
          follows Suarez, though in some points he departs from his
          master. Urráburu was an admirer of Lossada's "egregium et
          gravissimum cursum" (Institutiones philosophicae, I, 8777), and
          followed him very closely. Lossada took part in the famous
          discussion on the descent of Saint Dominic, and his learned
          writings on this point were published by the Bollandists in
          their "Acta Sanctorum" of 1755. The satirical vein in Lossada's
          works led him to be credited with Isla's famous novel "Fray
          Gerundio". Lossada and Isla wrote together the curious and
          amusingly absurd work "La juventúd triunfante".

          DE YEDRA, Breve noticia de la vida del P.L. de Lossada
          (Salamanca, 1745); FITA, Galeria de Jesuitas ilustres (Madrid,
          1880); RUIZ, Ensayos criticos (Lugo, 1868), 366;
          SOMMERVOGEL,Bibliotheque de la compagnie de Jesus; AMADO,
          Historia de la educacion y de la pedagogia (Barcelona, 1911).

          WILLIAM FURLONG
     __________________________________________________________________

   Macarius

                                    Macarius

          The name of two celebrated contemporary Nitrian monks of the
          fourth century:

          Macarius the Alexandrian

          Also called ho politikos either in reference to his city birth
          or polished manners; died about 405. He was a younger
          contemporary of Macarius the Egyptian, but there is no reason
          for confounding or identifying him with his older namesake. More
          than any of the hermits of the time he exemplified the spirit of
          emulation characteristic of this stage of monasticism. He would
          be excelled by none in his austerities. Palladius asserts "if he
          ever heard of any one having performed a work of asceticism, he
          was all on fire to do the same". Because the monks of Tabennisi
          eschewed cooked food in Lent he abstained for seven years. Once,
          in expiation of a fault, he lay for six months in a morass,
          exposed to the attacks of the African gnats, whose sting can
          pierce even the hide of a wild boar. When he returned to his
          companions he was so much disfigured that he could be recognized
          only by his voice. He is credited with the composition of a rule
          for monks, though his authorship is now generally denied.

          Macarius the Egyptian (or "Macarius the Elder")

          One of the most famous of the early Christian solitaries, born
          about A.D. 300; died 390. He was a disciple of St. Anthony and
          founder of a monastic community in the Scetic desert. Through
          the influence of St. Anthony he abandoned the world at the age
          of thirty, and ten years later was ordained a priest. The fame
          of his sanctity drew many followers, and his monastic settlement
          at his death numbered thousands. The community, which took up
          its residence in the Nitrian and Scetic deserts, was of the
          semi-eremitical type. The monks were not bound by any fixed
          rule; their cells were close together, and they met for Divine
          worship only on Saturdays or Sundays. The principle which held
          them together was one of mutual helpfulness, and the authority
          of the elders was recognized not as that of monastic superiors
          in the strict sense of the word but rather as that of guides and
          models of perfection. In a community whose members were striving
          to excel in mortification and renunciation the pre-eminence of
          Macarius was generally recognized. Several monasteries in the
          Libyan desert still bear the name of Macarius. Fifty homilies
          have been preserved which bear his name, but these and an
          "Epistle to the monks", with other dubious pieces, cannot be
          ascribed to him with absolute certainty.

          [ Note: Saint Macarius the Younger (the Alexandrian) is named in
          the Roman Martyrology on 2 January, Saint Macarius the Elder
          (the Egyptian) on 15 January; in Byzantine liturgical calendars,
          both Saints are commemorated on 19 January.]

          Hist. Lausiaca, xvii; Hist. monachorum, xxviii; a Coptic Life
          was edited by AMELINEAU in Monuments pour servir a l'histoire de
          l'Egypte chretienne au IVe, Ve, VIe et VIIe siecles (Paris,
          1895), Syriac tr. by BEDJAN in Acta sanctorum et martyrum
          syriace, V, 1895; BUTLER, The Lausiac History of Palladius, II,
          193; ZOCKLER, Askese u. Monchthum (Frankfurt, 1897), 226. For
          the homilies ascribed to MACARIUS see P.L., XXXIV, 409 sqq.; cf.
          BARDENHEWER, Patrology, tr. SHAHAN (St. Louis, 1908), 266 sqq.

          PATRICK J. HEALY

   Bartholomew MacCarthy

                             Bartholomew MacCarthy

          Irish scholar and chronologist, b. at Conna, Ballynoe, Co. Cork,
          12 Dec., 1843; d. at Inniscarra, Co. Cork, 6 Mar., 1904. He was
          educated at Mount Melleray Seminary, Co. Waterford, and at St.
          Colman's College, Fermoy, Co. Cork, afterwards studying at Rome,
          where he was ordained in 1869. On his return to Ireland he was
          appointed professor of Classics at St. Colman's, where he
          remained about three years. He then went as curate to
          Mitchelstown (where he was at the time of the famous
          Mitchelstown Massacre), and afterwards to Macroom and Youghal.
          In 1895 he was appointed parish priest of Inniscarra, near Cork,
          where he died. He was the author of the following works: (1)
          "Essays on various Early Irish Ecclesiastical Fragments",
          written while he was in Rome and published mostly anonymously in
          the "Irish Ecclesiastical Record" (1864 sqq.); (2) "The Stowe
          Missal", perhaps his most celebrated work, published in the
          "Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy", XXVII (1886),
          135-268, in which he establishes the date of Moelchaich's
          recension as about 750 or at least the eighth century, and
          proves that the so-called Middle Irish corruptions can be
          paralleled from old Irish MSS., none of which are later than the
          ninth century; he also separates the earlier portion of the text
          into (a) the original Mass, dating from at least A.D. 500,
          called "Missa Patricii" in the "Book of Armagh" (A.D. 807), and
          (b) later augments and Roman contents; (3) Four Dissertations on
          the Codex Palatino-Vaticanus, No. 830 (Chronica Mariani Scotti),
          published in the Todd Lecture Series of the Royal Irish Academy,
          III (1892), illustrated by studies on old Irish Metric, the
          Synchronisms from the "Book of Ballymote", Paschal computations,
          and various Irish historical documents; (4) "New Textual Studies
          on the Tripartite Life of St. Patrick", published in the
          "Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy", XXIX, 183 sqq., in
          which he proves that portion of the material of the "Vita
          Tripartita" must date back to the middle of the sixth century;
          (5) "The Annals of Ulster". On the death of William M.
          Hennessey, Dr. MacCarthy was asked by the Government to continue
          the editing of this most important collection of Irish Annals in
          the Rolls Series. He published vols. II (1893), III (1895), and
          IV (1901). In the introduction to the fourth and final volume of
          these annals he treats in detail of various important questions
          connected with the history of chronology among the nations of
          western Europe. Of peculiar interest are his discussions of the
          ancient Paschal Cycle of 84 years and other Paschal computations
          in vogue in Ireland, the origin of A.D. dating in Irish annals,
          the methods of rectifying errors in the same, and the history of
          the various British or Irish falsifications which appeared
          during the disputes regarding Easter in the insular churches of
          the West, such as the "Acts of Caesarea", the "Athanasian
          Tractate", the "Book of Anatolius", and the "Epistle" of Cyril.

          MacCarthy was a man of great ability and wide learning and was
          recognized as one of the foremost of Irish scholars and as the
          highest authority on all matters of Irish chronology, especially
          on those touching the Paschal question. A few months before his
          death he had been chosen by the Government on the recommendation
          of the Council of the Royal Irish Academy to edit the "Annals of
          Tighearnach". As a critic he was excessively inclined to fault-
          finding. He often spoke slightingly of the labours of his
          predecessors, for instance of John Colgan, O.S.F., the O'Clerys,
          Eugene O'Curry, etc., while his carping criticisms of
          contemporary scholars often led to warm discussions (cf. "Irish
          Ecclesiastical Record", 1883, and "Gaelic Journal", I, 8, 263).
          A rather bitter letter of his criticising a favourable review of
          John Salmon's "Ancient Irish Church as a Witness to Catholic
          Doctrine" in the "Irish Ecclesiastical Record" (August, 1897,
          166-170) led to a learned controversy between these two Catholic
          scholars, which was carried on in that periodical the following
          year. At the same time it cannot be denied that his extensive
          knowledge and critical acumen contributed very much to the
          elucidation of many an obscure point in Irish history both
          ecclesiastical and profane.

          Irish Catholic Directory (1870-1905); Minutes of the Royal Irish
          Academy (Session, 1903-04); Gaelic Journal, I, II; Irish
          Ecclesiastical Record (1864- 1898); and the various works of the
          author.

          JOHN MACERLEAN

   Justin McCarthy

                                Justin McCarthy

          Irish politician, journalist, novelist, and historian, b. at
          Cork, 22 Nov., 1830; d. at Folkestone, England, 24 June, 1912.
          He was the son of Michael McCarthy, and was educated at a
          private school in his native city. At the age of eighteen he
          obtained a position on the literary staff of the "Cork
          Examiner". In 1853 he went to Liverpool as a journalist; in 1860
          became Parliamentary reporter of the London "Morning Star",
          which he edited later (1864-68). From 1868 till 1871 he lectured
          with great success throughout the United States of America and
          was one of the assistant editors of the New York "Independent".
          On his return to England he contributed frequently to the
          "Nineteenth Century", the "Fortnightly Review", and the
          "Contemporary Review", and for many years was leader writer for
          the London "Daily News". From 1879 till 1896 he was a member of
          the British Parliament, representing the Irish constituencies of
          County Longford, Derry City, and North Longford. In November,
          1880, he joined the Irish Land League, which won so many
          victories for the Catholic peasantry; two years later he became
          chairman of the National Land and Labour League of Great
          Britain. In 1886 he revisited the United States. From 1890 till
          1896 he was chairman of the Irish Parliamentary party in
          succession to Parnell, having previously been vice-chairman for
          many years. His courtesy and moderation won him the respect of
          all parties in Parliament. Though participating so actively in
          the political life of Ireland, McCarthy took more interest in
          letters than in politics. His first novel, "The Waterdale
          Neighbours", appeared in 1867, and was followed by about twenty
          others, many of which are still popular. Of these the chief are:
          "Dear Lady Disdain" (1875); "A Fair Saxon" (1873); "Miss
          Misanthrope" (1877); and "The Dictator" (1893). Other
          publications were: "Con Amore", a volume of essays (1868), and
          biographies of Sir Robert Peel (1891), Leo XIII (1896), and
          Gladstone (1897). McCarthy's popularity as a writer depends
          rather on his historical writings, which are always lucid,
          forceful, and wonderfully free from party spirit. Of these works
          the most important are: "History of our own Times" (7 vols.,
          London, 1879- 1905), dealing with the events from the year 1830
          to the death of Queen Victoria and supplemented by
          "Reminiscences of an Irishman" (1899); "A short History of our
          own Times" (1888); "The Epoch of Reform, 1830-1850" (London,
          1874); "History of the Four Georges" (4 vols., 1884-1901), of
          which vols. 3 and 4 were written in collaboration with his son,
          Justin Huntly McCarthy, well-known as a novelist and
          play-writer; "Ireland and her Story" (1903); "Modern England"
          (1899); "Rome in Ireland" (1904). Failing health and old age
          could not induce McCarthy to lay down his pen, and even as late
          as November, 1911, he published his "Irish Recollections",
          describing with his wonted charm the events of his earlier life.
          He was an ardent advocate of Catholic rights, and, though he had
          been indifferent for many years, in his old age he returned to
          the practices of his religion.

          McCARTHY, Irish Recollections (London, 1911); IDEM,
          Reminiscences of an Irishman (London, 1899); IDEM, An Irishman's
          Story (London, 1904); The Times (London, 26 April, 1912);
          O'CONNOR, Justin McCarthy in Amer. Cath. Quart. Rev, XXXVII
          (Philadelphia, 1912), 387-407.

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   Heber MacMahon

                                 Heber MacMahon

          ( Also EMER or EVER).

          Bishop of Clogher, Ireland, and patriotic leader, born at
          Farney, County Monaghan, 1600; executed at Enniskillen in 1650;
          son of Turlogh MacMahon and his wife Eva O'Neill, and nephew of
          Sir Patrick MacArt MacMahon. His family, having become
          impoverished by a bill of attainder confiscating the land of
          those who had struggled for Ireland's liberty, withdrew to
          Killybegs, and Heber received his early education in the
          Franciscan convent at Donegal, some twenty miles away. He went
          to the Irish College at Douai in 1617 and later to Louvain,
          where he studied under Hugh MacCaghwell, was ordained in 1625,
          after which he returned to the Diocese of Clogher. He laboured
          there for some years with great zeal and fruit among his flock
          who had been despoiled of their lands, robbed of their churches,
          and forced to worship secretly in the mountains, and soon he was
          appointed vicar-general. On 10 Feb., 1642, he was nominated to
          the See of Down and Connor and was present at the Synod of Kells
          in that year. Before his consecration, however, he was
          transferred to Clogher, 2 June, 1643. When the struggle for
          freedom began in 1641 he became a steadfast adherent of Owen Roe
          O'Neill, and energetically supported the papal envoys, Scarampi
          in 1643 and Rinuccini in 1645, in opposition to Ormonde and the
          majority of the Supreme Council of the Irish, whom he believed
          to be sacrificing the interests of religion for the sake of
          peace. In 1647 the opponents of Rinuccini endeavoured to get rid
          of MacMahon by sending him on a mission to France, which,
          however, he refused to accept. In April, 1648, he condemned the
          truce with Inchiquin as inimical to the Catholics of Ireland.
          Finding his efforts fruitless he withdrew with Owen Roe O'Neill
          to Ulster, whereupon they were proclaimed traitors to Ireland by
          the Supreme Council. In 1649 he was captured by Sir Phelim
          O'Neill and imprisoned, but escaped shortly afterwards. In
          October, 1649, Ormonde and Owen Roe O'Neill made peace, the
          better to resist the Cromwellian invasion. In March, 1650,
          MacMahon was chosen to lead the Ulster forces, O'Neill having
          died some months earlier. Encouraged by some early successes he
          risked a serious conflict with the English army under Sir
          Charles Coote at Scariffhollis, County Donegal, on 21 June,
          1650, was defeated and captured two days later near Omagh, and
          though promised quarter was shortly afterwards put to death by
          Coote, despite the efforts made by Major-general King, governor
          of Enniskillen, to obtain a commutation of the death sentence.
          His head was stuck on a spike at Enniskillen Castle and his
          trunk buried by some Catholics on Devenish Island, with the
          permission of Governor King.

          MEEHAN, Irish Franciscan Monasteries (Dublin, 1870), 234-52;
          BRADY, Episcopal Succession in England, Ireland and Scotland, I
          (Rome, 1876); MORAN, Spicilegium Ossoriense, I, II (Dublin,
          1874-81); BAGWELL in Dict. Nat. Biog., s.v.

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   Marchese Francesco Scipione Maffei

                       Marchese Francesco Scipione Maffei

          Italian littérateur and archaeologist, b. at Verona, 1 June,
          1675; d. there, 11 Feb., 1755. He sprang from an ancient and
          illustrious family which came originally from Bologna; his
          brother was General Alessandro Maffei, whose "Memoirs" he
          published. He began at an early age to write poetry which,
          however, was marred by the bad taste of the period, but
          association with such men as Pastorini and Maggi and the study
          of the great Italian poets brought about a change in his style.
          In 1699, during a sojourn in Rome, he became a member of the
          Accademia degli Arcadi and on his return to Verona established
          in that city a branch of the Roman Arcadia. In 1703 he enlisted
          in the Bavarian army, in which his brother held the rank of
          lieutenant-colonel and in 1704 took part in the battle of
          Donauworth. In 1709 he went to Padua, where he shared with
          Apostolo Zeno the editorship of the "Giornale de Letteraria
          d'Italia", but soon abandoned the work. In 1710 he spent some
          time at Turin for the purpose of studying the MSS. in the Royal
          Library, and while there he arranged the collection of objects
          of art which Charles Emmanuel had brought from Rome. Declining
          posts proffered by Pope Clement XI and King Victor Amadeus he
          returned to Verona, where he devoted himself to the study of the
          Italian drama, with the object of raising it from its state of
          decadence, and his efforts in this direction may be regarded as
          the beginning of the rehabilitation of the Italian theatre.

          Maffei had already devoted some years to archaeological and
          artistic studies and in this connection had amassed in his
          palace a very valuable collection. In particular his scholarly
          publications on the history of his birthplace aroused such
          enthusiasm on the part of the Veronese that it was only with
          difficulty that he prevailed on them not to erect a statue to
          him during his lifetime. His familiarity with charters and other
          medieval documents resulted in his "Istoria diplomatica"
          (Mantua, 1727), a work which added much of importance to the
          history of diplomatics. In 1732 he went to the south of France
          for purposes of archaeological research and from there he went
          to Paris, where he remained four years and was received as
          member of the Académie des Inscriptions. At this time also the
          Jesuits requested him to write in defence of the orthodox system
          of grace against the doctrine of the Jansenists. In compliance
          he wrote his "Istoria teologica delle doctrine e delle opinione
          corse ne cinque primo secoli della chiesa in proposito della
          divina grazia, del libero arbitrio e della predestinazione"
          (Trent, 1742; Latin tr., Frankfort, 1765). Prior to the
          appearance of this work he went to London (1736), visited
          Oxford, where he obtained the degree of doctor, and was received
          in London by the most noted men of the country. In the same year
          he returned by way of Holland and Germany to Verona, where he
          thenceforth remained, save for occasional absences. He built a
          museum, which together with his valuable collection he
          bequeathed to his native city. Besides his historical and
          archaeological studies he interested himself in physics and
          astronomy, and even built an observatory that he might study the
          movements of the stars. At the age of eighty he began to study
          Hebrew and he is said to have learned it in a few months. The
          following is a list of his most important works: "Per la nascita
          del principe di Piemonte genetliaco" (Rome, 1699); "Conclusioni
          di amore" (Verona, 1702); "La prima radunanza della colonia
          arcadica Veronese" (Cervia, 1705); "La scienza cavalleresca"
          (Rome, 1710), a treatise against duelling, which was
          instrumental in diminishing the practice in Italy; "De fabula
          equestris ordinis Constantiniani" (Zurich, 1712; Paris, 1714),
          written to prove that all the orders of knighthood date only
          from the Crusades and affording valuable information concerning
          the aristocracy of the early Middle Ages; "Merope", a tragedy
          (Venice, 1714; since published in numerous editions and
          translations); "Dell' antica condizione di Verona" (Venice,
          1719); "Istoria diplomatica" (Mantua, 1727), containing
          documents not previously published and a discourse on primitive
          Italy; "Teatro del Marchese Maffei" (Venice, 1730); "Verona
          illustrata" (2 vols., Verona, 1732; a corrected edition
          according to the author's notes was issued in 4 vols., Milan,
          1825-27); "Galliae antiquitates quaedam selectae" (Paris, 1733),
          on the inscriptions and monuments observed by Maffei during his
          sojourn in France and dedicated to Louis XV; "Graecorum siglae
          lapidariae collectae atque explicatae" (Verona, 1746); "Della
          formazione dei fulmini" (Verona, 1747); "Il Raguet" (Verona,
          1787), a comedy; "Museum Veronense" (Verona, 1749); "Supplemento
          al Tesoro delle Inscrizioni di Muratori" (Lucca, 1765); this was
          published by Donati according to notes collected by Maffei for a
          complete work on the subject. Besides these original works
          Maffei also collaborated in editions of the works of St. Hilary
          (Verona, 1730), St. Jerome (1734), and St. Zeno (1739). He
          bequeathed his collection of MSS. to the canons of the cathedral
          of Verona.

          BOUGAINVILLE, Eloge de Maffei in Hist. de l'Acad. des Inscrip.,
          XXVII; PINDEMONTE, Elogio (Verona, 1784).

          BLANCHE M. KELLY

   Edward Maginn

                                 Edward Maginn

          Coadjutor Bishop of Derry, b. at Fintona, Ireland, 16 Dec.,
          1802; d. at Derry, 17 January, 1849, the son of Patrick Maginn,
          a farmer, and his wife, Mary Slevin, whose families gave many
          distinguished priests to the Irish Church in the eighteenth
          century. He was educated by his uncle, parish priest of
          Monaghan, and later by Thomas MacColgan, at Buncrana, Donegal,
          and entered the Irish College, Paris, in 1818. He was ordained
          in 1825 at Derry, and was soon appointed curate of Moville,
          where he remained till 1829, labouring with great fruit and
          winning renown as a preacher. He opposed energetically the
          efforts made by the Episcopalian body to proselytize his flock,
          and took a prominent part in a public controversy held at Derry
          concerning Catholic doctrines, a report of which was published
          later in book form (Dublin, 1828). In 1829 he became parish
          priest of Fahan, and applied himself to the suppression of
          agrarian secret societies, while appealing to the Government to
          protect the peasantry against the abuse of power by the local
          non-Catholic magistrates. He was one of the most zealous
          advocates of Catholic Emancipation, supported O'Connell in the
          Repeal movement, and endeavoured to heal the breach between the
          young Irelanders and the Liberator. Though recognizing the
          glaring defects of the "national school" system he accepted it,
          and by his protests prevented the withdrawal of the schools from
          clerical control. He repudiated the Queen's Colleges, helped to
          bring about their condemnation at Rome, and enthusiastically
          advocated the establishment of a Catholic university, which,
          however, he did not live to see. On 18 Jan., 1846, he was
          consecrated titular Bishop of Orthosia and coadjutor to Dr.
          MacLaughlin of Derry. Seized with typhus fever on 14 Jan., 1849,
          he expired three days later in St. Columb's College and was
          buried at Buncrana, Donegal. Dr. Maginn was an important factor
          in the rehabilitation of the Church in Ulster after
          Emancipation; he devoted himself, moreover, to the temporal
          welfare of the peasants, and his letters on land and the Poor
          Law administration, together with his evidence before the Devon
          Commission (Report published at Dublin, 1847), contain valuable
          information on the social condition of Ireland in the first half
          of the nineteenth century. The gross incompetency and partiality
          of the government officials during the famine of 1847-49
          inspired him with an abhorrence of English misrule. Not the
          least useful of his writings was a series of letters in reply to
          Lord Stanley, who in the House of Lords, 23 Nov., 1847, had
          accused the Irish clergy of using the confessional to encourage
          lawlessness and crime ("Refutation of Lord Stanley's Calumnies
          against the Catholic Clergy of Ireland", reprint, Dublin, 1850).

          McGEE, Life of Bishop Maginn (New York, 1857).

          A.A. MACERLEAN

   Paul de Chomedey de Maisonneuve

                        Paul de Chomedey de Maisonneuve

          Founder of Montreal, b. in Champagne, France, early in the
          seventeenth century; d. in Paris, 9 Sept., 1676. He served in
          the Dutch war at the age of thirteen. Attracted to Canada by
          reading the Jesuit "Relations", he was proposed by Father Jérome
          Lalemant to command the company sent by Royer de la Dauversiere
          to found Ville-Marie on the Island of Montreal, which had been
          ceded by ex- Governor Lauzon for an annual rent of ten pounds of
          fish. The future foundress of the Hôtel-Dieu, Jeanne Mance,
          joined the party. Governor Montmagny strove to prevent this
          seemingly foolhardy enterprise and retained the colonists at
          Sillery during the winter of 1641-42. Maisonneuve, who in the
          fall of 1641 had gone to take possession of the island, landed
          there with his followers on 17 May, 1642. The Jesuit Vimont said
          the first Mass, and the Blessed Sacrament remained exposed all
          day with a phial containing fireflies as a sanctuary lamp. The
          settlement was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin under the name of
          Ville-Marie. Situated at the point of convergence of the chief
          waterways, the colony was kept constantly on the alert by dread
          of the Iroquois. To guard against surprise and secure mutual
          assistance, Maisonneuve later commanded that all workers outside
          the fort should muster and disband at the sound of the bell. At
          sixty leagues' distance from Quebec and thirty from Three
          Rivers, the nearest fort, the position was most perilous,
          constantly demanding heroic courage. Yet Maisonneuve was to
          remain twenty-five years at his post. When, in 1644, 200
          Iroquois invaded the island, he encountered the enemy with only
          30 men. Overpowered by numbers, he retreated successfully after
          killing the chief. At the expiration of Montmagny's term of
          office, the governor-generalship was offered by Louis XIV to
          Maisonneuve, who thought fit to decline. He encouraged
          colonization by facilitating well-assorted marriages, attracted
          allies by his liberality, and, while inspiring the Iroquois with
          terror, he gained their confidence and saved from torture many
          French captives. As a magistrate he judged with equity and
          impartiality. In 1653 he returned from a voyage to France with
          Marguerite Bourgeoys, foundress of the Congregation of Notre
          Dame. A troop of soldiers arrived with them. After a third
          voyage, he brought with him the first Sulpicians who came to
          Canada (1659). In 1660 he authorized the heroic venture of
          Dollard and his sixteen companions, which saved New France from
          destruction. Maisonneuve's action showed itself particularly in
          the organization of defence. Though he seldom fought, his
          presence was felt everywhere planning and ordering. His
          character was a blending of reserve, calmness, and foresight,
          and, at the same time, of spontaneousness, initiative, and
          intrepidity. He saw to the military training of his followers
          and was the first to conceive the utility of flying camps to
          keep the Indians at a distance. In imitation of the ancient
          military orders, he founded a corps called the "Militia of the
          Holy Family", which maintained for many years the security of
          Montreal. He likewise favoured agriculture, commerce, and
          education, and was like a father to the colony, attending
          equally to its spiritual and temporal wants. When, in 1663, the
          Company of Montreal ceased to exist through the assumption of
          Canada by Louis XIV, Maisonneuve's public career was drawing to
          its close. His departure coincided with the arrival of Viceroy
          de Tracy and his regular troops (1665). He left Ville-Marie
          founded, well- fortified, municipally constituted, and civilly
          organized. He not only returned empty-handed but donated to the
          pious foundation all rents and dues accruing to him. Heedless of
          renown, he left no memoirs. He ended his days in retirement,
          never forgetting his colony nor ceasing to pray for its welfare.

          GARNEAU, Hist. du Canada (Montreal, 1882); FERLAND, Hist. du
          Canada (Quebec, 1882); ROUSSEAU, Vie de M. Paul de Chomedey
          (Montreal, 1886); Souvenir de Maisonneuve (Montreal, 1896);
          CAMPBELL, Pioneer Priests of North America, II: Among the Hurons
          (New York, 1910).

          LIONEL LINDSAY

   Malling Abbey

                                 Malling Abbey

          An abbey of Benedictine nuns, at West Malling in the County of
          Kent, England. The earliest mention of the nunnery occurs in
          Doomsday book (1080). The church land of Malling having fallen
          to the share of Bishop Odo of Bayeux at the time of the Norman
          Conquest, Lanfranc, then Archbishop of Canterbury, succeeded in
          making him restore them to him in 1076. In the next year Gundulf
          was appointed Bishop of Rochester; it was he who built the Abbey
          of Malling. The date of Gundulf's foundation is doubtful; it is
          given as early as 1078 and as late as 1106. In recognition of
          its subjection to the See of Rochester the abbey paid the annual
          tithe of ten pounds of wax and one boar. In the year 1190 a fire
          broke out which destroyed both the abbey and village, but they
          were very soon rebuilt. At the dissolution the abbess, Dame
          Vernon, and her community of eleven nuns, signed the surrender
          and the abbey with its land fell into the hands of Cranmer.
          Little of the original building is now standing; the tower is
          Norman up to the first two stories and Early English above.
          Attached to the tower are some remnants of the church, one of
          the transepts and a wall of the nave; the refectory is also
          standing. The cloisters were re- erected in the fourteenth
          century. Since the dissolution in 1538 it had been in the hands
          of private owners until 1893 when it was bought for an Anglican
          community founded by "Father Ignatius" of Llantony.

          DUGDALE, Monasticon, III (1846), 381; Downside Review, XVII,
          222.

          PAUL BROOKFIELD

   Giovanni De' Marignolli

                            Giovanni de' Marignolli

          Born at Florence about 1290; place and date of death unknown.
          When quite a youth he received the Franciscan habit at the
          convent of Santa Croce, Florence; later on, as he himself tells
          us, he held the chair of theology at the University of Bologna.
          Nothing more is known of his religious life until Benedict XII
          sent him with other Franciscans on a mission to the Emperor of
          China, as a result of the Chinese embassy which arrived at
          Avignon in 1338. Marignolli became one of the greatest
          travellers in Asia, and has left an account of his itinerary
          much studied today by geographers of the extreme East. In Dec.,
          1338, he left Avignon, arriving at Naples, on 10 Feb., 1339, and
          on 1 May reached the Court of Andronicus III at Constantinople,
          where he treated in vain with the clergy concerning the reunion
          with Rome. From there he passed to the Crimea and thence to
          Sarai, carrying papal letters to Usbek, Khan of Kiptchak, who
          sent an escort with him as far as Armalec, where he arrived in
          the winter of 1340. Towards the end of 1341 he left Armalec and
          crossed the desert of Gobi to Peking, where he was received with
          great honours at the Chinese Court. After three years at Peking
          he travelled through the greater part of southern China as far
          as Columbum (Quilon) and Cape Comorin. He visited Ceylon, Java,
          Sumatra, and other islands of the Indian Ocean, and then
          returned to the Coromandel Coast. There he embarked for Malabar,
          and thence took the route to Europe by the Persian Gulf, Ormuz,
          Gezd, Ispahan, and then by Mesopotamia, Syria, Palestine,
          Cyprus, Egypt, arriving at Naples in 1353. From there he went to
          Florence and arrived at Avignon after fifteen years' absence. In
          March, 1354, the pope named him Bishop of Bisignano; and in 1356
          Florence sent him as papal legate to Avignon. In 1357 Emperor
          Charles IV called him to be his councillor with the office also
          of court historian. Some years afterwards he compiled his
          "Chronicon Bohemiæ", in which he described his eastern travels.
          The work was edited by Dobner in "Monumenta historica Bohemiæ"
          (Prague, 1768).

          MEINERT, Johannes von Marignola minder Bruders und papstlichen
          Legaten, Reise in das Morgenland, tr. from Latin, in Abhandl,
          der königl. böhm. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaft, VII (Prague,
          1820); KUNSTMANN in Histor.-polit. Blätter, XXXVIII, 701-19,
          793-813; YULE, Cathay and the Way Thither, II (London, 1866),
          309-94; DE GUBERNATIS in Storia dei viaggiatori italiani nelle
          Gudie Orientoli (Leghorn, 1875), 142-60; DA CIVEZZA, Saggio di
          bibliografia San Francescana (Prato, 1879), 372-83. Cf. also
          FERUSSAC in Bulletin de la soc. de géographie, II (1824),
          115-20; PALACKY in Würdigung der alten böhm. Geschichtschreiber
          (Prague, 1830), 164-72; AMAT DA S. FILIPPO, Studi bibl. e
          biogr., etc. (Rome, 1871), 103-9; POTTHAST, Bibliotheca hist.
          medii vi, I, 767; ROHRICHT, Bibliotheca geographica Palestin
          (Berlin, 1890), n. 207.

          GIROLAMO GOLUBOVICH

   Enrico Martin

                                 Enrico Martín

          Date and place of birth unknown; d. in Mexico in 1632. According
          to some he was of Spanish descent; Humboldt says that he was
          either a German or Dutchman, and according to others a Mexican
          educated in Spain, but in all probability he was a Frenchman,
          Henri Martín hispanicized under the form of Enrico Martín or
          Martínez. He was cosmographer to the king, interpreter for the
          Inquisition, publisher, and distinguished in his career as an
          hydraulic engineer. In 1607 the Viceroy D. Luis de Velasco
          entrusted to him the difficult task of draining the valley
          surrounding the City of Mexico. The valley formed a closed
          basin, and when the rains were heavy the Lakes of Zumpango and
          San Cristobal rose higher than that of Texcoco and overflowed
          into the basin, inundating the city and threatening it with
          destruction. Martín's plan was to open a canal as outlet to the
          Lake of Zumpango to prevent its overflow. The work began on 28
          Nov., 1607, and was terminated by 13 May, 1609. Corrosion and
          the constant action of the water caused caving-in in the
          interior of the tunnel, and obstructed the passage to such an
          extent that, during the viceregency of Archbishop Fray Garcia
          Guerra (1611-12), in reply to the inquiry made by Philip III for
          information concerning the utility of the work, the amount so
          far expended, and what would still be required to complete it,
          the archbishop and the municipal government replied that the
          work done by Martín was not sufficient to place the city beyond
          the danger of inundations and that $413,325 had been expended
          and 1,126,650 workmen engaged in the work. Martín wrote to the
          king contradicting this information.

          The viceroy, D. Diego Fernandez de Cordoba, Marques de
          Guadalcazar (1612-21), the successor of Fray Garcia Guerra, was
          sent from Spain with special instructions concerning the work of
          the draining of the valley. At the same time Philip III
          commissioned the Spanish ambassador to the Court of France, D.
          Inigo Contreras, to find a competent engineer for the work and
          the Hollander Adrian Boot, who arrived in Mexico in 1614, was
          selected. At the suggestion of the viceroy, Boot with Martín and
          the auditor Otalora visited the works and each made a report.
          Boot reported that Martín's canal called Huehuetoca or
          Nochistongo was inadequate and presented plans for a new work
          which would cost $185,900; Martín offered with 300 men and
          $100,000 to finish the work, and to moreover divert into the
          course of the canal the waters of the River Cuauhtitlan, which,
          when it rose, overflowed into the valley of Mexico. Boot's plan
          was rejected, and that presented by Martín was accepted with the
          king's approval. The royal approbation was obtained 3 April,
          1616, and Martín received his instructions to begin the work at
          once.

          In 1623 when the work was still in an unfinished state the
          Viceroy Marques de Belvez (1621-24) to test the utility of the
          canal directed the work to be suspended and the waters,
          including that of the River Cuauhtitlan, which was then
          discharging through the tunnel, to be once more diverted into
          the lakes of the valley. This caused a flood in 1627 and the
          municipal government petitioned the Viceroy Cerralvo (1624-35)
          to rectify the trouble and avert a disaster. The viceroy
          entrusted the matter to Boot, Martín, and several others who had
          studied the situation, and all submitted reports. Between
          disputes and meetings the time up to 1629 was lost and the mouth
          of Martín's tunnel having become practically obstructed, the
          waters of the Cuauhtitlan overflowed into the Lake of Zumpango
          and the City of Mexico was placed in great peril. The viceroy
          had Martín arrested and imprisoned on the charge of having
          purposely closed the mouth of the tunnel, to which he replied
          that the lack of funds had prevented the repairs being made in
          the roof of the tunnel, and that the portions that had caved in
          had impeded the flow of the water. A few days later (21 Sept.,
          1629) he was released and the work of repairing the tunnel put
          into his hands. It was, however, too late, as the following day
          the greatest of all floods occurred, water rising in the city
          proper to the height of two metres. The ravages of the water
          were terrible, the greater portion of the houses were rendered
          uninhabitable, and according to some historians 30,000 persons
          lost their lives. Some years later the auditor, D. Juan de
          Villabona Cubiaurre, was appointed chief superintendent of the
          work and submitted an unfavourable report on the work of Martín.
          The aged engineer defended himself against these imputations,
          but his opinion was treated with so much scorn that he died the
          following year, crushed by the injustice and disappointment. In
          1789 the tunnel was converted into an open canal which is still
          to be seen. Within very recent years an entirely new project has
          been carried out by which the waters of the valley discharge
          through the Tequisquiac tunnel.

          Martín left a number of works among which may be mentioned:
          "Repertorio de tiempo e historia natural de Nueva Espana"
          (Mexico, 1606); "Agricultura de Nueva Espana sobre la cria de
          ganados, labores, huertas, jardines, etc."; "De fisionomia de
          rostros"; "Discurso sobre la magna conjuncion de los planetas
          Jupiter y Saturno acaecida el 24 de Diciembre de 1603"; "Treinta
          y dos mapas de la costa del sur de Nueva Espana, de sus puertos,
          ensenadas, cabos, etc."

          Diccionario enciclopedico hispano-americano (Barcelone, 1893);
          SIERRA, Mexico, su evolucion social (Mexico, 1901); BERISTAIN,
          Biblioteca hispano-americana septentrional (Amecameca, 1883);
          PALACIO, Mexico a traves de los siglos, III (Barcelona).

          CAMILLUS CRIVELLI

   Bequests For Masses

                              Bequests for Masses

          "The efficacy of prayers for the dead", remarks the Court of
          Appeals of the State of New York in Holland v. Alcock, 108 New
          York Court of Appeals Reports, page 312, "is one of the
          doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church . . . and those
          professing that belief are entitled in law to the same respect
          and protection in their religious observances thereof as those
          of any other denomination" (p. 329). But the court held to be of
          no effect a bequest by a testator to his executors of money "to
          be applied by them for the purpose of having prayers offered in
          a Roman Catholic Church to be by them selected for the repose of
          my soul and the souls of my family and also the souls of all
          others who may be in purgatory". And following this decision the
          same court, in a later case, declared to be of no effect a
          bequest by a testator to his executors of a sum of money "to be
          expended in having masses said for the repose of his soul" (see
          O'Conner v. Gifford, 117 New York Court of Appeals Reports, p.
          276), or, as rather infelicitously expressed by the judge
          writing the opinion of the court, "disposed of in the purchase
          of masses" (p. 283). Notwithstanding "respect and protection"
          due to "Roman Catholic" religious observances, these legacies
          failed, because "religious or pious uses were, when the Roman
          Catholic religion prevailed in England, recognized as charities"
          (108 ibid., p. 325), and the court held that the English legal
          doctrine on which the validity of charitable uses and trusts
          depended was not a part of the law of the State of New York.
          And, since in that state the bequests could not be upheld as
          charities, their validity was deemed to be open to an objection
          fatal to the validity of any trust not charitable, namely,
          "absence of an ascertainable beneficiary" (108 ibid., p. 329;
          Fosdick v. Town of North Hempstead, 125 ibid., p. 591).

          The court in the Holland case calls attention to the
          circumstance that its decision adverse to the existence in New
          York of the English legal doctrine of charities is a denial of
          the correctness of the Court of Appeals in the previous case of
          Williams v. Williams, decided in 1853 (8 New York Court of
          Appeals Reports, p. 525), the doctrine of that case being that
          charitable trusts are a part of the law of the state, "that they
          came to us by inheritance from our British ancestors and as part
          of our common law" (108 ibid., p. 336). The Holland case was
          decided in 1888, the O'Conner case in 1889. The highest court of
          the state having thus decided that the legal doctrine of the
          same court in 1853 was erroneous and to be no longer adhered to,
          the legislature of the state enacted in 1893 a statute (Laws of
          1893, chapter 701), which has been declared by the Court of
          Appeals "to restore the ancient doctrine of charitable uses and
          trusts as a part of the law of this State" (Bowman v. Domestic
          and Foreign Missionary Society, 182 Court of Appeals Reports, p.
          498, decided in 1905), "the law of charitable trusts as declared
          in the Williams case" (Allen v. Stevens, 161 ibid., p. 141,
          decided in 1899). As if to approve legislatively what is thus
          declared judicially, the legislature, by laws becoming effective
          in 1909 (see Personal Property Law, section 12; Real Property
          Law, section 113) has re-enacted (with changes immaterial for
          our present purposes) the statute of 1893.

          The reason on which Holland v. Alcock was based having thus
          ceased to exist, we might, perhaps, doubt whether the law of
          that case could be deemed to survive. But in this connexion a
          case decided in 1907 ought to be noticed. This case (Johnston v.
          Hughes, 187 New York Court of Appeals Reports, p. 446) involved
          the validity of a bequest of proceeds of real estate to a
          hospital conducted by a corporation, "The Sisters of the Poor of
          St. Francis" incorporated for "the gratuitous care of the sick,
          aged, infirm and poor", the testator adding to the bequest these
          words "for the benefit and use of the Blessed Virgin Mary
          purgatorial fund of said hospital". There had never been
          maintained any such fund in the hospital. But there was "a
          chapel", observes the court "connected with the hospital in
          which they have morning Mass and religious devotions during the
          day; in which prayers are offered for departed souls" (p. 452).
          And the court surmises that from knowledge of the observance of
          these religious practices, persons under the charge of the
          Sisters may derive "comfort and peace of mind", conducive to the
          physical welfare which the corporation had been chartered to
          promote (p. 453). The court holds that "an imperative intent on
          the part of the testator not to make the gift absolute" does not
          appear (p. 451), and that "the gift was absolute and valid", for
          the legal purposes of the corporation (p. 454). The Sisters, as
          individuals and apart from regard for the inmates of the
          hospital, might feel morally bound to pray for the dead; but the
          corporation was held to take the bequest for the purposes of the
          corporate charter, and these were certainly limited to the
          welfare of the living, "the sick, aged, infirm and poor". The
          bequest being thus sustained because deemed to be for purposes
          within the corporate functions of the legatee, the court
          intimates that if the legatee had not been a corporation, the
          decision might have been that the bequest was invalid, and
          invalid on the authority of the Holland case. "In this case",
          remarks the court, "the bequest was to a corporation duly
          organized, and it is not therefore subject to the objection that
          was made in the case of Holland vs. Alcock" (p. 453). The fact
          is not alluded to that the reason for sustaining this objection
          was the nonexistence in New York of the English law of
          charities, a reason no longer tenable under the statute of 1893
          as construed by the court. We may well regret that this
          recognition in 1907 of Holland vs. Alcock was unaccompanied by
          any reference to this intervening statute.

          Incorporation of "Roman Catholic" Churches has been provided for
          by the statutes of New York since the year 1863 (see Laws of
          1863, chapter 45; and Religious Corporations Law, in effect
          1909). The views expressed in the Holland case, in conjunction
          with the statute of 1893, seem favourable to the legal
          competency of a church thus incorporated to accept a
          testamentary gift charged with a trust of offering public masses
          for the dead (In re Davidson, English Law Reports, 1 Chancery
          page 572, anno 1909; cf. Bowman v. Domestic and Foreign
          Missionary Society sup.). By chapter 732 of the Laws of 1911,
          "any property devised or bequeathed for religious ceremonies,
          observances or commemorative services of or for the deceased
          donor" is exempted from transfer tax. This exemption seems to
          embrace devises and bequests whether to individuals or to
          corporations, and Masses for the repose of his soul might,
          perhaps, be considered to be "commemorative services . . . for
          the deceased donor" (chapter 795, Laws of 1913). And, possibly,
          some case involving a question of liability to payment of this
          tax may cause the Court of Appeals to settle the question
          whether, notwithstanding the Statute of 1893, bequests and
          devises for Masses are to be deemed void in the State of New
          York in accord with the rulings of the Court in the Holland case
          and the O'Conner case.

          CHARLES W. SLOANE

   Meaux

                                     Meaux

          (Melsa).

          A Cistercian abbey about four miles east of Beverley in the East
          Riding of Yorkshire. It was founded in the year 1150 by William
          le Gros, Earl of Albemarle, and was dedicated to Our Lady. The
          history of the abbey is a sad one. On reading the chronicle
          compiled by Abbot Burton we see that the abbey was hardly ever
          free from litigation; three times the monks were forced to
          disperse through poverty; once, in the year 1349, four-fifths of
          the monks were carried off by the pestilence; and once by
          incurring the anger of a king they barely escaped dissolution.
          Richard Draper, the last abbot, signed the surrender of the
          abbey, and received a pension from Henry VIII.

          Chronica monasterii de Melsa in Rolls Series, XLIII; DUGDALE,
          Monasticon, V (1846), 388; JANAUSCHEK, Orig. Cisterc., I (1877),
          124-5.

          PAUL BROOKFIELD

   Marcelino Menendez y Pelayo

                          Marcelino Menéndez y Pelayo

          Poet, historian and literary critic, b. at Santander, Spain, in
          1856; d. at Santander in 1912. After having made his first
          studies in his native town, he went in 1871 to the University of
          Barcelona, where he passed two years and won the admiration of
          his fellow- students, his teachers and of the Government, by
          which he was given extensive means for making literary,
          critical, and historical researches. At the age of twenty-two he
          was appointed to the chair of literature in the University of
          Madrid, and three years later was received into the Spanish
          Academy. In 1876 he published his "Estudios criticos sobre
          poetas Montañeses" and in 1880 his "Heterodoxos Españoles". This
          work, which is a proof of the writer's incomparable knowledge
          and skill, deals with the political and literary history of
          Spain in its relation to the Catholic Church from the time of
          Priscilian down to our age. A new phase of his genius was
          displayed in "Horacio en España". Himself a lyric poet of no
          mean ability, as his "Oda a Horacio" and "La galerna del sábado
          de gloria" bear witness, he was fitted to undertake the task of
          collecting and criticizing the numerous Spanish translations and
          imitations of Horace.

          His extensive "Historia de las ideas estéticas en España"
          includes not only a complete exposition of the æsthetic ideas of
          Spanish writers but also an elaborate and finished treatise on
          aesthetic ideas in Europe. Four volumes have been published on
          "Los orígines de la novela en España", a treatise on the origin
          of the Spanish novel. This is one of the most learned and
          original of Menéndez y Pelayo's works. From a national as well
          as from a Catholic viewpoint the "Ciencia española" (1887) is
          one of the most valuable publications of this writer. The work
          is chiefly a collection of letters and essays which demonstrate
          that Spain is one of the richest nations in original and sound
          philosophy and is endowed with many scientists of remarkable
          genius. Here also he proves that the Inquisition did not hinder
          culture in Spain, but fostered it. Other works of Menéndez y
          Pelayo are: "Obras completas de Lope de Vega", "Antología de
          poetas líricos castellanos", "Crítica literaria" and "Poetas
          hispaño-americanos". In the five volumes contained in the
          "Critica literaria" are published his essays on the "Mystic
          poetry of Spain", "Saint Isidore", "History considered as an
          Art", "Tirso de Molina", etc. Menéndez y Pelayo was the
          president of the Academia Real de la Historia, director of the
          "Revista de archivos", "Bibliotecas y museos", editor of the
          "Nueva biblioteca de autores castellanos", and member of
          countless literary and scientific societies both in Spain and in
          the other European countries.

          In point of style Menéndez y Pelayo is regarded as the superior
          of all writers who have flourished since the Golden Age of
          Spain. His first essays as well as his last works are composed
          with all his youthful enthusiasm and poetic taste. Every page of
          his writings reveals a wealth of strong common sense, clear
          perception, and a vein of wonderful and ever varying erudition.
          Thoroughly Catholic in spirit, he found his greatest delight, he
          declared, in devoting all his work to the glory of God and the
          exaltation of the name of Jesus.

          GARCIA ROMERO, Apuntes para la biografia de D. M. Menendez y
          Pelayo (Madrid, 1879); PIDAL Y MON, Discursos y articulos
          literarios (Madrid, 1884); VALERA, Homenaje al Sr. Menendez y
          Pelayo (Madrid, 1899), introduction to volume I; BLANCO GARCIA,
          Historia de la literatura espanola del siglo XIX (Madrid, 1891),
          III; BORIS DE TANNENBERG, L'Espagne litteraire (Paris, 1902);
          DEL VALLE RUIZ, Estudios literarios (Madrid, 1903); DE VASSAL,
          Menendez y Pelayo (1856-1912) in Etudes, CXXXII (Paris, 20 Aug.,
          1912), 452-65; MARIN, VASQUEZ MELLA, MARTINEZ, Discursos sobre
          Menendez y Pelayo (Madrid, 1912); Razon y Fe, XXXIII (Madrid,
          July, 1912), 277-318 contains four studies on Menendez y Pelayo:
          PEREZ GOYENA, Biografia de Don M. y P.; PORTILLO, Obras de M. y
          P.;ASTRAIN, M. y P.; examen critico de sus obras; EGUIA RUIZ,
          ?M. y P. poeta?

          WILLIAM FURLONG

   Claude-Francois Menestrier

                          Claude-François Menestrier

          Antiquarian, b. at Lyons, 9 March, 1631; d. at Paris, 21 Jan.,
          1705. He inherited a taste for antiquities, his great-uncle
          Claude Menestrier having been employed by Cardinal Barberini
          (Urban VIII) as librarian to collect art objects and medals. A
          pupil of the College of the Trinity, Lyons, which was in charge
          of the Jesuits, he entered the Society there, and at the age of
          fifteen was professor of rhetoric; in this capacity he composed
          the ballets "Destinées de Lyon" and "L'autel de Lyon" and
          arranged the plays which were performed before Louis XIV when he
          visited Lyons in 1658. He also directed the festivities which
          took place at the time of the marriage of Françoise d'Orléans
          and Charles Emmanuel, Duke of Savoy, as also of the solemnities
          wherewith the Visitandines of Chambéry celebrated the
          canonization of St. Francis de Sales. But he was more than an
          organizer of spectacles; he issued important publications on
          heraldry which led him into violent disputes with Claude le
          Laboureur, provost of L'ile Barbe; he also made a study of
          emblems and mottoes. Stationed at Paris from 1670, he preached
          successfully for twenty-five years in the principal towns,
          during which time he also composed Latin inscriptions for
          LeBrun's prints, for the battle pictures of Van der Meulen, as
          well as supervising the decorations for Turenne's obsequies and
          writing, among other important books, "Histoire de Louis le
          Grand par les medailles, devises, inscriptions et armoiries"
          (1689) and "Histoire civile ou consulaire de la ville de Lyon"
          (1696). He had planned a vast synthesis of knowledge, the
          "Philosophie des images", in which were to be included his
          numerous and strangely varied volumes. In 1682 he had discovered
          in the Cistercian abbey at Villiers the tomb of Queen Anne or
          Agnes of Russia, second wife of Henry I. In 1770, in the second
          edition of the "Gallia christiana", he was accused of falsehood
          in this connection, but the discovery by Prince Labanoff in 1825
          of a diploma bearing the seal of this queen vindicated
          Menestrier's memory. The bibliography of Menestrier's works is
          so considerable that it disconcerts bibliophiles.

          ALLUT, Recherches sur la vie et sur les oeuvres du P.
          Claude-François Menestrier (Lyons, 1856); RENARD, Catalogue des
          oeuvres imprimees de Claude-François Menestrier (Lyons, 1883);
          SOMMERVOGEL, Bibliotheque de la C. de J., V (Paris, 1894),
          905-45; Le Bulletin du bibliophile (1898).

          GEORGES GOYAU

   Mino di Giovanni

                                Mino di Giovanni

          (Called DA FIESOLE.)

          Born 1431; died 1484. He is inscribed in the "Libro della
          Matricola" of the Florentine masters of stone and woodwork as
          "Minus Johannis Mini de Pupio", whence some have concluded he
          was born at Poppi, Casentino; elsewhere he is "Mino di Giovanni
          di Mino da Firenze". As a sculptor he is noted for the delicate
          fineness and finish of his handicraft. A large number of
          portraits and subjects in low-relief are attributed to him: the
          circular Madonna and Child on a bracket (Bargello, Florence);
          the busts of Piero and Giovanni de'Medici (Bargello); that of
          Rinaldo della Luna, dated 1461; a remarkable portrait of Isotta
          da Rimini (Camposanto, Pisa); an open-air relief of the Madonna
          and Child (Via Zannetti, Florence). Two important works are in
          the cathedral at Fiesole: an altar-piece with figures of the
          Madonna and Child, an infant St. John, St. Leonard, and St.
          Remigius, the architectural setting surmounted by a bust of the
          Saviour; and in a side chapel the monument of Bishop Salutati,
          with a portrait bust (1464-66). Equally important, in the Church
          of the Badia, Florence, is the monument to its founder, the
          famous Margrave Hugo of Andeburg (finished 1481), and an earlier
          work, the tomb of Bernardo Giuigni (1466); here also is a relief
          of the Madonna and saints. In the sacristy of Santa Croce there
          is a marble ciborium with angels. Mino worked with Antonio
          Rosellino on the pulpit in the cathedral at Prato, contributing
          two reliefs from the life of the Baptist. In 1473 he went to
          Rome where he remained apparently about six years. It is
          doubtful if all the monuments there attributed to him are of his
          own hands; there is no question about the tomb of the Florentine
          Francesco Tornabuoni in the Church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva,
          the remains of the monument to Paul II in the crypt of St.
          Peter's, and the tabernacle in S. Maria in Trastevere bears the
          inscription "Opus Mini". Monuments attributed to him, noted for
          purity and elegance of design, are those of Cristoforo della
          Rovere (S. Maria del Popolo); Cardinal Niccolo Forteguerra (S.
          Cecilia); and Pietro Riario (SS. Apostoli). Further attributions
          are the tomb of Bartolomeo Roverella (S. Clemente); that of the
          Scotch Bishop Alan (S. Prassede); and the Piccolomini tomb (S.
          Agostino). Other works are the ciborium in the cathedral at
          Volterra; a marble bust of the Baptist (Louvre, Paris); Madonna
          and Child, a bust of a young Florentine woman, and a portrait of
          Niccolo Strozzi dated 1454, in the museum, Berlin.

          PERKINS, Tuscan Sculptors (London, 1864); MUNTZ, Hist. de l'art
          pendant la Renaissance (Paris, 1895); BODE, Denkmaler der
          Renaissance Sculptur Toscanas (Munich, 1905); SEMPER AND BARTH,
          Hervorragende Bildhauer-Architekten der Renaissance (Dresden,
          1880).

          M.L. HANDLEY

   Christobal Morales

                              Christóbal Morales

          A composer, born at Seville, 2 Jan., 1512; died at Málaga, 14
          June, 1553. From 1 Sept., 1535, to 4 April, 1540, he was a
          member of the papal choir. Formed in the Netherland School, he
          belonged to that group of distinguished Spaniards -- da
          Vittoria, de Baema, del Encina, Ribera, Peñalosa, and others --
          whose musical achievements in the sixteenth century won for
          their country a renown which has since declined. His style is
          original in a marked degree. Many contrapuntal devices invented
          by him came into general use after his time. Among his
          compositions are numerous masses for four, five, and six voices,
          settings of the "Lamentations" for four and six voices, a large
          number of motets for from three to six voices, and settings of
          the "Magnificat" according to the Gregorian modes for four and
          six voices. The latter are considered by Ambros to be Morales'
          most finished works. Besides the papal archives, where five
          masses, his "Lamentations", "Magnificats", and a number of other
          works are preserved, Proske's "Musica divina" and Eslava's "Lira
          sacra" contain works of the master. In Wooldridge's "Oxford
          History of Music" (Vol. II) is reproduced a three-part motet
          which offers a striking example of the style of this composer.

          WOOLDRIDGE, Oxford History of Music (Oxford, 1905); AMBROS,
          Gesch. der Musik, II, III, IV, V (Leipzig, 1881); HABERL,
          Bausteine für Musikgeschichte, II, III (Leipzig, 1888).

          JOSEPH OTTEN

   John O'Kane Murray

                               John O'Kane Murray

          Physician, historian, b. in County Antrim, Ireland, 12 Dec.,
          1847; d. at Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A., 30 July, 1885. He
          emigrated to New York with his parents in 1856, and was sent to
          St. John's College, Fordham, to make his studies. After
          finishing these he took the medical course at the University of
          the City of New York and practised as a physician in Brooklyn
          until 1880. The last five years of his life were spent in a vain
          effort to ward off the ravages of tuberculosis to which he fell
          a victim. He was a constant contributor to the Catholic Press
          and periodicals, and compiled a number of books, the most
          notable of which were: a "Popular History of the Cathoic Church
          in the United States" (1876); "Poets and Poetry of Ireland"
          (1877); "Catholic Heroes and Heroines" (1878); "Little Lives of
          Great Saints" (1879); "Catholic Pioneers of America" (1881);
          "Lessons in English Literature" (1883). He also revised
          Kearney's "General History" and brought it down to date and had
          begun to do the same to Lingard's "England". What he wrote was
          very widely read and always exerted a good influence.

          THOMAS F. MEEHAN

   Cornelius Musso

                                Cornelius Musso

          Friar Minor Conventual, Bishop of Bitonto, prominent at the
          Council of Trent; born at Piacenza 1511; died 1574. He was,
          perhaps, the most renowned orator of his day, and has been
          justly styled the "Italian Demosthenes". Returning to ancient
          patristic models, he has raised the homily to its highest form
          of perfection. He was among the first three bishops present at
          the Council of Trent, where he delivered the inaugural oration,
          distinguishing himself especially at the debates on
          Justification. In 1560 he was sent as papal legate to Emperor
          Ferdinand. He wrote: "De divina historia libri tres" (Venice,
          1585; 1587); "Comment. in epist. ad Romanos" (Venice, 1588); "De
          operibus sex dierum" (Venice, 1598). His "Conciones
          evangeliorum" and "Sermones" (ed. by Jos. Musso, Venice, 1580)
          Were translated into Latin by Michael of Isselt (Cologne, 1594).
          Musso was buried in the Church of the Twelve Apostles, Rome.

          GAUDENTIUS, Beiträge z. Kirchengesch. d. 16. und 17. Jahrh.
          (Bozen, 1880), 48 sqq.; Manuale dei Minori Conventuali, 324 sq.;
          PALLAVICINO, Istoria de concilio di Trento (Rome, 1883), passim;
          KEPPLER in Theologische Quartalschrift (Tübingen, 1892), 98;
          HURTER, Nomenclator Lit., III (3rd ed.), 84 sqq.

          THOMAS PLASSMANN
     __________________________________________________________________

   Ancient See of Odense in Denmark

                        Ancient See of Odense in Denmark

          (OTHINIA, OTHONIENSIS.)

          The diocese included the islands of Fünen, Langeland, Taasinge,
          Laaland, Falster, Als, and Aerö. It was founded before 988 from
          Schleswig, and the first church built at Odense was dedicated to
          St. Mary. Othinkar Hvide the Elder, a missionary bishop in
          Sweden, is said to have preached Christianity in Fünen, but the
          first Bishop of Odense whose name is known with certainty is
          Reginbert (Reginar), an Englishman consecrated by Archbishop
          Alnoth of Canterbury in 1020 or 1022 and sent by King Canute the
          Great to Denmark. Reginbert was succeeded by Eilbert, a clerk of
          Bremen (about 1043-72). After his death the diocese was vacant
          and subject to the Bishop of Roskilde, until 1086, at the
          earliest, when the English Benedictine monk Hubald was appointed
          its bishop. On 10 July, 1086, King St. Canute was murdered in
          the Church of St. Alban, Odense. The fame of his miracles and
          the bad harvests which followed upon his murder led to his
          canonization and to the translation (19 April, 1101) of his
          relics by Bishop Hubald to the new Church of Our Lady and St.
          Alban. At King Eric Eiegod's request William II, King of
          England, induced the Abbot of Evesham, Worcestershire, to send
          over twelve of his monks to Odense in 1100. They served the
          newly-erected Cathedral of St. Canute, and later they and their
          successors formed the chapter. The Church of St. Canute, which
          was at first of wood, and connected with the great Benedictine
          monastery of the same name, was burnt down more than once, and
          the present fine building was not begun until the time of Bishop
          Gisico (1287?-1300?). It is built of brick in pure Gothic style,
          and is considered one of the largest and finest ecclesiastical
          edifices in Denmark. Its construction was continued under his
          successor, Peter Pagh (1304-39), who apparently assisted, even
          if he did not found, the school at Odense. The next bishop,
          Nicholas Jonsen (1340-62), made the school a free one in 1349;
          before this the pupils paid half the cost of their education.
          Bishop Mogens Krasse (1460-74) seems to have finished the
          cathedral. His successor, Charles Rönnow (1474-1501), who had
          been provost of the Church of Our Lady, was hostile to the
          Benedictine monks at St. Canute's, and in 1474 drove them from
          the cathedral, replacing them with regular canons. It was not
          till 1489 that the monks were brought back, at the command of
          Innocent VIII.

          Long before this Odense was one of the richest bishoprics in
          Denmark. It was so exclusively regarded as belonging to the
          nobility that the famous Bishop Jens Andersen Beldenak endured
          much persecution on account of his humble origin. In 1529 he
          resigned his bishopric to Canute Henriksen Gyldenstjerne, Dean
          of Viborg. The latter can scarcely be regarded as a Catholic
          bishop. His election was never confirmed by the pope, and though
          imprisoned in 1536 he was released in 1537. From the beginning
          of his episcopate he had practically been a Lutheran, and after
          1537 he married and lived as a rich lay nobleman until his death
          (1568). Besides the cathedral at Odense with its crypt,
          containing the bodies of St. Canute and of his brother Prince
          Benedict, and its glorious reredos, etc., there are many fine
          churches at Nyborg, Svendborg, and elsewhere. Before the
          Reformation the diocese contained Augustinian Canons at St.
          Mary's, Odense; Benedictines at the cathedral, Odense and at
          Halsted (Laaland); Benedictine (?) nuns at St. Gertrude's,
          Odense; Augustinian nuns at Dalum; Cistercian monks at Holm
          (Insula Dei), now Brahetrolleborg; Franciscans at Odense,
          Svendborg, Nysted, and Nykjobing (Falster); Dominicans at
          Odense; Carmelites at Assens; a convent of Poor Clares at
          Odense; and a Brigittine abbey at Maribo (Laaland), the latter
          until 1620. Finally there were hospitals of the Holy Spirit at
          Odense, Assens, Faaborg, and Nakskov, and a Commandery of the
          Knights of St. John at Odense.

          At present there are Catholic churches at Odense (Church of St.
          Alban, dedicated in 1907), Svendborg, Nyborg, Assens, Maribo,
          and Glorup, as well as schools. There are also Redemptorists of
          the Austrian province at Odense and Franciscans at Maribo. The
          Sisters of St. Joseph have a hospital at Odense, while those of
          St. Hedvig have a sanatorium in the ancient nunnery of Dalum
          besides creches and kindergartens at Odense and Nyborg.

          Script. rer. dan., III (Copenhagen, 1774), 317-422; VII (ed.
          1792), 216-43; Samlinger til Fyens Historie (Odense, 1861-62),
          I, 245-328; II, 18-121; DAUGAARD, De danske Klostre i
          Middelalderen (Copenhagen, 1830); Muller, Jens Andersen Beldenak
          (2nd ed., Odense, 1837); BRICKA, Dansk biografisk Leksikon, VII
          (Copenhagen, 1892); Knud Hendriksen Gyldenstjerne, 378-83;
          METZLER, Biskop Johannes von Euch (Copenhagen, 1910); GERTZ,
          Vitae sanctorum danorum, I (Copenhagen, 1908), 27-166.

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Ancient See of Oslo in Norway

                         Ancient See of Oslo in Norway

          (ASLOIA, ASLOENSIS.)

          Oslo occupied part of the site of Christiania (founded 1624).
          After the formation of the Diocese of Hamar in 1152, the Diocese
          of Oslo was limited to the Provinces of Christiania, Smaalenene,
          Jarlsberg and Laurvik, and Akershus in Norway, and the Counties
          of Göteborg (Gothenburg) and Bohus in Sweden. Although Rudolf, a
          court bishop brought by St. Olave from Rouen, lived at Sarpsborg
          (1015-30) and worked in the surrounding district, Asgaut
          (1047-72?) is usually regarded as the first Bishop of Oslo. Of
          his successors Nicholas Arnesson (1190-1225) played a great
          though unhappy part in Norwegian politics. Bishop Haakon
          (1248-65) was very generous towards the chapter of Oslo; he was
          transferred to Trondhjem. Helge II (1304-21) was also a
          munificent benefactor of his diocese. Bishop Solomon (1322-52)
          was the only Norwegian bishop who survived the Black Death in
          1349. In 1350 he consecrated Gisebert, Bishop of Bergen, and
          Gyrder Ivarssön, Bishop of Skalholt (Iceland). In 1352, by a
          provision of Pope Clement VI, Gyrd Aslessön, Bishop of Olso, was
          compelled to exchange bishoprics with Bishop Sigfrid of
          Stavanger. Bishop Eystein of Oslo (1385-1407) and Dean Arne of
          the Royal Chapel at Oslo took a prominent part in the
          negotiations connected with the union of Denmark, Norway, and
          Sweden under Queen Margaret in 1397. Bishop Aslak Harniktsson
          Bolt of Oslo exchanged bishoprics in 1408 with Bishop Jakob
          Knutsson of Bergen, from which see Bolt was tranferred to
          Trondhjem. In 1522 Hans Mule, a favourite of Christian II and
          commandant of the Castle of Akershus, forced Bishop Andrew Muus
          to resign. Mule was consecrated bishop in 1524, but was drowned
          the same year. He was succeeded in 1525 by Hans Reff (d. 1545),
          the last Catholic bishop. Although originally a partisan of
          Christian II, Reff paid homage to Frederick I in 1532. He
          resigned his bishopric into King Christian III's hands in 1536,
          but was appointed as Lutheran superintendent of the Dioceses of
          Oslo and Hamar in 1541.

          The cathedral of Oslo, which originated from the foundation of
          the town by King Harald Hardraade (c. 1060), was the finest
          building in the diocese. It was dedicated to St. Halvard, a
          cousin of Kings Harald Hardraade and St. Olaf, who had been
          killed when defending a pregnant woman from her pursuers, and
          whose body was cast up on the shore near Oslo. His silver shrine
          was placed in the cathedral, when it was rebuilt after Oslo had
          been burnt by the Danes in 1137, and it remained there till the
          Reformation. Important councils were held at Oslo in 1306 and
          1436. The first of these was largely concerned with the
          maintenance of discipline in religious houses. It also issued an
          exhortation to bishops to have a priest always ready to hear
          confessions in every cathedral church. In 1436 canons were made
          with regard to the payment of tithe and other matters. Besides
          the cathedral chapter with an archpriest and canons, founded
          soon after 1150, there was a collegiate church at Oslo, namely,
          the Royal Chapel of St. Mary, with a provost, six canons, and
          six vicars. In 1314 Haakon V united the provostship of St.
          Mary's, Oslo, with the dignity of chancellor of the kingdom. The
          city also contained a Benedictine nunnery (Nonneseter) dedicated
          to St. Mary and founded before 1150, as well as a Dominican
          priory (St. Olave's) from before 1240 and a Franciscan priory
          founded about 1286. The great Cistercian Abbey of Hovedoe lay
          close to Oslo and was founded by monks from Kirkstead in
          Lincolnshire (England) in 1147. Other religious houses in the
          diocese were the Premonstratensian Abbey of St. Olaf at Tönsberg
          founded from Prémontré (c. 1190), and the Benedictine nunnery at
          Gimsoe (c. 1110). There were also Franciscan (Minorite) priories
          at Tönsberg, Konghelle, and Marstrand (Sweden). Dragsmark
          (Mariskog, Silva Sanctae Mariae), in the Swedish part of the
          diocese, seems to have belonged to the Premonstratensians.
          Lastly there were the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem at
          Varna, for the benefit of the king's courtiers and followers,
          and the house of Augustinian canons, Kastelle near Konghelle,
          both founded about 1198.

          WILLSON, History of Church and State in Norway (Westminster,
          1903); JORGENSEN, Den nordiske Kirkes Grundloeggelse, I-II
          (Copenhagen, 1874-78); KEYSER, Den norske Kirke under
          Katholicismen (2 vols., Christiania, 1856-58); Diplomatarium
          norvegicum (16 vols., Christiania, 1849-1903); DAAE, Det gamle
          Christiania (2nd ed., Christiania, 1891), 1-22; IDEM, Norges
          helgnes (Christiania, 1879), 163-69; STORM, Monumenta historica
          Norvegiae (Christiania, 1880), 155-58, 190; Samlinger til det
          norske Folks Sprog og Historie (Christiania, 1833), I, 264-304,
          553-63; II, 171-213; LANGE, Norske Klostre (Christiania, 1856);
          Historisk Tidsskrift, third series, II (Christiania, 1892),
          82-94.

          A.W. TAYLOR
     __________________________________________________________________

   Peace of the Church

                              Peace of the Church

          This is the designation usually applied to the condition of the
          Church after the publication at Milan in 313 by Emperor
          Constantine of an edict of toleration by which the Christians
          were accorded complete liberty to practise their religion
          without molestation. The freedom of conscience demanded by the
          Christian religion was incompatible with the theocratic or
          absolutist views which had prevailed regarding the relations of
          the State and religion prior to the time of Christ. This
          fundamental difference as to the extent and province of the
          civil power together with other reasons of a religious, social,
          and economic character led to the prescription of the followers
          of Christ in the Roman Empire. The attitude of the civil
          authorities changed as the Christians increased in numbers and
          importance. At first looked on merely as Jewish schismatics, the
          Christians were afterwards persecuted as enemies of the State
          and established institutions. A new stage was reached when, in
          the middle of the third century, the Church as such was made the
          object of attack. This attitude, inaugurated by Emperor Decius,
          made the issue at stake clear and well-defined. The imperial
          authorities convinced themselves that the Christian Church and
          the pagan Roman State could not co-exist; henceforth but one
          solution was possible, the destruction of Christianity or the
          conversion of Rome. For half a century the result was in doubt.
          The failure of Diocletian (284-305) and his colleagues in the
          last and bloodiest persecution to shake the resolution of the
          Christians or to annihilate the Church left no course open to
          prudent statesmen but to recognize the inevitable and to abandon
          the old concept of government, the union of civil power and
          paganism.

          The first decisive step in this direction was taken by the
          beaten and implacable Galerius, who published from Nicomedia in
          311 an edict of toleration in which he confessed that the
          efforts to "reclaim the Christians" had failed. This edict was
          the result of utter impotency to prolong the contest. Complete
          amnesty and freedom were attained two years later when Emperor
          Constantine, after defeating Maxentius, published early in 313
          with his colleague Licinius the famous Edict of Milan by which
          Christians were guaranteed the fullest liberty in the practice
          of their religion. Without detracting from the credit of
          Constantine, the important social and political changes implied
          in this act must be looked on as a triumph of Christian
          principles over pagan narrowness. The absolute independence of
          religion from state interference, which formed the keynote of
          this famous document, produced a new concept of society, and may
          be looked on as the first official expression of what afterwards
          came to be the medieval idea of the State. It was in Western
          Europe the first declaration on the part of any one vested with
          civil authority that the State should not interfere with the
          rights of conscience and religion. In addition to removing the
          ban from the Christians Constantine ordered that the property of
          which they had been deprived during the persecutions by seizure
          or confiscation should be returned to them at the expense of the
          State. For the Christians the immunities and guaranties
          contained in this act had most important results. Then for the
          first time it became possible to observe the Liturgy in its
          fullness, and seriously and earnestly to attempt to mould the
          life of the empire according to Christian ideals and standards.
          The joy of the Christians at this change in their public status
          is admirably expressed by Eusebius in his "Church History" (X,
          ii).

          GALERIUS, Edict of toleration in EUSEBIUS, Hist. eccl., VIII,
          xvii; Edict of Constantine in Hist. eccl., X, v. A large part of
          the edict in the original Latin can be found in LACTANTIUS, De
          mortibus persecut., xlvii. See also MASON, Persecution of
          Diocletian; ALLARD, Histoire des persecutions, VI; and
          bibliography under CONSTANTINE.

          PATRICK J. HEALY

   Pectorius of Autun

                               Pectorius of Autun

          The name with which the important document frequently known as
          the Inscription of Autun concludes. Nothing is known of the
          personal history of Pectorius. The inscription in which his name
          occurs, the authorship of which is usually attributed to him,
          was discovered, 24 June, 1839, in the cemetery of St. Pierre
          l'Estrier at Autun. It is written in Greek metre and engraved on
          a marble tablet which was recovered in fragmentary, though
          sufficiently complete, state to permit of the reconstruction of
          the entire text. The fragments are preserved in the museum of
          Autun and constitute one of the most remarkable epigraphic
          monuments of the early Christian Church. The following is a
          literal rendering of the inscription: "Divine race of the
          heavenly fish preserve a pure heart having received among
          mortals the immortal source of Divine waters. Refresh, O friend,
          thy soul with the everflowing waters of treasure-bestowing
          wisdom. Receive the sweet food of the Saviour of the Saints, eat
          with delight holding the fish in thy hands. Nourish (thine) with
          the fish, I pray, Master and Saviour; Sweetly may mother
          slumber, I beseech thee, Light of the Dead. Ascandios father,
          beloved of my heart with sweet mother and my brothers in the
          peace of the fish remember Pectorius". The inscription
          considered in its content naturally falls into three parts, the
          first of which addresses itself to the Christians, the second to
          Christ, and the third contains a loving appeal to Pectorius's
          deceased relatives. The language of the first part stands alone
          in its purity, whereas parts of two and three contain traces of
          decadence. Various dates ranging from the second to the sixth
          centuries have been assigned for the composition of the
          inscription. Its language, symbolism, and palaeographic
          characteristics refer it with great probability to the end of
          the second or beginning of the third century. In its
          interpretation the use of the fish among the early Christians as
          a symbolical designation of Christ Himself should be remembered.
          The document bears witness to some of the fundamental truths of
          the Catholic Faith, viz. the Divinity of Christ, the doctrines
          of transubstantiation, of prayer for the dead, and of the
          communion of saints. It clearly states the manner of
          distribution of the Holy Eucharist which in early times was
          placed in the hands of the recipient.

          LECLERCQ, Dictionnaire d'archeologie (Paris, 1907), s.v. Autun;
          POHL, Das Ichthys Monument von Autun (Berlin, 1880); MARRIOTT,
          Testimony of the Catacombs (London, 1870).

          N.A. WEBER

   Piatus of Mons

                                 Piatus of Mons

          (Secular name, JEAN-JOSEPH LOISEAUX), b. 5 Aug., 1815; d. in the
          Monastery of Ste. Claire, Bruges, 21 April 1904. As a student of
          priesthood he distinguished himself in moral theology and canon
          law. After his ordination as a secular priest of the Diocese of
          Torunai, Belgium, in 1838, he continued his study of canon law
          at Louvain. In 1843 he was appointed a vicar of the cathedral of
          Tournai, but the following year he went to Rome, and there spent
          two years in the Belgian college, studying canon law and working
          for the congregations. He returned to Belgium in 1846 and the
          next year was appointed to the chair of canon law and
          ecclesiastical history at Louvain. In 1847 in cooperation with
          Abbé Felise he founded the quarterly magazine, "Mélanges
          théologiques", and later the "Revue théologique" and the
          "Nouvelle revue théologique". The first was concerned chiefly
          with canon law; the second with liturgy. He continued to edit
          the "Nouvelle revue théologique" until 1895. when it passed into
          the hands of the Redemptorists. He twice refused the Bishopric
          of Tournai. In 1871 he entered the Order of Capuchin Friars
          Minor. His chief works are: "Praelectiones juris regularis", a
          dissertation, "De sentia S. Bonaventurae circa essentiam
          sacramenti Poenitentiae"; "Traité du jubilé". He also wrote a
          great number of articles in theological reviews.

          Analecta Ord. FF. Min. Capp. (Rome, July, 1904); Etudes
          franciscaines (Louvain, May, July, and August 1912).

          FATHER CUTHBERT

   Joseph-Antoine Plateau

                             Joseph-Antoine Plateau

          Belgian physicist, b. at Brussels, 14 Oct., 1801; d. at Ghent,
          15 Sept., 1883. His father, a flower-painter, wished him to be
          an artist, and, after his elementary studies, he was sent to the
          Académie de Dessein at Brussels. Left an orphan at fourteen,
          Joseph Plateau became the ward of a maternal uncle, an advocate,
          who intended him to study law. His intermediate studies were
          made at the Athénée Royal at Brussels, and in 1822 he entered
          the University of Liège, being enrolled as a student both of
          philosophy and letters and of science. He graduated doctor of
          physical and mathematical sciences, 3 June, 1829. After a brief
          period of teaching in the Athenee Royal at Liège, he was
          appointed, in 1835, professor of experimental physics in the
          University of Ghent. His thesis for the doctorate had been "On
          certain properties of the impressions produced by light upon the
          organ of sight". This line of research he followed for many
          years, studying successively the persistence of luminous
          impressions on the retina, accidental colours, irradiation, the
          contrast of colours, coloured shadows, etc. Many of the results
          obtained by him are still classical. In the course of these
          researches he once kept his naked eye fixed on the sun for
          twenty-five seconds, and this imprudence brought on a choroid
          inflammation which, in 1843, resulted in total blindness. Being
          obliged to give up teaching, he nevertheless continued his
          experimental work with admirable courage and marvellous success,
          helped by his elder son, Félix Plateau, the naturalist, his
          son-in-law, Van der Mensbruyghe, the physicist (1835-1911), and
          some friends and colleagues in the University of Ghent. To this
          period belong almost all his famous researches on the statics of
          liquids freed from pressure, on surface tension, and on the
          properties of thin liquid plates. After 1844 Joseph Plateau had
          no laboratory but his study in his own modest home. He himself
          planned all the experiments and arranged all the details in
          advance. His assistants would announce in a loud voice
          everything they were doing, all that they observed, and the
          results of each process. Joseph Plateau would then dictate the
          notes and, later on, the text of the memoirs for publication. In
          this way he worked until he was upwards of eighty. Joseph
          Plateau was a sincere Christian, faithful to all the duties of a
          pratical Catholic. He was a member of the Royal Academy of
          Belgium, punctually attending all its meetings, a correspondent
          of the Institute of France, and a member of most of the
          academies and learned societies of Europe. A complete list of
          Plateau's works with sources indicated will be found in Van der
          Mensbruyghe, "Notice sur J. A. F. Plateau" (extract from the
          Annuaire de l'académie royale de Belgique for 1885). His papers
          on visual phenomena have not been published separately: they are
          scattered through Mémoires and Bulletins of the Académie Royale
          of Belgium. His researches on liquids have been corrected,
          arranged, and published by the author in G. Plateau, "Statique
          expérimentale et theorique des liquides soumise aux seules
          forces moleculaires" (2 vols., Paris-London, 1873). The best and
          most complete study of his scientific work is that of Joseph
          Delsaulx, S.J., published under the title of "Les travaux
          scientifiques de Joseph Plateau" in the "Revue des questions
          scientifiques" (1st series, XV, 114-58, 518-77; XVI, 383-437).

          J. THIRION

   Prefecture Apostolic

                              Prefecture Apostolic

          (SUPPLEMENTAL LIST)

          An account is here given of the prefectures Apostolic that have
          been erected or changed during the publication of the earlier
          volumes of this work.

          BAR-EL-GAZAL. -- This mission was separated from the Vicariate
          Apostolic of the Sudan, and formed into a prefecture Apostolic
          on 30 May, 1913. It was entrusted to the care of the
          Congregation of the Sons of the Sacred Heart. Its boundaries
          were fixed as follows: on the north, the 10º N. lat. from the
          British Sudan frontier to the river Bar-el-Arab, then the rivers
          Bar-el-Arab, Bar-el-Gazal, Bar-el-Gebel, and Lobat as far as the
          British-Abyssinian border; on the east, the Abyssinian border
          from the Baro to Naita mountain and thence to Foweira on the
          Victoria Nile; on tue south the Victoria Nile, the northern
          shore of Lake Albert, and the Belgian-British frontier. On the
          west the Belgian-British and British-French frontiers as far as
          the 10º N. lat. By a Decree dated 30 May, 1913, R. P. Antonio
          Stoppani, of the Verona Institute of the Sons of the Most Sacred
          Heart of Jesus, was appointed first prefect Apostolic.

          BETAFO. -- This mission was separated from the Vicariate
          Apostolic of Central Madagascar (or Tananarive) by a Decree
          dated 15 May, 1913, and made a prefecture Apostolic. It is
          entrusted to the care of the Missionary Fathers of La Salette.
          The following boundary was assigned to the new prefecture: on
          the north, the 19º S. lat. from the Mozambique Channel to the
          borders of the Province of Itasy, then the southern limits of
          the province to the Kitsamby, then the northern and eastern
          borders of Faratsiho, to the latitude of Mount Faratsiho, and
          from there to the western border of Yatomandri; on the east, the
          border of Yatomandri as far as the 20º S. lat.; on the south,
          the Vicariate Apostolic of Fianarantsao; on the west, the
          Mozambique Channel from the 19º to 20º S. lat.

          CHOCO, in Colombia. -- This prefecture was erected on 28 April,
          1908, and entrusted to the care of the Sons of the Immaculate
          Heart of Mary. The superior of the mission is R. P. Juan Gil y
          García.

          CIMBEBASIA, LOWER. -- The boundary between this prefecture and
          that of Great Namaqualand was modified slightly by a Decree of 2
          June, 1913, which provided that the southern boundaries of the
          districts of Gobabis, Windhuk, Karibib, and Swakopmund, should
          be the line of delimitation between the two prefectures. The
          mission contains about 185,000 inhabitants, of whom are 907
          native and 636 European Catholics; there are 378 catechumens 20
          priests (Oblates of Mary Immaculate), 23 lay brothers, 10
          catechists, 11 stations, 24 schools with 520 pupils, and 16
          Franciscan Missionary Sisters. The prefect Apostolic is R. P.
          Eugène Klaeylé, born at Mutzig, Alsatia, in 1879; ordained,
          1903; superior of the mission since 30 Nov., 1909.

          CAROLINE ISLANDS. -- This prefecture Apostolic and that of the
          Mariana Islands were suppressed by a Decree dated 1 March, 1911,
          and replaced by a new vicariate Apostolic, called that of the
          Mariana and Caroline Islands (q. v.)

          DRISDALE RIVER, Australia, erected on 4 May, 1910; the
          territory, bounded by the 128º E. long. and 16º S. lat. and the
          ocean, was separated from the Vicariate Apostolic of Kimberley,
          when a mission was established for the conversion of the
          aborigines. It is at present under the jurisdiction of the Abbot
          of New Norcia, but is later to be erected into an abbacy
          nullius.

          ERYTHREA, in East Africa. -- This prefecture was erected into a
          vicariate Apostolic on 7 Feb., 1911.

          HO-NAN, WESTERN, in China. -- This was erected into a vicariate
          Apostolic on 2 May, 1911.

          KAFFA, SOUTHERN, in Abyssinia, a mission separated from the
          Vicariate Apostolic of Galla (q. v.), by a Decree dated 28 Jan.,
          1913; and committed to the care of the Turin Institute of the
          "Consolata" for the Foreign Missions. Its boundaries are: on the
          north, the Baro from the Abyssinian-British frontier to its
          source in Mount Secia, next the Goggeb till it falls into the
          Omo, and then a line directly east to the Arussi Mountains; on
          the east, the watershed between the Indian Ocean and Lakes
          Margherita, Ciamo, and Stefania; on the south, a line from the
          extremity of that watershed to the eastern shore of Lake
          Rudolph, at 4º N. lat.; on the west, the Abyssinian-British
          frontier between the River Baro and Lake Rudolph. R. P.
          Gaudentius Barlassina was appointed prefect Apostolic on 6 May,
          1913.

          KATANGA.-This mission was separated from the Vicariate Apostolic
          of Belgian Congo on 5 Aug., 1910. Its boundaries were fixed as
          follows: on the west, the Lualaba and the Luvua as far as Lake
          Moero, thence eastward along the Luapula to Lake Banguelo. From
          the source of the Luapula to the source of the Lualaba, the
          eastern and southern boundary of the prefecture is the
          Congo-Rhodesian frontier. The mission is entrusted to the
          Brazilian Congregation of the Benedictines of the Abbey of
          Saint-André, of Lophem-lés-Bruges, Belgium; as it is intended to
          erect the mission into an abbacy nullius. Three Benedictine
          priests and two lay brothers left Belgium for the mission on 18
          Aug., 1910. The first prefect Apostolic is Dom Jean de
          Hemptinne, appointed, Aug., 1910.

          KATANGA, SOUTHERN. -- This mission, which formed the eastern
          portion of the Prefecture Apostolic of Upper Kassai, was
          separated from it and erected into a distinct prefecture on 30
          June, 1911; it has been entrusted to the Fathers of the Holy
          Ghost and the Immaculate Heart of Mary. Its boundaries are: on
          the north, a right line from the mouth of the Elila to the town
          of Benakamba; on the west, the Lomani from Benakamba to its
          sources; on the south, the Lovoi; on the east, the Lualaba from
          the mouth of the Lovoi to the Elila, R. P. Emile Callawaert was
          appointed first prefect Apostolic on 25 July, 1911.

          KOROGO, in Equatorial Africa. -- On 17 Nov., 1911, the
          Prefecture Apostolic of the Ivory Coast, was divided into two
          parts. The northern portion was formed into the Prefecture
          Apostolic of Korogo, and entrusted to the Lyons Society of the
          African Missions. R. P. Pierre-Marie Kernivinen was appointed
          first prefect Apostolic on 16 Jan., 1912.

          MARIANA ISLANDS.-This prefecture and that of the Caroline Island
          were suppressed by a Decree of 1 March, 1911, when the two
          missions, with the exception of the Island of Guam, were formed
          into the Vicariate Apostolic of the Mariana and Caroline Islands
          (infra, p. 82).

          MATADI, in Belgian Congo. -- This mission was separated from the
          Vicariate of Belgian Congo and formed into a prefecture
          Apostolic on 1 July, 1911, and confided to the Redemptorists.
          Its boundaries are: on the north, the Congo from the mouth of
          the Kodio to that of the Binza, then the Binza to its source;
          next a line from that point to the mouth of the Binza-Nzau,
          finally the Congo to the Prefecture Apostolic of Kwango; on the
          east, the Prefecture of Kwango; on the south, the Belgian Congo
          frontier; on the west, the Bidizi to its source, thence a line
          through the mountains to the source of the Lukokote; then the
          course of the Lukokote and the Kodia to the Congo. R. P. Joseph
          Heintz was appointed the first prefect Apostolic on 1 Aug.,
          1911.

          NAMAQUALAND, GREAT, South Africa. -- The boundary between the
          Prefectures of Great Namaqualand and Lower Cimhebasia was
          changed on 2 June, 1913 and is now the southern limits of the
          districts of Gobabis, Windhuk, Karibib, and Swakopmund.

          NIGERIA, EASTERN, in Equatorial Africa. -- By a Decree dated 24
          Aug., 1911, the mission of the Upper Niger was divided into two
          parts, following the 8º E. long.; the name Upper Niger was
          dropped and the two missions called Eastern and Western Nigeria.
          Both were made prefectures Apostolic. The eastern mission was
          entrusted to the Lyons Society of African Missions. R. P. Oswald
          Waller, born at Bennwihr, Alsatia, 24 Jan., 1866; ordained, 10
          July, 1892, sent to the mission in Egypt, then to Dahomey in
          1898, and to Nigeria in 1906; was appointed first prefect
          Apostolic on 26 Sept., 1911. He resides at Shendam, Demshi.

          NYGATA, in Japan. -- This mission was erected into a prefecture
          Apostolic on 13 Aug., 1912, and committed to the care of the
          Society of the Divine Word, of Steyl. It comprises the Provinces
          of Akita, Yamagata, Nygata, formerly part of the Diocese of
          Hakodate; and Toyama, Ishikawa, and Fukui, part of the
          Archdiocese of Tokio and the Diocese of Osaka. On 19 Nov., 1912,
          R. P. Joseph Reiners was appointed the first prefect Apostolic.
          He resides at Nygata.

          PUTUMAYO, in Peru. -- This mission was erected into a prefecture
          Apostolic on 4 Oct., 1912, and was confided to the Friars Minor;
          R. P. Leo Sambook was appointed first prefect Apostolic in Nov.,
          1912. The establishment of this mission was the outcome of the
          agitation stirred up in the British Parliament by a detailed
          account of the atrocities perpetrated on the unfortunate Indians
          by the officials of a British rubber company operating in
          Putumayo, a distant district of Peru, at the head waters of the
          Amazon. For years this company had forced the Indians to collect
          crude rubber for them in the forests, and enforced their orders
          by tortures and scourging, inflicted by negro overseers imported
          from the Barbados for the purpose. Even women and children were
          not spared. The charges made by Sir Roger Casement, who visited
          the district at the request of the British Government, were in
          the main corroborated by the report of Romulo Paredes, a special
          independent investigator sent to the region by the Peruvian
          Government. For years the few missionaries in the district had
          appealed to the Peruvian authorities, when the opportunity
          presented itself, to protect the Indians, but until the
          agitation provoked by the revelations in England occurred and
          action was taken by the British and United States governments,
          no attention was paid to their petitions on behalf of the
          suffering natives.

          TEFFÉ, in Brazil, -- erected by a Decree dated 23 May, 1910,
          when together with the prefecture Apostolic of Upper Solimoes it
          was separated from. the Diocese of Amazonas or Manaos. The
          missions in Teffé and and Upper Solimoes were undertaken in 1897
          by the Fathers of the Holy Ghost and the Immaculate Heart of
          Mary, under R. P. Libermann at the request of Mgr. da
          Costa-Aguiar, Bishop of Amazonas, whose immense diocese erected
          only five years earlier was practically devoid of priests. The
          first mission was established by R. P. Berthon in June, 1907 at
          Teffé, a town on the Amazon 700 miles from Manaos, and 1600
          miles from the Atlantic. It is situated at the confluence of the
          Teffé and the Solimoes (or Upper Amazon), opposite the mouth. of
          the Japura; the missionaries have been greatly aided in their
          work by the co-operation of the local government authorities.
          They have established at Teffé a large orphanage and industrial
          school for the young Indians, on a site donated for the purpose
          by the municipal authorities. The first prefect Apostolic is R.
          P. Michel-Alfred Barat, born at Clermont, France, on 12 Nov.,
          1864; missionary in the Amazon district since 1897; appointed
          superior of the prefecture in May, 1910.

          TRIPOLI. -- This prefecture was erected into the Vicariate
          Apostolic of Libya by a Decree dated 23 Feb., 1913.

          WELLÉ. -- By a Decree of 18 Dec., 1911, the Prefecture Apostolic
          of Wellé was divided into Eastern and Western Wellé; the line of
          separation being the 23º 30' E. long. Each division was made a
          prefecture Apostolic. Western Wellé remained under the care of
          the Premonstratensians of the Abbey of Tongerloo, Belgium.
          Eastern Wellé was entrusted to the Dominicans; its first prefect
          Apostolic is R. P. Réginald Van Schoote, who was appointed on 12
          Jan., 1912. He resides at Amadi.

          ZAMBESI. -- The eastern boundary of the Zambesi mission was
          changed by a Decree of 28 June, 1912, and is now: the Portuguese
          Mozambique territory to 15º S. lat., then the rivers Luangwa,
          Lukasashi and Mlembo as far as the south-east corner of Belgian
          Congo.

          Acta Apostolicoe Sedis (Rome. 1909-); BATTANDIER, Annuaire
          pontifical catholique (Paris, 1908-13); Missiones catholicoe
          (Rome, 1907); PIOLET, Les missions catholiques françaises au XIX
          ^e siècle (Paris, 1901-03).

          A. A. MacErlean.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Queen's Daughters

                               Queen's Daughters

          (DAUGHTERS OF THE QUEEN OF HEAVEN, FILIÆ REGINÆ COELI)

          A religious and charitable society founded at St. Louis, Mo., 5
          Dec., 1889, by Miss Mary Hoxsey. It was organized to supplement
          the work done for the poor in their homes by the members of the
          Conference of St. Vincent de Paul. The project received the
          approbation and encouragement of the Very Rev. P.P. Brady in
          whose parish it was inaugurated, and several years later the
          papal sanction and blessing were accorded (17 July, 1894). The
          society has since spread to numerous parishes of the United
          States and there are now thirty-five associations affiliated to
          those at St. Louis. The constitution of the society provides
          that it shall be governed by a general council composed of
          subordinate councils and associations. Five or more associations
          in a diocese have the right of forming a subordinate council
          with its own bylaws and officers. The society was incorporated
          on 6 Jan., 1902. The Queen's Daughters visit the poor in their
          homes and afford them spiritual and material aid. They endeavour
          to influence those who neglect their religious duties or the
          religious training of their children, they teach Christian
          doctrine in mission Sunday-schools, and assist in preparing
          persons for baptism, and in providing suitable clothing for the
          first Communion of children whose parents are unable to make
          such provision. Their organizations include sewing-guilds,
          cooking-schools, boarding-homes for women and girls, sanctuary
          guilds and altar societies. At their Saturday industrial schools
          for children the children of the poor are taught to sew and be
          self-helpful. Here also they are brought in contact with the
          members of the Guardian Angel Bands, the children of well-to-do
          parents, who are taught to make garments for the poor and to be
          generally helpful and sympathetic to their poorer companions.
          The usual work in connexion with juvenile courts is done
          according to instructions provided by court officials. The
          members of several religious congregations are honorary members
          of the association. Representative of these are the White
          Sisters of the Nazareth Home, Providence, R.I., who maintain a
          day nursery and visit the sick poor in their homes and to whom
          the society is pledged to contribute a specified sum monthly.
          The patroness of the society is the Blessed Virgin; and its
          motto "Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam".

          BLANCHE M. KELLY
     __________________________________________________________________

   Ratzeburg

                            Ancient See of Ratzeburg

          (RACEBURGUM, RACEBURGENSIS.)

          In Germany, suffragan to Hamburg. The diocese embraced the Duchy
          of Lauenburg (Holstein) in the Prussian Province of Schleswig-
          Holstein, the Principality of Ratzeburg in the Grand Duchy of
          Mecklenburg-Strelitz, and the western part of the Grand Duchy of
          Mecklenburg-Schwerin, including Wismar but not Schwerin. The
          whole of it is now included in the Diocese of Osnabruck.
          Ratzeburg was one of the dioceses formed about 1050 by Adalbert
          I, Archbishop of Hamburg, who appointed St. Aristo, who had just
          returned from Jerusalem, to the new see. Aristo seems to have
          been but a wandering missionary bishop. In 1066 the Wends rose
          against their German masters, and on 15 July, 1066, St.
          Ansuerus, Abbot of St. George's, Ratzeburg (not the later
          monastery bearing that name), and several of his monks are said
          to have been stoned to death. It was not however till 1154 that
          Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony, and Hartwich, Archbishop of
          Hamburg, refounded the See of Ratzeburg, and Evermodus became
          its first bishop. A disciple of St. Norbert and provost of the
          Monastery of Our Lady at Magdeburg, Evermodus was, like many of
          his successors, a Premonstratensian monk and a model of all
          virtues. In 1157 a chapter was attached to Ratzeburg cathedral
          by Pope Adrian IV. In 1236 Bishop Peter was invested by Emperor
          Frederick II with temporal jurisdiction over the land of Butin
          and a number of villages outside it (the Principality of
          Ratzeburg). The succeeding bishops retained this jurisdiction in
          spite of the frequent attempts which the dukes of
          Sachsen-Lauenburg made to deprive them of it. In 1504, during
          the episcopate of Bishop John V von Parkentin, the
          Premonstratensian canons of Ratzeburg cathedral were, with Papal
          consent, made secular canons. Bishop George von Blumenthal
          (1524-50) was the last Catholic bishop. In 1552 the cathedral
          was plundered by Count Volrad von Mansfeld. In 1566 the dean and
          chapter went over to Lutheranism.

          The cathedral of Ratzeburg dates from the beginning of the
          twelfth century. It was restored, and additions were made to it
          in the fifteenth century. The diocese also contained a number of
          other beautiful churches at Molln, Wismar, Buchen, and
          elsewhere. Besides the cathedral chapter of Ratzeburg with its
          provost or dean and twelve canons, there were in the diocese the
          Benedictine Abbeys of St. George, Ratzeburg (refounded in 1093),
          and of Wismar, where Benedictines expelled from Lubeck founded a
          monastery in 1239; also convents of the same order at Eldena
          founded in 1229, by Bishop Gottschalk of Ratzeburg, and burnt in
          1290, at Rehna founded in 1237 by Bishop Ludolfus, and at
          Zarrentin founded in 1243. There were also Franciscans (1251)
          and Dominicans (1293) at Wismar.

          Mecklenburgisches Urkundenbuch (23 vols., Schwerin, 1863); Codex
          diplomaticus lubecensis (11 vols., Lubeck, 1843-1902);
          Diplomatarium raceburgense in De Wesphalen. monumenta. inedita
          rerum germanicarum (Leipzig, 1740), coll. 1997- 2335; SCHRODER,
          Papistisches Mecklenburg (2 vols., Wismar, 1739-41);
          Vaterlandisches Archiv des Vereins fur das Herzogthum Lauenburg,
          I (Ratzeburg, 1857); Archiv des Vereins fur die Geschichte
          Lauenburgs, new series, I-V, VII (Molln, 1884-), pt. 2; MASCH,
          Geschichte des Bisthums Ratzeburg (Rostock, 1832); NEUENDORFF,
          Die Stiftslander des ehemaligen Bisthums Ratzeburg (Rostock,
          1832), with a map of the diocese in 1231.

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Ancient See of Ribe in Denmark (Jutland)

                    Ancient See of Ribe in Denmark (Jutland)

          (RIPAE, RIPENSIS.)

          The diocese (29 deaneries, 278 parishes) consisted of the modern
          Danish Provinces of Ribe, Vejle, and Ringkjöbing, and of part of
          North Schleswig. The first church built at Ribe was founded by
          St. Ansgar in 860, served by his biographer and successor, St.
          Rembert, and destroyed during the heathen reaction after the
          latter's death in 888. It was rebuilt towards 948, in which year
          St. Leofdag. first Bishop of Ribe, was consecrated by Archbishop
          Adaldag of Hamburg, probably at the Council of Ingelheim
          (Germany), which the Jutish bishops attended. Leofdag is said to
          have been martyred by the heathen at Ribe. Until the death of
          his third known successor Vale (1044-59) the bishops of Ribe,
          Schleswig, and Aarhus wandered about Jutland on missionary
          tours. In 1060, however, Jutland was divided into the four
          Dioceses of Ribe, Aarhus, Viborg, and Vestervig (Borglum).
          Bishop Thure (1125-34) began to build the fine Cathedral of Our
          Lady at Ribe, which was finished under Bishop Elias (1142-66),
          who founded the chapter in 1145. His successor Radulf (1170-71),
          an Englishman and chancellor to King Valdemar I, translated to
          the cathedral the relics of St. Leofdag, who, however, was never
          formally canonized. He began the foundation of the Cistercian
          Abbey of Logum (Locus Dei) in North Schleswig, which was
          completed by his successor Stephen (1173-77), formerly Abbot of
          Herrisvad (Scania). Bishop Omer (1178-1204) reduced the number
          of the canons of Ribe to twelve. Bishop Christian II (1288-1313)
          in 1298 greatly enriched the cathedral school, which had been
          founded in 1145. Bishops Eskil (1388-1409) and Henry Stangberg
          (1455-65) published synodal statutes with a view to reforming
          both clergy and laity. Ivar Munk was elected bishop in 1499 but
          not consecrated till 1513. Although he was unable to prevent
          Duke Christian from protestantizing North Schleswig, he kept the
          new doctrine out of the rest of his diocese. Ivar Munk opposed
          Christian's election as King Christian III of Denmark in 1533,
          being however compelled as a privy councillor for Jutland to
          join that monarch's party, Ivar Munk resigned his bishopric in
          1534 in favour of his nephew, Olaf Munk. The bishop's palace at
          Ribe was bestowed upon Ivar Munk and there he died in 1539. Like
          the other Danish bishops Olaf Munk was imprisoned on 12 August,
          1536. When released he had to promise to marry as well as to
          comply with the conditions imposed upon all the Danish bishops.
          On the fulfillment of his promise the Abbey of Tvis was bestowed
          upon him, he was later readmitted to the privy council, and he
          lived the life of a rich nobleman until his death in 1569.

          The cathedral of Ribe (restored in 1904), a Romanesque building
          with Gothic additions and a tower dating from 1440, contained
          besides the shrine of St. Leofdag a chapel dedicated to St.
          Lambert, which was a great centre for pilgrimages. St. Lambert
          was the patron of Ribe as well as of Liège in Belgium, and his
          cultus at Ribe is doubtless due to the trading connection
          between that city and the Low Countries. The abbey church of
          Logum, the Romanesque churches near Ribe, like the cathedral
          built of volcanic stone brought from Andernach on the Rhine, and
          the earliest Christian monument in Denmark, the great carved
          stone set up by King Harold Bluetooth near the funeral mounds of
          his parents, King Gorm the Old (d. 940) and Queen Thyra Danebod
          (d. 945) at Jellinge near Veile, are all memorials of the
          Catholic past of the Diocese of Ribe. The cathedral chapter
          consisted of four prelates and twenty-one prebendaries (twelve
          resident). There were eight minor canons and nearly fifty
          chaplains. In the city there were also the Benedictine Convent
          of St. Nicholas (founded before 1215), a Franciscan and a
          Dominican priory, each dating from 1259, and a hospital of the
          Holy Spirit, and a commandery of the Knights of St. John of
          Jerusalem, both dating from about 1300. Elsewhere there were the
          Cistercian Abbeys of Tvis, near Holstebro (founded by Prince
          Buris in 1163), of Logum, and of Seem, the last having been a
          Benedictine abbey till 1171. There were Benedictine convents at
          Gudum and at Stubber, a Dominican priory at Veile, and a
          Franciscan priory at Kolding. At present (1912) there are
          Catholic churches, schools, and hospitals at Esbjerg, Kolding,
          Fredericia, and Veile.

          RIIS, The Old Town (New York, 1909); LANGEBEK, Script. rer. dan.
          V (Copenhagen, 1783), 534-70; VII (1792), 182-209;
          Kirkehistoriske Samlinger, II (Copenhagen, 1853-56), 490-500;
          III (1857-59), 69-91, 388-418, 584-648; TERPAGER, Ripae
          cimbricae descriptio (Flensburg, 1736); KINCH, Ribe Bys
          Historie, I (Ribe, 1869); HELMS AND AMBERG, Ribe Domkirke
          (Copenhagen, 1906); O. NIELSON, Ribe Oldemoder (Copenhagen,
          1869); BRICKA, Dansk Biog. Leks. (Copenhagen, 1887-1905).

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Francisco de Rioja

                               Francisco de Rioja

          A poet, born at Seville, 1583; died at Madrid, 1659. Rioja was a
          canon in the cathedral at Seville and a member of the Supreme
          Inquisition. His poems will keep his name forever remembered by
          his countrymen. Quintana considers them the first attempts at
          descriptive poetry in the Castilian language. The style is
          original, the thoughts beautifully expressed, the taste refined,
          and the versification well adapted and harmoniously blended with
          the theme. The ode "A las ruinas de Italia", which belongs to
          Rodrigo Caro, and the "Epístola moral", whose author is probably
          Francisco de Andrada, were, until late, ascribed to Rioja, who,
          although despoiled of these literary gems, is highly esteemed by
          all Spanish scholars. Menéndez y Pelayo felicitously writes that
          Rioja's "Ode to Summer", and those "To Tranquillity", "To
          Constancy," "To Riches" and "To Poverty" are, after the lyrics
          of Fray Luis de León, the best moral odes of the Castilian
          poetical treasure.

          RAMÓN FERNÀNDEZ, Poesías de Francisco de Rioja y de otros poetas
          andaluces (Madrid, 1798); SISMONDI, Hist. de la literatura
          española, II (Seville, 1842), 173; TICKNOR, Hist. of Spanish
          Lit., II (New York, 1854), 545; FERNÁNDEZ-ESPINO, Curso híst.
          crítico de la lit. española (Seville, 1895). The best edition of
          Rioja's poems is that of BARRERA (Madrid, 1867); Adiciones á las
          poesías de Rioja (Madrid, 1872).

          WILLIAM FURLONG

   Ancient See of Roskilde in Denmark

                       Ancient See of Roskilde in Denmark

          (ROSCHILDIA, ROSKILDENSIS.)

          Suffragan to Hamburg, about 991-1104, to Lund, 1104-1536. The
          diocese included the Danish Islands of Zealand and Moen and the
          Prussian Island of Rügen (Pomerania). About 960 King Harold
          Bluetooth built a wooden church dedicated to the Holy Trinity at
          his new capital of Roskilde. Godebald (991-1021), Gerbrand
          (1022- 30), and Aage or Avoco (1030-48) were the first three
          bishops of Roskilde. Godebald and Gerbrand were both Englishmen.
          Scania (Sweden) was subject to Roskidle from 991 to 1021, to
          Lund, 1021- 30, and again to Roskilde from 1030 to 1060, when
          Scania was divided between the Diocese of Lund and the
          short-lived Diocese of Dalby. Bishop William (1048-76) began,
          and Bishop Svend Norbagge (1076-88) finished, with the help of
          King St. Canute, the first stone cathedral at Roskilde in 1080.
          The following year he enlarged the existing monastery of Canons
          Regular, and made it into a chapter with fifteen prebendaries.
          Bishop Svend also completed the foundation of the Benedictine
          Abbey of Ringsted begun by King Svend Estridssen. During the
          episcopate of Arnold (1089-1124) a nobleman named Peter Bodilsen
          led a popular movement in Zealand directed against the marriage
          of the clergy. About this time the skull of Pope Saint Lucius I
          (253-55) was brought to Roskilde cathedral, of which he became
          the patron saint. This famous relic was given a year or two ago
          by the Danish Government to the vicar Apostolic for Denmark.
          Other prominent bishops were Eskil and the Danish national hero
          Absalon (see ABSALON OF LUND; ESKIL; LUND). Absalon founded
          Copenhagen in 1168, and gave it to the See of Roskilde in 1191.
          The Island of Rugen was incorporated in the Diocese of Roskilde
          by papal Bull in 1169. On 25 June, 1170, Valdemar I saw his
          father St. Canute Lavard's relics enshrined and his own son
          Canute (VI) crowned on the same day in the Abbey of Ringsted. It
          was the first Danish coronation. In 1171 Bishop Absalon
          published the Ecclesiastical Laws of Zealand. Peter Sunesen, a
          former Canon Regular of St. Augustine, and a pupil of Abbot
          Stephen of Saint Genevieve's, Paris, and of Abbot St. William of
          Ebeltoft, succeeded Absalon as Bishop of Roskilde in 1191. He
          began the present cathedral of Roskilde about A.D. 1200, in
          imitation of the cathedral of Tournai, Belgium, where Abbot
          Stephen was bishop from 1192 till 1203. Peter Sunesen died in
          1214. Bishop Niels Stigsen (1225-49) turned the canons of the
          cathedral from regulars into seculars. His successor, Jacob
          Erlandsen, the great champion of the claims of the Church, as
          against the State, who was Bishop of Roskilde from 1249 until
          his transition to Lund in 1254, founded schools for poor boys at
          Roskilde and at Lund, and greatly favoured the Franciscans.
          Bishop Olaf I (1301-20) added to Roskilde cathedral the
          lady-chapel, which was taken down in 1772 in order to make room
          for the ugly building in which the Danish monarchs are still
          buried. Bishop Peter (V) Jensen Lodehat, formerly Bishop of
          Vexiö (Sweden) and then of Aarhus, signalized his translation to
          the See of Roskilde in 1413 by forcibly removing the body of his
          benefactress Queen Margaret from Soroe abbey to the cathedral.
          On Bishop Peter's death in 1416 King Eric of Pomerania took
          possession of Copenhagen, which henceforward ceased to be
          episcopal property.

          Bishop Jens Andersen (1416-31) refurnished the choir of the
          cathedral, which however was greatly damaged when most of the
          town was destroyed by the great fire of 14 May, 1443, during the
          episcopate of Jens Pedersen (1431-48). Consequently it was not
          till 1464 that Bishop Olaf Mortensen Baden (1461-85) was able to
          consecrate the restored cathedral and the Chapel of the Three
          Kings added to it by King Christian I. The same monarch founded
          the University of Copenhagen in 1479 in virtue of a Bull from
          Sixtus IV. Bishop Baden was its first chancellor. The last truly
          Catholic bishop was the learned Lage Urne (1512-29) who, like
          his predecessors for many generations, was also High Chancellor
          of Denmark. He managed to keep Lutheranism out of the diocese
          for the most part, and it was not till the time of his successor
          Joachim Rönnov, nominal Bishop of Roskilde (1529-36), that the
          deluge came. Rönnov had neither received papal confirmation, nor
          had he been consecrated. All episcopal functions were performed
          by the Franciscan Vincent Lange, titular Bishop of Gardar,
          Greenland. Although Rönnov had made great concessions to
          Lutheranism, he was imprisoned, like the other bishops, in 1536,
          and, unlike them, kept in prison until his death in the Castle
          of Copenhagen in 1544. The cathedral of Roskilde, the abbey
          churches of Soroe, Ringsted, and Skovkloster (now Herlufsholm),
          the five-towered church at Kallundborg, the unique
          fifteenth-century Carmelite Priory of St. Mary's, Elsinore
          (Helsingor), all of whose buildings are intact, which was the
          home of the Catholic controversialist Paulus Helix or Poul
          Helgesen (1480-1536?), and is not even mentioned in any English
          guide-book, these, the Romanesque churches of Zealand and Rugen,
          and many other buildings and works of art testify to the
          importance of the diocese before the Reformation. Of the
          institutions then existing, the chapter of Roskilde, dating from
          about 1080, and the chapter of the Collegiate Church of Our Lady
          at Copenhagen, each consisted of a numerous clergy. There were
          Benedictines at Ringsted, where, besides St. Canute Lavard, the
          holy King Eric Plovpenning (d. 1250) and good Queen Dagmar (d.
          1212) were buried. The Abbeys of Esrom, Soroe, the home of Saxo
          Grammaticus the historian and the burial place of Absalon, and
          Skovkloster, formerly at St. Peter's Naestved, belonged to the
          Cistercians. There was an abbey of Canons Regular of St.
          Augustine at Ebelholt, and the Knights of St. John had a great
          house at Antvortskov. The Canons of St. Anthony of Vienne had a
          house at Praestoe. As elsewhere in Denmark, there were
          Franciscan, Dominican, or Carmelite convents, as well as
          hospitals of the Holy Spirit and sometimes leper-houses (as at
          Copenhagen and Kallundborg) in the towns. The Benedictine
          (afterwards Cistercian) nunnery of St. Mary at Roskilde
          contained the body of St. Margaret of Oeleshove (Olsemagle) near
          Kjoege, who was beatified in 1176. Another famous local saint
          was St. Andrew, priest of St. Peter's, Slagelse, who rode from
          Jerusalem to Slagelse one Easter Day according to the
          thirteenth-century legend. On the Island of Rugen there was the
          Cistercian nunnery of Bergen.

          Copenhagen is now (1912) the residence of the vicar Apostolic
          for Denmark and Iceland. There are about seven Catholic churches
          at Copenhagen, Jesuit colleges (of the German province) at
          Copenhagen and Ordrup, a house of Austrian Redemptorists, a
          community of Marists, various convents of the Sisters of St.
          Joseph of Chambéry (Savoy) including a novitiate, as well as
          convents of the (German) Sisters of St. Elizabeth and of the
          Assumptionist nuns. The Jesuits conduct schools (including a
          grammar school) at Copenhagen and Ordrup; the Christian Brothers
          have one at Frederiksberg. The Sisters of St. Joseph and the
          Assumptionist Sisters keep secondary, and the former four
          elementary, schools, as well as an orphanage. The Sisters of St.
          Joseph and the Sisters of St. Elizabeth possess splendid
          hospitals. There is also a training-home for young servants
          (Mariehjem) at Copenhagen. At Roskilde there are a church with
          two priests, a school, and a fine hospital kept by the Daughters
          of the Divine Wisdom (Filles de la Sagesse). At Elsinore there
          is a church with a school conducted by the Sisters of St.
          Vincent de Paul. There are also churches at Kjöge, Naestved,
          Ringsted, and Slagelse. The Island of Rugen now forms part of
          the Diocese of Breslau, and is under the immediate
          superintendence of the provost of Berlin as delegate of the
          prince-bishop. There is a Catholic church at Bergen.

          LANGEBEK, Scriptores rerum danicarum, I (Copenhagen, 1772); III
          (1774), 265-75; VII (1792), 1-155; JORGENSEN, Den nordiske
          Kirkes Grundlaeggelse (2 vols., Copenhagen, 1874-78); TRAP,
          Danmark, I-II (ibid., 1906, 1898); KORNERUP, Roskilde Domkirke
          in Danske Mindesmaerker, II (ibid., 1877); Aarboeger for nordisk
          Oldkyndighed, IX (ibid., 1874), 393-441; second series, III
          (1888), 114-28; V (1890), 105-84, 365-75; XII (1897), 225-46;
          BRICKA, Dansk biografisk Leksikon (19 vols., Copenhagen,
          1887-1905); Danske Magasin, IV, R. II (ibid., 1873), 62-69; V,
          R. III (1893-97), 356-77; OLRIK, Absalon (2 vols., ibid.,
          1908-09); MULLER, Vita Lagonis Urne (ibid., 1831-33); KNUDSEN,
          Joachim Ronnov (bid., 1840); Manuale curatorum (ibid., 1513);
          FREISEN, Katholisches Ritualbuch der danischen Diozese Roskilde
          (Paderborn, 1898); Breviarium Roskildense (Paris, 1517); Canon
          secundum usum Ecclesiae Roschildensis (Nyborg, 1522); Diurnale
          Roskildense (Paris, 1511); DAUGAARD, De danske Klostre i
          Middelalderen (Copenhagen, 1830); Kirkehistoriske Samlinger, IV,
          R. I (ibid., 1889-91), 56-91, 741-757; IV, R. V (1897-99), 503-
          543, 787-794; METZLER, Biskop Johannes von Euch (ibid., 1910);
          GERTZ, Vitae Sanctorum Danorum (ibid., 1908-12), 285-390,
          409-45; HELVEG, De danske Domkapitler (ibid., 1855).

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Antonio di Matteo di Domenico Rosselino

                    Antonio di Matteo di Domenico Rosselino

          The youngest of five brothers, sculptors and stone cutters,
          family name Gamberelli (1427-78). He is said to have studied
          under Donatello and is remarkable for the sharpness and fineness
          of his low relief. His most important work is the monument of
          Cardinal Jacopo of Portugal in the Church of S. Miniato al
          Monte, Florence (1461-67). The portrait bust of Matteo Palmieri
          in the Bargello is signed and dated 1468. In 1470 he made the
          monument for the Duchess of Amalfi, Mary of Aragon, in the
          Church of Monte Oliveto, Naples; the relief of the Nativity over
          the altar in the same place is also probably his. A statue of
          St. John the Baptist as a boy is in the Bargello; also a
          delicate relief of the Madonna and Child, an Ecce Homo, and a
          bust of Francesco Sassetti. The so-called Madonna del Latte on a
          pillar in the Church of S. Croce is a memorial to Francesco
          Neri, who fell by the stab intended for Lorenzo de' Medici.
          Other reliefs of the Madonna and Child are in the Via della
          Spada, Florence, and in the South Kensington Museum, London. In
          the latter place is the bust of Giovanni di S. Miniato, a doctor
          of arts and medicine, signed and dated 1456. Working in
          conjunction with Mino da Fiesole, Rosselino executed the reliefs
          of the Assumption of Mary and the martyrdom of St. Stephen for
          the pulpit at Prato. A marble bust of the boy Baptist in the
          Pinacoteca, Faenza, and a Christ Child in the Louvre are
          attributed to Antonio by some authorities.

          MUNTZ, Histoire de l'art pendant la Renaissance (Paris, 1895);
          PERKINS, Tuscan Sculptors (London, 1864); STURGIS, Dictionary of
          Architecture (New York, 1904); BODE, Denkmaler der Renaissance
          Sculptur Toscanas (Munich, 1905).

          M.L. HANDLEY

   Bernardo Rosselino

                               Bernardo Rosselino

          (Properly BERNARDO DI MATTEO GAMBARELLI.)

          B. at Florence, 1409; d. 1464. Rosselino occupies the first
          place among the architects and sculptors of second rank who
          flourished during the Early Renaissance. As an architect he
          built the Rucellai palace at Florence from the plans of his
          celebrated countryman Leon Battista Alberti, and had an
          important share in the working out of the details. Another
          striking work is the façade of the building of the Fraternità
          della Misericordia at Arezzo which he erected on a Gothic
          substructure. He won his greatest fame as an architect, however,
          while in the service of Nicholas V and Pius II. During the
          pontificate of Nicholas V he aided Alberti in working for the
          pope's plans respecting a new Church of St. Peter and the
          reconstruction of the Vatican. The choir which Rosselino began
          was used later by Bramante. At the order of Pius II he built in
          the pope's native town Castel Corsignano, later called Pienza, a
          cathedral, a palace, and a residence for a bishop. At the pope's
          request the cathedral was erected as a Gothic church with all
          the aisles of the same height, like the Gothic churches of
          Austria. He also, at the pope's command, prepared the designs
          for the Palazzo Nerucci and the beautiful Palazzo Piccolomini at
          Siena.

          Rosselino shows his great architectural talent in his work as
          sculptor; his importance for the sculpture of the Early
          Renaissance rests more in the structure as a whole and in the
          relation of the parts than upon the execution of individual
          figures, which still showed lack of life and spirit. This is
          especially true of the sepulchral monuments of Florence to which
          he gave their permanent form. The tomb he built to the
          Florentine secretary of State, Leonardo Bruni, in Santa Croce at
          Florence, was used as a model throughout the entire Early
          Renaissance. Bruni is represented as lying with the head
          slightly turned on a raised sarcophagus in a niche; in the
          semicircular background of the niche the Madonna and Child are
          shown with two worshipping angels. Among other works of the same
          character he designed the tomb of Beata Villana in the Church of
          Maria Novella at Florence, that of the jurist, Filippo Lazzari,
          in the Church of San Domenico at Pistoja, a richly ornamented
          marble doorway in the Palazzo Publico at Siena, and a terra
          cotta panel representing the Annunciation in the cathedral at
          Arezzo.

          MUNTZ, Histoire de l'art pendant la Renaissance, I (Paris,
          1888), 104, 306, 423, 543; BURCKHARDT-BODE, Cicerone (Leipzig,
          1901), 446 sq.; PASTOR, Hist. of the Popes (London, 1902-), I,
          43; II, 183; V, 71; VI, 460, 483.

          BEDA KLEINSCHMIDT
     __________________________________________________________________

   Fajardo Diego de Saavedra

                           Fajardo Diego de Saavedra

          Statesman and author, b. at Algezares, Murcia, Spain, in 1584;
          d. at Madrid in 1648. He made his studies at the University of
          Salamance where he received his degree in law. After having been
          the secretary of Cardinal Borgia, Spanish ambassador at Rome, he
          succeeded him in that position. Saavedra enjoyed the full
          confidence of Philip IV, conducting the political and diplomatic
          affairs of the latter during the course of thirty- five years in
          Italy, Germany, and Switzerland. His qualities and abilities as
          a statesman are shown as well in his works as in his deeds. His
          "Idea de un principe. . .representado en cien empresas" (Madrid,
          1670), translation by J.E. (London, 1827), embodied in a
          pleasing garb of humor. Other secondary works of Saavedra are:
          "Corona gótica" (1670), "Locuras de Europa" and "politica y
          razón de estado del Rey Católico D. Fernando". A complete
          edition of all his works appeared at Madrid in 1853. Saavedra is
          not only one of the foremost prose writers of Spain but is also
          one of the greatest glories of Spanish diplomacy.

          TICKNOR, History of Spanish Literature, III (New York, 1854),
          185; MENENDEZ Y PELAYO, Historia de las ideas esteticas en
          Espana, III (Madrid, 1888); DE PIUBUSQUE, Histoire comparee des
          litterateures espagnole et francaise (Paris, 1854); CORTINES Y
          MURUBE, Ideas juridicas de Saavedra Fajardo (Madrid, 1908): This
          latter work is prefaced by a very good account of Saavedra's
          life and diplomatic missions.

          WILLIAM FURLONG

   Karl Friedrich Savigny

                             Karl Friedrich Savigny

          Diplomatist, born at Berlin, 19 Sept., 1814; died at
          Frankfort-on-the-Main, 11 Feb., 1875. He was the son of the
          great jurist Friedrich Karl von Savigny, who was then privy
          councillor of the court of appeals, member of the Prussian
          council of State, and professor at the University of Berlin, and
          of his wife, Kunigunde Brentano, sister of the poet Klemens
          Brentano. The father was a Protestant, but the mother was a
          Catholic, and the children were allowed to follow the religion
          of the mother. Karl Friedrich was first taught at home, then
          attended the French Gymnasium at Berlin, the Collegium Romanum
          at Rome, and the Collegium Sebastianum at Naples. He studied law
          at Berlin, Munich, and Paris. In 1836 he became an auscultator
          at Berlin; in 1837 he was a referendar in the court at Aachen,
          in 1840 secretary of legation at London and Dresden, in 1842 at
          Lisbon, in 1848 at London. In 1849 he was councillor of
          legations and member of the ministry of foreign affairs, and in
          1850 ambassador at Karlsruhe. While here he was able to win over
          the Government of Baden for the Prussian policy, and, as
          Bismarck testified, "by cautious and tactful bearing to win a
          commanding position at Karlsruhe for the Prussian government."

          From 1859 Karl Friedrich was Prussian ambassador at Dresden,
          from 1862 at Brussels, and from 1864 he was minister with full
          powers at the Diet of the German Confederation at Frankfort. In
          1866 he offered at the Diet the Prussian motion for the reform
          of the German Confederation, and when it was rejected on 14
          June, 1866, he declared the withdrawal of Prussia, upon which
          the Austro-Prussian war began. Later in connection with Bismarck
          he was plenipotentiary in making a treaty of peace with the
          states of southern Germany and Saxony. He was the presiding
          officer of the government conferences for the drafting of a
          constitution for the North German Confederation, and was a
          plenipotentiary at the Reichstag which decided the constitution.
          Thus he performed important services in national affairs. In
          1868 he retired partially, and in 1871 entirely, from government
          positions in order to become one of the parliamentary leaders of
          the Catholics. From 1867 he was a member of the Lower House of
          the Prussian Diet, from 1868 a member of the Lower House of the
          Diet of the North German Confederation, and later of the German
          Reichstag, or Parliament of the German Empire. In 1871 he took
          part in the founding of the Centre Party. He was not
          particularly distinguished as a speaker, but his knowledge,
          distinguished personality, and connections were of much benefit
          to the Catholic cause.

          Unsere Zeit, XI, Pt. I (Leipzig, 1875), 466-69; Allegemeine
          deutsche Biographie, s. v.; PASTOR, August Reichensperger, I,
          Pt. II (Freiburg, 1899), passim.

          KLEMENS LÖFFLER

   Caspar Schatzgeyer

                               Caspar Schatzgeyer

          A foremost opponent of the Protestant Reformers; b. at Landshut
          in 1463 or 1464; d. at Munich, 18 Sept., 1527. For many years he
          was guardian at Munich, and since 1517 first provincial of the
          Strasburg province of the Friars Minor, and definitor-general.
          In 1523 he was appointed inquisitor for Germany. Schatzgeyer
          energetically oposed the new errors both in word and writing. It
          is in great part due to him and his confreres that the Catholic
          Faith held its ground in southern Germany, and that the Bavarian
          Government strenuously defended its cause. Within a few years he
          published upwards of twenty-three works in which he defended the
          Catholic position on such doctrines as grace, the veneration of
          saints, monasticism, the indissolubility of marriage, the Mass,
          purgatory, etc. His writings have received the highest praise
          from John Eck, who collected and published them at Ingolstadt in
          1543. The dukes of Bavaria recommended them to all
          ecclesiastics.

          GREIDERER, Germania franciscana, II (Innsbruck, 1777-81), 418
          sq.; DRUFFEL, Der baierische Minorit der Observ. C. Schatzger u.
          seine Schriften in Sitzungsbericht der kon. Baier. Akademie der
          Wissenschaft: philog. U. hist. Klasse (1890), 397-433; MINGES,
          Geschichte der Franziskaner in Bayern (Munich, 1896); PAULUS, C.
          Schatzyeier ein Vorkampfer der kath. Kirche in Suddeuschland
          (Freiburg, 1898); HURTER, Nomenclator lit., II (3rd ed.), 1253
          sqq.

          THOMAS PLASSMANN

   James Shirley

                                 James Shirley

          Poet and dramatist, b. in London, 18 Sept., 1596; d. there Oct.,
          1666. As a boy he attended the Merchant Taylors School, from
          October, 1608, to June, 1612, matriculating at St. John's
          College, Oxford, in the latter year; he there won the esteem of
          Laud, the president of the college. In 1617 he took his degree
          of B.A. at St. Catherine's Hall, Cambridge, and soon after
          taking orders in the English Church (1619), was assigned curate
          in a parish near St. Albans, where he remained until his
          conversion to the Catholic Church. After his conversion he
          taught for a livelihood and became master in the Edward VI
          School at St. Albans, on the failure of which he removed to
          Gray's Inn, London, 1625, as he said "to set up for a play
          maker". That he was faithful in the practice of his religion is
          gleaned from his works. His praise of the Benedictines in the
          "Grateful Servant" betrays an intimacy with the monks of that
          order. His first poem, "Eccho or the Infortunate Lover",
          appeared in 1618. There is no known copy of this under that
          title but it is supposed to be identical with "Narcissus or the
          Self Lover", still extant, which was published in 1616 and is an
          evident imitation of "Venus and Adonis". The beginning of his
          literary career was coincident with the accession of Charles I,
          who was enthusiastic over his comedy "The Gamester" and is even
          said to have suggested the plot. Shirley was a loyalist as
          evidenced by his poem on "The Prince's Birth", 1630, and he
          received great encouragement from Queen Henrietta Maria. His
          "Maide's Revenge" (1639), however, shows him to have been no
          lover of court flattery. He enjoyed great popularity as a
          playwright, and before 1640 he produced over thirty plays.
          "Love's Tricks" (1631) was the first, followed by: "The
          Traitor", a tragedy (1635); "Hyde Park", comedy (1637); "The
          Gamester", comedy (1637); "The Royal Master", sentimental comedy
          (1638); "The Ball", comedy, in collaboration with Chapman
          (1639).

          During the plague in London (1636-37), when the theatres were
          closed there, the dramatist went to Dublin, probably under the
          patronage of George Fitzgerald, 16th Earl of Kildare, to whom he
          dedicated "The Royal Master". Here he produced three or four
          plays, among them "St. Patrick for Ireland" and "The Royal
          Master", in Ogilby's Theatre (built in 1635), the first public
          theatre in Ireland. He returned to England a few years before
          the revolution in 1642 when the Long Parliament ordered all the
          theatres closed. From Nov., 1642, to July, 1644, Shirley fought
          under the Duke of Newcastle, to whom, in gratitude for former
          kindness, he had dedicated his tragedy "The Traitor" (1635). On
          the decline of the king's fortune he returned to London and his
          old occupation of teaching at the academy in Whitefriars,
          numbering among his students many afterwards eminent men. For
          these pupils he wrote several text-books, among them: the "Via
          ad latinam linguam complanata", with rules "for the greater
          delight and benefit of readers in both English and Latin Verse";
          "Rudiments of Grammar" with rules in English verse. However, the
          attraction of the theatre was too strong and he soon returned to
          the composition of plays. In 1646 he wrote "The Triumph of
          Beauty", on the familiar theme of Peele's "Arraignment of
          Paris", and "The Contest of Ajax and Ulysses". In the latter is
          found the now famous dirge beginning "The glories of our Mortal
          State are shadows, not substantial things", which is said to
          have terrified Oliver Cromwell. "The Cardinal", his masterpiece
          in tragedy, appeared in 1652, followed in 1653 by "Six Newe
          Plays" and in 1655 by two more. In a preface to a work in 1659
          he informed his readers that this is "likely to be the last of
          his dramatic productions" and he held to this resolution. Driven
          from his home in Fleet Street during the great fire of London,
          1666, he took refuge in the parish of St. Giles where he and his
          wife died on the same day, survived by three sons and a married
          daughter. They were buried in the Church of St.
          Giles-in-the-Fields, 29 Oct., 1666.

          James Shirley was the last of the great Elizabethan dramatists
          linking the Golden Age with the period of the Restoration.
          Though at times original in the invention of his plot, which was
          always ingenious and interesting, his mind was not that of a
          great master opening up new and untried ways. He was rather a
          diligent student and painstaking imitator of his great
          contemporaries and predecessors. He was an honour student in a
          school of which Shakespeare, Massinger, and Fletcher chiefly
          were the masters. He owes more to Fletcher perhaps than to any
          other; but he is often also reminiscent of Shakespeare. A critic
          said of him that what he borrowed from others lost nothing in
          his hands. He borrowed characters, situations, and ideas, but
          the manipulation of them was his own as was also the poetic
          language which enriched them. He numbered among his friends such
          men as Massinger, Ford, and Habington; his admiring imitators
          are found for two centuries after his death. "The Gamester" was
          frequently adapted by Garrick in 1758 and 1773, and by Poole in
          "The Wife's Strategem" in 1827. He was quick to observe the
          follies of his time and his pen was facile in delineating them.
          He is often reminiscent of Shakespeare, as when he introduces
          into one of his masques an imitation of the famous comic portion
          of a Midsummer Night's Dream where the shepherd "Bottle" takes
          the place of Bottom the Weaver. His tragedy "The Politicians"
          brings back memories of Hamlet. With the exception of
          Shakespeare no dramatist knew better than he how to enhance his
          narration with striking images or to intersperse his dialogues
          with poetic passages of rare workmanship, while he was far in
          advance of his day in grasping the idea of making the whole play
          centre in one striking scene (la scène à faire). Splendid
          examples of this may be seen in the three classes of drama in
          which he exercised his pen, in the tragedies, "The Traitor" and
          "The Cardinal", in the tragi-comedy, "The Royal Master", and in
          his comedy "The Gamesters". If lacking in pathos or in deep
          knowledge of the human heart, he possesses one quality not
          prevalent in the writings of his contemporaries. His plays are
          clean morally, and of "The Young Admiral", a romantic comedy
          licensed 3 July, 1633, we read that it was fit to serve "for a
          patterne to other poetts not only for the bettring of manners
          and language, but for the improvement of the quality [i.e., the
          actors] which hath received some brushings of late". The plays
          of Shirley, once produced in the famous cockpit at Drury Lane,
          are preserved for us in the only complete edition of his works
          ever made and edited by Gifford and Dyce (6 vols., London,
          1833). The revival of interest in his dramas is due to the
          sympathetic criticism of Charles Lamb.

          WOOD in Athenae Oxonienses, ed. BLISS, III (London, 1817),
          737-44; FLEAY, Biographical Chronicle of the English Drama
          (London, 1891); WARD, History of English Dramatic Literature
          (London, 1875); Quarterly Review, xlix (April and July, 1833);
          CIBBER, Lives of the Poets (London, 1753); WARD in Dict. Nat.
          Biog., s. v.

          WILLIAM DEVLIN

   Ancient See of Skara

                              Ancient See of Skara

          (SCARAE; SKARONENSIS, SCARENSIS).

          Located in Sweden; suffragan to Hamburg (990-1104), to Lund
          (1104-64), and finally to Upsala (1164-1530). This diocese, the
          most ancient in Sweden, included the Counties of Skaraborg,
          Elfsborg, and Vermland. It was founded about 990 at Skara, the
          capital of the country of the Goths (Gauthiod), the whole of
          which it embraced until about 1100, when the eastern portion of
          the Diocese of Skara was formed into that of Linkoping. At the
          beginning there was no strict division of the country into
          dioceses, and the missionary bishops went about preaching
          wherever they would. Thus it is that, though Odinkar Hvite the
          Elder was apparently the first bishop stationed at Skara about
          990, Sigurd, a court bishop of King Olaf Tryggveson of Norway,
          is named as the first Bishop of Skara in the list of bishops
          written down about 1325 as an appendix to the Laws os the
          Western Goths (Vestgotalagen). It is added that he founded three
          churches in Vestergotland, and he also seems to have baptized
          Olaf Skotkonung, first Christian King of Sweden, at Husaby near
          Skara in 1008. Odinkar's successor was Thurgaut, first diocesan
          Bishop of Skara (about 1012-30). He was nominally succeeded by
          Gotskalk, a monk of the Benedictine abbey at Luneburg, who never
          left his abbey, although he had been consecrated to the See of
          Skara by Archbishop Liavizo of Hamburg (1030-32). Meanwhile
          Sigurd, or Sigfrid, an Englishman of Scandinavian origin and a
          monk of Glastonbury (?), took possession of the See of Skara
          about 1031, and remained there till after 1043. Although he
          entered into communication with Bremen and sent his relative and
          successor Osmund to be educated there, both Sigurd and Osmund
          seem to have been regarded as intruders by the Archbishop of
          Hamburg-Bremen. Osmund was consecrated in Poland, and refused to
          acknowledge the primacy of Hamburg. In this refusal he was
          supported by King Anund Jacob. Consequently when Adalvard the
          Elder, subdean of Bremen, who had been consecrated Bishop of
          Skara by Archbishop Adalbert on the death of Bishop Gotskalk,
          came to Skara about 1050 to take possession of his see, he was
          prevented from doing so, and had to wait for Osmund's departure
          for England in 1057 (?) before he could become Bishop of Skara
          de facto. Adalvard the Elder died in 1060 and was buried near
          the first Cathedral of St. Mary, which he had built. Acelin,
          dean of Bremen, was consecrated bishop in 1061, but never took
          possession of the see. Adalvard the younger, who had visited and
          buried his elder namesake in 1060, was invited on his expulsion
          from the See of Siguna in 1067 to become Bishop of Skara, but
          was recalled to Bremen by Archbishop Adalbert.

          Of the next four bishops of Skara hardly anything is known.
          Concerning Bishop Oedgrim the following facts are recorded. He
          was present at the consecration of Lund cathedral in 1145.
          During his episcopate the abbey at Varnhem was founded (1150) by
          some Cistercians of Clairvaux who came from Alvastra. Finally in
          1151 Bishop Oedgrim consecrated part of the present cathedral,
          which Bishop Benedict I (1158-90) enlarged and furnished. The
          latter also built the Churches of St. Nicholas and of St. Peter
          at Skara as well as many roads and bridges. Bishop Jerpulf
          (1191-1201) persuaded a popular assembly at Askubeck to assign
          to the bishop part of the tithe. Benedict II (1217-30) founded
          several secular canonries in 1220, and thus originated the
          cathedral chapter. St. Bryniolph Algotsson is the best known
          bishop. He studied for eighteen years at Paris, became dean of
          Linkoping, and in 1278 Bishop of Skara. He issued statutes in
          1231, and composed hymns and other works, amongst them a "Life
          of St. Helena of Skoffde" (Schedvia), who was murdered in 1140
          and was canonized by Pope Honorius III, and whose remains were
          translated to Upsala in 1164. She was also greatly venerated at
          Tidsvilde (Zealand) and elsewhere in Denmark. St. Bryniolph died
          on 6 February, 1317. In 1499 Alexander Vi granted leave for the
          translation of his relics, but St. Bryniolph was never formally
          canonized. Under him and his successor, Bishop Benedict III
          Tunnesson (1317-21), that is between 1312 and 1320, the whole of
          the cathedral was restored. Bishop Sven the Great (1435-48?)
          painted it in fresco.

          Bishop Bryniolph III Gerlaktsson (1478-1505) regulated the
          frontier between his diocese and that of Lund. His successor,
          Bishop Vincent Hennings, was beheaded by Christian II at the
          Massacre of Stockholm on 8 November, 1520, although he protested
          aloud on his way to the scaffold against the injustice of his
          condemnation. Then came Magnus Haraldsson (1523), who election
          was not confirmed by the pope in spite of King Gustavus I Vasa's
          request. Johannes Franciscus de Potentia, a Franciscan, was
          nominated Bishop of Skara the same year by papal provision, but
          the king refused to receive him. Bishop Magnus Haraldsson,
          though at first submissive towards Gustavus I, led his diocesans
          to Larf to take part in the rising of 1529. He was accordingly
          deposed by the king, who appointed in 1530 a Protestant, Svend
          Jacobsson, in his place. Besides Skara cathedral and the abbey
          church at Varnhem, there are interesting romanesque churches at
          Asklanda and elsewhere. At Husaby there was a spring dedicated
          to St. Brigid of Kildare. This Irish dedication may be accounted
          for by the fact that Olaf Skotkonung was, as mentioned above,
          baptized there in 1008 by Sigurd, court bishop of King Olaf
          Tryggveson, who had many connections with Ireland. St. Olaf was
          specially venerated at Dalby and Elgaa in Vermland.

          At Skara the cathedral chapter consisted latterly of a dean, an
          archdeacon, a subdean, and twenty-one canons. There were also in
          the town a Franciscan priory dating from about 1242 and a
          Dominican priory from about 1260. At Lodose there were also
          Franciscans from 1283 and Dominicans from 1286. Finally there
          were the Cistercian monastery at Varnhem and the Cistercian
          nunnery at Gudhem; the latter was founded about 1160.

          Scriptores rerum svecicarum, II (Upsala, 1876), 112-20, 135-85;
          BORTZELL and WISELGREN, Vestgotalagen gengivet i Lystryk
          (Stockholm, 1889); JORGENSEN, Den nordiske Kirkes Grundlaeggelse
          (2 vols., Copenhagen, 1874-8); Historisk Tidskrift, XI
          (Stockholm, 1891), 73-88; Kyrkohistorisk Aarsskrift, XI (Upsala,
          1910), 214-20; REUTERDAHL, Svenska Kyrkans Historia (5 vols.,
          Lund, 1838-66); IDEM, Statuta synodalia veteris ecclesiae
          sviogothicae (Lund, 1841); Skrifter utgifna af den
          kyrkohistoriska foreningen, III; GUMMERUS, Synodalstatuter
          (Stockholm, 1902), 8-20, 25-29, 46-83; LINDSKOG, Om Skara Stift
          (Skara, 1812-16); LINDBERG, Vestergotland (Tidaholm, 1908);
          WENNERBLAD, Skara Stifts Kyrkor, (2 vols., Norrkoping, 1902);
          HILDEBRAND, Skara Domkyrka (Stockholm, 1891); HALL,
          Cistercienserorden i Sverige (Gefle, 1899), school programme.
          For St. Helena of Skoffde see CHEVALIER, Bio-Bibl., I (Paris,
          1905), col. 2045; FRONDIN and FORSSENIUS, Specimen historicum de
          Schedvia urbe (Upsala, 1734-36), disputation; Museum, pt. II
          (Copenhagen, 1895), 1-34. For St. Bryniolph see Acta SS., Feb.,
          I (Antwerp, 1658), 925-26.

          A.W. TAYLOR

   William Smits

                                 William Smits

          Orientalist and exegete, b. at Kevelaer in the Duchy of Geldern,
          1704; d. 1 Dec., 1770. He entered the Order of Friars Minor, in
          the Belgian province, at the age of eighteen. As a religious he
          applied himself with remarkable success to the study of Biblical
          languages and Sacred Scripture and was appointed lector. From
          1732 to 1744 he published, at Antwerp, several Biblical theses
          dealing with questions of textual criticism and chronology. In
          one of these, "Isagoge Romano-Catholica ad textum hebraeum. .
          .", he shows that the Latin Vulgate is substantially a faithful
          translation of the original Hebrew; and in another, "Isagoge
          Romano-Catholica ad textum graecum vulgo LXX. . .", he states
          the reasons why the LXX is preferable to the actual Hebrew text.
          Yielding to the entreaties of Cardinal Thomas Philip of Alsace,
          then Archbishop of Mechlin Smits undertook the translation of
          the entire Bible into Flemish. But far from merely rendering the
          Vulgate into his native tongue, he has left us a voluminous and
          learned work of monumental importance. The title is: "Biblia
          Sacra Vulgatae editionis, versione belgica, notis
          grammaticalibus, literalibus, criticis,. . .elucidata per FF.
          Minores Recollectes musae philologico-sacri antwerpiensis." Of
          this series he lived to finish only thirteen Sacred books, which
          were published, in seventeen volumes, from 1744 to 1767. The
          work was continued by his collaborator and former pupil, Peter
          van Hove. In 1765 Smits was appointed the first prefect of the
          "Musaeum philologico-sacrum", a Franciscan biblical institute at
          Antwerp which, though shortlived, has a glorious history.

          DIRKS, Histoire litteraire et bibliographique des Freres Mineurs
          (Antwerp, 1885), 318 sqq.; SCHOUTENS, Geschiedenis van het
          voormatlig Minderbroederklaster van Antwerpen (Antwerp, 1908),
          169-99; HOLZAPFEL, Handbuch der Geschichte des
          Franziskanerordens (Freiburg, 1909), 565, 595.

          THOMAS PLASSMANN

   Ancient See of Stavanger

                            Ancient See of Stavanger

          (STAVANGRIA; STAVANGRENSIS)

          Located in Norway; included the Provinces of Stavanger, Lister
          and Mandal, and Nedenes. It was formed early in the twelfth
          century out of the southern portion of the Diocese of Bergen,
          which had included until then the whole of Western Norway
          (Gulathingslagen). Reginald, an Englishman and most probably a
          Benedictine monk from Winchester cathedral, was the first Bishop
          of Stavanger. With the money given him in 1128 by King Sigurd
          Jorsalefarer, for allowing that monarch to marry one Cecilia
          during the lifetime of his consort Queen Malmfrid, Reginald
          began the cathedral and founded the chapter. He was hanged at
          Bergen in 1135 by King Harald Gille upon his refusing to
          impoverish his see by paying fifteen marks of gold to that
          monarch, who suspected him of concealing the treasures belonging
          to King Magnus IV. Reginald's successor, John Birgerssön, was
          translated to Trondhjem in 1152, as was also Bishop Eric
          Ivarssön in 1188. The great quarrel lasting from 1294 to 1303,
          which Bishop Arne (1276-1303) had with his chapter, was
          terminated only by the intervention of King Haakon, who decided
          in favour of the chapter and decreed, among other things, that
          they should have a voice in all nominations to, and deprivations
          of, benefices in the diocese. Bishop Gutterm Paalssön (1343-50)
          died of the Black Death. His successor, Arne Aslakssön, also
          died suddenly at Avignon, whither he had gone to seek a
          dispensation super defectu natalium. Consequently Clement VI
          appointed Sigfrid, a Swedish Dominican, Bishop of Stavanger by
          papal provision in 1351. Most of his successors were appointed
          in the same way after agreement with the king. In 1352 Sigfrid
          was transferred to Oslo, while Gyrd Aslessön, who had just been
          appointed to that bishopric, had to accept in 1354 the less
          lucrative See of Stavanger. He was soon succeeded by Botolph
          Asbjornssön (1355-81), who gave his library to the chapter and
          compiled a Domesday Book (Jordebog) for the diocese. It has
          since disappeared. Bishop Audum Eivindssön (1426-55) built many
          churches and gave the episcopal tithes of Valdres to the
          Brigittines of Munkalif near Bergen in 1441 in their hour of
          need. The last Catholic bishop was Hoskold Hoskoldssön
          (1513-37), who was taken prisoner by Thord Rod at Bergen and
          died there.

          The fine Cathedral of the Holy Trinity and St. Swithun, with its
          twelfth century Norman nave and its Gothic choir (from 1275-97),
          which once contained the shrine of Saint Swithun, the chapel of
          the old Bishop's Palace (Munkkirken) dating from the same period
          as the cathedral choir, King Olaf Tryggveson's church (from 995)
          on the Island of Moster, the fine thirteenth-century church at
          Avaldsnes, and many other buildings are monuments of the
          Catholic past. The cathedral chapter consisted of dean,
          archdeacon, subdean, and ten canons. The Church of St. Olaf,
          Avaldsnes, was collegiate, though most often it was served by
          only one priest. It was a royal chapel, as were also the chapels
          of St. Peter at Saurboe (Ryfylke), of St. Lawrence at Huseby
          (Lister), and another chapter dedicated to St. Lawrence at
          Egersund. The last three chapels were not collegiate. The only
          monastery of importance was the Augustinian Abbey of Utstein
          founded about 1280. The bishops of Stavanger had many disputes
          with the abbots of Utstein. In 1537 the abbey was handed over to
          Thrond Ivarssön, who had, however, to maintain the monks. Other
          monasteries are said to have existed in the Diocese of
          Stavanger, but little or nothing is known of them. There was a
          hospital dedicated to St. Peter at Stavanger itself. There is
          now a Catholic church at Stavanger.

          THORKELIN, Diplomatarium arna-magnaeanum (2 vols., Copenhagen,
          1786); Diplomatarium norregicum, especially IV (Christiania,
          1858); DAAE, Stavanger Stift I Middalderem in Historisk
          Tidsskrift, third series, vol. V (Christiania, 1899), 218-36;
          Norges Land og Folk, IX-XI (ibid., 1888, 1893, 1894); MUNCH,
          Paavelige Nuntiers Regnskabs-og Dagboger, 1282-1334
          (Christiania, 1864); STORM, Afgifter fra den norske
          Kirkeprovins, 1311-1523 (ibid., 1897), 30-39, 113, 114.

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Ancient See of Strengnas

                           Ancient See of Strengnäs

          (STRENGAE, STRENGENSIA; STRENGENESIS).

          Located in Sweden. The diocese consisted of the County of
          Nykoping, the County of Stockholm south of Lake Malar, and the
          southern half of the County of Orebro. In 829 St. Anschar and
          his companion, Witmar, having reached Bjoerkoe (Birca), an
          island on Lake Malar and a great centre of trade, were well
          received and made many converts. Returning to Germany in 831,
          St. Anschar was made first Archbishop of Hamburg by Gregory IV
          and given a share in the superintendence of the Northern Mission
          hitherto exercised by Ebbo, Archbishop of Rheims. Ebbo's
          relative Gautbert (Simon) became Archbishop of Sweden and built
          a church at Bjoerkoe. This success incurred the enmity of the
          heathen, who drove him from the country in 837, and slew his
          relative Nithard. St. Anschar sent Ardgeir to Sweden in 844, but
          he did not stay long. St. Anschar revisited Bjoerkoe in 853,
          when a law tolerating Christianity was passed, and until 865 St.
          Rimbert, the biographer and successor of St. Anschar, and other
          missionaries worked there. In 936 Archbishop Unni visited
          Bjoerkoe and died there. In 1066 the city was utterly destroyed.
          About 1080 St. Eskil, an English bishop, while at Sodermanland,
          disturbed a heathen sacrifice held at Strengas and was killed.
          Botvid, a native layman converted in England, continued the
          preaching of Christianity until his murder, 28 July, 1120, by a
          Slavonic captive whom he had redeemed. About this time St.
          Regnhild, wife of King Inge II, died and was buried at
          Sodertelje, of which town she became the patron saint. In 1152
          the limits of the Diocese of Strengnäs were determined at an
          assembly at Linkoping. The first bishop was Gerder (1129-59),
          who founded a school at the Cluniac monastery of Strengnäs. He
          was succeeded by Bishop William (1160-1208). In 1160 the
          Cistercian Abbey of Juleta was founded. In 1165 Nericia (Nerike)
          was added to the diocese. About this time the building of
          Strengnäs cathedral was begun. In 1176 of 1179 the new stone
          church as Botkyrka was consecrated by Bishop William and
          Archbishop Stephen of Upsala; the relics of St. Botvid were
          translated thither. A hospital of St. John of Jerusalem was
          built over the grave of St. Eskil, and was restored in 1255.
          Bishop Olaf or Ulf Bonde (1208-24), called Bassatämir, a nephew
          of King St. Eric IX, was transferred to Upsala. The see lay
          vacant for nine years, but in 1233 Bishop Trogil was elected.
          About this time the Cistercian nunnery of Vaarfruberga (Mons
          Mariae) on the Island of Fogdoe and in 1234 the Franciscan
          priory at Nykoping were founded. About 1250 Frogil was succeeded
          by Colo or Kol (Charles?), who resigned in 1257 and was
          succeeded by Bishop Finved (1257-75). About 1268 the Dominican
          priory at Strengnäs was founded. In 1291 Bishop Annund (1275-91)
          consecrated the cathedral, which was burnt down on the same day,
          and rebuilt by Isarus, the next bishop (1291-1303). In 1305 it
          was decided that the city of Stockholm belonged to Upsala, but
          that Sondermalm belonged to Strengnäs.

          The most famous of the later bishops was Conrad Rogge
          (1479-1501), a doctor of Perugia and a learned humanist. He
          built the present cathedral choir about 1481, and founded a
          charterhouse at Svartsjo about 1493 and a hospital for aged and
          infirm priests at Strengnäs in 1496. In 1495 he had the Breviary
          of Strengnäs printed at Stockholm in a revised edition. His
          successor, Matthias Gregerson Lilje, was the protector of "the
          Swedish Luther", Olaus Petri Phase (b. at Örebro, 1493), who,
          having studied as a disciple of Luther and Melancthon at
          Wittenberg (1516-18), returned to Strengnäs in 1519. The bishop
          made him chancellor of the diocese and master of the cathedral
          school, and in 1520 he was ordained deacon and became canon of
          Strengnäs. There he taught Lutheranism, with which heresy Bishop
          Gregerson was entirely unacquainted. On 8 Nov., 1520, that
          unfortunate prelate was beheaded during the massacre at
          Stockholm. King Christian II gave the bishopric to Jens Andersen
          Beldenak, Bishop of Odense, who, however, returned to Denmark in
          April, 1521. During the vacancy the diocese was governed by
          Laurentius Andreae who had become archdeacon of Strengnäs in
          1520. He greatly favoured Olaus Petri, and as chancellor of King
          Gustavus Vasa (1523) he promoted the interests of Protestantism.
          The last Catholic Bishop of Strengnäs, if he can be called so,
          was Magnus Sommar (1528-36), dean of Strengnäs in 1518,
          nominated bishop by Gustavus Vasa in 1522, and consecrated
          without papal confirmation by Petrus Magni, Bishop of Westeraas,
          6 Jan., 1528. Messenius states that the bishops elect signed a
          document in which they promised to go to Rome to seek papal
          confirmation, and thus persuaded Petrus Magni to proceed to the
          consecration. Magnus Sommar was very submissive towards the
          king, but his concessions did not save him. For a slight offense
          he was deposed and imprisoned, and only released in order that
          he might retire to the monastery of Krokek.

          The cathedral of Strengnäs with its numerous chapels, one of
          which now contains a fine museum of ecclesiastical art, the
          bishop's palace, built about 1490, now the cathedral school, the
          fine Church of St. Nicholas at the interesting old town of
          Orebro, and numerous ancient village churches bear witness to
          the piety of the inhabitants in Catholic times. Three provincial
          synods were held at Telge in the Diocese of Strengnäs in 1279,
          1341, and 1380. The first two issued statutes on matters
          concerning the discipline of the clergy, while the synod of 1380
          threatened with divers penalties those who molested the tenants
          of church lands. The "Sondermannalagen", a code of laws
          published early in the fourteenth century for the people of
          Sodermanland, contains a number of ecclesiastical laws. Among
          other institutions, there was in the diocese the chapter of the
          cathedral, funded about 1288, which counted thirteen members at
          the end of the fifteenth century, besides which there were a
          least eighteen chaplains, who served the eighteen altars. To the
          institutions mentioned throughout the article must be added the
          charterhouse of Mariefred (1491-1526), and the Carmelite priory
          of Orebro founded in 1418.

          PERTZ, Monumenta germaniae historica; Script., II (Hanover,
          1829); Vita S. Anskarii, cc. x, xi, xxv, xxvii, pp. 697, 710-12;
          JORGENSEN, Den nordiske Kirkes Grundlaeggelse (2 vols.,
          Coppenhagen, 1874-78); Scriptores rerum srecacarum, II (Upsala,
          1828), 377-404; III (1876), 250-52; INDEBETOU, Sodermanlands
          Minnen, I (Stockholm, 1877); AMIKNSON AND WAHLFISK,
          Sodermanlands aldre Kulturhistoria (2 vols., Strengnäs,
          1884-95); HOFBERG, Nerikes Gamla Minnen (Orebro, 1868);
          Diplomatium svecanum; MARTIN, Gustave Vasa et la Reforme en
          Suede (Paris, 1906); REUTERDAHL, Statuta synodalia veteris
          ecclesiae sveogothicae (Lund, 1841); SCHIYTER, Sweriges Gamla
          Lagar, IV; Sodermanna-Lagen (Lund, 1838); HALL, Bidrag till
          Kannedomen om Cistercienscrorden (Gefle, 1899); LUNDQVIST, De
          svenska Domkapitlen (Stockholm, 1897); AHLENIUS, Sverige, IV
          (Stockholm, 1909); Acta SS., June, II (Antwerp, 1688), 598-600;
          July, VI (1729), 633-38.

          A.W. TAYLOR
     __________________________________________________________________

   Monastery of Tallagaht

                             Monastery of Tallagaht

          The name Tallaght (Irish Tamlachta), derived from tam, plague,
          and lecht, stone monument, records the burial place of some of
          the earliest inhabitants of Ireland, the Parthalonians, who were
          swept off by a plague about A.M. 2600. Tallaght is situated in
          the barony of Uppercross, 5 miles south of Dublin. The monastery
          was founded by St. Maelruain (d. 7 July, 792), the site having
          been given in honour of God and St. Michael by Cellach (d. 18
          July, 771) of the Ui Donnchada, grandson of a Leinster king,
          Donogh (d. 726). One of Maelrain's companions was St. Aengus the
          Culdee, who with him compiled the "Martyrology of Tallaght".
          Other saints associated with Tallaght were Airennan (10
          February), second abbot; Eochaid (28 January), second bishop;
          Joseph (5 January); and Dichull (d. 889). In 1179 Tallaght, with
          its subsidiary chapels of Killohan and St. Bride's, was united
          to the Archdiocese of Dublin by a Bull of Alexander III (20
          April, 1179). In 1223 the deanery of Tallaght was annexed to St.
          Patrick's Cathedral by Archbishop Henry de Loundres. In 1324
          Alexander de Bicker built or restored an archiepiscopal manor at
          Tallaght, which was fortified later to protect the English in
          Dublin from the attacks of the O'Byrnes. At the Reformation it
          passed into the hands of the Protestant Archbishops; its ruins
          and grounds were acquired in 1812 by the Dominicans, who have
          erected a novitiate and church there.

          ARCHDALL, Monasticon hibernicum, ed. MORAN (Dublin, 1873);
          FITZGERALD in Journ. Kild. Archaeol. Soc., V (Dublin, 1908);
          D'ALTON, Hist. of Co. Dublin, 761 sqq.

          A.A. MACERLEAN
     __________________________________________________________________

   Ancient Diocese of Vaison

                           Ancient Diocese of Vaison

          (VASIONENSIS.)

          This was suppressed by the Concordat of 1801, and its territory
          is now included in the Dioceses of Avignon and Valence. St.
          Albinus (d. 262) was incorrectly placed by the Carthusian
          Polycarpe de la Riviere among the bishops of Vaison. The oldest
          known bishop of the see is Daphnus, who assisted at the Council
          of Arles in 314. Others were: St. Quinidius (Quenin, 556-79),
          who valiantly resisted the claims of the patrician Mummolus,
          conqueror of the Lombards; Joseph-Marie de Suares (1633-66), who
          died in Rome while filling the office of librarian of the
          Vatican, and who left numerous works. Vaison, the capital of the
          Voconces, was very important during the Celtic period and under
          the Roman domination; it belonged in turn to the Visigothic and
          Austrasian Kingdoms. The disputes which broke out in the twelfth
          century between the counts of Provence and the bishops, both of
          whom were in possession of half the town, were injurious to its
          prosperity; they were ended by a treaty negotiated in 1251 by
          the future Clement IV. The apse of the Church of St. Quenin
          seems to date from the eighth century; it is one of the oldest
          in France. As a whole the cathedral dates from the eleventh
          century, but the apse and the apsidal chapels date from the
          Merovingian period. St. Rusticala (b. at Vaison, 551; d. 628)
          was abbess of the monastery of St. Caesarius at Arles. Two
          rather important councils as regards Gallican ecclesiastical
          discipline were held at Vaison in 442 and 529, the latter under
          the presidency of St. Caesarius.

          Gallia christiana, nova, I (1715), 919-40, 1329-30, instr.
          151-54; DUCHESNE, Fastes episcopaux, I, 254; BOYER DE
          SAINTE-MARTHE, Histoire de l'eglise cathedrale de Vaison (2
          vols., Avignon, 1731); COURTET, Notice historique et
          archeologique sur Vaison in Revue archeologique, VIII (1851),
          306-22; LABANDE, La cathedrale de Vaison (Caen, 1905).

          GEORGES GOYAU

   Coptic Bibles

                          Coptic Versions of the Bible

  DIALECTS

          The Coptic language is now recognized in four principal
          dialects, Bohairic (formerly Memphitic), Fayumic, Sahidic
          (formerly Theban), and Akhmimic. The relative antiquity of these
          as literary idioms is much debated. But the fact is that no
          Bohairic manuscript and probably no Fayumic manuscript is older
          than the ninth century, while some Sahidic and Akhimimic codices
          are apparently as old as the fifth and even the fourth century.
          In the ninth century Bohairic was flourishing, in Northern
          Egypt, particularly in the Province of Bohairah (hence its name)
          south-west of Alexandria and in the monasteries of the Desert of
          Nitria, while Sahidic was spread throughout Upper Egypt or Sahid
          (hence the name of Sahidic) inclusive of Cairo, having already
          superseded Fayumic in the Province of Fayum (ancient
          Crocodilopolis) and Akhmimic in the region of Akhmim (ancient
          Panopolis). Later (eleventh century?) when the Patriarch of
          Alexandria moved his residence from that city to Cairo, Bohairic
          began to drive out Sahidic and soon became the liturgical
          language of the Copts throughout Egypt.

  VERSIONS

          There are versions of the Bible in all four dialects. All of
          them are now incomplete, but there is hardly any reason to doubt
          that they once existed in their entirety. It is now considered
          certain that they were made independently and that their
          differences are to be traced to a difference between the Greek
          recensions from which they were translated. There is much
          discussion between specialists as to the age of the Coptic
          versions, especially as to which of them was made first. The
          present writer in his "Étude sur les versions coptes de la
          Bible" (Revue biblique, 1897, p. 67) concluded that some Coptic
          version must have been in existence as early as the end of the
          second century. On the other side Forbes Robinson (Hastings,
          "Dict. of the Bible:, IV, 570) does not think that there is
          sufficient ground for believing that a Coptic version existed
          before the fourth century (see also Burkitt in Cheyne, "Encycl.
          Biblica", IV, 5008 seq.). However, in proportion as older
          manuscripts are discovered, and Coptic versions are submitted to
          closer study, the pendulum of opinion is swinging back to the
          former view. Leipoldt agrees that the Sahidic version was
          completed about A.D. 350 ("Gesch. der christlichen Literaturen",
          VII, 2, Leipzig, 1907, p. 139). Dr. Kenyon goes one step
          further: "If, therefore, we put the origin of the Coptic
          versions about A.D. 200, we shall be consistent with all extant
          evidence, and probably shall not be very far wrong" ("Textual
          Criticism of the New Testament", 154, quoted by Budge in "Coptic
          Biblical Texts", p. LXXXIII). More emphatic still is Horner:
          "If, with Harnack, relying on Leipoldt we may conjecture, though
          we cannot prove, that the Sahidic version partly goes back to
          the third century, there seems some reason for supposing that
          need of a vernacular version arose as early as the time of
          Demetrius [A.D. 188]. Where history fails us, the internal
          character of the Sahidic supplies confirmation of a date earlier
          than the third century. . .the traces of early mixture shown by
          the definite tinge of Western influence can hardly be explained
          except by reference to a date as early as possible. If
          Christianity did not exist at all in Upper Egypt before A.D.
          150, then we must come down to the date of Demetrius as the
          earliest possible date of the version; but if, as is more
          likely, the Christian religion had spread by means of the Nile
          immediately after it began to be preached in Alexandria, and had
          already become infected by heretical and semi-pagan
          superstitions in the second century, we may provisionally
          conclude from the character of the Sahidic version that it was
          made at that time" ("The Coptic Version of the New Testament in
          the Southern Dialect", III, Oxford, 1911, p. 398).

          All agree as to the great value of the Coptic versions. The
          Sahidic version is especially of importance for the study of the
          Septuagint, as it was made, it seems from Greek manuscripts free
          from Hexapla influence. However, the critical value of those
          versions cannot be fully realized until we have a more
          comprehensive study of them, based on critical editions as we
          already have for the New Testament in Boharic and for the
          Gospels in Sahidic by Horner. The following is a synopsis of the
          material on hand for the study of the several Coptic versions.
          (See the writer's "Étude des versions coptes de la Bible" in
          "Rev. bibl." (1896-7) for a fuller account of the Boharic
          material and in the case of the other three versions for an
          account up to that date.

          The Bohairic Version

          The only complete books of the Old Testament known to be extant
          in Bohairic are the Pentateuch, the Prophets with Lamentations,
          the Psalms, and Job. Of the others we have fragments only,
          mostly taken from lectionaries. The New Testament is complete.
          Chief editions: Pentateuch, Wilkins (London, 1731); P. de
          Lagarde (Leipzig, 1867); Prophets and Lamentations, Tattam,
          Prophetae majores (Oxford, 1852); Prophetae minores (ibid.,
          1836); Psalms, Tuki (Rome, 1744), Ideler (Berlin, 1837),
          Schwartze (ibid, 1851); Job, Tattam (London, 1846). The older
          editions of the New Testament have all been outranked by the
          recent Oxford edition; "The Coptic Version of the New Testament
          in the Northern Dialect, otherwise called Memphitic or
          Bohairic", by Geo. Horner (4 vols. Clarendon Press, 1898-1905).
          The only new manuscript of importance is one of these recently
          acquired by the late J. P. Morgan of New York. It is supposed to
          have come from the Monastery of St. Michael in the Fayum as the
          rest of the collection. It contained once the four Gospels. Many
          leaves unfortunately are now missing. Still it may prove of
          considerable value as it is from one to two hundred years older
          than the oldest known Bohairic manuscript of the Gospels (Bodl.
          Huntington 17, A.D. 1174).

          The Sahidic Version

          Of this version until recently we had almost nothing but
          fragments, representing several hundred manuscripts, chiefly
          from the monastery of Amba Shnudah (Shenoute) near Sohag
          province of Akhmim, generally known as the "White Monastery".
          The only complete books were those of the Wisdom of Solomon and
          the Wisdom of Jesus son of Sirach (Ecclesiasticus), and some of
          the minor Epistles. Of late, however, this number has been
          considerably increased, see above. COPTIC LITERATURE, Morgan
          collection, and British Museum, Recent acquisitions. The most
          important editions since 1897 (besides those mentioned in the
          article just referred to) are the following:

          Old Testament

          (1) Rahlfs, "Die Berliner Handschrift des sahidischen Psalters"
          (Abhandlungen der königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenchaften, zu
          Gottingen, philolog.-hist. Klasse, IV, 4), Berlin, 1901. This
          codex, which Rahlfs ascribes to about A.D. 400, contained in the
          neighbourhood of 129 leaves out of which 98 are still extant in
          a rather dilapidated condition. The greatest lacuna (about
          thirty leaves), between leaf 94 and 95, covered Psalms 106-143.
          Six pages are reproduced in collotype at the end of the book.

          (2) "A Coptic Palimpsest containing Joshua, Judges, Ruth,
          Judith, and Esther", by Sir Herbert Thompson (Oxford Univ.
          Press, London, 1911). This palimpsest is the manuscript Add.
          17,183 of the British Museum known already from the descriptions
          of W. Wright, "Catalogue of the Syriac Manuscripts in the
          British Museum", II, 89, no. DCCCXII, and Crum, "Catalogue of
          the Coptic Manuscripts of the British Museum", no. 12. Specimens
          of the script, which can be dated in the seventh century, were
          published by the present writer in "Album de paleographie copte"
          (Paris, 1888), pl. VII, 1, and LVI, 1. Some twenty-five folios
          of the original MS. are now missing, leaving as lacunae: Joshua,
          ii, 15-iii, 5; x, 26-36; xvii, 17-xviii, 6; xix, 50-xx, 1,6;
          xxii, 14-20; Judges, vii, 2-6, 15-19; viii, 11-19; viii, 28-ix,
          8; x, 7-14; xvi, 19-xvii, 1; xviii, 8-21; xix, 8-15; xx, 16-23;
          xx, 48-xxi, 6; xxi, 15 end; Ruth, iv, 3-9; Judith, ii, 6-iv, 5;
          v, 6-14; v, 23-vi, 3; vii, 2-7; vii, 18-21; xvi, 7-xvii, 16;
          Esther (according to Sweet's Greek edition: A, 11-i,11; ii,
          8-15; iii, 13-B, 4; iv, 13-C, 6; D, 9-vi, 5; viii, 2-E, 6; E,
          17-viii, 12.

          (3) "The Coptic (Sahidic) version of certain books of the Old
          Testament from a Papyrus in the British Museum: by Sir Herbert
          Thompson (Oxford Univ. Press, London, 1908). This papyrus
          (British Museum, Or. 5984), once in ordinary book form, now
          consists of fragments only, preserved in 62 numbered glass
          frames. Originally it contained the Books of Job, Proverbs,
          Ecclesiastes, Canticle of Canticles, Wisdom, and Ecclesiasticus
          (Sirach). Of Job only xxxviii, 27-xxxix, 12 is left. Of Proverbs
          there are considerable portions from iv, 16 to the end; of
          Ecclesiastes, likewise from vi, 6 to ix, 6; of Canticle of
          Canticles, from the beginning to the end; of Wisdom, from the
          beginning to xix, 8; of Ecclesiasticus from the beginning to xl,
          18. The script (illustrated by a plate reproducing
          Ecclesiasticus Prol., 1-i, 12) is pronounced by Crum (Proc. Of
          the Soc. of Bibl. Archaeology) to be "Perhaps of the sixth or
          seventh century".

          (4) "Sahidischgriechischa Psalmenfragmente" by C. Wessely in
          "Sitzungsber. d. kais. Akad. d. Wissenschaften, philos.-histor.
          Klasse", vol. 155, I (Vienna, 1907). In this the learned curator
          of the Rainer collection gives us some very important fragments
          of the Psalms, among which are twenty-four leaves of a papyrus
          codex containing once the whole Psalter both in Greek and
          Sahidic on opposite pages, and shorter fragments of two other
          bilingual parchment manuscripts of the Psalms, and other
          parchment fragments in Sahidic only. Another bilingual fragment
          of the Psalms, from the same collection, was published by
          Wessely in his "Griechische u. koptische Texte theologischen
          Inhalts I" in "Studien zur. Palaographie u. Papyruskunde", IX
          (Leipzig, 1909) no. 17.

          (5) The latter volume of Wessely contains also several fragments
          of the Old Testament in Sahidic, along with some Psalms in Greek
          only.

          (6) "Textes de l'ancien testament en copte sahidique" by Pierre
          Lacau in "Recueil de travaux relatifs a la philologie et a
          l'archeologie egyptiennes et assyriennes", XXIII (Paris, 1901).
          From the library of the Institut Francais, Cairo, one leaf of an
          Old-Testament lectionary (Borgia, XXXII), and six leaves of a
          manuscript of Isaias; from the Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris,
          one leaf of the latter manuscript.

          (7) Winstedt. Some unpublished Sahidic fragments of the Old
          Testament in "Journ. of Theol. Studies", X (Oxford, 1909),
          233-54. Those are the nos. 5, 15, 44, 19, 20, 40, 43, 45, 46,
          47, 53, 51, 52, 56, 59, and 14 of Crum's "Catalogue of the
          Coptic Manuscripts in the British Museum" (London, 1905).

          (8) "Sahidische Bibel-Fragmente aus dem British Museum zu London
          I and II" in "Sitzungsberichte der kai. Akademie d.
          Wissenschaften in Wien, philos.-hist. Klasse", vol. 162, VI, and
          164, VI (Vienna, 1909-11) by J. Schleifer and "Bruchstucke der
          sahidischen Bibelubersetzung," (ibid., vol. 170, I, Vienna,
          1912) by the same author. Those are the nos. 11, 43, 48, 47, 21,
          51, 40; 1, 4, 5, 7, 10, 13, 23, 8, 938; 9, 934, 935, 936, 953,
          of Crum's "Catalogue" (see above), plus one fragment from Eaton
          College Library, London, and one from the Bibliothèque Nationale
          of Paris (1317, fol. 36). With reference to the edition of the
          Paris Old-Testament fragments published by G. Maspero, "Memoires
          de la Mission," etc. (Paris, 1886) we must mention:

          (9) S. Gaselee's "Notes on the Coptic Version of the LXX, I" in
          "Journ. of Theol. Studies", XI (1909-10), 246-55, in which the
          writer supplies from the originals quite a number of corrections
          and some additions, to the text of the historical books in that
          edition.

          Also (10) Deiber's "Fragments coptes inédits de Jérémie",
          supplying likewise one leaf of Jeremias (xxxiii, 13b-xxxiv, 4),
          overlooked by Maspero.

          (11) Finally, an excellent contribution to the Old-Testament
          Sachidic fragments by A. Hebbelynck in his "Manuscripts coptes
          sahidiques du Monastère Blanc, I", reprinted from the "Muséon"
          (Louvain, 1911). The author identifies the fragments scattered
          throughout Europe which belonged once to the same codices as the
          thirty-two Borgian fragments. We are informed that this work of
          identification will be extended to the other fragments of the
          whole Monastery outside of the Borgian collection.

          B. New Testament

          (1) "Sacrorum bibliorum fragmenta copto-sahidica musaei
          Borgiani, vol. III, Novum Testamentum edidit P.J. Balestri
          O.S.A." (Rome, 1904), with forty full-page collotype specimens
          under special cover.

          (2) "The Coptic Version of the New Testament in the Southern
          Dialect otherwise called Sahidic and Thebaic, with Critical
          Apparatus, literal English translation, Register of fragments
          and estimate of the version", I-III (Oxford, 1911), with
          photographic specimens of the most important manuscripts. In
          this masterpiece of patient scholarship, the author (whose name
          does not appear on the title page), Rev. George Horner, has
          succeeded in reconstructing the whole of the Four Gospels (a few
          verses excepted) out of 744 fragments scattered throughout the
          public and private collections of the world. These fragments
          belonged once to some 150 different manuscripts, the
          identification of which by the author is perhaps not the least
          merit of his work. Unfortunately some valuable fragments, in
          particular those in the Rainer collection, now incorporated with
          the Imperial Library of Vienna, were not accessible to Horner in
          time to be used for his edition.

          (3) Since then, the New-Testament fragments of that rich
          collection have been published in autography with the most
          minute palaeographical details by the curator C. Wessely,
          "Griechische u. koptische Texte theologischen Inhalts, I-III" in
          "Studien zur Paläographie u. Papyruskunde", IX, XI, XII
          (Leipzig, 1909-12).

          C. Mixed Editions

          Fragments both of the Old and the New Testament have also been
          edited since 1897 (inclusive).

          (1) By Pleyte and Boeser from the the Leyden Museun in their
          "Catalogue des manuscripts coptes du Musée d'antiquités des
          Pays-Bas" (Leyden, 1897).

          (2) By Leipoldt, from the Museum of Berlin in "Aegyptiselie
          Urkunden aus den königlichen Museen zu Berlin, koptische
          Urkunden", I (Berlin, 1904).

          (3) By O. v. Lemm, from the British Museum, the Bibliothèque,
          Nationale of Paris, the Golenishef Collection, St. Petersburg,
          and the Berlin Library in his "Sahidische Bibelfragmente III" in
          "Bulletin de l'Académie imper. des Sciences," Ve, ser., XXV, 4
          (St. Petersburg, 1906).

          Most of the New-Testament publications in the fragments just
          mentioned have been used by Horner for his edition. But they are
          not the less welcomed in their independent actual condition,
          especially when printed page by page and line by line, as done,
          for instance by Wessely, O. v. Lemm, and Schleifer, so as to
          give to all students of the Coptic version the means of
          reconstructing as far as possible the ancient codices as they
          originally were.

          Fayumic Version

          E. Chassinat edited anew and more correctly the fragments once
          published by Bouriant (Bull. de l'Inst. Franc. D'arch. or. au
          Claire, II) and showed that they belonged to the same codices as
          the Borgian "Fragmenta Basmurica", I-III. Other additions to the
          same fragments were made from the Rainer collection by C.
          Wessely in "Sitzungsber. der kais. Akad. d. Wissensch. in Wien,
          philos.-hist. Klasse", vol. 158, 1 (Vienna, 1908), and Jos.
          David from the Bibliothèque Nationale of Paris in "Revue
          biblique" (1910), 80 sqq.. There are also a dozen more fragments
          rather short, on papyrus or on parchment, described and
          published as far as they could be deciphered by W. E. Crum,
          "Catalogue of the Coptic MSS. in the British Museum" (London,
          1905), nos. 493-510, 1221. Three of those, 500, 502 and 504 are
          bilingual, one side of the leaf, exhibiting the Greek and the
          other the Fayumic text. Since the completion of Crum's
          "Catalogue," the British Museum has acquired a new fragment, Or.
          6948, Acts, vii, 14-28, ix, 28-39. It was published by S.
          Gaselee in "Journ. of Theol. Studies", XI, (1909-10), 514-7.

          Akhmimic Version

          A considerable addition since 1897 has been made to the material
          for our knowledge of this version, in the discovery of a whole
          papyrus codex containing the Proverbs of Solomon. It is to be
          hoped that this valuable manuscript, now preserved in the Berlin
          Library, will soon be published. Apart from that the only other
          important additions are papyrus fragments of the Gospel of St.
          John (bilingual, Ch. x, complete in Akhmimic, vv. 1-10, in
          Greek; xi, complete in Akhmimic, vv, 1-8, 45-52, in Greek; xii,
          1-20, in Akhmimic, xiii, 1, 2, 11, 12, in Akhm.) and the Epistle
          of St. James (I, 13-v, 20). They were published by Rosch, in
          "Bruchstücke des ersten Clemensbriefes" (Strasburg, 1910). The
          famous parchment codex of the twelve lesser Prophets in the
          Rainer collection is unfortunately still unpublished. But the
          short papyrus fragments published by Bouriant have been given
          out anew in a more correct edition by Lacau in "Bulletin de
          l'Institut Francais d'archéologie orientale", VIII (Cairo,
          1911), 43-107 (see COPTIC LITERATURE in this volume; and EGYPT).

          H. HYVERNAT

   Ancient See of Vexio

                             Ancient See of Vexiö

          (WEPIONENSIS.)

          The Ancient See of Vexiö, in Sweden, comprised the County of
          Kronoberg and the hundreds of Ostra, Westra, Östbo, and Westbo
          in the County of Jönköping. John Sigfrid, an Englishman from
          Northumbria, who had been court bishop to King Olaf Tryggvasson
          from 977 to 1000, left Norway for Sweden in 1002 and worked six
          years in Westergötland (see ANCIENT SEE OF SKARA). About 1008 he
          arrived at Vexiö, and with great success preached Christianity
          to the heathens of Varend. He built a wooden church at Vexiö and
          remained there till his death about 1030. In 1158 he was
          canonized by Adrian IV and his shrine was, till the Reformation,
          the glory of the Cathedral of St. John the Baptist and St.
          Sigfrid at Vexiö. He had no immediate successors and in 1126
          King Sigurd Jorsalafarer of Norway led a crusade to Smaaland to
          Christianize its inhabitants. Varend was included in the Diocese
          of Skara until 1100, when it formed part of the Diocese of
          Linköping. About 1150 the Diocese of Vexiö was re-erected. The
          first bishop was Stenar, who is mentioned in two letters dating
          from 1183. In 1191 he quarrelled with the Bishop of Linköping
          concerning the frontiers of their respective dioceses. Stenar
          was succeeded in 1193 by John Ehrengisleson. In 1205 the
          biography of St. Sigfrid was written. Bishop Gregory (about
          1241), or his successor, renewed the boundary dispute with the
          Bishop of Linköping, which was settled by the pope in 1248 or
          1249. Bishop Bo (1287-91) appealed in a dispute to the
          Archbishop of Lund, which was regarded as an insult to the
          Archbishop of Upsala. Conflict was averted by Bo's death and a
          declaration of obedience to the Archbishop of Upsala, issued by
          the chapter of Vexiö. The most famous of the later bishops was
          Nicholas Ragwaldi (1426-38), present at the Council of Basle,
          and in 1438 translated to Upsala. The last Catholic bishop was
          Ingemar Petri (consecrated 1495), who, by judicious concessions,
          remained at Vexiö until his death in 1530. He took no part in
          episcopal consecrations during Gustavus I's reign. The chapter
          of Vexiö consisted of dean, archdeacon, subdean, and eleven
          prebendaries. There was also a schoolmaster. The cathedral was
          burnt down in 1740 and rebuilt in 1755. There were apparently no
          religious houses in the diocese.

          [ Note: The feast of St. Sigfrid, first Bishop of Vexiö and
          Apostle of Sweden, is 15 February.]

          Historiskt geographiskt och statistiskt Lexikon ofver Sverige,
          VII (Stockholm, 1876), 326, 327, 440, 444; Scriptores rerum
          svevicarum, II (Upsala, 1828), 344- 76; III (1876), 129-31;
          JORGENSEN, Den nordiske Kirkes Grundlaeggelse (Copenhagen,
          1874-78), 413-18; supplement no. VIII, 52-55; Historisk
          Tidskrift, XI (Stockholm, 1891), 73-88; Kyrkohistorisk
          Aarsskrift, XI (Upsala, 1910), 214- 19; REUTERDAHL, Svenska
          kyrkans Historia (5 vols., Lund, 1838-66). The last five works
          contain information concerning the identity of the various
          Sigurds. LUNDQVIST, De svenska Domkapitlen (Stockholm, 1897),
          42, 43.

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Ancient See of Viborg in Denmark

                        Ancient See of Viborg in Denmark

          (VIBERGAE, VIBERGENSIS.)

          The ancient See of Viborg, in Denmark, comprised the Province of
          Viborg, the town of Aalborg, and the hundreds of Fleskum,
          Hornum, Hellum, Hindsted, Aars, Gislum, and Slet in the Province
          of Aalborg. The hundreds of Gjerlev, Onsild, Nörhald, and
          Stövring in the Province of Randers also belonged to the Diocese
          of Viborg until 1396 when they were transferred to that of
          Aarhus. The diocese was founded in 1065 after the death of
          Bishop Vale (see RIBE, ANCIENT SEE OF). Herbert was first Bishop
          of Viborg (1065-1100?). In 1080 St. Canute endowed the bishopric
          and chapter. The latter consisted of Canons Regular of St.
          Augustine. Bishop Svend I (1106-1112) was drowned in the Elbe by
          the Count of Stade, and Eskild (1112-33), who began rebuilding
          the cathedral about 1130, was murdered during Matins in the
          Church of St. Margaret by command of King Eric Emun. Svend II
          (1135-51) was succeeded as provost of the chapter by Willo, and
          he by St. Kjeld or Ketil (d. 27 Sept., 1150). Bishop Niels I
          (1153-91) was very generous towards his chapter. He founded the
          hospital of St. Michael, Viborg, in 1159, and the Cistercian
          nunnery of Asmild in 1169, and finished the original Romanesque
          cathedral, of which only the crypt now remains. It is also
          largely due to him that St. Kjeld was beatified, and his body
          translated to the shrine, suspended from the vaulting of his
          chapel on 11 July, 1189.

          Bishop Gunner was one of the greatest men of his time. He was
          born in 1152 and educated at the University of Paris, where he
          acquired a great knowledge of law. In 1208 he entered the
          Cistercian Abbey of Öm (Cara Insula), of which he was chosen
          abbot in 1216. In 1222 he was elected Bishop of Viborg by the
          chapter on the advice of Cardinal Gregory of Crescentia. As
          bishop he devoted special care to the training of the clergy. He
          probably wrote out the Law of Jutland (Jydske Lov) and composed
          the original preface to it, and was present when it was
          published at Vordingborg in 1241. He died at Asmild, 25 Aug.,
          1251, and was buried in front of the shrine of St. Kjeld.
          Thorleif Olafssön (1438-50) was translated to Bergen, and
          succeeded at Viborg by Canute Mikkelsen (1451-78), dean of the
          Church of Our Lady at Copenhagen, and rector of the University
          of Erfurt in 1434. A great diplomatist and jurist, he was author
          of the Latin notes appended to the first two editions of the Law
          of Jutland and of a popular treatise on the plague. The last
          Catholic bishop was Jörgen Friis (1521-36). He was a worldly-
          minded man and quite unable to cope with the movement to which
          the preaching of Hans Tausen at Viborg (1525) gave rise. In 1530
          the cathedral was in the possession of the Protestants. Friis
          retired to the Castle of Hald, where he was imprisoned in his
          own dungeon in 1536. Two years later he was released on
          promising to submit to the new order of things. In 1540 he was
          endowed with the lands of the Abbey of Vrejlev and some of the
          property of the see, and though he never married, he led the
          life of a lay nobleman until his death in 1547.

          Though the Danish Reformation began at Viborg, certain Catholic
          usages were kept up in its cathedral longer than anywhere else
          in Denmark. The shrines of St. Kjeld and St. Willehad were
          removed to the choir of the cathedral in 1538, but Lutheran
          ministers continued to recite daily the Office of the Dead for
          the soul of King Eric Glipping (d. 1286) from 1560 to 1630. The
          Protestant Bishop Hans Wandal shortened and Protestantized the
          service and entrusted its performance to the senior curate of
          the cathedral and twelve of the school boys. These all benefited
          by the endowment, and continued the service until 1684. Of the
          twelfth-century cathedral nothing remains but the crypt. The
          upper church built in 1876 contains splendid frescoes by Joachim
          Skovgaard begun in 1895 and a seven-branched candlestick from
          1494. The abbey church of Grinderslev, the Church of St.
          Botolph, at Aalborg, and numerous village churches are memorials
          of the Catholic past. At Karup there was a pilgrimage to Our
          Lady's Well. The chapter of the Cathedral of St. Mary and St.
          Kjeld was secularized in 1440, after which it consisted of a
          dean, an archdeacon, a precentor, and twelve secular canons.
          There were also at Viborg the Benedictine nunnery of St.
          Botolph, a Franciscan friary from 1235, and a Dominican friary
          from 1246, as well as the hospitals of St. Michael and of the
          Holy Ghost. At Aalborg there were a Benedictine nunnery and a
          Franciscan friary. The Cistercian Abbey of Vidskild (Vitae
          Scola) founded in 1158, the Augustinian abbey at Grinderslev
          founded before 1176, and the Augustinian nunnery of Asmild were
          all situated in the diocese, as were also the Benedictine (?)
          nunnery of Sibber, and the hospitals at Tesdrup and Karup. In
          1523 there were 236 churches in the Diocese of Viborg. Now
          (1912) the Camillians have a church and hospital at Aalborg,
          while Viborg is one of their out-stations.

          URSIN, Stiftstaden Viborg (Viborg, 1849); HEISE, Diplomatarium
          vibergense (Copenhagen, 1879); TRAP, Danmark, IV (Copenhagen,
          1902); JORGENSEN, Den nordiske Kirkes Grundlaeggelse (2 vols.,
          Copenhagen, 1874-78); GERTZ, Vitae sanctorum danorum
          (Copenhagen, 1908-12), 249-83; Vita Gunneri episcopi vibergensis
          in Scriptores rerum danicarum, V (Copenhagen, 1783), 574-80;
          BRICKA, Dansk biografisk Leksikon (19 vols., Copenhagen,
          1887-1905); RORDAM, Nykirkehistoriske Samlinger, I (Copenhagen,
          1857-59), 526-37; III (1864-66), 1-46, 292-367; V (1869-71),
          522-81, 703-71; VI (1872-73), 716-32; Kirkehistoriske Samlinger,
          3rd series, II (Copenhagen, 1877-80), 674-77; III (1881-82),
          186-201; 4th series, V (1897-99), 84-125, 299-333; Samlinger til
          Jydsk Historie og Topographi, II (Aalborg, 1868-69), 97-107; 3rd
          series, I (Copenhagen, 1896-98), 485-93; V (1906- 08), 347-66;
          Historisk Tidskrift, 7th series, V (Copenhagen, 1904-05),
          299-364; La cathedrale de Viborg (Ministry of Public Worship,
          Copenhagen, 1909), in Danish with a summary in French;
          PONTOPPIDAN, Marmora danica, II (Copenhagen, 1741), 191-252;
          DAUGAARD, Danske Klostre (Copenhagen, 1830).

          A.W. TAYLOR

   Vicariate Apostolic

                              Vicariate Apostolic

          The following is an account of the newly-erected vicariates
          Apostolic and of those changed so recently as not to have been
          included in the earlier volumes of this work.

          BAGAMOYO in Equatorial Africa.--By a decree dated 7 May, 1913,
          the boundary between the Vicariates Apostolic of Bagamoyo and
          Dar-es-Salam or Zanzibar was changed so as to conform with civil
          limits; the new boundary is the line separating Bagamoyo and
          Morogoro from Dar-es-Salam and Ruffi, then the Rivers Ruaha, and
          Umeroke, and finally the railway from the Indian Ocean to the
          town of Tabora.

          BANGUELO, in Equatorial Africa, erected on 27 Jan., 1913, and
          committed to the care of the White Fathers. It was previously
          the northern portion of the Vicariate Apostolic of Nyassa.

          BASUTOLAND, in South Africa.--The Prefecture Apostolic of
          Basutoland (q.v.) was erected into a vicariate Apostolic with
          unchanged boundaries by a Decree dated 18 Feb., 1909. The
          vicariate at the close of the year 1912 contained 23 priests,
          all Oblates of Mary Immaculate, 5 Oblate brothers, 7 Marist
          brothers, 41 European and 21 native nuns, 21 churches, chapels,
          and stations, 12 convents (9 of the Sisters of the Holy Family,
          and 3 of Sisters of the Holy Cross), 17 schools, about 10,000
          Catholics and 800 catechumens out of 400,000 inhabitants. The
          first vicar Apostolic is the right Rev. Jules Joseph Cenez,
          O.M.I, titular Bishop of Nicopolis, who was born at Hampont,
          Lorraine, on 9 May, 1865; was ordained, 8 Sept., 1890; head of
          the mission since 1895, appointed to the titular see 27 Feb.,
          1909, and consecrated at Metz on 1 May following.

          BROWNSVILLE, in United States of America, was erected into the
          Diocese of Corpus Christi, on 23 March, 1912.

          CAROLINE ISLANDS. See below MARIANA AND CAROLINE ISLANDS.

          CENTRAL AFRICA, VICARIATE APOSTOLIC OF. See below KHARTUM.

          CHE-KIANG, WESTERN, in China, erected on 10 May, 1910. At the
          request of Mgr. Paul-Marie Reynaud, Vicar Apostolic of
          Che-kiang, the western portion of his mission was erected into a
          new vicariate, that of Western Che-kiang; at the same time the
          word "Eastern" was added to the official title of the old
          vicariate. The mission of Western Che-kiang comprises the civil
          prefectures of Kia-shing, Hu-chu, Hang-che, Yen-che, Hin-chu,
          and King-hoa. Its boundaries are: on the north the Vicariate of
          Kiang-nan, and Lake T'al-hu; to the west, the Vicariates of
          Kiang-nan, and Eastern Kiang-Si; to the south the Vicariates of
          Eastern Che-kiang and Fu-kien; and to the east, the Vicariate of
          Eastern Che-kiang and the Chinese Sea, or the Bay of Han-chu.
          The first mission is entrusted to the Lazarists. The first vicar
          Apostolic is Mgr. Paul-Albert Faveau, C.M., b. at Crochte,
          France, 5 April, 1859; appointed to the vicariate, 10 May, 1910,
          with the title of Bishop of Tamassus.

          CHI-LI, MARITIME, in China, erected on 27 April, 1912; it
          comprises the civil prefecture of Tientsin-fu, previously part
          of the Vicariate of Northern Chi-li or Peking. Boundaries: on
          the north the Vicariate of Peking, on the east the Gulf of
          Chi-li; on the south the missions of Changteng and Southeastern
          Chi-li; on the west the missions of Southwestern Chi-li and
          Northern Chi-li. It is entrusted to the care of the Lazarists.
          The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Paul Dumond, C.M., born at
          Lyons, 2 April, 1864; ordained, 10 Aug., 1888; appointed Vicar
          Apostolic of Maritime Chi-li, 27 April 1912 and consecrated at
          Peking titular Bishop of Durubis on 30 June, following.

          CHI-LI, CENTRAL, in China, erected on 14 Feb., 1910; comprises
          the civil Prefectures of Pao-ting-fu, and Y-tchu, formerly part
          of the Vicariate of Northern Chi-Li. Its boundaries are: on the
          north the prefecture of Suen-hoa-fu, on the east, Chun-tren-fu,
          on the south, Ho-kiang-fu; on the west, Ting-chu, Chang-ting-fu,
          and Shan-Si. The cathedral at Pao-ting-fu is dedicated to Sts.
          Peter and Paul. The mission is undertaken by the Lazarists, and
          contains about 72,530 Catholics, 38 priests, 255 churches and
          chapels, and 914 schools. The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr.
          Joseph Fabregues, C.M., born at Montpellier, France, 26 Nov.,
          1872, appointed to the vicariate, 26 Feb., 1910, and consecrated
          titular Bishop of Alali on 22 May, 1910 by Mgr. Stanislas
          Jarlin, at Pao-ting-fu.

          CONGO, UPPER.--The mission of the Upper Congo was begun on 21
          Sept., 1880; it was erected into a vicariate Apostolic on 10
          Dec., 1895, its boundaries being: on the north, a line from the
          mouth of the Elila to Lake Edward Nyanza at the 30 degree E.
          long.; on the east the Congo Free State frontier to the mouth of
          the river Kafu at Lake Tanganyka; thence along its course and
          the western boundaries of Urungu and Loemba to Lake Banguelo; on
          the south and west Lake Banguelo and the river Congo to the
          mouth of the Lira. On 8 April, 1911, a decree was published
          changing the eastern and southern lines separating the Vicariate
          of the Upper Congo from the missions of N. and S. Victoria
          Nyanza, Unyanyembe, Tanganika, and Nyassa. The boundary now is:
          on the east, the Belgo-British and Germano-Belgian frontiers,
          that is, a line from the south shore of Lake Albert Edward to
          Sabingo Mountain, thence by Lake Kion, along the Rusizi, and
          through Lake Tanganika; on the south, a line from Lake Tanganika
          to Lake Moero; that is, the Belgo-British frontier. The mission
          is entrusted to the White Fathers. It contains 300,000
          inhabitants, of whom 5520 are Catholics, 5148 neophytes, and
          29,019 catechumens; there are 7 chief stations and 27 chapels,
          31 missionary priests, 8 lay brothers, 9 White Sisters of
          Notre-Dame d'Afrique, 45 negro catechists teaching 2960 children
          in 55 schools, 14 orphanages, 7 hospitals, 22 dispensaries, and
          1 home for widows. The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Victor
          Roelens, b. at Ardoye, Belgium, 21 Feb., 1853; appointed to the
          vicariate on 30 March, 1895; he resides at Baudoinville, and is
          titular Bishop of Girba. On 24 March, 1909, he received as
          coadjutor Mgr. Auguste-Leopold Huys, b. at Bruges, 9 July, 1871,
          who has been working as a missionary in the Congo since 1897. He
          is titular Bishop of Rusicade.

          COREA.--The name of this vicariate has been changed to SEOUL
          (q.v.).

          DELTA OF THE NILE, in Egypt, erected 17 Sept., 1909; the
          boundaries of the mission remained unchanged. It is entrusted to
          the care of the Society of African Missions of Lyons. The first
          vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Auguste Duret, b. in the Diocese of
          Nantes, 2 Jan., 1846; ordained, 17 Dec., 1870; missionary in
          Oran in 1878; Prefect Apostolic of the Delta of the Nile in
          1885; appointed vicar Apostolic on 17 Sept., 1909, and
          consecrated titular Bishop of Bubastis on 24 Feb., 1910.

          DIEGO SUAREZ, in Madagascar.--By a Decree of Propaganda dated 20
          May, 1913, the name of the Vicariate Apostolic of Northern
          Madagascar (q.v.) was changed to Diego Suarez, which is the name
          of the chief town in the mission.

          ERITHREA, in East Africa.--On 13 Sept., 1894, the Italian colony
          of Erythrea or Eritrea, previously part of the Lazarast mission
          of Abyssinia, was formed into a prefecture Apostolic, with R. P.
          Michele da Carbonara (b. at Carbonara, Italy, 10 Oct., 1836; d.
          there, 24 June, 1910), a Capuchin, as superior. The mission
          comprises the territory on the coast of the Red Sea from Ras
          Kasar (18 degrees 2 minutes N.) to the French Possessions at the
          Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb (12 degrees 30 minutes N.) and is
          bounded on the interior by the Sudan, Abyssinia, and French
          Somaliland. It includes likewise all the islands in the adjacent
          part of the Red Sea, subject to the Italians. The inhabitants,
          mostly of a semi-nomadic disposition, number about 450,000. Of
          these 12,200 belong to the Latin Rite, about one-half being
          Italians; 15,000 are Copto-Ethiopians, about 80,000 are
          Monophysites, and the remainder fetishists or Mohammedans. The
          ordinary people speak Arabic, Tigrai, and Tigre, and the upper
          classes Amaric; while Ghez is the liturgical language. On Feb.
          7, 1911, after the death of R. P. Michele da Carbonara, the
          mission was made a vicariate Apostolic. It contains 9 Capuchin
          fathers and 6 brothers, with 5 residences, 42 native priests, 22
          Daughters of St. Anne, some Franciscan tertiary lay sisters
          (native), 8 churches, 30 chapels in the back-country, served by
          native Catholic priest of Copto-Ethiopic Rite, 2 seminaries (at
          Achur and Asherem) with 48 students, 5 schools with over 200
          pupils and 2 orphanages. The mission is confided to the
          Capuchins of the province of Rome. The first vicar Apostolic is
          Mgr. Francesco Carrara, Capuchin, b. at Albino, in the Diocese
          of Bergamo, Italy, on 14 March, 1871; professed on 8 Sept.,
          1887; minister provincial of Lombardy in 1902; appointed to the
          vicariate in January, 1911, and consecrated at Milan, 26 Feb.
          following, as titular Bishop of Agathopolis.

          FERNANDO PO, in West Africa.--In 1855 a mission was established
          in the island of Annobon, Corisco, and Fernando Po under R. P.
          Miguel Martinez, of Toledo. In 1857 the mission became a
          prefecture Apostolic and was entrusted to the Jesuits; in 1860
          their jurisdiction was extended to the mainland. After thirteen
          years' labour they gave up the mission owing to difficulties
          with the Spanish Government, as well as to the severity of the
          climate. Till 1883 there was only one priest in the mission, the
          parish priest of Santa Elisabeth in Fernando Po. In 1883 the
          prefecture was revived and the mission entrusted to the
          Congregation of the Missionary Sons of the Immaculate Heart of
          Mary. On 25 April, a large territory on the continent was added
          to the mission, which on 5 May, 1904, was made a vicariate
          Apostolic. The vicariate now comprises the Islands of Annobon
          (11 sq. miles), Corisco (11 sq. miles), Elobey, Fernando Po (780
          sq. miles), and Spanish Guinea (12,000 sq. miles), extending
          from the Muni river to the Campo and to Kamerun, the eastern
          boundary being the meridian of 11 degrees 20 minutes E.; it has
          in all an area of about 12,814 sq. miles and a population of
          235,000. The languages ordinarily spoken in the mission are:
          Bubi in Fernando Po; Benga in Corisco; Ambu in Annabon, and
          Pamwe and Kombe on the mainland. The climate in the mission
          territory is torrid and enervating, and malaria is prevalent.
          There are 6274 Catholics and 370 catechumens; 42 missionary
          priests; 10 catechists; 13 churches; 9 chapels, 27 stations; 18
          parochial schools with 1170 pupils; 4 hospitals. The Sisters of
          the Immaculate Conception have 6 houses with 26 nuns. The first
          Vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Pedro Armengaudio Coll, of the
          Missionary Sons of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, appointed on 10
          May, 1904. He is titular Bishop of Thignica, and resides at
          Santa Isabel, Fernando Po.

          FIANARANTSOA, in Madagascar, erected on 10 May, 1913, and
          committed to the care of the Jesuits, formed previously the
          southern part of the Vicariate of Central Madagascar. Its
          boundaries are: on the north the 20 degree S. lat., the southern
          limits of Autsirabe, the 20 degree S. lat. again, and then to
          the Indian Ocean; on the east the Indian Ocean from 20 degrees
          to 22 degrees S. lat.; on the south the Vicariate Apostolic of
          Fort Dauphin (formerly Southern Madagascar); on the west the
          Mozambique Channel from 20 degrees to 22 degrees S. lat. On 16
          May, 1913, R. P. Charles Givelet, S.J., was appointed first
          vicar Apostolic.

          FORT-DAUPHIN, in Madagascar.--In order to distinguish more
          easily the various vicariates in Madagascar, the Holy See
          decreed on 20 May, 1913, that the vicariates should be called in
          future by the name of the town in which the vicars reside. Hence
          the name of the Vicariate Apostolic of Southern Madagascar was
          changed to Fort-Dauphin.

          GUAM, ISLAND OF, in the Mariana Islands.--The Mariana Islands
          with the exception of Guam belong to Germany; Guam is held by
          the United States of America. By a Decree dated 1 March, 1911,
          Guam was withdrawn from the jurisdiction of the Prefect
          Apostolic of the Mariana Islands, and made a vicariate
          Apostolic, to prevent troubles arising from differences of
          nationality. The new vicariate was entrusted to the Capuchins,
          and Mgr. Francisco Xavier Ricardo Vila y Mateu, O.F.M. Cap., b.
          at Arenys de Mar, Spain, was appointed on 25 Aug., 1911, vicar
          Apostolic and titular Bishop of Adraa. In 1911 the population
          was 12,240, of whom 11,877 were natives; there are about 2500
          non-Catholics. The vicariate has 10 Capuchin priests, 3 lay
          brothers, 6 parishes, and 10 churches. The Island of Guam lies
          at the Southern end of the Mariana group and was ceded to the
          United States in 1898; it is about 30 miles long and 6.5 miles
          wide, and has an area of about 200 sq. miles. The natives are
          Chamorros, with a mixture of Tagal and Spanish blood. Education
          has been compulsory since the American occupation; San Ignacio
          de Agana (population over 7000) is the capital of the island.

          HO-NAN, WESTERN, in China.--The Prefecture Apostolic of Western
          Ho-nan was erected into a vicariate Apostolic by a Decree of 2
          May, 1911, its boundaries remaining unchanged, that is, on the
          north, the yellow River, on the east, the Shen-si, on the south
          the prefecture of Nan-Yang-fu; on the west that of Kai-fong-fu.
          The mission is entrusted to the missionaries of the Parma
          Seminary of St. Francis Xavier for the Foreign Missions. It
          contains about eight million inhabitants, of whom 2727 are
          Catholics, 4006 catechumens; 9 priests, 3 churches, 9 chapels,
          and 5 schools. The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Luigi Calza, b.
          at Rocca Prebalza, Italy, 26 July, 1872; ordained in 1909;
          appointed Prefect Apostolic of Western Ho-nan, 23 June, 1906,
          and vicar Apostolic on 18 Sept., 1911. He was consecrated at
          Parma on 21 April, 1912, as titular Bishop of Termessus.

          IVORY COAST, in Equatorial Africa.--On 17 Nov., 1911, the
          Prefecture Apostolic of the Ivory Coast was erected into a
          vicariate Apostolic. The mission had been formerly part of the
          Prefecture Apostolic of the Gold Coast, from which it was
          separated on 28 June, 1895. Its boundaries are: on the east, the
          Gold Coast; on the south, the sea from the Gold Coast to
          Liberia; on the west, Liberia. The inhabitants number over
          3,000,000, of whom 1100 are Catholics, 400 catechumens, about
          400 Protestants, and the remainder fetishists. The vicariate is
          under the care of the Society of the African Mission of Lyons,
          and has 13 churches and chapels, 12 stations, 6 schools, 10
          orphanages, 7 Sisters of the Queen of Angels, and 27 missionary
          priests. The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Jules-Joseph Moury,
          titular Bishop of Ariassus. He was born at Agnat, France, 11
          Oct., 1873, and ordained 30 May, 1897; set out for the Ivory
          Coast on 25 Sept., 1899; founded the mission of Abidjan in 1904
          and that of Katiola in 1908; was appointed prefect Apostolic of
          the Ivory Coast, 18 Jan., 1910, and vicar Apostolic, 17 Nov.,
          1911; he was consecrated at Lyons on 6 June, 1912. The episcopal
          residence is at Abidjan.

          KHARTUM, in the Sudan.--On 26 May, 1914, the Prefecture
          Apostolic of Bar-el-Gazal was formed from the Vicariate of the
          Sudan or of Central Africa; and by a Decree four days later, the
          name of the Vicariate was changed to that of Khartum.

          KIEN-CHANG, in China, was formed on 12 Aug., 1910, by separating
          from the Vicariate Apostolic of Southern Sze-ch'wan, the
          southwestern portion called Kien-chang; its boundaries were
          fixed as those of the civil Province of Nin-yuen-fu. At the
          request of the vicar Apostolic of Southern Sze-ch'wan, the civil
          sub-prefecture Tsinkyhiem was transferred from his jurisdiction
          to that of the Vicar of Kien-chang, on 30 April, 1912. The
          mission is under the care of the Society of Foreign Mission of
          Paris. The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Jean-Baptiste-Marie de
          Guebriant, b. at Paris, 11 Dec., 1860; ordained 5 July, 1885;
          appointed vicar Apostolic 12 Aug., 1910, and consecrated at
          Su-fu on 20 Nov. following. He resides at Nin-yuen-fu.

          KILIMA-NJARO, in Equatorial Africa, erected from the northern
          part of the Vicariate Apostolic of Bagamoyo, by a Decree of 13
          Sept., 1910. Its boundaries are: on the north, the Vicariate of
          Zanzibar; on the east, the Indian Ocean; on the west, the
          Vicariate of Unyanyembe, near Lake Balangidda, north of Irangi.
          The vicariate is entrusted to the Fathers of the Holy Ghost and
          the Immaculate Heart of Mary. It has 9 missions, with 20
          priests, 12 lay brothers, 25 nuns, more than 4500 Catholics. The
          first vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Louis Munsch, b. at Felleringen,
          Alsatia, 5 Oct., 1869; ordained in 1896, after which he went on
          the East African mission; he was appointed to the vicariate, 13
          Sept., 1910, and was consecrated as titular Bishop of Magnesia
          on 5 Feb., 1911. He resides at Kilema (founded 1891), the oldest
          station in the mission; it contains over 1500 Catholics.

          KIVU, in Equatorial Africa, erected on 12 Dec., 1912, and
          committed to the care of the Society of African Missionaries.
          The district of Kivu lies beyond the western limits of the
          Vicariate of Southern Victorian Nyanza and Unyanyembe. The
          boundaries of the new vicariate are: on the north, the British
          frontier from the river Kagera to the Belgian frontier, thence
          to Lake Kivu; on the west, the Belgian frontier; on the south,
          the northern boundaries of Uvinza and Ujiji; on the east, the
          Kagera and Ruinvu, then the western boundary of Ussurvi and the
          eastern boundary of Uha. The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr.
          Jean-Joseph Hirth, titular Bishop of Theveste, appointed on 12
          Dec., 1912; he was at the time of this appointment Vicar
          Apostolic of Southern Victoria Nyanza.

          LIBYA, in North Africa.--On 23 Feb., 1913, the Prefecture
          Apostolic of Tripoli was erected into a vicariate Apostolic and
          its name changed to Libya. The boundaries of the old prefecture
          remained as before.

          MADAGASCAR.--By a Decree dated 20 May, 1913, the Propaganda to
          prevent any ambiguity as to the vicariates in Madagascar,
          ordered that they should be called by the name of the place of
          residence of the vicar Apostolic. Therefore the vicariate
          Apostolic of Northern Madagascar takes the name of Diego Suarez;
          that of Central Madagascar the name of Tananarive; and that of
          Southern Madagascar the name of Fort-Dauphin.

          MARIANA AND CAROLINE ISLANDS.--By a Decree of 1 March, 1911, the
          Prefectures Apostolic of the Mariana Islands and of the Caroline
          Islands was suppressed, and in their stead a new vicariate was
          erected, embracing both groups of islands, except the Island of
          Guam. The mission is under the care of the Capuchins of
          Westphalia. The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Peter Salvator
          Walleser, O.F.M. Cap., b. at Wieden, near Freibourg im Breisgau,
          22 Oct., 1874; professed, 4 Oct., 1898; ordained, 15 Aug., 1901;
          missionary in the Palau Isles in 1906; appointed vicar Apostolic
          and titular Bishop of Tanagra on 21 Aug., 1912. He is the author
          of a Palau grammar and dictionary. The vicariate in 1911
          contained 4500 Catholics, 15 capuchin priests, 14 lay brothers,
          11 nuns, 14 stations, 14 churches and chapels. There were
          mission schools in the Caroline Islands, but none in the Mariana
          group, as the Government claims there a monopoly in educational
          matters.

          MOROCCO.--On 14 April, 1908, the Prefecture Apostolic of Morocco
          (q.v.) was erected into a vicariate. Mgr. Francisco Maria
          Cervera, of the Friars Minor, titular Bishop of Fessa, is the
          first vicar Apostolic. He was born at Valencia, Spain, 13 March,
          1858; was professed, 19 Nov., 1878; ordained in 1880 and made
          Prefect Apostolic of Morocco in 1906; appointed vicar Apostolic,
          8 April, 1908, and consecrated at Madrid, 23 May, 1908. He
          resides at Tangiers.

          NAPO, in Ecuador, erected on 3 Feb., 1893, and confided to the
          Jesuits. The superior of the mission is R. P. Andres Perez, S.J.

          NORWAY AND SPITZBERG.--By a Decree of 1 June, 1913, the
          archipelago of Spitzbergen was placed under the jurisdiction of
          the Vicar Apostolic of Norway, and at the same time the words
          "and Spitzberg" were ordered to be added to the official title
          of the vicariate.

          NYASSA, in Equatorial Africa.--The portion of this vicariate
          lying north of the watershed between the Luangwa and the
          Zambesi, and then of the 13 degree S. Lat., was separated on 28
          Jan., 1913, and formed into the Vicariate Apostolic of Banguelo;
          the remaining part of the vicariate retains its old name.

          SEOUL, in Corea.--On 7 April, 1911, two civil prefectures,
          Kieng-siang-to and Tiyen-la-to, were separated from the
          Vicariate Apostolic of Corea and formed into a new mission,
          Tai-kou. In consequence of this the official name of the old
          vicariate was changed from Corea to Seoul.

          SHENSI, CENTRAL, in China.--By a Decree of 12 April, 1911, the
          Vicariate Apostolic of Northern Shensi was divided, and the
          northern portion formed into a new mission. The name of the
          vicariate therefore was changed from Northern Shensi to Central
          Shensi.

          SHENSI, NORTHERN, in China.--On 12 April, 1911, two civil
          prefectures, Yu-lin-fu and Yen-an-fu, with 14 subprefectures and
          two towns were detached from the vicariate of Central (then
          called Northern) Shensi, and erected into a new vicariate, which
          from its position with regard to the old vicariate was given the
          name of Northern Shensi. The mission is confided to the Friars
          Minor. The first vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Celestius Ibanez
          Aparicio, titular Bishop of Bagi, who was appointed on 12 April,
          1911.

          SOLOMON ISLANDS, SOUTHERN.--The Prefecture Apostolic of the
          Southern Solomon Islands was erected into a vicariate Apostolic
          on 1 June, 1912, its boundaries remaining unchanged. The first
          vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Jean-Ephrem Bertreux, Marist, b. at
          Saint-Jean-de-Boseau, France, in Jan., 1853; ordained in June,
          1878; went on the foreign mission in the Fiji Islands, 1879;
          appointed 2 June, 1912, and consecrated at Nantes on 28 Oct.
          following. He is titular Bishop of Musti, and resides at
          Rua-Sura.

          SUDAN.--By a Decree of 14 Feb., 1911, the northern limits of the
          Prefecture Apostolic of Ubanghi-Chari were extended to the 13
          degree N. Lat., the new territory being taken away from the
          Vicariate Apostolic of the Sudan. Furthermore, as on May, 1913,
          the Prefecture Apostolic of Bar-el-Gazal was formed by
          separation from the Sudan mission, it was decreed on 30 May,
          1913, that the official name of this mission should be changed
          to the Vicariate Apostolic of Khartum.

          SZE-CH'WAN, SOUTHERN, in China.--On 30 April, 1912, the civil
          subprefecture of Tsinkyhiem was transferred from the
          jurisdiction of the Vicar Apostolic of Southern Sze-ch'wan to
          that of the Vicar Apostolic of Kien-chang.

          TAIKU comprises Kieng-siang-to and Tiyen-la-to, two civil
          prefectures formerly part of the Vicariate of Corea (now Seoul).
          It was erected on 7 April, 1911, and committed to the care of
          the Society of Foreign Missions in Paris. The first vicar
          Apostolic is Mgr. Florien Demange, b. at Saulxures-les-Salles,
          France, 25 April, 1875; ordained, 26 June, 1898; set out for the
          foreign mission in Corea on 3 Aug. following; appointed vicar
          Apostolic, 8 April, 1911; and consecrated at Seoul on 11 June,
          1911, as titular Bishop of Adrassus.

          TANARIVE, in Madagascar.--This new name was given by a decree of
          20 May, 1913, to the Vicariate Apostolic of Central Madagascar
          (q.v.)

          TIENTSIN, in China.--This is another name for the Vicariate
          Apostolic of Maritime Chi-li (q.v.)

          ZANZIBAR (ZANGUEBAR), NORTHERN.--In 1869 a mission was begun in
          the island of Zanzibar through the efforts of Mgr. Armand
          Maupoint, Bishop of St. Denis (Reunion); on 12 Nov., 1862, this
          was made a prefecture Apostolic under Mgr. Maupoint as Apostolic
          delegate. The mission was confided to the Fathers of the Holy
          Ghost on 9 Sept., 1872; on 13 Nov., 1883, it was erected into a
          vicariate Apostolic, from which were separated later the
          Prefectures Apostolic of Benadir and Kenia, the Vicariate
          Apostolic of Southern Zanzibar and on 11 May, 1906, that of
          Bagamoyo or Central Zanzibar. It now comprises the British East
          Africa territory (except the district of Kenia) and the Islands
          of Zanzibar and Pemba. The chief languages spoken are Kiswahili
          and Kikuya. There are about 3,000,000 inhabitants, of whom 4450
          are Catholics, and 4800 catechumens; the mission has 34 priests,
          22 lay brothers, 8 catechists, 31 nuns (sisters of St. Joseph,
          and Dominican Tertiaries), 17 stations, 12 schools with 1000
          children, 26 orphans, 1 leper asylum, 2 hospitals, and 11
          pharmacies. An agreement was made on 24 Oct., 1906, between the
          Sultan of Zanzibar and the vicar Apostolic by which the bishop
          was to take care of all the lepers and the poor of Zanzibar, to
          feed them and care for them, and provide Sisters to look after
          their wants, while the Government was to build and furnish two
          homes. The vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Emile-Auguste Allgeyer, b. at
          Rixheim in Alsatia, in 1856, appointed to the vicariate, 17
          Feb., 1897; as titular Bishop of Ticelia.

          ZANZIBAR, SOUTHERN or DAR-ES-SALEM, in German East Africa.--
          This mission was erected into a prefecture Apostolic, under the
          care of the German Benedictines of St. Odila for the Foreign
          Missions, on 16 Nov., 1887. Previously it had formed part of the
          Vicariate of Zanguebar (Zanzibar). On 10 July, 1897, its
          southern boundaries were extended to Cape Delgado, and its
          inland limits made to embrace Magwangwara. On 10 Sept., 1902, it
          was made a vicariate Apostolic; the first vicar being R. P.
          Cassian Spiess, who was slain by the natives in Aug., 1905. Mgr.
          Speiss was born at Sankt Jacob in Austria, 12 July, 1866. He was
          appointed vicar Apostolic and titular Bishop of Ostracina on 15
          Sept., 1902. With him were slain two lay brothers and two
          Benedictine Sisters. The name of the vicariate was changed on 10
          Aug., 1906, to Dar-es-Salem-the name of the town where the vicar
          Apostolic resides. The boundary between the Vicariates of
          Bagamoyo and Dar-es-Salem was modified by a Decree of 7 May,
          1913; it is now the line separating Bagamoyo and Morogoro from
          Dar-es-Salem and Rufiji; then the rivers Ruaha and Umeroke and
          finally the railway from the Indian Ocean to Tabora. The
          vicariate contains about 1,000,000, most of whom speak
          Kiswahili, which language was reduced to writing and a grammar
          and dictionary of two of its dialects compiled by the
          missionaries in 1904; there are 3967 Catholics, 2600
          catechumens, 14 missionary priests, 18 lay brothers, 55
          catechists, 11 chief and 36 secondary stations, 66 schools with
          2577 pupils, 15 orphanages, and 18 Benedictine nuns. The second
          and present vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Thomas Spreiter, O.S.B., b.
          at Ratisbon, 28 Dec., 1865; professed, 2 Feb., 1888; ordained,
          28 July, 1897; sent to the Zanzibar mission in 1900; appointed
          vicar, 13 March, 1906, and consecrated at Augsburg, on 6 Dec.,
          1906, as titular Bishop of Thaenae.

          Acta Apostolicae Sedis (Rome, 1909-); BATTANDIER, Annuaire
          pontifical catholique (Paris, 1909-13); Missiones catholicae
          (Rome, 1897); BAUDRILLART, Dict. d'hist. et de geog. eccl.
          (Paris, 1911-).

          A.A. MACEARLEAN
     __________________________________________________________________

   Patrick Walsh

                                 Patrick Walsh

          Journalist, United States senator; born at Ballingary, Co.
          Limerick, Ireland, 1 January, 1840; died Augusta, Georgia,
          U.S.A., 19 March, 1900. With his parents he emigrated in 1852 to
          Charleston, South Carolina, where he was apprenticed to a
          printer. While working at this trade he attended night school,
          and saved money enough to enable him to enter as a student at
          Georgetown College, D.C., in 1859, where he remained until the
          Civil War in 1861, when he returned to Charleston and joined the
          state militia as a lieutenant of the Meagher Guards of the First
          Regiment, Carolina Rifle Militia. In 1862 he moved to Augusta,
          Georgia, and became one of the editorial staff of the daily
          "Constitutionalist", thus beginning a connection with the press
          of that city which extended over thirty-two years, and included
          service on the "Pacificator" (1864); "Banner of the South"
          (1867); and "Chronicle and Sentinel", which he purchased in
          1877, combined with the "Constitutionalist", and retained until
          his death. In addition to his editorial work he was agent of the
          New York Associated Press, 1866-92, and general manager of the
          Southern Associated Press. He was a member of the state
          Legislature, 1872-74-76; delegate-at-large to the Democratic
          National Convention, 1884, and a member of the World's Columbian
          Fair Commission. To fill an unexpired term he was appointed by
          the governor, as a Democrat, a United State senator from
          Georgia, 2 April, 1894, and then was elected to the same office
          by the Legislature, 3 March, 1895.

          Biographical Congressional Directory (Washington, 1903); LAMB,
          Biog. Dict. of U. S. (Boston, 1903); Chronicle (Augusta, Ga.),
          Morning Star (New Orleans), contemporary files.

          THOMAS F. MEEHAN

   Benjamin Joseph Webb

                              Benjamin Joseph Webb

          Editor, historian, born at Bardstown, Kentucky, 25 February,
          1814; died at Louisville, Kentucky, 2 August, 1897. His father,
          a convert, was one of the pioneers of Kentucky in 1774. Benjamin
          was educated at St. Joseph's College, Bardstown, which he left
          at an early age to learn the printer's trade. He was foreman of
          the office of the "Journal", a newspaper in Louisville, when, in
          1836, the Rev. Dr. Reynolds (later Bishop of Charleston, South
          Carolina), who had been one of this teachers at St. Joseph's,
          persuaded him to undertake the publication at Bardstown of the
          "Catholic Advocate". This paper, with the assistance of Bishops
          Spalding, David, and Flaget, he successfully conducted; he
          removed its office to Louisville in 1841, and in 1847 retired
          from its management. He continued, however, to defend Catholic
          interests, notably in connection with George D. Prentice, editor
          of the Louisville "Courier-Journal" in 1855, in a series of
          letters on the intolerance of Knownothingism, which had
          disgraced the city by the atrocities of "Bloody Monday". These
          letters were printed subsequently in book form with the title,
          "Letters of a Kentucky Catholic". On 1 May, 1858, at the
          instance of Bishop Spalding and in connection with other members
          of the Particular Council of the St. Vincent de Paul Society of
          Louisville, he issued the "Catholic Guardian", which the Civil
          War troubles ended in July, 1862. He was also a contributor to
          the "Catholic Advocate" on its revival in 1869. His long
          association with Catholic interests in Kentucky prompted him to
          compile "The Centenary of Catholicity in Kentucky" (Louisville,
          1884), a volume invaluable in its records of the men and times
          of the pioneer era. He served as a member of the state senate
          from Louisville during the years 1867-75, and in 1868 wrote, at
          the request of the Legislature, "Memoirs of Gov. Lazarus W.
          Powell and Gov. John L. Helm" (published by the State). During
          his life he was justly regarded as the foremost Catholic layman
          of Kentucky.

          History of the Ohio Falls Cities (Cleveland, 1882); The Record
          and Catholic Advocate (Louisville), contemporary files.

          THOMAS F. MEEHAN
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
