     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Church in Rome in the First Century
      Creator(s): Edmundson, George (1849-1930)
   CCEL Subjects: All; History;
      LC Call no: BR182
     LC Subjects:

                  Christianity

                  History

                  By period

                  Early and medieval
     __________________________________________________________________

                               THE CHURCH IN ROME
                              IN THE FIRST CENTURY

George Edmundson's

The Church in Rome in the First Century

Is in the Public Domain

   PDF Format Dedicated to
   The Glory of God and Salvation Through Jesus the Messiah

MCMXCIX

THE BAMPTON LECTURES

  FOR 1913

                               THE CHURCH IN ROME
                              IN THE FIRST CENTURY

  AN EXAMINATION OF VARIOUS CONTROVERTED QUESTIONS
  RELATING TO ITS HISTORY, CHRONOLOGY, LITERATURE AND
  TRADITIONS

EIGHT LECTURES

  PREACHED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
  IN THE YEAR 1913

    ON THE FOUNDATION OF THE LATE REV. JOHN BAMPTON, M.A.
    CANON OF SALISBURY

   BY

GEORGE EDMUNDSON, M.A.

    LATE FELLOW AND TUTOR OF BRASENOSE COLLEGE,

    VICAR OF ST. SAVIOUR, UPPER CHELSEA

LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.

   39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON

   NEW YORK, BOMBAY AND CALCUTTA

   1913

   [A11 rights reserved]

CAROLO BULLER HEBERDEN
D.C.L.
AUL. REG. ET COLL. AEN. NAS. PRINCIPALI
ACAD. OXON. VICECANCELLARIO
AMICITIAE PROBATAE
TESTIMONIUM
D. D. D.
OLIM PER DECENNIUM COLLEGA
     __________________________________________________________________

EXTRACT

  FROM THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT

    OF THE LATE

REV. JOHN BAMPTON

  CANON OF SALISBURY

   . . . I give and bequeath my Lands and Estates to the Chancellor,
   Masters, and Scholars of the University of Oxford for ever, to have and
   to hold all and singular the said Lands or Estates upon trust, and to
   the intents and purposes hereinafter mentioned; that is to say, I will
   and appoint that the Vice-Chancellor of the University of Oxford for
   the time being shall take and receive all the rents, issues, and
   profits thereof, and (after all taxes, reparations, and necessary
   deductions made) that he pay all the remainder to the endowment of
   eight Divinity Lecture Sermons, to be established for ever in the said
   University and to be performed in the manner following:

   I direct and appoint, that, upon the first Tuesday in Easter Term, a
   Lecturer be yearly chosen by the Heads of Colleges only, and by no
   others, in the room adjoining to the Printing-House, between the hours
   of ten in the morning and two in the afternoon, to preach eight
   Divinity Lecture Sermons, the year following, at St. Mary's in Oxford,
   between the commencement of the last month in Lent Term, and the end of
   the third week in Act Term.

   Also I direct and appoint, that the eight Divinity Lecture Sermons
   shall be preached upon either of the following Subjects--to confirm and
   establish the Christian Faith, and to confute all heretics and
   schismatics--upon the divine authority of the holy Scriptures--upon the
   authority of the writings of the primitive Fathers, as to the faith and
   practice of the primitive Church--upon the Divinity of our Lord and
   Saviour testis Christ --upon the Divinity of the Holy Ghost--upon the
   Articles of the Christian Faith, as comprehended in the Apostles' and
   Nicene Creeds.

   Also I direct, that thirty copies of the eight Divinity Lecture Sermons
   shall be always printed, within two months after they are preached; and
   one copy shall be given to the Chancellor of the University, and one
   copy to the Head of every College, and one copy to the Mayor of the
   city of Oxford, and one copy to be put into the Bodleian Library; and
   the expense of printing them shall be paid out of the revenue of the
   Land or Estates given for establishing the Divinity Lecture Sermons;
   and the Preacher shall not be paid, nor be entitled to the revenue,
   before they are printed.

   Also I direct and appoint, that no person shall be qualified to preach
   the Divinity Lecture Sermons, unless he hath taken the degree of Master
   of Arts at least, in one of the two Universities of Oxford or
   Cambridge; and that the same person shall never preach the Divinity
   Lecture Sermons twice.'
     __________________________________________________________________

SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS

                                    LECTURE I

  Character of the theme--The Rome of Claudius and of
  Nero--Intercourse--Population--Slavery--The Freedman' Class--Alien
  admixture--The Jewish Colony and its history--Its privileges and
  characteristics--Judaism attractive--Proselytes and God-fearers'--The
  Synagogues--Soil prepared for Christianity--The Laureolus--The Jews
  expelled by Claudius--Aquila and Prisca at Corinth--Their antecedents
  and position--Their close intercourse with St. Paul--St. Paul at
  Ephesus--His Journey to Greece--He writes to the Roman Church from
  Corinth--The Epistle to the Romans: an Apologia--St. Paul's proposed
  visit to Rome--Three groups of Roman Christians addressed--The
  impelling motive of the Epistle--The Judaeo-Christians at Rome--The
  Salutations of Chap. xvi. 1-23--Genuineness of the passage--Criticism
  dealt with--The Church in the house of Prisca and Aquila--Was this
  Ecclesia Domestica existent before 57 A.D.?--The Apostles Andronicus
  and Junias--The households of Aristobulus and Narcissus--The
  auto-biographic passage Chap. xv. 14-29--Another man's foundation'--Was
  the other man St. Peter?
                                                                         1-29
                                   LECTURE II

  The Lukan authorship of the Acts--Fragmentary character of the
  narrative--The Acts written before 62 A.D.--The closing verses of the
  Acts--The Day of Pentecost--The sojourning Romans--The Twelve at
  Jerusalem--The Hellenists and St. Stephen--Consequences of St.
  Stephen's martyrdom--Activity of St. Peter --The vision at
  Joppa--Conversion of Cornelius--Missionaries at Antioch--Barnabas sent
  to Antioch--He seeks Saul--The name Christiani--Herod Agrippa
  persecutes the Church--St. Peter escapes from prison--St. James and the
  Brethren--Value of tradition--Oral tradition--Early Christian written
  records--Their destruction--Apocryphal Acts'--Criteria of
  authenticity--Evidence for St. Peter's martyrdom at Rome--Ascension of
  Isaiah'--Clement of Rome--Ignatius--Dionysius of Corinth--Irenaeus--The
  Episcopal lists--Eusebius of Caesarea--Jerome--The Petrine tradition
  universally accepted in East and West alike--Archaeological
  evidence--Portraits--Sepulchral inscriptions--Mosaics--Frescoes--The
  Petrine legends' based on fact--The Preaching of Peter--Local
  memories--St. Peter at Rome--The envoy of the Twelve--Precedents of
  Samaria and Antioch--Analogy of circumstances
                                                                         30-58
                                   LECTURE III

  St. Peter encounters Simon Magus at Rome--Eusebius on the story of
  Simon Magus--His visit to Rome in Claudius' reign, and success--Weighty
  evidence of Justin Martyr, of Irenaeus and Hippolytus--The theories of
  Baur and Lipsius untenable--Vogue of Oriental cults and teachers at
  Rome--John Mark Peter's interpreter--Origin of St. Mark's Gospel--Its
  date--Jerome's version of the Petrine tradition--His sources of
  information--Relations with Pope Damasus--The Hieronymian tradition and
  that of the Liberian Catalogue--The differences between
  them--Chronological difficulties and discrepancies--Attempted
  solution--The Antiochean narrative [ Acts xi. and xii.]
  examined--Barnabas and Paul bear alms to Jerusalem, 46 A.D.--They meet
  Peter on his return from Rome--Peter makes Antioch the missionary
  centre of his work, 47-54 A.D.--Peter with Barnabas at Corinth, 54
  A.D.--Testimony of the First Epistle to the Corinthians--Accession of
  Nero--Peter and Barnabas journey to Italy--Evidence of Bamabas'
  missionary activity in Rome and North Italy--No rivalry between St.
  Peter and St. Paul at Corinth--Paul's delay in visiting Rome due to
  Peter's presence there, 54-56 A.D.--First organisation of the Roman
  Church--The trial of Julia Pomponia Graecina--Inscription in the crypt
  of Lucina
                                                                         59-86
                                   LECTURE IV

  St. Paul's visit to Jerusalem, Pentecost, 57 A.D., and captivity at
  Caesarea--Character of the administration of Felix--Accuracy and
  trustworthiness of the Lukan narrative--St. Paul's financial
  resources--Indulgent treatment of St. Paul by Felix--Influence of
  Drusilla--Recall of Felix--Elymas or Etoimos--Attitude of Festus--St.
  Paul's appeal to Caesar--His motives in appealing --St. Paul's journey
  from Puteoli to Rome--He is delivered in charge to the
  Stratopedarch--The favours accorded to him--St. Paul invites the Jewish
  leaders to meet him--His interviews with the chiefs of the
  Synagogues--The Apostle's appeal to the Jews is fruitless--The Epistles
  of the First Captivity--The earlier group--Colossians, Ephesians,
  Philemon--Their tone cheerful--Release expected--Many friends surround
  the Apostle--Mark, the cousin of Barnabas, at Alexandria--His visit to
  Rome and mission to Colossae--The Epistle to the Philippians--Changed
  situation--Friends absent--Issue of trial in doubt but Paul
  hopeful--The letter of a friend to friends--Discords at Philippi--The
  true yoke-fellow'--Clement--Caesar's household--St. Paul is set at
  liberty--Probable course of the trial
                                                                         87-114
                                    LECTURE V

  A High-Priestly embassy in Rome--Growth of hostility between Jew and
  Christian--The Christians accused of anarchism and secret crimes--St.
  Peter's last visit to Rome in 63 A.D.--The First Epistle of St.
  Peter--Its genuineness--The Epistle written at Rome--Its literary
  indebtedness to other New Testament writings--St. Peter acquainted with
  the Epistles to the Romans and Ephesians--Mark and Silvanus with Peter
  at Rome--The great fire of July 19, 64 A.D.--Rumour attributes the fire
  to Nero--Steps taken by Nero to efface the rumour--The Pisonian
  conspiracy and its suppression--The charges brought against the
  Christians--The Tacitean account of their sufferings--Character of the
  Neronian persecution--The personal act of Nero--Tigellinus, the active
  agent of Nero's cruelty--The Christians not implicated in the burning
  of Rome--Origin of the charge of incendiarism--Apocalyptic
  utterances--Tigellinus and Apollonius of Tyana: a parallel--Atheism,
  Thyestean feasts, Oedipodean intercourse--Hatred of the human race,
  Institutum Neronianum'--Crimina adhaerentia Nomini'--Christian
  contemporary evidence--The spectacle in the Vatican Gardens --The
  arrest of the great multitude, end of April, 65 A.D.--Comparison of
  evidence from Tacitus, Suetonius and Orosius fixes the
  date--Persecution in the Provinces
                                                                         115-144
                                   LECTURE VI

  Deaths of St. Peter and St. Paul at Rome--Their tombs piously
  preserved--They were not martyred on the same day--Manner of their
  deaths--How the mistake as to a common date arose --Statement of
  Prudentius--The Quo Vadis?' story examined --St. Peter's crucifixion in
  the early summer of 65 A.D.--The Epistle to the Hebrews--Addressed to
  Judaeo-Christians at Rome--Internal and external evidence for this--The
  Epistle never received as Pauline in Rome or the West--Tertullian names
  Barnabas as the author--Barnabas well qualified to write this
  Epistle--Sent to Rome, as an eirenicon--The personal references support
  the Barnabean hypothesis--The Pastoral Epistles--St. Paul's second
  imprisonment at Rome--His sense of desertion--His death, 67 A.D.--The
  Apocalypse written in 70 A.D.--Statements of Irenaeus and Origen
  considered--Eusebius' use of his authorities--Evidence of Victorinus
  and Jerome--The book reflects contemporary history--Neronian
  Persecution--Events of 69 A.D.--Burning of the Capitol--Domitian in
  power, Jan. to June, 70 A.D.--Nerva Consul, 71 A.D.--Temple of
  Jerusalem still standing--The Number of the Beast--Nero Caesar--The
  Apocalypse, a Neronian document--Nero is Anti-Christ--The Nero
  legend--Armageddon--Impressions of an eye-witness--Earthquakes and
  convulsions of nature--The islands of Patmos and Thera
                                                                         145-179
                                   LECTURE VII

  The First Century Episcopal Succession at Rome--The Jewish Synagoge and
  the Christian Ecclesia--The Official Ministry in the early
  Church--Duties and position of episcopi--Pastors and Stewards with cure
  of souls--They form an inner Presbyterate--Its president The
  Bishop--Apostles, Prophets, Teachers and their functions--The Didache
  an untrustworthy authority for the First Century--The genuine Epistle
  of Clement to the Corinthians--Not written in 96 A.D. but in beginning
  of 70 A.D.--The recent examples of our own time--The Neronian
  persecution fresh in memory--The sudden and successive troubles and
  calamities of 69 A.D.--Internal evidence of the Epistle to its early
  date--Church Organisation--Christology--New Testament Quotations--The
  Daily Sacrifice at Jerusalem had not ceased--The Corinthian
  dissensions--Predisposing circumstances, 66-68 A.D.--Reference to the
  Phoenix--Episcopal succession--Apostolical regulations--The disturbers
  of the peace at Corinth rebuked--Force of the word archaian--The
  bearers of the Epistle to Corinth--No allusion to Clement as the
  writer--Authoritative position of Clement in 96 A.D.--The Epistle
  belongs to an earlier time--Written by him as secretary to the
  Presbyterate--Interesting inscription
                                                                         180-205
                                  LECTURE VIII

  Attitude of the Flavian emperors to the Christians--A quarter of a
  century of moderation--Titus personally hostile--The Shepherd' of
  Hernias: a Flavian writing--Blunder of the Muratorian Fragmentist--The
  notice in the Liberian Catalogue'--The Muratorian and Liberian
  statements derived from a common source--Hermas confused with the
  presbyter Pastor--Patristic testimony supports the early
  date--Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian--Unity of The
  Shepherd'--It contains a real life story--Hermas a contemporary of
  Clement of Rome--Harnack's views discussed--The book in three parts,
  but the period covered by it short--Hermas' references to the Neronian
  persecution--To the organisation of the Church--Its primitive
  character--Signs of an evolutionary movement--Contentions about
  precedence--Growth of a Monarchical Episcopate--The persecution of
  Domitian--In its origin fiscal--The didrachma tax--Many Christians of
  high position suffer--Flavius Clemens put to death--His wife Flavia
  Domitilla banished--Flavius Sabinus, father and son--Flavius Clemens
  the Consul and Clemens the bishop--A third contemporary Clemens--M.
  Arrecinus Clemens is Consul 94 A.D.--He is put to death by his relative
  Domitian--The two Flavia Dornitillas--The Acts of Nereus and
  Achilles'--Plautilla the sister of Clemens the Consul--Relationship
  between the Flavian and Arrecinian families --Is Clement the bishop
  brother of Arrecinus Clemens?--The death of M. Acilius Glabrio--The
  Acilian Crypt in the cemetery of Priscilla--Conclusion
                                                                         206-237
                                   APPENDICES

  Note A. ?Chronological Statement
                                                                         239-241

  Note B. ?Aquila and Prisca or Priscilla
                                                                         242-3

  Note C. ?The Pudens Legend
                                                                         244-249

  Note D. ?The Family Connexion of Clement the Bishop
                                                                         250-258

  Note E. ?The Tombs of the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul
                                                                         259-272

  Note F. ?The Cemeteries of Priscilla and Domitilla
                                                                         273-282

  Index
                                                                         283

  Index of Scripture References
                                                                         295-6

                               THE CHURCH IN ROME
     __________________________________________________________________

LECTURE I

   Rom. i. 8: First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that
   your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.'

   The subject of these lectures is in one sense a well-worn theme. The
   literature bearing upon the history of the Church in Rome during the
   first century is enormous, and unfortunately in modem times the
   prevailing note has been controversial. It has seemed as if it were
   impossible even for those who have tried to write on the beginnings of
   Roman Christianity in the impartial spirit of the scientific historian
   to free themselves from bias and prejudice. This very fact, however,
   only proves that this has been and is a subject of profound and indeed
   of absorbing interest, and it is so from whatever point of view we
   regard it, the political, no less than the. ecclesiastical and
   religious. That interest indeed, so far from diminishing, has been
   greatly stimulated and increased by the archaeological researches and
   discoveries made in Rome and its immediate neighbourhood during the
   past half-century. Year by year additions have been made to our
   knowledge, and it is now generally admitted that the last word on many
   most important and critical questions has not yet been spoken. Already
   many assertions once confidently made have had to be modified or
   abandoned, opinions put forward with authority are constantly being
   revised, and a careful study of avail-able evidence has convinced me
   that there are grounds for questioning seriously certain conclusions
   now generally received, and at the same time for upholding the
   historical character of some ancient traditions too hastily rejected.

   The first point to grasp is the character of the spell exercised over
   the minds of men by the very name of Rome during the period of the
   early Caesars. Rome in the first century of our era occupied a position
   of influence unique in the annals of history. It had become the
   magnetic centre of the civilised world, and it was itself the most
   cosmopolitan of cities that have ever existed. The Rome of Claudius and
   of Nero was the seat of an absolute and centralised Government, whose
   vast dominion stretched from the shores of the Atlantic to the borders
   of Parthia, from Britain to the Libyan deserts, over diverse lands and
   many races, all of them subdued after centuries of conflict and of
   conquest by the Roman arms, but now forming a single empire under an
   administrative system of unrivalled flexibility and strength, which
   enforced obedience to law and the maintenance of peace without any
   unnecessary infringement of local liberties or interference with
   national religious cults. One of the most remarkable features of this
   great Empire was the freedom of intercourse that was enjoyed, and the
   safety and rapidity with which travelling could be undertaken. Never
   until quite modern times has any such ease and security of
   communication between place and place been possible. And this not
   merely by those admirable military roads which were one of the chief
   instruments for the maintenance of the Roman rule and for the binding
   together of province with province and of the most distant frontiers
   with the capital; the facilities for intercourse by water also were
   abundant and were, except during the winter months, freely used. The
   Roman Empire, as a glance at the map reveals, was--even at its
   zenith--essentially a Mediterranean power. Its dominion consisted
   mainly of the fringe of territory encircling that sea. In the midst
   stood the capital. The greatest cities of the Empire were ports, and
   Rome itself, the chief among them, was dependent upon sea-borne traffic
   for its daily food.' [1]

   At the beginning of the Christian era the population of the imperial
   city has been estimated at not less than 1,300,000, of which more than
   one half were slaves. The entire number of citizens owning private
   property was very small--a few thousands only.' [2] Each of these
   possessed vast numbers of slaves, [3] who were trained to perform every
   kind of work, so that a considerable portion of the free inhabitants
   found themselves without occupation or employment. In the time of
   Julius Caesar [4] no fewer than 320,000 were supported by the state,
   and though Augustus was able to reduce this multitude of paupers to
   200,000, [5] the number afterwards rapidly increased. This huge
   population was, as has been already said, one of the most cosmopolitan
   that has ever been gathered together to form one community. This was
   due in the first instance to the practice of selling prisoners of war,
   and the inhabitants of captured cities, as slaves. The institution of
   slavery therefore implied that in every wealthy household in Rome there
   was a great mixture of races, and the custom of manumission on a large
   scale was continually admitting batches of persons of foreign
   extraction to many privileges of citizenship. Thus was formed the large
   and important class of freedmen (liberti) containing men of culture and
   ability, who not only filled posts of responsibility in their former
   masters' households but not seldom became rich and rose to high
   official positions in the state. Freedmen indeed and the descendants of
   freedmen played no small part in the history of the times with which we
   are dealing, and Christianity found among them many of its early
   converts and most earnest workers. But the freedmen and the slaves by
   no means comprised all the foreign population of Rome at this epoch.
   The legionaries were recruited in all parts of the empire; the
   Pretorian camp contained contingents drawn from distant frontier
   tribes. Traders, travellers, adventurers of every kind thronged to
   Rome--particularly from the East. So did the preachers and teachers of
   many philosophies, cults, and modes of worship, Greek, Egyptian, and
   Phrygian. The very language of ordinary everyday life in Rome had
   become Greek, and the whole atmosphere of the great city was in no
   small measure orientalised. [6]

   Amongst this large alien element in the population the Jews formed one
   of the most marked and important sections. Their position indeed was at
   once singular and exclusive, for they had privileges accorded to none
   others. The origin [7] of the Jewish colony at Rome may be traced back
   to 63 B.C., when Pompeius after the capture of Jerusalem brought back a
   large number of prisoners, who were sold as slaves. But the Jew, as a
   slave, was always difficult to deal with, through his obstinate
   adherence to his ancestral faith and peculiar customs, and so many of
   these slaves were speedily manumitted [8] that they were able to form a
   community apart on the far side of the Tiber. [9] Julius Caesar from
   motives of expediency showed especial favour to the Jews, and his
   policy was continued by Augustus and, except for brief intervals, by
   his successors. The privileges thus conferred were very great, and
   included liberty of worship, freedom from military service and from
   certain taxes, the recognition of the Sabbath as a day of rest, the
   right of living according to the customs of their forefathers, and full
   jurisdiction over their own members. [10] Once in the reign of Tiberius
   [11] the worshippers of Jahveh and of Isis fell under the heavy
   displeasure of the emperor; some were punished, others expelled from
   the city, and the consuls were ordered to enlist 4000 Jews for military
   service in the malarious climate of Sardinia, 19 A.D. The determination
   of Caligula to set up a statue of himself in the Temple of Jerusalem
   aroused a storm of opposition, which would undoubtedly have brought a
   fierce persecution upon the Jews but for the assassination of the
   tyrant (41 A.D.), before his design was carried into effect. [12]
   Claudius, however, on his accession at once renewed all the old
   privileges, and took steps to allay the fanatical passions stirred up
   by the action of his half-insane predecessor. From this time forward
   the Jews were never compelled to take part in Caesar-worship. [13] To
   them alone of all the peoples of the empire was this concession made.

   This Jewish colony in Rome seems from the descriptions of contemporary
   writers to have had the same characteristics as the Jewish colonies in
   European cities throughout the Middle Ages, and indeed much as we see
   them to-day. A large proportion of these Roman Jews were very poor,
   living in rags and squalor, making a precarious livelihood as hawkers,
   pedlars, and dealers in second-hand goods. Above these were then, as
   now, the moneylenders, larger traders, and shopkeepers, and at the head
   the wealthy financiers, and in the days of Tiberius and his successors
   many members of the Herodian family made Rome their home and lived on
   terms of close intimacy with the Imperial circle. [14] It is a curious
   fact that the Jewish race, while hated and despised by the people of
   Rome, should have been endowed with so many immunities by the Emperors,
   and above all that its exclusive religion and ceremonial rites should
   have possessed such an attraction as undoubtedly they did possess, and
   should have drawn so many adherents from all classes. [15] The truth is
   that the privileges, as I have said before, were granted from motives
   of pure expediency. The Jewish race was numerous, it had settlements in
   practically every important city in the empire, and it was financially
   indispensable. The number of Jews in Rome in 5 B.C. has been estimated
   at 10,000; in Egypt, 1,000,000; in Palestine, 700,000; in the whole
   Roman Empire (out of a total population of fifty-four to sixty
   millions) four to four and a half millions.

   As 4000 adult males were actually sent to Sardinia in 19 A.D. it may
   safely be said that a quarter of a century later, allowing for the
   natural growth of population, for fresh batches of slaves receiving
   manumission, and for immigration from outside, the total Jewish
   settlement in Rome would not be less than 30,000 and might reach
   50,000.

   Everywhere the Jew however held aloof from his Gentile neighbours, and
   his absolute refusal to mingle with them and to share their life could
   only be met either by coercion or by favoured treatment. To the wise
   statesmanship of the dictator Julius the latter course commended
   itself, and the permanence of the policy he adopted is sufficient proof
   of its prescience. The attractiveness of Judaism, as a religious cult,
   is more difficult to explain. It had neither the mysticism nor the
   sensuousness of the worship of Isis or of Cybele. Yet although the Jew
   was hated and scorned, his religion became to a surprising degree the
   mode in Rome, especially among ladies of the patrician houses. The
   number of actual proselytes of Gentile origin was large, and still
   larger the number of those whom St. Luke in the Acts styles
   God-fearers' [16] (sebomenoi ton Theon), i.e. people who adopted the
   Jewish monotheism, attended the synagogue [17] services, and observed
   the Sabbath and certain portions of the ceremonial law. These
   God-fearers,' in every place where Jewish communities were to be found,
   formed a fringe round the Synagogue of bodies of men and women, who, in
   this age of religious electicism, without altogether abandoning their
   connexion with Paganism, had become semi-Jews.

   In a city such as the Rome we have been describing it is not difficult
   to see a seed-plot ready prepared for the planting of a new religion
   like Christianity, oriental in its origin, an outgrowth of Judaism,
   akin in so many points to the Mystery-Religions of Egypt and Asia Minor
   then so much in vogue, and bearing, as it did, in its ethical teaching
   so striking a resemblance to the moral code of the Stoics. That the
   message of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in some primitive form reached
   the banks of the Tiber very early there is, as I shall show later, good
   reason to believe, but of the when or how we know nothing directly. The
   converts at first would be almost certainly few in number and drawn
   from the humbler class of Jews. [18] The new sect, if it were noticed
   at all by the authorities, would be regarded with contemptuous
   indifference as a variety of Judaism, and therefore sheltered by the
   privileges which Judaism, as a religio licita, enjoyed. [19] The only
   possible allusion in the first decade after the Crucifixion to the
   existence in Rome of a knowledge of Christian teaching is contained in
   a passage of Suetonius' Life of Caligula,' in which he tells of the
   performance before the Emperor of a play in which a certain Laureolus,
   who gives his name to the piece, is crucified upon the stage. Might
   there not be here a cruel parody upon the central theme of Christian
   preaching? Probably not, though such an exhibition is at any rate
   thoroughly illustrative of the spirit of mockery with which the idea of
   a crucified Saviour would be received. [20]

   There is evidence, however, in the pages of the same historian,
   Suetonius, that almost exactly a decade after the aforesaid production
   of the Laureolus Christianity in Rome had already become a force
   sufficiently potent to draw down upon it the fanatical antagonism of
   the Jews. Tumults and disorders seem to have arisen in the Jewish
   quarter of the city in 50 A.D. of such a threatening character as to
   force the Government, in spite of its favourable inclination to the
   Jews, to take strong action. This appears to me to be nothing more than
   a fair interpretation of Suetonius' words--the Jews who were
   continually rioting at the instigation of Chrestus he (Claudius)
   expelled from Rome.' [21] To write Chrestus for Christus was quite
   natural to a Latin historian, for Chrestus was a name in use at Rome as
   extant inscriptions show, [22] and both Tertullian and Lactantius [23]
   tell us that in their time the common pronunciation was "Chrestus' and
   Chrestianos' for Christus' and Christianos.' The French word chrétien'
   is to this day a living proof that this mode of spelling still
   survives. Dion Cassius [24] informs us that the edict of expulsion,
   owing to the disturbance that it caused, was only partially carried
   out, but that the synagogues were closed and the clubs licensed by
   Caligula dissolved. Among the Jews that were expelled were no doubt the
   chief leaders of the contending factions. Among these were Aquila and
   Priscilla or Prisca, of whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles that
   in consequence of Claudius' edict of banishment they had left Rome and
   taken up their abode at Corinth, and were there brought into personal
   contact with St. Paul, when in the summer of 51 A.D. he first visited
   that city.

   The intercourse which thus began was destined to be long-continued and
   intimate, and it was through this intercourse (such at least is my firm
   persuasion) that that eager desire to visit Rome, to which the Apostle
   gives such strong expression in his Epistle to the Romans some five or
   six years later, was first fanned into flame. Not without purpose did
   St. Luke, who never wastes words, give such an elaborate description of
   this husband and wife upon their first entry on the stage of his
   history. Having departed from Athens' we read Acts, xviii. 1. Paul came
   to Corinth and having met a certain Jew, by name Aquila, a Pontian [25]
   by birth, who had lately come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife, in
   consequence of the decree of Claudius that all the Jews should depart
   from Rome, betook himself to them, and because they were of the same
   trade he abode with them and wrought at his craft, for they were
   tentmakers by trade.' Here undoubtedly St. Luke intended in the first
   place to give the reason for the strong bond of sympathy which at once
   sprang up between these two Asiatic Jews and fellow craftsmen. The
   description of Aquila as a Jew does not mean that he was not a
   Christian. Had he and his wife required to be converted and baptised,
   it is almost impossible that so important a fact should not here have
   been mentioned. Compare the notice about Apollos, Acts xviii. 24-27,
   The Jews who were actually exiled by Claudius were no doubt the leaders
   of the contending factions, Aquila and Prisca having been in 50 A.D. as
   afterwards among the foremost of the Christian congregation. In the
   eyes of the Roman authorities, as has already been pointed out,
   Christianity was as yet simply a Jewish sect. The emphatic statement
   that Aquila was a Jew applies, as the context shows, not to his
   religion but to his race, and the separate mention of Priscilla without
   that epithet may be taken to imply, firstly, that she was not Jewish
   but Roman, and secondly that she was to play an independent role in the
   furtherance of St. Paul's missionary work. Never indeed in the New
   Testament is the one name mentioned without the other, and in four out
   of the six places in which they occur the name of Prisca or Priscilla
   stands first. [26] From this fact the deduction has been made, and in
   my opinion rightly, that Prisca was of more honourable position by
   birth than her husband, and that she possessed private means which she
   freely used in furthering the cause of the Gospel. [27]

   I have spoken, not without good reason, of this intercourse which began
   in 51 A.D. at Corinth, as being long-continued and intimate. During the
   whole of his eighteen months' sojourn in that city St. Paul lived under
   their roof, and when he sailed from Cenchraea for Ephesus in the early
   spring of 53 A.D. Aquila and Prisca accompanied him. At Ephesus they
   took up their abode, Acts, xviii. 11 and 18, 19. and at once set about
   active missionary work, while awaiting the Apostle's return some six
   months later. During this interval it was by their instrumentality that
   the eloquent and learned Apollos was instructed in the full Christian
   faith, and probably it was by their advice that he entered upon, what
   we know to have been, his fruitful ministry at Corinth. Acts, xviii.
   24-27. Throughout the two years and a quarter Acts, xix. 10. that St.
   Paul made Ephesus the centre of his labours, Aquila and Prisca resided
   there. Probably their house was as before the Apostle's home; in any
   case we know that it was a meeting-place in which the faithful gathered
   for worship, for in his First Epistle to the Corinthians, I Cor. xvi.
   19. which was written from Ephesus some time in the autumn of 55 A.D.,
   St. Paul sends the salutations of Aquila and Priscilla and of the
   Church that is in their house.' From these his close friends and
   fellow-workers, with whom he was for some five or six years in constant
   communication, St. Paul would therefore have ample opportunities for
   learning much about the condition of the Church in Rome, and this not
   only from Aquila and Prisca themselves but from other exiles and the
   many travellers and traders from the capital whom he must have met at
   their house, and who would bring with them the latest news as to the
   state of things in the Imperial City. Among other things would come the
   glad tidings of the accession of the young and popular Nero in the
   place of Claudius, and of the happy prospects that his reign promised,
   a promise that was justified so long as the boy emperor was content in
   his public administration to place himself under the guidance of his
   wise counsellors Seneca and Burrhus. [28] What is certain is that St.
   Paul at the close of his two years' ministry at Ephesus began to look
   ahead and to plan fresh schemes of missionary activity. His first task
   was to journey through Macedonia to Corinth, where his presence was
   called for and needed; his next to pay another visit after a long
   absence to Jerusalem, but fter I have been there,' he said, I must see
   Rome.' [29] His departure from Ephesus was more hurried than he
   expected, for in the riots raised by Demetrius and his fellow-craftsmen
   against the Christians and the Jews with whom as usual they were
   confounded, [30] Paul seems to have narrowly escaped from the violence
   of the angry throng, and to have succeeded in doing so only through the
   self-sacrificing courage of Aquila and Prisca, [31] who risked their
   own lives in order to save his.

   It had been Paul's intention to remain at Ephesus till Pentecost, but
   this serious tumult compelled [32] him to leave much earlier in the
   year 56 A.D., and at the same time and for the same reasons his friends
   Aquila and Prisca may have taken the opportunity to start on their
   return journey to Rome, the edict of banishment having now been allowed
   to lapse by the conciliatory policy of Nero's advisers. The friendly
   Asiarchs, who warned Paul not to adventure himself into the theatre,
   would indeed feel it their duty, as soon as the riot was appeased, for
   the sake of the peace of the city to insist that both Paul and his
   protectors Aquila and Prisca should quit Ephesus for a time. Paul
   himself carried out his plan of journeying by way of Troas and Philippi
   to Corinth, where he passed the three winter months of 56-57 A.D. The
   project of a visit to Rome, so long cherished, so often hindered, now
   began to assume a concrete shape in his mind, and the result was the
   writing, almost certainly in the early spring of the year 57 A.D., of
   the Epistle to the Romans. Now this great epistle stands in the
   forefront of the Pauline writings chiefly as a theological treatise,
   but apart from its theology it has other claims, as an historical
   document of the highest evidential value, deserving from the Church
   historian's point of view the closest and most attentive study.

   In the first place then this Epistle bears upon its face the clearest
   testimony to the existence in 57 A.D. of a distinguished and
   well-established Christian Church in Rome, a Church already of some
   standing and in which the Gentile element predominated. The mere fact
   that the Apostle, at a time when many cares pressed heavily upon him,
   [33] took the pains to write this elaborate and carefully reasoned
   statement of his doctrinal teaching to a body of Christians that he had
   never visited, is evidence to the very important place they occupied in
   his thoughts. His words, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you
   all that your faith [34] is proclaimed in all the world,' may be
   somewhat hyperbolic, but they mean at any rate that the Roman Church
   was well known and highly spoken of in all the various Christian
   communities with which St. Paul was acquainted. And the impression
   these words convey is emphasised by the Apostle's later declaration
   affirming even in stronger terms his personal assent to this widely
   received estimate of the character of Roman Christianity, for no
   language could be more explicit than this--I am persuaded, my brethren,
   I myself also concerning you, that even of yourselves'--i.e. without
   any extraneous help derived from such an epistle as I am sending to
   you--you are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to
   admonish one another.' [35] Such a declaration implies a conviction
   based upon trustworthy evidence, otherwise his readers would be the
   first to perceive that here was only high-flown language covering an
   empty compliment. Such an utterance from a man and a writer like St.
   Paul presupposes an already existing acquaintance with a considerable
   number of Roman Christians, whose goodness, knowledge, and sound
   judgment he has tested and learnt to appreciate. Indeed it is not too
   much to say that Paul in writing this epistle is somewhat oppressed by
   a sense that those whom he is addressing--for a reason, which will
   appear presently--may possibly think that they have no special need
   either of his instruction or of his admonition. His epistle is an
   apologia for venturing to be so bold as to propose to pay a visit to
   Rome, even though that visit should be no more than a brief pause in
   the course of a journey farther west. [36] He evidently had in his mind
   the fear that in Rome he had, as a preparatory step, to fight down
   disparaging rumours concerning himself, his teaching, and his office,
   and that he might be regarded as an intruder. If he had found it
   necessary even in Corinth, a Church which he himself had planted, and
   where even now he was writing, to defend strenuously his Apostolic
   claims and doctrine, [37] how much more in Rome among Christians of old
   standing, in whose conversion he had had no hand. So in the
   Introductory Salutation St. Paul sets forth his credentials. He is no
   mere ordinary apostle, a man commissioned by the Twelve or by some
   particular Church to go forth to some limited field of missionary work.
   His Apostleship differed from that of their own Junias and Andronicus,
   [38] whom later he describes as apostles of note,' differed--perhaps it
   is implied--even from that of so eminent a man as Barnabas, [39] in
   that he [Paul] like the Twelve had been chosen out and set apart [40]
   for the preaching of the Gospel by the Lord Jesus Christ
   Himself--chosen and set apart for preaching the Gospel among all
   nations and bringing them to the obedience of the faith. [41] And
   though the Gospel has already been preached in Rome and with such
   success that the faith of the Roman Christians is spoken of everywhere
   in terms of praise, yet Rome too lies within the bounds of his
   commission, and so he has many times planned, though hitherto always
   hindered, to come to them that he might have some fruit amongst them
   also. Indeed he calls God to witness that he had prayed continually
   that he might be prospered on his way to visit them, that he might be
   able to impart to them some spiritual gift for their confirmation.
   Immediately, however, adding lest he should offend their
   susceptibilities by any assumption of superiority--that is that while I
   am amongst you we may be jointly strengthened by the mutual faith of
   you and me.' [42]

   But if the note of apologia can be discerned here in the introductory
   verses, it comes out much more strongly in what may be styled the body
   of the epistle. The difficulties of interpretation theologically of the
   Apostle's reasoning and arguments, in that grand series of chapters
   which end with chapter xi., lie outside my province. Those
   difficulties, admittedly very great, are caused in no small degree by
   our ignorance of the circumstances, of the persons, parties, questions,
   and situation generally with which St. Paul was dealing. We lack in
   fact the historical background. It is my present object to try to trace
   out from the materials, which the epistle itself supplies in definite
   even though in parts but in faint outline, such features of that
   background as are discernible through the mist of ages. Leaving on one
   side for the present the extremely important autobiographical passage
   in chapter xv., also the valuable testimony as to the composition of
   the Roman Church furnished by the list of salutations in chapter xvi.,
   which require special and separate treatment, we can, I think, make
   certain well-grounded assertions concerning the three distinct groups
   of persons whom St. Paul had in his thoughts as he wrote this epistle.
   These three groups are (1) a body of Jewish Christians, (2) a larger
   body of converted Gentiles, (3) the mass of unbelieving Jews. St. Paul
   leaves in no doubt that the third group comprised the vast majority of
   the Roman Jews, including practically the whole of official Israel. And
   what is more, as yet these rabbis, elders, and rulers of the Synagogues
   were not so much actively hostile to the preaching of Christianity as
   simply deaf, contemptuously indifferent. Those of Group No. 1, the
   Jewish Christians, were relatively small in number, but though small
   they were divided into two very distinct sections or parties. One of
   these sections consisted of Jews like Aquila and others mentioned in
   the salutations, who were Paul's friends and fellow-workers; the other,
   an extremely influential and energetic section of Judaeo-Christians,
   Jews rather than Christians, who, like the Judaisers who are brought
   before us in the Epistle to the Galatians and elsewhere, were bitterly
   opposed to St. Paul, disputed his Apostolic authority, traduced and
   misrepresented his teaching, and denounced him as a renegade from the
   faith of his fathers. The Gentiles of the second group formed the chief
   element in. the Roman Church. Of these no doubt a certain number had
   been converted straight from heathendom, but the assumption which runs
   through the epistle, that they were familiar with the Jewish Scriptures
   in the Septuagint version, and with the Jewish ceremonial law, would
   seem to point to their being largely drawn from the class of
   Greek-speaking God-fearers,' which, as I have already stated, in all
   the chief towns of the Empire, and conspicuously in Rome, formed a
   fringe round the synagogue. If it be asked, what was the impelling
   motive which led to the writing of this epistle, and which dictated the
   order and character of the arguments, the answer surely is not far to
   seek. St. Paul had made up his mind after many hesitations to visit
   Rome, but from information that had come to him he was not altogether
   happy about the reception he would meet. To the Christian community of
   the imperial city as a whole he was a stranger, and as I have said, he
   was aware that there was a Judaising faction there busy at their usual
   task of stirring up enmity against him. His own words (Rom. iii. 8), as
   we are slanderously reported and as some affirm that we say, let us do
   evil that good may come,' are a proof that he had been informed that
   his great doctrine of Justification by Faith had been seized upon by
   these adversaries to represent him as an antinomian. He therefore felt
   it to be incumbent upon him to answer at once and in advance these
   Judaistic attacks by a full exposition of his teaching on the subject
   of Justification by Faith, and at the same time he desired to make
   clear what was his real attitude towards many disputed questions
   concerning Judaism and the observance of the Mosaic Law, and the
   relation between Jew and Gentile in the Church of Christ.

   If this be granted then a flood of light is immediately thrown on the
   interpretation and import of that central portion of this epistle,
   which begins with the words (Rom. ii. 17)--but if thou bearest the name
   . . . of Jew and possessest a law to rest upon'--up to the end of
   chapter xi. It is unmistakably addressed to Jews. [43] Not to the
   strict orthodox Jews of the Synagogues, who in their haughty aloofness
   would not be likely either to see or to read the Apostle's arguments.
   The Jews addressed were men who had indeed accepted Jesus as the Jewish
   Messiah but who perhaps only the more obstinately for that very reason
   clung to their Judaism, and hated the thought of losing any of those
   exclusive religious privileges, as Israelites, which were their pride
   and boast. The doors of the Christian Church, as they conceived it,
   might be open to Gentiles, but only if they would consent to be
   circumcised and to conform to the ordinances of the Mosaic Law.

   But though in form he is addressing himself to Jews, Paul's thoughts
   are all the time directed to his Gentile readers, and it is for their
   sake and for their edification quite as much as for the persuasion of
   his Jewish fellow-countrymen that he step by step leads up to the
   establishment of the fundamental principles of the Gospel that he
   preached. This is made quite clear by his own words (chap. xi. 13-14):
   For it is to you the Gentiles that I am speaking. Nay, more, [44] in so
   far as I am the Gentiles' Apostle I make-the-most-of [45] my ministry;
   if by any means I may stir to jealousy my own flesh and might save
   some.' [46]

   The lengthy list of salutations to be found in the first twenty-three
   verses of chapter xvi. is a passage of great and peculiar interest
   historically, for it enables us to form some estimate, not
   conjecturally but positively, concerning the social and racial
   composition of the Roman Christian community at this time. It also
   gives indirectly an indication of the close relations of intercourse
   subsisting between the Churches of the chief cities of the
   Mediterranean coast. The very fact of its historical importance has
   however caused doubts to be raised by certain critics of the
   hypercritical school whether the passage is really an integral part of
   the Epistle to the Romans. Its Pauline authorship is not assailed, but
   attempts have been made to show that the list where it stands has
   (wholly or in part) been displaced and that it should be attached to
   some hypothetical epistle addressed at some unknown time to another
   Church, most probably to that of Ephesus. It must suffice here to say
   that I accept without hesitation the whole of this sixteenth chapter as
   an original and authentic portion of the Epistle to the Romans on the
   following grounds. First, to quote the words of Professor Kirsopp Lake,
   one of the most recent advocates of the Ephesian hypothesis, There is
   no trace of any external evidence for doubting that this section has
   always belonged to the epistle.' [47] This then is admitted, and it
   counts heavily. Secondly, all the names, some of them rare and uncommon
   names, contained in the list of salutations have been discovered in the
   inscriptions found in the colurnbaria and cemeteries of Rome, of a date
   contemporary or nearly contemporary with the date of the epistle: an
   evidence in favour of authenticity, which, if not absolutely
   conclusive, is at least remarkably convincing. [48] The arguments in
   favour of the anti-Roman hypothesis are of a purely a priori character,
   and there are only two of them, it seems to me, of weight sufficient to
   deserve consideration. The first is the difficulty of imagining that
   Paul could possibly have been acquainted with the names of so many
   members of a Church he had never visited, and still more that he should
   have been able in quite a large proportion of cases to add personal
   details. With this argument I have already dealt in part. Besides the
   information which he must have acquired from Aquila and Prisca during
   those four years they spent together at Corinth and Ephesus, he would
   be brought into contact at those two great centres of Mediterranean
   traffic with a constant stream of travellers and traders from Rome.
   Among these would be Christians, whose first thought would be to find
   their way to the friendly house of their banished fellow-citizens.
   Criticism here, as in many other instances, has gone astray from its
   failure to recognise the great facilities for intercourse in Apostolic
   times, especially between cities on the shores of the Mediterranean,
   and the freedom with which those facilities were used. The travels of
   Apollonius of Tyana as told by Philostratus are a good instance in
   point, for Apollonius was a contemporary of St. Paul. The Apostle did
   not draw up, we may be sure, this unusually long list of salutations
   without an object. Diffident, as he seems to have been, of the welcome
   he would receive upon his visit to Rome, may we not regard these
   salutations as in some sense a tactful act of diplomacy? He wished to
   remind those who are mentioned that he bore them in his remembrance and
   affection, and at the same time to bespeak, as it were, their good
   offices with their brethren for the time when he actually came amongst
   them. [49] That Paul himself could not have made out such a list with
   its many details without assistance is possibly true, but that
   assistance was at his very side, as his words were being written down.
   Very interesting, as a mark of the genuineness of this passage, is the
   sudden interpolation, in the midst of the Pauline phrases, of a
   salutation from another hand, I, Tertius, the scribe of this epistle,
   salute you.' [50] Tertius was then a Roman Christian, and he had
   doubtless been chosen by Paul on this occasion to act as his
   amanuensis, for this very reason.

   The second argument relied upon by the critics is at first sight more
   plausible. Paul in writing his First Epistle to the Corinthians from
   Ephesus sends salutations from Aquila and Prisca and the Church in
   their house, adding according to one group of authorities the words
   with whom also I am a guest.' [51] Nothing could be more natural, and
   the inference seems to follow that when previously the Apostle was a
   guest in their house at Corinth, there likewise that house was a
   meeting-place for a Christian congregation. About a year and a quarter
   after this Paul, writing from Corinth to the Romans, again sends
   salutations to these same fellow-workers (Aquila and Prisca), and then
   after a eulogistic reference to their having risked their lives to save
   his, and thanking them not only in his own name but in that of all the
   Churches of the Gentiles, he proceeds to salute the Church that is in
   their house.' Now to the critics with whom I am dealing it appears very
   improbable that if Aquila and Prisca had only returned to Rome so
   recently there could have been already a Church in their house with the
   existence of which St. Paul could have been sufficiently acquainted to
   deem it worthy of a special salutation. It is pointed out, moreover,
   that in his Second Epistle to Timothy (an epistle, by the by, not
   accepted by these same critics as Paul's or contemporary) Paul sends
   salutations from Rome to Prisca and Aquila apparently at Ephesus, and
   the suggestion is put forward that during the decade which intervened
   between the first and last of these salutations the home of this
   husband and wife had always been at Ephesus. This being so, this
   section of the sixteenth chapter of the Romans cannot belong to the
   epistle in which we find it.

   It might be thought a sufficient answer to this allegation that
   external authority in its favour is confessedly nonexistent--to say
   nothing of the fact that tradition with no uncertain voice connects the
   names of Prisca and Aquila with definite localities in Rome. [52] But
   quite apart from this there is no real difficulty in accepting the
   usual interpretation of the salutation.

   When the Apostle parted at Ephesus with the faithful companions and
   fellow-workers who had been so long of such service to him, one may be
   quite sure it would not be without full knowledge on both sides of
   their future intentions and plans. On his reaching Corinth a whole
   twelve-month at least must have passed, ample time for news to have
   come, by some of those using the highway of traffic across the isthmus,
   that Aquila and Prisca were again settled at Rome and carrying on their
   work there on the same lines as at Corinth and Ephesus. There is
   nothing whatever impossible in this, nothing certainly to afford the
   slightest pretext for the rejection of a well-authenticated text.
   Personally however I do not believe that there is any necessity for
   entering upon the consideration of what I venture to call time-table
   calculations.' There is nothing in St. Paul's words to warrant us in
   assuming that this Church in the house' of Aquila and Prisca was new to
   Roman Christianity. The banishment decreed by Claudius was according to
   Dion Cassius most leniently carried out and would not involve the
   confiscation of property. [53] It is one of those minute points that
   are often so significant, that St. Paul speaks of the house at Ephesus
   as that of Aquila and Prisca, of the house at Rome as that of Prisca
   and Aquila. If Prisca were, as is commonly supposed, when they were
   resident at Rome the more important person of the two spouses, and the
   owner of property, then the unusual inversion of the names is
   explicable. But at Ephesus where they were strangers the house would
   naturally be described as that of Aquila and Prisca, the husband's name
   standing first in order of precedence. [54]

   Since Aquila and Prisca were expelled, it must have been, as I have
   already said, because they were recognised leaders of that faction of
   Chrestus' of which Suetonius speaks. May one not be justified then in
   the assumption that the readiness of the exiles at Corinth and at
   Ephesus to offer hospitality and a room for worship in their house was
   but the continuation of their previous practice at their Roman home
   before their banishment? But if the Church in their house was thus in
   existence before 50 A.D., it is scarcely likely that the owners in
   their enforced absence would forbid its use. It would but lessen their
   sense of separation, if they were thus able to be of continued service
   to their poorer Christian brethren in Rome. Such a supposition of
   course involves certain assumptions about the state of the Church in
   Rome in 50 A.D., but I hope to be able to show that it is a reasonable
   assumption, and consistent alike with the positive and traditional data
   that we possess. [55] The Epistle to the Romans is itself a proof that
   Christianity was firmly established in the metropolis some time before
   57 A.D.; there must therefore before that date have been houses where
   the faithful met. Tradition mentions only two such places of
   assembly--the house of Prisca and Aquila and the house of Pudens. The
   localities are still supposed to be marked by the very ancient Churches
   of St. Prisca and St. Pudenziana.

   Granting then that this list of salutations is addressed to the Roman
   community, let us glance very briefly at its general features. A study
   of the names enables us to draw the conclusion that the Roman
   Christians mainly belonged to the class of Greek-speaking freedmen and
   slaves. [56] Certain of these are addressed by the Apostle as kinsmen
   (sungeneis), and it is safe to assume that these were Jewish
   fellow-countrymen. [57] It is possible that some others not so
   designated may have been Jews, but the probability is the other way.
   The evidence already adduced points clearly to a hostility to Paul
   among the Judaeo-Christians at Rome, which would naturally exclude them
   from receiving friendly greetings. Two names in this group deserve
   special mention. Salute Andronicus and Junias my kinsmen and my
   fellow-prisoners, who are men of mark among the apostles, who also were
   in Christ before me' [58] is the remarkable language of the seventh
   verse. When and where these two had been Paul's fellow-prisoners we
   know not. Paul in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians--only a few
   months before--had spoken of frequent imprisonments [59] of which we
   know nothing. The very fact that he describes Andronicus and Junias as
   men of mark among the apostles' makes it probable that he had
   encountered them in his journeys, for the term apostle' at this early
   period seems to have been applied generally to delegates sent out with
   a commission by some Church for some special field of missionary work,
   and to have carried with it as a necessary qualification the possession
   of charismatic gifts. [60] But a still greater distinction is conferred
   on these two by Paul's admission that they were in Christ before me,'
   words which imply that their conversion dated back at least as far as
   the days of St. Stephen's activity. Possibly they belonged to that
   Synagogue of the Libertines' [61] in which Stephen argued, and
   afterwards became, a little later, the first preachers of the Gospel at
   Rome. Very interesting are the salutations to the households of
   Aristobulus and Narcissus. These would all be freedmen or slaves.
   Aristobulus may well have been that grandson of Herod the Great who is
   described by Josephus [62] as making his permanent home at Rome. This
   is borne out by the salutation to Herodion my kinsman' intervening
   between those of the two households. The name suggests a member of the
   family to which Aristobulus belonged. Narcissus can scarcely be any
   other than the freedman and favourite of Claudius. He had been put to
   death some three years before this epistle was written, but his slaves
   and dependents, though they would after his execution be incorporated
   in the Imperial household, might still retain the distinctive name of
   Narcissiani. [63] It is possible that Aristobulus may have been dead in
   57 A.D., and have bequeathed his slaves to the emperor. If so, both
   these groups would form part of that vast body of freedmen and slaves
   known as Caesar's Household, to which St. Paul refers writing from Rome
   to the Philippians: all the Saints salute you, specially they of
   Caesar's Household.'

   How vast a number composed the imperial household may be gathered from
   the statement of Lanciani (Ancient Rome in the Light of Recent
   Discoveries,' p. 130) that in two columbaria of the servants and
   freedmen of Augustus and Livia the remains of no fewer than 6000
   persons have been found. The two groups of names in verses 14-15 seem
   to indicate that they were members of two smaller households belonging
   to private persons. [64] The expression all the Churches of Christ
   salute you' (v. 16) is unique in the New Testament, and when taken in
   connexion with the language of this epistle elsewhere upon the high
   repute of the Roman Church may be held (to quote the words of Dr. Hort)
   to signify that that Church was already an object of love and respect
   to Jewish and Gentile Churches alike.' [65]

   And now we come to a consideration of the all-important autobiographic
   passage in the fifteenth chapter, [66] which contains, if rightly
   interpreted, an explanation at once of St. Paul's attitude of deference
   to the Roman Church and the widespread esteem in which, as he declares,
   it was held by its sister Churches. This passage may be regarded as an
   expansion of the earlier autobiographic section with which the epistle
   opens. The object and the tone are the same, only here the Apostle
   enters more into detail. After recounting how from Jerusalem and round
   about even to Illyricum I have fully carried the Gospel of Christ, but
   in doing so making it my pride-and-care [67] to preach not where Christ
   was named lest I should build upon another man's foundation,' Paul
   proceeds wherefore also I was hindered many times [68] from coming to
   you. But now having no more place in these regions and having had these
   many years a keen-longing [69] to come to you, whenever I journey to
   Spain [I will come to you] [70] for I hope to see you, as I am
   journeying through, and to be sent forward on my way thitherward by you
   after I have first in some measure enjoyed-my-fill of your company.'
   The meaning of this statement, though the language and sequence of
   thought are somewhat involved, is nevertheless, so it seems to me, as
   plain and direct as it is possible to be. St. Paul had been hindered
   hitherto from visiting Rome, because he had made it a cardinal
   principle of his missionary life not to trespass in fields opened out
   by other men's labours, in Churches whose foundations others had laid.
   May not this ordinance of limitation imposed by the Apostle on himself
   afford the explanation of Acts xvi. 6-7, And they went through the
   region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been forbidden of the Holy Ghost
   to preach the word in Asia; and when they came over against Mysia, they
   assayed to go into Bithynia; and the Spirit of Jesus suffered them
   not'? If the South Galatian theory be accepted (I myself accept it
   unreservedly), it is really remarkable how small a portion of what is
   now known as Asia Minor was actually evangelised by St. Paul. [71] Even
   now he does not propose to come to Rome with any intention of
   undertaking a prolonged spell of missionary work, but merely to pay a
   brief passing visit on his journey further west, in order to make the
   acquaintance of the Roman Christians, of whom he had heard so much, and
   to receive at their hands a friendly and encouraging send-off when he
   leaves them for the scene of his new labours in Spain. It has often
   been asked, why St. Paul, if he meant that another had preached at Rome
   and been the founder of the Roman Church, did not mention his name? The
   answer is a very simple one: he was not writing for the information of
   students and critics of the twentieth century, but for the Roman
   Christians, who knew the facts.

   There had then been a founder of this great Church of world-wide fame
   with whom Paul was well acquainted and into whose special sphere of
   successful preaching he did not think it right to intrude. Who was he?
   [72] All tradition answers with one voice the name of St. Peter. In the
   next lecture I shall attempt to set forth the grounds on which this
   tradition rests, and to show that its acceptance, so far from being
   inconsistent with those fragments of early Christian history which have
   been preserved to us in the Acts and in the Epistles, serves to
   complete and bind them together and to explain much that is otherwise
   inexplicable in the rapid spread of Christianity in the three decades
   which followed the Great Day of Pentecost.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] See Sir W. Ramsay's Article in Hasting's Dict. vol. v. Roads and
   Travel in N.T. Times'; his Seven Churches, p. 15, and elsewhere in his
   writings. Friedlander, Sittengeschichte Roms, ii. 3; Sanday and
   Headlam, Ep. to Rom. p. xxvi; Merivale, St. Paul at Rome, p. 5; Miss C.
   Skeet, Travel in the First Century; Renan, Hibbert Lectures, 1850, The
   Influence of the Institutions, Thought, and Culture of Rome on
   Christianity and the Development of the Catholic Church,' Eng. tr., pp.
   17-19.

   [2] Cicero (De Officiis, ii. 21) speaks of the number as 2000 in 102
   B.C.

   [3] At the end of the Republic and under the Empire it was not a rare
   thing to meet rich Romans possessing many thousands. Under Augustus a
   simple freedman, C. Caecilius Isidorus, although he had lost a
   considerable part of his fortune during the civil wars, still left at
   his death 4116 slaves. Pliny, Historia Naturalis, xxxiii. 47.

   [4] Suetonius, Caesar, 41; Dion Cassius, xliii. 21.

   [5] Dion Cassius, lv, 10.

   [6] Among the upper classes it had become the fashion to speak and
   write Greek; for trade purposes and among the lowest classes of mixed
   race a debased Greek was used, as the language most generally
   understood. Juvenal, Sat. iii. 60 Non possum ferre, Quirites, Graecam
   urbem'; ibid. 62 Jam pridem Syrus in Tiberim defluxit Orontes.' Also
   73-80.

   [7] Berliner, Abraham (Geschichte der Juden in Rom, one of the best
   monographs on the subject), thinks that there must have been Jewish
   settlers in Rome before 63 B.C., or else it is difficult to account for
   Cicero, when pleading for Flaccus in 59 B.C., affecting to be
   intimidated by the crowd of Jews thronging the Aurelian
   steps--multitudinem Iudaeorum flagrantium nonnunquam in concionibus'
   (Cic. pro Flacco xxviii.), and probably he was right. Cicero however
   was no doubt greatly exaggerating his fear for his advocate's purpose.
   See Sanday and Headlam, Ep. to Rom. p. xix.

   [8] Philo, Leg. ad Caium, 568.

   [9] The Transtiberine Ghetto,' which was first removed across the river
   in 1556.

   [10] Schürer, Hist. of the Jewish People in N.T. Times, 2nd Div., vol.
   ii. pp. 234, 259, 264. Josephus (Ant. xiv.) gives a number of the
   edicts conferring these privileges. See also Suet. Caesar, 42. The
   action of Julius Caesar was the more remarkable as he took energetic
   steps to repress all collegia which were unable to prove ancient
   prescriptive rights and liberty of association generally. Consult also
   Harnack, Expansion of Christianity, vol. i. pp. 5-10, 350-371; Fouard,
   S. Pierre, c. xiv. Les Juifs de Rome'; Renan, Hibbert Lectures, Eng.
   tr., pp. 45-55.

   [11] Josephus (Ant. xviii. 5) tells us that the anger of Tiberius was
   aroused by the complaint of Saturninus, a friend of the emperor, that
   his wife Fulvia, who was a proselyte, had been induced to give money
   for the service of the Temple at Jerusalem under false pretences.
   Suetonius (Vit. Tib. 36) writes: Iudaeorum iuventutes per speciem
   sacramenti in provincias gravioris caeli distribuit, reliquos gentis
   eiusdem vel similia sectantes urbe summovit, sub poena perpetuae
   servitutis nisi obtemperassent.' Tacitus (Ann. ii. 85) confirms the
   account of Josephus about the sending of this body of Jews to Sardinia
   and characteristically remarks si ob gravitatem caeli interiissent;
   vile damnum.' The action of Tiberius was confined to the Jews of Rome.

   [12] Much may be learnt about the position of the Jews in the Empire
   and of Caligula's disposition towards them in Philo's Legatio ad Caium,
   in which he gives an account of the reception by the emperor of a
   deputation from the Jews of Alexandria headed by himself.

   [13] Tacitus, Hist. v. 5 Non regibus haec adulatio, non Caesaribus
   honor.'

   [14] For the Herodian family at Rome see Josephus, Ant. xviii. 5, 6.

   [15] Harnack, Expansion of Christianity, i. 7-11; Schürer, 2 Div. ii.
   220-242; Allard, Hist. de Perséc. c. i. sec. 1; Hardy, Studies in Roman
   Hist. pp. 14-28; Workman, Persecutions in Early Church, pp. 108-115.

   [16] These people, described in the Acts and elsewhere as sebomenoi (or
   phoboumenoi) ton Theon or simply as sebomeeoi, were by Schürer, in the
   1st ed. of his Geschichte d. Jüdischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu
   Christi, described as being the Proselytes of the Gate' of the Talmud.
   He followed the commonly received opinion. He has however since then,
   by a careful study of inscriptions, been led to change his opinion. In
   his 4th ed. 1909 (iii. 173 ff.) he is able to show that the term
   proselyte of the gate' was not used until a much later period than that
   with which we are dealing, and that the real meaning is that given
   above, heathen who had partially adopted Judaism, but without becoming
   proselytes. See Kirsopp Lake, Early Epistles of St. Paul, pp. 37-39.

   [17] The synagogues in Rome were each separately organised and
   independent. The entire body of Jews of the capital were not allowed,
   as at Alexandria, to form a state within a state, self-administered
   with an Alabarch at their head. The names of seven synagogues have been
   discovered in the inscriptions of the ancient Jewish cemeteries: (1)
   Augousteseon, (2) Agrippesion, (3) Bolumni, (4) Kampesion, (5)
   Sibouresion, (6) Aibreon, (7) Elaias. The first two were probably the
   synagogues of the households of Augustus and Agrippa. The fourth and
   fifth belong to Jewish settlements on the outskirts of the Campus
   Martius and in the crowded Suburra. The third may have been built by
   some one of the name of Volumnus, or have been associated with him in
   some unknown way. The seventh, the synagogue of the Olive Tree, may
   have suggested the simile of Rom. xi. 17-24. The sixth inscription does
   not seem to have referred to any special synagogue but to have been a
   generic term, a synagogue of the Hebrews (or Jews).' In addition to
   settlements in the Suburra and near the Campus Martius, the discovery
   of two ancient Jewish cemeteries on the Appian Way, one of them close
   to the Porta Capena, bears evidence to yet another Jewish colony at
   this point, not inconsiderable in numbers. The Transtiberine, however,
   was always by far the largest of the Jewish quarters. See Schürer, 2
   Div., ii. 247-249; Fouard, S. Pierre, pp. 316-322; Garrucci, Cimetero
   degli antichi Ebrei in Roma, and Marucchi, Elements d'Archéologie
   Chrétienne, vol. ii. pp. 208-226, 259-274.

   [18] For the chronology of these Lectures see Note A of the Appendix.

   [19] Tertullian (Apol. xxi.) says that the Church until the time of
   Nero's persecution grew up under the shadow of the synagogue: quasi sub
   umbraculo religionis insignissimae certe licitae.'

   [20] Suet. Calig. 57. See also for later notices of Laureolus, Jos.
   Ant. xix. 18; Martial, Spect. 7; Tertullian, Valent. 14. In Mayor's
   Juvenal, vol. ii. p. 40, the following note appears to Sat. viii. 167:
   Laureolum Schol. In ipso mimo Laureolo figitur crux unde vera cruce
   dignus est Lentulus, qui tanto detestabilior est quanto melius gestum
   imitatus est scenicum. . . . Hic Lentulus nobilis fuit et suscepit
   servi personam in agendo mimo.'

   [21] Suet. Claudius, 25 Iudaeos impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantes
   Roma expulit.'

   [22] CIL. vi. 10233. The following inscription, which I came across,
   seemed to me specially interesting from the collocation of the names
   Chrestus and Paula. P. Ælius Chrestus et Cornelia Paula hoc scalare
   adplicitum huic sepulchro quod emerunt a fisco agente Agathonico proc
   [-uratore] Augustorum nostrorum quod habet scriptura infra scripta.
   Gentiano et Basso cons. vii Kal. April.' Date, 211 A.D.

   [23] Tert. Apol. 3: Sed ut cum perperam Chrestianos pronuntiatur a
   vobis, nam nec nominis certa est notitia penes vos'; Lact. Inst. Divin.
   iv. 17: Sed exponenda huius nominis [Christi] ratio est propter
   ignorantium errorem, qui eum immutata litera Chrestum solent dicere.'
   Compare the title Le Roy très Chréstien of the French Kings.

   [24] Dion Cassius, lx. 6: tous te Ioudaious, pleonasantas authis
   chalepos an aneu taraches hupo tou ochlou sphon tes poleos eirchthenai,
   ouk exelase men, to de de patrio nomo bio chromenous, ekeleuse me
   sunathroizesthai. tas te hetaireias epanachtheisas hupo tou Gaiou
   dieluse.

   [25] I.e. a native of the Roman Province of Pontus.

   [26] For further details about Prisca and Aquila see Appendix, Note B.
   It is noteworthy that St. Paul according to the authority of the best
   authenticated readings always calls the wife Prisca, while St. Luke
   names her Priscilla. Both writers, except in one case, I Cor. xvi. 19,
   place the name of the wife first. St. Luke is wont to use the
   diminutive forms of names, which were usual in conversation, i.e.
   Priscilla, Silas, Sopatros; St. Paul the forms Prisca, Silvanus,
   Sosipatros. See Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, pp. 267-8.

   [27] Plumptre, Biblical Studies, p. 417; Hort, Romans and Philippians,
   pp. 12-14; Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, pp. 253 f., 267 f.; Zahn,
   Intr. to N.T. i. 263, etc. etc.

   [28] For the good government of the Empire during the first five years
   of Nero's reign, known in history as the quinquennium of Nero, see
   Henderson's Life and Principate of the Emperor Nero.

   [29] Acts, xix, 21.

   [30] Acts, xix. 33-4.

   [31] Rom. xvi. 34: Aspasasthe Priskan kai Akulan tous sunergous mou en
   Christo Iesou, hoitines huper tes psuches mou ton heauton trachelon
   hupethekan. Comp. 2 Cor. i. 8. The group of MSS. D, E, F, G, add par
   hois kai psenizomaa, pointing to the tradition in the Western Church
   that St. Paul lived at Ephesus in the house of Aquila and Prisca.

   [32] Acts, xix. 31.

   [33] 2 Cor. ii. 4, 5, 13; iv. 8-11; xi. 27-28; xii. 10, 20-21; Acts,
   xx. 19-25.

   [34] 2 Rom. i. 8: he pistis humon = your profession of Christianity.

   [35] Rom. xv. 14: Pepeismai de, adelphoi mou, kai autos ego peri humon,
   hoti kai autoi mestoi este agathosunes, pepleromenoi pases gnoseos,
   dunamenoi kai allelous nouthetein. Notice the emphatic position of kai
   autos ego. Compare xvi. 19: he gar humon hupakoe eis pantas aphiketo.

   [36] Rom. xv. 24.

   [37] 2 Cor. x. 12-18; xii. 11-13; and elsewhere.

   [38] Rom. xvi. 7.

   [39] There are grounds, as will appear in the sequel, for believing
   that Barnabas had already visited Rome.

   [40] Rom. i. 1: kletos apostolos, aphorismenos eis euangelion theou.

   [41] Rom. i. 5: di hou [Iesou Christou tou kuriou hemon] elabomen
   charin kai apostolen eis hupakoen pisteos en pasin tois ethnesin.

   [42] Rom. i. 12: touto de estin sunparaklethenai en humin dia tes en
   allelois pisteos humon te kai emou. See Zahn, Int. to N.T. pp. 355-8,
   369. Kirsopp Lake, Early Epist. of St. Paul, pp. 378-9.

   [43] Rom. ii. 17-29; iii. 1, 2; iv. 1. That this body of
   Judaeo-Christians were still active in Rome, and doing their utmost at
   a later time to counteract St. Paul's influence and oppose his
   teaching, see Phil. i. 15, 16; iii. 1-6. It was to these same Jews that
   chap. xiv. 1-23 appears to have been addressed. The extreme
   particularity about meats and rigid asceticism were characteristic of
   the party of the circumcision. See Zahn, Int. to N.T. pp. 366-7.

   [44] So Sanday and Headlam give the force of the men oun in this verse.
   Commentary on Romans, p. 324.

   [45] Lit. glorify.

   [46] On St. Paul's attitude towards Jewish Christianity and Judaism see
   the extremely interesting section of Harnack's Neue Untersuchungen sur
   Apostelgeschichte, 1911 (Eng. tr. by Rev. J. R. Wilkinson in Crown
   Theol. Lib.), pp. 28-47. Of the evidence supplied by that section of
   the Epistle to the Romans from which these words are taken, Harnack
   writes: Der Grosse Abschnitt--c. 9-11--ist aus der Feder eines Juden
   geflossen der mit allen Fasern seiner Seele an seinem Volke hängt' (p.
   31). And again concerning the simile of the olive-tree in c. xi.: Man
   beachte wohl, das (gläubige) Israel kata sarka ist and bleibt "der güte
   Ölbaum" (gegenüber dem wilden Ölbaum der Heiden); jeder Israelit ist
   ein "naturlicher Zweig" dieses guten Ölbaums, wenn er auch unter
   Umständen abgehauen werden muss, and er d.h. das gläubige Israel kata
   sarka ist die Wurzel an deren Safte and Fettigkeit die eingepropften
   wilden Schösslinge teilnehmen und die sie trägt' (p. 32). See also the
   quotation from Herzog in note. I have already pointed out the
   possibility that the name of one of the Roman synagogues The Olive
   Tree' may have suggested this simile to St. Paul.

   [47] Kirsopp Lake, The Early Epistles of St. Paul, their motive and
   origin, p. 325 ff.

   [48] Sanday and Headlam, Ep. to Romans, pp. xciii-xcv; Lightfoot, Ep.
   to Philippians, see dissertation on Caesar's Household, pp. 169-176.

   [49] Zahn (Int. to N.T. i. 388) says: Who does not see that all these
   personal references are due to Paul's desire to make the Church feel
   that it is not such a stranger to him as it seems, and at the same time
   are indications of an effort on his part to bring himself into closer
   touch with the Church where as yet he was really a stranger?'

   [50] Rom. xvi. 22.In the first-century Cemetery of Priscilla close to
   the mausoleum of the noble family of the Acilii there may be seen
   to-day a Greek inscription in red (a proof of its very early date):

   TERTIADELPhE
   EUPsUChIOUDIC
   AThANATOC
   The Tertius here mentioned is probably not St. Paul's amanuensis, but
   there is no reason why he should not be. It is interesting that a
   well-authenticated tradition places the tombs of Aquila and Prisca in
   the vicinity of this inscription. Horace Marucchi, Eléments
   d'Archéologie Chrétienne, ii. 419. See also i. 104.

   [51] par hois kai xenizomai. D, F, lat, goth, Bede.

   [52] The Church of St. Prisca and the Cemetery of Priscilla. See
   Appendix, Special Note B.

   [53] Relegatio, not deportatio. Dion Cassius, lx. 6.

   [54] See Zahn, Int. to N.T. p. 390, for a useful comment on the
   movements of Aquila and Prisca.

   [55] See Marucchi, Eléments d'Archéologie Chrétienne, iii. p. 180 ff
   and 364 ff.

   [56] They would consist of people of every nationality, but among those
   converted to Christianity probably a large proportion were Orientals by
   race.

   [57] Compare Rom. ix. 3: euchomen gar anathema einai autos ego apo tou
   christou huper ton adelphon mou, ton sungenon mou kata sarka, hoitines
   eisin Israelitai.

   [58] aspasasthe Andronikon kai Iounian tous sungeneis mou kai
   sunaichmalotous mou, hoitines eisin episemoi en tois apostolois, ohi
   kai pro emou gegonan en Christo. It is possible that Iounian might be
   feminine = Junia, but it is generally taken as masculine, Junias an
   abbreviation for Junianus.

   [59] 2 Cor. xi. 23: en phulakais perissoteros.

   [60] See Harnack, Expansion of Christianity, i. 398-412; Lightfoot,
   Epistle to Galatians, p. 93; Kirsopp Lake, Early Epistles of St. Paul,
   pp. 108-110. Comp. 2 Cor. viii. 23: apostoloi ekklesion.

   [61] Acts, vi. 9. Andronicus and Junias may, of course, have been among
   the strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselytes,' who were converted on the
   Great Day of Pentecost.

   [62] Josephus, Ant. xx. 1. 2; Bell. Iud. ii. 11. 6.

   [63] Lightfoot, Epistle to Philippians, Dissertation on Caesar's
   Household, p. 169; Sanday and Headlam, Romans, pp. 405-6.

   [64] Lanciani (p. 132) says that in certain columbaria on the Esquiline
   at least 370 members of the household of Statilius Taurus are buried.

   [65] Sanday and Headlam, Romans, pp. 128-9; Hort, Romans and Ephesians,
   i. 52.

   [66] Rom. xv. 14-29.

   [67] v. 20 philotimoumenon = (lit.) priding myself, or endeavouring
   earnestly.

   [68] dio kai enekoptomen ta polla tou elthein pros humas. ta polla
   seems to be the equivalent of the pollakis of i. 13 = the many times to
   which I have already referred: ou thelo de humus agnoein, adelphoi,
   hoti pollakis proethemen elthein pros humas kai ekoluthen achri tou
   deuro.'

   [69] epipothian.

   [70] These words are omitted in the best MSS., but are necessary to
   complete the sense.

   [71] Bigg, Comment on 1 Peter, pp. 73-4.

   [72] Professor Kirsopp Lake in his Early Epistles of St. Paul, pp.
   378-9, writes: St. Paul clearly implies that the Roman Church was
   another man's foundation, and that he had hitherto refused to preach in
   such places where others had made a beginning: this was the reason why
   he had never yet been to Rome. "Wherefore" he says "I was greatly
   hindered from coming to you." That "you" implies that the Church was
   someone else's foundation and the "wherefore" explains that this was
   his reason for not coming. He then goes on to explain why he now
   proposes to depart from his principle: there is now "no place left for
   him in these districts," i.e. from Jerusalem to Illyricum. Thus with a
   proper exegesis the meaning of this passage is that the Church of Rome
   was founded by some one else, and the question will always remain, why
   not St. Peter?' A remarkable admission on the part of this writer.
     __________________________________________________________________

LECTURE II

   Romans, x. 14: How shall they call on Him, in whom they have not
   believed? And how shall they believe in Him whom they have not heard?
   And how shall they hear without a preacher?'

   The narrative of St. Luke in that earlier part of the Acts of the
   Apostles which leads up and is introductory to the main theme of the
   work is obviously fragmentary. The object of the writer however stands
   out clearly. He intended to give such an account, step by step, of the
   beginnings of Christianity, as was necessary for a full understanding
   of the life-work and missionary labours of St. Paul up to the time of
   his captivity at Rome. Every episode appears to have been carefully
   selected with a definite and precise purpose, and if the story, as told
   by him, seems at times to be tantalisingly brief and scanty, even
   disjointed, we must remember that those for whom it was written had
   access to oral sources of information from persons who had witnessed or
   taken part in the events described, which would place each episode in
   its proper setting and give to it its rightful significance. This we
   cannot do now, but if we bear in mind that not only the facts recorded
   by Luke but even his silences are suggestive, we may, I think, by the
   help of evidence gathered in from various sources, from contemporary or
   nearly contemporary writings, from the accumulated results of
   archaeological research, and from well-authenticated tradition, be able
   to show that the spread of Christianity during the period covered by
   the Acts was not by any means confined to the sphere of Paul's
   activity, nor intended to be so confined, but that one most important
   field was reserved for the Apostle who fills the foreground of the
   Lucan narrative up to the year 42 A.D. and then, except for a single
   brief appearance, is seen no more.

   It is, of course, evident from what I have said that I am assuming that
   St. Luke the physician, the travelling companion of St. Paul, was the
   author of the Acts of the Apostles. I do so without feeling that such
   an assumption at the present time requires defence. In these lectures
   it is my aim, as far as possible, to avoid the mere collecting or
   comparing of other men's opinions, or the balancing of the authority of
   one set of scholars against another. It is the results of personal
   investigation into the history of the Church in Rome in the first
   century that I am now specially desirous of bringing before you, not a
   recapitulation of what has recently been written about that history. My
   own experience has taught me that the only way to arrive at conclusions
   in historical questions satisfying to the historical conscience is to
   study the original authorities for oneself with an independent mind,
   using indeed all the light and all the suggestions that modern critical
   scholarship can throw upon the many problems and difficulties that have
   to be solved, but never accepting any of the so-called results of
   criticism' without testing for oneself with the greatest care and at
   first hand the grounds on which they are supposed to rest.

   The case for the Lucan authorship of the Third Gospel and of the Acts I
   consider however to have been so thoroughly established by the
   remarkable series of works published by Sir William M. Ramsay [73] and
   Dr. Adolf Harnack [74] upon the subject, as to have been placed, if not
   beyond the reach of controversy--for alas ! the spirit of controversy
   is not quickly laid--on a solid bedrock of reasoned and exhaustive
   argument against which the waves of controversy will beat in vain. And
   not merely have they proved the unity of authorship. They have shown
   that we have in St. Luke a cultured writer possessed of literary power
   and historical grasp and well acquainted with the details of Roman
   provincial administration and of the distinct characteristics,
   geographical and political, of different localities, who in a
   considerable part of his work speaks as an eyewitness, and who
   elsewhere uses first-hand evidence, if at times with a certain freedom,
   yet always with honesty and intelligence. My own conviction that the
   book of the Acts must have been written during St. Paul's first
   captivity at Rome and completed before his release has long been firmly
   held, but this conviction has been strengthened and deepened by the
   extraordinarily powerful way in which Dr. Harnack [75] has quite
   recently set forth in serried array the reasons which have slowly
   driven him to abandon his earlier prepossessions on this question, and
   forced him (in spite of the knowledge that he was--to use his own
   words--creating a revolution within the domain of criticism' [76] ) to
   fix on grounds alike of external and of internal evidence the end of
   St. Paul's imprisonment as the date when the Acts, in the form we now
   possess the book, was finished.

   It is needless to say that the acceptance of such a conclusion has a
   very important bearing on the subject of these lectures. For, if St.
   Luke wrote the Acts at Rome, the work must have been written in the
   first instance for the Roman Christians, but if so the question
   naturally arises, why should there be a total omission in the book of
   any reference to the founding of the Church in Rome or to the names of
   those who first preached the Gospel in that city? This is one of those
   silences of St. Luke, of which I have spoken already as being
   suggestive. A comparison of the last verses of the Third Gospel and of
   the Acts may help us to an answer. [77] Had the Gospel stood alone all
   commentators and critics would have asserted unanimously that the
   Evangelist believed the Ascension of our Lord to have taken place on
   the evening of the day of the Resurrection. [78] But from the opening
   passage of the Acts we learn that they would have been wrong, and that
   St. Luke in the conclusion of his Gospel deliberately foreshortened the
   events of six weeks in this way, because he intended to take up the
   thread of the story and fill in the details later. The. similar
   foreshortening of the events of two years, which we find in Acts
   xxviii. 30-1, suggests that St. Luke in writing this otherwise
   strangely puzzling and abrupt ending to his narrative had already
   planned in his mind a third book, which should supplement the Acts as
   the Acts had supplemented the Gospel, and that this book would have
   begun by taking up the account of Peter's life-work, so sharply broken
   off at his release from prison, and that a brief sketch would have been
   given of the history of the Church in Rome previous to St. Paul's two
   years'ministry during his captivity.

   With this preface let us now turn to those introductory chapters of the
   Acts in which St. Luke sketches for us the steps by which Christianity
   emerged from the condition of a strictly Jewish sect to that of a
   universal religion intended for all mankind. It will be seen that the
   enlargement of view, which is so clearly traced, was very gradual; that
   it came from below rather than from above; from the subordinates, to
   some extent from the rank and file, rather than from the acknowledged
   leaders. On the Great Day of Pentecost when St. Luke so carefully
   enumerates the various nationalities from which the great crowd of
   pilgrims was drawn, it should be noted that St. Peter addresses them as
   Men of Israel,' and his whole discourse is that of a man concerned only
   with proving to an assembly of Jews that Jesus of Nazareth was the
   promised Messiah of their sacred Scriptures. The passage is in fact a
   striking testimony both to the wide extent of the Jewish Diaspora and
   to the fact of the intense love and reverence for the Holy City and for
   the injunctions of the Mosaic Law, which brought together such a throng
   of worshippers from far-distant regions, including people speaking many
   different tongues, to this feast at Jerusalem. In the list of those
   forming St. Peter's audience we find the names of six different peoples
   and the inhabitants of nine different districts, and it is implied that
   Jews from these various places had come up specially for the
   occasion--with one exception. The phrase the sojourning Romans, Jews as
   well as proselytes' seems capable of only one interpretation, that St.
   Luke is here referring to a body of Roman Jews and converts to Judaism,
   who were temporarily residing in Jerusalem, and whom it may be
   permitted with considerable probability to identify with the Synagogue
   of the Libertines' [79] mentioned in Acts vi. 9. Among this body may
   have been numbered the Roman Christians Junias and Andronicus, who were
   some quarter of a century later saluted by St. Paul in his Epistle to
   the Romans as men of mark among the Apostles and who were in Christ
   before me.'

   In his record of the period that follows St. Luke makes it quite clear
   that the first organised Christian community was at Jerusalem, not in
   Galilee. [80] After the day of Pentecost when certain of the multitude
   exclaimed Are not all these that speak Galilaeans?'--there is not a
   word in the Acts to indicate that the early Church had any connexion
   with Galilee. The Twelve, whose authority, as being derived directly
   from the Lord, no one called in question, made Jerusalem their
   headquarters from this time forward, and from this centre carried on
   their mission work. But that mission work was limited to. Jews. The
   Twelve, moreover, we are expressly told, visited the Temple regularly
   [81] and they seem to have conformed in every way to the regulations of
   the Mosaic Law, and to have differed from the Jews amongst whom they
   lived only in that they taught that the crucified Jesus, to whose
   Resurrection from the Dead they bore personal testimony, had by His
   Resurrection proved Himself to be the Messiah. [82] Among the Twelve
   St. Peter on every occasion takes the lead and is the spokesman of the
   rest, and occupies a position of undisputed pre-eminence. [83] In all
   that they did during these years, which immediately followed their
   Lord's departure from them, it is scarcely possible that these personal
   disciples should not have been acting in strict accordance with their
   Master's last commands. Eventually they were to go forth upon a wider
   mission to the nations, but for awhile--an ancient tradition of
   considerable weight says definitely for twelve years [84] --they were
   to abide at Jerusalem, and restrict themselves to proclaiming in its
   simplest form the message of the Gospel to the Palestinian Jews,
   meanwhile resting in the promise that in the future whenever fresh
   calls should be made upon them they should receive illumination and
   guidance from the Holy Spirit. [85]

   Not until the sixth chapter of the Acts do we find any indication of a
   widening of view. But here reading between the lines of the brief
   narrative one cannot but feel something more than a suspicion that the
   movement of which the appointment of the Seven was the outcome, and at
   the head of which St. Stephen placed himself, was not one with which
   the Twelve were at the time in entire sympathy. The work to which St.
   Stephen specially addressed himself was the preaching of the Gospel to
   the members of those Synagogues which were set apart for the use of the
   Hellenistic settlers and sojourners in Jerusalem, i.e. for Jews of
   foreign origin, speaking a foreign tongue, and trained amidst Gentile
   associations. Those mentioned seem to belong in order of importance to
   the chief Jewish Colonies of the Dispersion. The first place, be it
   noted, is assigned to the Libertines or Roman freedmen, men conspicuous
   probably alike for their wealth and their close connexion with the
   Imperial City. Then come the Alexandrians, members of a Jewish
   settlement of ancient date and high culture, in numbers exceeding
   probably the entire population of Palestine. [86] And after them the
   Cyrenians, [87] second only to the Alexandrians in number, and like
   them thoroughly Hellenised. Lastly, mention is made of those of Cilicia
   and Asia--traders no doubt connected by ties of family and business
   with those characteristically Graeco-Asiatic cities, Tarsus and
   Ephesus. Among such a body of Hellenists' the message of the Gospel
   would naturally be interpreted in a larger and more universal sense
   than in those stricter Hebrew' circles to which as yet the Twelve had
   chiefly directed their appeal.

   What we do know is that St. Stephen's ardour and activity and the
   special character of his teaching speedily aroused the intense enmity
   of the Jewish rulers. He was seized, brought before the Sanhedrim, and
   without proper trial or condemnation in a sudden outburst of fanatic
   fury stoned to death. It was the signal for a persecution which
   scattered far and wide those who had attached them-selves to him and
   the doctrines that he taught. [88]

   But fierce though the persecution was, St. Luke expressly tells us, it
   did not touch the Twelve. They were all,' we read scattered abroad,
   except the Apostles.' [89] Apparently at this time the accusers of
   Stephen did not regard the Twelve, and the Judaeo-Christians who held
   with them, as men speaking against this Holy Place and trying to change
   the customs that Moses hath delivered unto us.' As yet they (the
   original Apostles) seem not to have offended the susceptibilities of
   the High-Priestly caste by any neglect in their outward observance of
   the rites and ceremonies of the Jewish law. But tliis scattering abroad
   of the friends and disciples of Stephen was to be, under God's
   providence, gradually productive of great results. It led directly to
   the conversion of Saul the persecutor. It brought Philip, one of the
   Seven, to Samaria, where many were converted by his preaching. Such
   indeed was his success that for the first time the Apostles broke
   through their rule of confining themselves to Jerusalem and its
   neighbourhood, and Peter and John, the two leaders, were sent to take
   official charge of the new field of missionary operations. And there at
   Samaria (mark the emphasis Luke lays upon the incident) Peter was
   confronted with the man who, under the name of Simon Magus, was
   according to tradition to exercise a large, perhaps a decisive,
   influence upon his action at a critical point in his career. [90]

   Nor was this all. After an interval, probably of some three years, [91]
   we find that persecution has for the time entirely ceased, and that
   already the Christian Church is peacefully and firmly established
   throughout the whole of Judaea, Galilee and Samaria, [92] and Peter
   engaged on a tour of visitation in all parts. [93] Finally he reaches
   Joppa and there takes up his abode for some time in the house, we are
   told, of one Simon a tanner. Now this very fact, that the Apostle chose
   to reside with a man whose trade in the eyes of strict orthodox Judaism
   was unclean, points to the advance he had already made in casting
   himself loose from the fetters of Jewish prejudice. The vision which
   sent him to Cornelius was probably the reflection of the doubts and
   questionings which had been previously filling his thoughts and an
   answer to his prayers. [94] It was a preparation for that which was to
   follow, for his visit to the Roman centurion was not merely to teach
   him that the law which forbade intercourse between Jew and Gentile was
   henceforth done away, but to open his eyes to the startling and
   all-important fact that it was the revealed will of God that
   uncircumcised Gentiles should be admitted to the full privileges of
   Christianity. The question how far such Gentiles would have to conform
   to the Jewish law was indeed not yet settled, nor was it to be settled
   without much prolonged and even embittered controversy in the years
   that were to come. The collocation by St. Luke in juxtaposition of the
   defence of St. Peter [95] to the brethren at Jerusalem for his action
   in regard to Cornelius, and of the news reaching those same brethren
   that certain men from Cyprus and Cyrene, on their own initiative,
   without sanction or authority from the Mother Church, were preaching to
   the Greeks at Antioch and had converted a large number of them to the
   faith, [96] was clearly intentional. St. Peter's apologia was
   apparently somewhat grudgingly accepted, for there is little of
   spontaneous enthusiasm about the words--and when they had heard these
   things they held their peace and glorified God, saying "Then also--ara
   ge kai--to the Gentiles hath God granted repentance unto life."'

   On receiving information, therefore, about what was occurring at
   Antioch, it was only natural that those at the head of the Church in
   Jerusalem should determine to send to the Syrian capital one of their
   own body with instructions to inquire personally into the truth of the
   reports that had reached them, and to establish official control over a
   movement which seemed at first sight to be revolutionary, and which was
   in fact a long step in advance towards a totally new conception of the
   mission of Christianity in the world.

   Joseph, surnamed Barnabas, whom they selected as their emissary, was a
   man singularly well qualified for dealing wisely and sympathetically
   with the new situation. He had been intimately associated from the very
   first with the Jerusalem Church. [97] He was at once a Levite and a
   Cypriote Hellenist, and the surname which was given to him by the
   Apostles themselves tells us that he was a man endowed with prophetic
   gifts for the exposition and interpretation of Scripture. [98] And he
   was to remain for some years, probably to the end of his life, a
   mediator and reconciler between the opposing schools of thought and
   ideals of Christianity associated later with the names of St. James and
   St. Paul. It is noteworthy how large a part Barnabas, who had now gone
   to Antioch as the representative of the Church at Jerusalem, took in
   preparing the way for him who was to be pre-eminently the Apostle of
   the Gentiles. The two men may possibly have first become friends in
   their youth, when Saul of Tarsus was studying at the feet of Gamaliel.
   In any case when Saul, three years after his memorable conversion, came
   up to Jerusalem to make the acquaintance of Peter, he found, perhaps
   not unnaturally, that the brethren looked askance at the erstwhile
   persecutor, until Barnabas took him by the hand and, as it were, stood
   voucher for his good faith. [99] His reception, however, on this
   occasion appears to have been so far discouraging that Saul withdrew
   for a considerable time to his native place Tarsus. Thither Barnabas
   after a brief sojourn at Antioch now went to seek in his retirement the
   man whom he knew to be specially well fitted to act as his colleague at
   this juncture. His judgment and prevision were more than justified. For
   a whole year, we read in the Acts, Barnabas and Saul taught with such
   success that the assemblies of the faithful, whether of Jewish or
   Gentile origin, met together harmoniously and in such numbers [100]
   that even in this vast city, [101] of mixed population, professing
   every known variety of religion, the new sect became sufficiently large
   and well known to attract public attention. The scoffing nick-name,
   Christiani, was now for the first time given to the disciples of Jesus
   by the pagan Antiocheans--a term of shame and reproach, which soon was
   to become a title of glory.

   While at Antioch under the leadership of Barnabas the preaching of the
   Gospel was thus making rapid progress, events were taking place in
   Judaea of critical importance for the future of the Church. The peace
   which the Christians in Palestine enjoyed in the period preceding the
   conversion of Cornelius had been due, not to any increase of good-will
   on the part of the Jewish rulers, but to the fact that thesewere too
   much occupied at that time with their own serious troubles. The order
   given by the Emperor Caligula to place his statue in the Holy of Holies
   had filled the whole nation with horror and made them resolve rather to
   be massacred than allow such a profanation of the Temple. [102] The
   assassination of Caligula alone averted a general revolt. According to
   Josephus, Herod Agrippa, who was then in Rome, played a very important
   part in securing the peaceful accession of Claudius, who rewarded him
   for his services by bestowing upon him, in addition to Galilee, Peraea
   and the territory beyond the Jordan with which he had been invested by
   Caligula, also Judaea, Samaria and Abilene, making his kingdom thus
   equal in extent to that of his grandfather Herod the Great. [103]
   Claudius became emperor, January 24, 41 A.D., and towards the end of
   that year King Agrippa went to Palestine with the intention of using
   every means to ingratiate himself with his new subjects. He was
   especially desirous of impressing them with his careful observance of
   the Mosaic law and his zeal for the national religion, being to some
   extent suspect through his long residence in Rome and alien descent.
   [104] Accordingly having gone to Jerusalem to keep the first Passover
   after his accession, he resolved to give a signal mark of his fervour
   as a defender of the faith, by the summary execution of James the son
   of Zebedee. Possibly he was the only one of the Christian leaders on
   whom for the moment he could lay hands. But finding his action had
   pleased the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter also, and, as the days
   of unleavened bread had already begun, he placed the Apostle in prison
   under the strictest guard with the intention of bringing him forth
   before the people as soon as the Passover was over. [105] The story of
   his escape as told by St. Luke, which ends so abruptly, has every
   internal mark of having been derived directly from the maid-servant
   Rhoda, whose name is otherwise so unnecessarily mentioned. We learn
   from this graphic narrative that the house in Jerusalem where the
   disciples were accustomed to hold their gatherings for prayer was that
   of Mary, the mother of John Mark, and the aunt of Barnabas. It was to
   this house that the Apostle naturally turned his steps, as soon as he
   found himself outside the prison gates, but with no intention of
   remaining in so well known a spot. As he entered the room with a
   movement of his hand he at once checked their cries of astonishment,
   briefly told his tale, probably almost in the rapid words recorded,
   asked his hearers to repeat it to James and the brethren, and then
   immediately, while it was still dark, he went out to betake himself to
   a more secure hiding-place. And as the Apostle disappears into the
   obscurity of the night, so does he, so far as his active career is
   concerned, disappear henceforth from the pages of St. Luke's history.

   There are difficulties in this brief account of the Herodian
   persecution of the spring of 42 A.D. There is no hint that the Twelve
   were at Jerusalem at this critical time. St. Peter himself does not
   seem to have been there when St. James was beheaded. His parting words
   point to two conclusions: (1) that the other James, the Lord's Brother,
   was already the recognised head of the Jerusalem community; and (2)
   that the speaker had no expectation of being able to tell his tale to
   James and the brethren' in person. The explanation however lies to our
   hand, if we accept the ancient and well-attested tradition of which I
   have already spoken, that the Lord Jesus had bidden his Apostles to
   make Jerusalem the centre of their missionary activity for twelve
   years, after which they were to disperse and go forth to preach to the
   nations. Already before Herod Agrippa struck his blow the Twelve had
   begun to set out each one to his allotted sphere of evangelisation, the
   care of the Mother Church being confided to James, the Lord's Brother,
   assisted by a body of presbyters, of whom he was one, but over whom he
   presided with something of monarchical authority. It would be an
   anachronism to give him the Gentile title of Bishop, but in this
   earliest constitution of the Jerusalem Church we have the model which
   other Churches were to follow and out of which episcopacy grew.

   But even if this be granted, it throws no light on the after-life of
   St. Peter.

   For his after-life we have again to fall back mainly upon tradition, a
   tradition already referred to by me at the close of my first lecture,
   which makes St. Peter to have been the founder of the Church in Rome.
   St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, as I have shown, speaks of that
   Church as already in 57 A.D. long established and of world-wide repute,
   into which as being built on another man's foundation he had not
   thought it right to intrude. [106] The question then arises, what
   grounds are there for believing that the man to whom he refers was St.
   Peter?

   Now there are traditions and traditions. First let it be premised that
   we are not dealing here with a tradition handed down orally by
   illiterate people. Not that oral tradition is to be neglected or
   despised. There is abundant evidence to show with what accuracy
   historical traditions including long lists of names have been handed
   down from generation to generation even among tribes unacquainted with
   writing. After describing the pre-Hispanic civilisation in Peru, a
   recent writer remarks: It is not surprising, in spite of the fact that
   no form of writing was known, that the people capable of such political
   organisation had pre-served in traditional form much of their early
   history. Feats of memory, which seem almost miraculous to civilised
   races, who have become dependent on written records, have been
   chronicled of several peoples below the Peruvians in the scale of
   culture. The nobility among the Polynesians received regular
   instruction in their past history, and the chiefs could repeat long
   genealogies, which had been faith-fully handed down from generation to
   generation. Even among African races traditional records are not
   unknown, and in one case a list of even one hundred chiefs, together
   with historical details, has been recently obtained from a tribe in the
   heart of the Southern Belgian Congo.' [107] In the first century,
   however, in Rome and in all the chief centres of population, where the
   early Christian Churches were established, writing was familiarly
   employed by all classes. At one time it was assumed, with an assurance
   that had absolutely no basis, that the events of early Christian
   history could only have been known through oral transmission, that it
   was most unlikely that anything was committed to writing at the time,
   and the idea that the separate Churches kept any records of the
   appointment of their officers, or any statements concerning the various
   vicissitudes of their fortunes, was dismissed as untenable. There is a
   very strong body of opinion,' said Sir W. Ramsay [108] about nine years
   ago, that the earliest Christians wrote little or nothing. It is
   supposed that partly they were either unable to write or at least
   unused to the familiar employment of writing for the purposes of
   ordinary life. Put aside that prejudice, and the whole body of opinion,
   which maintains that the Christians at first did not set down anything
   in writing about the life and death of Christ, strongly and widely
   accepted as it is, dominating as a fundamental premise much of the
   discussion of this whole subject in recent times, is devoid of any
   support. . . . One of the initial presumptions, plausible in appearance
   and almost universally assumed and conceded, is that there was no early
   registration of the great events in the beginning of Christian history.
   This presumption we must set aside as a mere prejudice, contrary to the
   whole spirit and character of that age and entirely improbable.' Such a
   presumption has in fact been proved by recent discoveries to be in all
   probability quite erroneous, and indeed there are strong grounds for
   making an assumption of a precisely opposite character, i.e. that the
   chief Christian Churches did keep more or less regular archives, which,
   like the bulk of ancient records, perished through fire or other
   accidents, [109] through the ruthless sacking of the city by barbarian
   conquerors, and in the case of these Christian archives by systematic
   destruction at the hands of the imperial authorities, more especially
   during the persecution of Diocletian. But though the documents
   themselves disappeared, [110] the memory of their contents would remain
   to be worked up afresh into new narratives tinged with the opinions,
   beliefs and modes of thought of the time at which they were written,
   and in such a setting as the pious fancy of the compilers thought to be
   edifying, and in harmony with their subject. What criteria then, it may
   be asked, have we for judging whether these later Acts and Passions of
   Saints and Martyrs contain in the midst of apocryphal accretion a real
   core of sound and trustworthy historical fact? A tradition before it
   can be accepted as embodying authentic history should, I think, satisfy
   the following conditions: (1) It must be concerned with an event or
   series of events that had a great number of witnesses, and of witnesses
   who would have a strong motive to record or bear in memory what they
   had seen. (2) The beginning of the tradition should appear at a time
   not too remote from the facts it records, at a time, that is to say, in
   which it should not be possible for the notices handed down by
   contemporaries to be obscured. (3) Shortly after that time to which the
   beginning of the tradition goes back there should appear in the
   community to which it relates a firm and general persuasion of its
   truth. (4) This persuasion should spread gradually until everywhere the
   facts are accepted as true without any doubts being raised even by
   those who, had they not been plainly true, would have desired to reject
   them.

   Let us now apply these criteria to the Petrine tradition at Rome. That
   Peter visited Rome between the years 62 A.D. and 65 A.D. and that he
   was put to death there by crucifixion is admitted by everyone who
   studies the evidence in a fair and reasonable spirit. [111] This is not
   a tradition, it may rather be described as a fact vouched for by
   contemporary or nearly contemporary evidence. On this point no
   statement could be stronger than that of Professor Lanciani: I write
   about the monuments of Rome from a strictly archaeological point of
   view, avoiding questions which pertain or are supposed to pertain to
   religious controversy. For the archaeologist, the presence and
   execution of SS. Peter and Paul in Rome are facts established beyond a
   shadow of doubt by purely monumental evidence.' It is now generally
   conceded that the first epistle bearing the name of Peter was written
   from Rome. The Apocalypse of St. John' and the Sibylline Oracles' show
   that Babylon was a common synonym for Rome in the second half of the
   first century. [112] The language of Clement of Rome [113] in his
   Epistle to the Corinthians leaves no doubt--for it is the witness of a
   contemporary--that Peter was martyred at Rome. But leaving ancient
   examples let us come to the athletes who were very near to our own
   times, let us take the illustrious examples of our own generation.
   . . . Peter who through unjust jealousy endured not one or two but many
   sufferings and so having borne witness--marturesas--departed to the
   place of glory that was his due.' The statement in the apocalyptic
   Ascension of Isaiah' [114] --also the work of a contemporary--that a
   lawless king, the slayer of his mother, will persecute the plant which
   the Twelve Apostles of the Beloved have planted. Of the Twelve one will
   be delivered into his hands' can scarcely refer to another event than
   the death of Peter at the time of the Neronian persecution. A
   comparison of St. John xxi. 18, 19 with St. John xiii. 36, 37 and with
   2 Peter i. 14 is evidence as to the manner of that death. The question
   of the authorship of the Fourth Gospel or of 2 Peter is immaterial, for
   the writers, whoever they were, belong to the first century, and the
   testimony to the received belief of the Christian Church which they
   give is authentic.

   But a solitary brief visit to Rome after St. Paul had previously spent
   in that city two years of fruitful work does not account for the
   position assigned by tradition to St. Peter in relation to the Roman
   Church. Though the two names are on several occasions coupled together,
   as joint founders of the Roman Church, in all the earliest notices in
   which the two are named together the name of Peter stands first. Thus
   Ignatius in his Epistle to the Romans written about 109 A.D. says: I do
   not command you like Peter and Paul; they were Apostles; I am a
   condemned criminal.' [115] Dionysius of Corinth 171 A.D. writing to
   Soter bishop of Rome [116] a speaks of the plantation by Peter and Paul
   that took place among the Romans and Corinthians.' Irenaeus a few years
   later is filled with respect for the most great and ancient and
   universally known Church established at Rome by the two most glorious
   Apostles Peter and Paul, and also the faith declared to men, which
   comes down to our own time through the succession of her bishops. For
   unto this Church, on account of its more powerful lead, every Church,
   meaning the faithful who are from everywhere, must needs resort; since
   in it that tradition which is from the Apostles has been preserved by
   those who are from everywhere. The Blessed Apostles, having founded and
   established the Church, entrusted the office of the episcopate to
   Linus. Paul speaks of this Linus in his epistles to Timothy, Anencletus
   succeeded him, and after Anencletus, in the third place from the
   Apostles, Clement received the episcopate.' Now Irenaeus, who was a
   disciple of Polycarp, and acquainted with others who had known St.
   John, and who in 177 A.D. became bishop of Lyons, had spent some years
   in Rome. This passage was written, as he tells us, in the time of
   Eleutherus, probably about 180 A.D. [117]

   Eusebius of Caesarea has left us two lists of the Roman bishops, one in
   his Ecclesiastical History,' the other in his Chronicle.' The first is
   the list of Irenaeus, the beginning of which has just been quoted. The
   second is derived from the lost Chronicle' of Hippolytus, bishop of
   Portus, written about half a century later. In the Chronicle' St.
   Peter's episcopate at Rome is stated to have lasted twenty-five years.
   [118] In the Ecclesiastical History' we read--under the reign of
   Claudius by the benign and gracious providence of God, Peter that great
   and powerful apostle, who by his courage took the lead of all the rest,
   was conducted to Rome.' In other passages his martyrdom with that of
   Paul is represented as taking place after Nero's persecution. [119] The
   interval between these two dates would roughly be about twenty-five
   years. Now it is evident that these figures, derived as they are from
   men like Irenaeus and Hippolytus, who had access to the archives and
   traditions in Rome itself, cannot be dismissed as pure fiction. They
   must have a basis of fact behind them. Eusebius tells us that after the
   martyrdom of Paul and Peter Linus was the first that received the
   episcopate at Rome.' Now the date of this martyrdom was according to
   the received tradition the fourteenth year of Nero or 67 A.D.; if then
   we deduct twenty-five years, we arrive at 42 A.D., which is precisely
   the date given for St. Peter's first visit to Rome by St. Jerome in his
   work De Viris Illustribus.' Remembering that Jerome was a translator of
   the Eusebian Chronicle his words may be taken to embody a close
   acquaintance with Eusebius' works, including his lost Records of
   Ancient Martyrdoms,' and with the sources that he used. Jerome writes
   as follows: Simon Peter, prince of the Apostles, after an episcopate of
   the Church at Antioch and preaching to the dispersion of those of the
   circumcision, who had believed in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and
   Bithynia, in the second year of Claudius goes to Rome to oppose Simon
   Magus, and there for twenty-five years he held the sacerdotal chair
   until the last year of Nero, that is the fourteenth.' [120] Now here
   amidst a certain confusion, which will be dealt with presently, a
   definite date is given for Peter's first arrival at Rome, and, be it
   noted, it is the date of his escape from Herod Agrippa's persecution
   and his disappearance from the narrative of the Acts.

   This evidence of Jerome, it will be thus seen, rests upon that of
   Eusebius, and that of the earlier authorities which that historian
   consulted. It has been said that one of the conditions of the soundness
   of an historical tradition was the wideness and unanimity of its
   reception. Now probably never was any tradition accepted so
   universally, and without a single dissentient voice, as that which
   associates the foundation and organisation of the Church of Rome with
   the name of St. Peter and which speaks of his active connexion with
   that Church as extending over a period of some twenty-five years.

   It is needless to multiply references. In Egypt and in Africa, in the
   East and in the West, no other place ever disputed with Rome the honour
   of being the see of St. Peter; no other place ever claimed that he died
   there or that it possessed his tomb. Most significant of all is the
   consensus of the Oriental, non-Greek-speaking, Churches. A close
   examination of Armenian and Syrian MSS., [121] and in the case of the
   latter both of Nestorian and Jacobite authorities, through several
   centuries, has failed to discover a single writer who did not accept
   the Roman Petrine tradition.

   No less striking is the local evidence (still existing) for a
   considerable residence of St. Peter in Rome. There is no doubt,' is the
   judgment of Lanciani, once more to quote his well-known work Pagan and
   Christian Rome' (p. 212), that the likenesses of St. Peter and St. Paul
   have been carefully preserved in Rome ever since their lifetime, they
   are familiar to every one, even to school-children. These portraits
   have come down to us by scores. They are painted in the cubiculi of the
   Catacombs, engraved in gold leaf in the so-called vetri cemeteriali,
   cast in bronze, hammered in silver or copper, and designed in mosaic.
   The type never varies. St. Peter's face is full and strong with short
   curly hair and beard, while St. Paul appears more wiry and thin,
   slightly bald with a long pointed beard. The antiquity and the
   genuineness of both types cannot be doubted.' Other noticeable facts
   are: (l) the appearance of the name of Peter, both in Greek and Latin,
   among the inscriptions of the most ancient Christian cemeteries,
   especially in the first-century catacomb of Priscilla. [122] The
   appearance of this unusual name on these early Christian tombs can most
   easily be explained by the supposition that either those who bore it or
   their parents had been baptised by Peter. In any case it may be taken
   that his memory was held in especial reverence by them. Again, on a
   large number of early Christian sarcophagi now in the Lateran Museum
   the imprisonment of Peter by Herod Agrippa and his release by the angel
   is represented. The French historian of the Persecutions of the first
   two Centuries,' Paul Allard, [123] was the first to point out that the
   frequency with which this subject was chosen might be accounted for by
   the existence of a traditional belief in a close connexion between this
   event and the first visit of St. Peter to Rome. Orazio Marucchi, the
   learned and accomplished pupil and successor of De Rossi, in his latest
   volume upon recent researches in the catacombs, commenting upon this
   suggestion of Allard, adds that this scene is often united to others,
   in which Moses and Peter appear as the representative founders of the
   Jewish and Christian Churches with particular reference to the Church
   in Rome. [124] In some representations may be seen the Lord handing to
   Peter a volume on which is written Lex Domini, or beneath which is the
   legend Dominus Legem Dat. [125] More remarkable still are those in
   which Moses, with the well-known traits of St. Peter, strikes the rock
   out of which flow the waters of cleansing through baptism in the name
   of Jesus Christ. [126] Taken together all these authentic records of
   the impressions that had been left upon the minds of the primitive
   Roman Church of a close personal connexion between that Church and the
   Apostle Peter cannot be disregarded. They are existent to-day to tell
   their own tale.

   Once more the number of legends and the quantity of apocryphal
   literature that grew up around the Petrine tradition are witnesses not
   merely to the hold that it had upon popular regard but to its
   historical reality. Many of these legends, much of this literature may
   in the main be evidently fictitious, but even in those which are most
   clearly works of imagination, there is almost always a kernel of truth
   overlaid with invention. [127] It is perfectly well known that most of
   these documents have behind them other documents, which are now lost,
   but out of which those we now possess have grown by gradual accretions
   and interpolations. [128] But it is not impossible even now for sound
   and scholarly criticism to arrive with fair certainty in many cases at
   the ultimate basis of fact on which the edifice of fiction rests. One
   of these apocryphal documents we have in a very early form--the
   Ebionite Preaching of Peter'--which was produced in the first decade of
   the second century; as a proof of its early date it may be mentioned
   that it was used by Heracleon in Hadrian's time. [129] The work bears
   on the face of it testimony to the fact that Peter did labour and
   preach at Rome, for it was written at a time when some of those who
   actually saw and heard him may have been still alive, and there must
   have been numbers whose fathers were grown-up men even in the time of
   Claudius. The traditions connected with the cemetery ad Nymphas' where
   Peter baptised, with the primitive chair now in St. Peter's Basilica,
   with the very ancient churches of St. Pudenziana, St. Prisca and St.
   Clement, with the Quo Vadis? story, whatever their real historical
   value or lack of value, undoubtedly stretch back long before the fifth
   and sixth centuries, when pilgrims flocked to Rome with their
   itineraries' in their hands, and they spring from a general and
   deep-rooted belief in a long and active ministry of the Apostle in the
   See that had become identified with his name. [130]

   Returning then once more to the undisputedly historical ground of St.
   Paul's Epistle to the Romans, we find that in 57 A.D. there was in Rome
   a Christian community not of yesterday, but of many years' standing: an
   important community, whose faith and whose high repute were well known
   in all churches of the Empire with which the writer was acquainted.
   Further that St. Paul himself for some years past had been longing to
   visit this Rdman community, but had been hindered from doing so by the
   restriction he had imposed upon himself of not building on another
   man's foundation. If again the question be repeated--Who was this man?
   with greater emphasis than before the same answer must be returned--It
   cannot be any other than St. Peter.

   But having arrived so far, we are confronted with certain difficulties
   that arise in making this earlier ministry of St. Peter at Rome fit in
   with the New Testament records relating to the same period. These
   difficulties will be dealt with in the next lecture. To-day I shall
   confine myself to pointing out that the circumstances which led to St.
   Peter's mission to Rome very soon after his escape from prison in the
   second year of Claudius were strictly analogous to those described in
   the earlier part of the present lecture, which led first to the mission
   of Peter accompanied by John to Samaria, and then to that of Barnabas
   to Antioch.

   The dispersion of the Hellenist disciples of St. Stephen, after the
   persecution in which their brilliant leader died a martyr's death, was
   the direct cause of the evangelisation first of Samaria and then some
   years later of Syrian Antioch. Philip, like Stephen one of the Seven,
   preached in Samaria meeting with great success, and there encountered a
   certain man, Simon by name, who gave himself out to be some great one,
   and who had by his sorceries astonished and drawn to him great numbers
   of the people. On the news of this state of affairs being brought to
   the Apostles at Jerusalem, Peter and John were despatched in the name
   of the Twelve, to deal with the situation authoritatively. The result
   for a time, according to the Acts, was the triumph of St. Peter, Simon
   himself being baptised and seeking to be endowed by the Apostle with a
   portion of his wonder-working spiritual gifts. And as with Samaria so
   it was with Syrian Antioch. Men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who had been
   obliged to fly from Jerusalem upon the tribulation that arose about
   Stephen,' after preaching in their own native regions found their way
   to Antioch, and preaching in that city of mixed nationalities, not only
   to Jews but also to the Greeks, converted many. This news again, that a
   Church was arising in the Syrian capital with a considerable Gentile
   element in its midst, when it reached the Twelve at Jerusalem, led to
   immediate action being taken. Barnabas was sent to exercise
   super-vision over the new movement, and to see that a precedent of
   far-reaching consequences should not be established with-out the
   knowledge and sanction of those in authority.

   Events at Rome probably followed on precisely the same lines. Just as
   the men of Cyprus and Cyrene in the face of persecution made their way
   back to their own homes carrying with them the message of the Gospel,
   so would it be with some of the sojourners of Rome' belonging to the
   Synagogue of the Libertines. They would return to the capital inspired
   by the spirit and example of St. Stephen to form there the first
   nucleus of a Christian community. As I have already suggested, St.
   Paul's salutation to Andronicus and Junias seems to point to these two
   men as the leaders of this first missionary band. Among those converted
   would be, as at Antioch, both Jews and Gentiles.

   Some time may well have elapsed before any news of these first small
   beginnings of Christianity in Rome reached Jerusalem. Possibly St.
   Peter's intercourse with Cornelius the centurion and his relatives and
   friends at Caesarea first made him acquainted with the fact that the
   Gospel had obtained a foothold in the capital, for the body of troops
   to which Cornelius belonged--the Cohors Italica--consisted of
   volunteers from Italy. [131] From this source too he may in due course
   have learnt that Simon Magus was in Rome, and that there as in Samaria
   previously he was proclaiming himself to be the Great Power of God' and
   was leading many astray by his magical arts.

   This information in any case, whether derived from Cornelius or from
   Roman Christians, who came up for the feasts, would reach the Apostles
   about the time when their twelve years' residence in Jerusalem was
   drawing to a close, and when, according to tradition, they divided
   among themselves separate spheres of missionary work abroad. To St.
   Peter, as the recognised leader, it may well have been that the charge
   of the Christian Church in the Imperial capital should have been
   assigned as the post of honour. If so, it will be seen that the
   persecution of Herod Agrippa only hastened on a journey already
   planned. After his imprisonment and escape St. Peter's first object
   would be to place himself out of the reach of the persecutor and to set
   about his voyage as quickly as possible. If so, his arrival at Rome
   would be in the early summer of 42 A.D., the date given by St. Jerome.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [73] The Church in the Roman Empire before A.D. 170, 3rd ed. 1894; St.
   Paul the Traveller and Roman Citizen, 7th ed. 1903; A Historical
   Commentary on St. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians; The Cities of St.
   Paul; Luke the Physician and other Studies in the History of Religion,
   1908; The First Christian Century, 1911, etc. etc.

   [74] Lukas, der Arzt, der Verfasser des dritten Evangeliums und der
   Apostelgeschichte, 1906; Sprüche and Reden Jesu. Die zweite Quelle des
   Matthäus and Lukas, 1907; Die Apostelgeschichte, 1908; Neue
   Untersuchungen zur Apostelgeschichte, etc., 1911. All these volumes
   have been translated into English and published as vols. xx. xxiii.
   xxvii. and xxxiii. of the Crown Theological Library.

   [75] Neue Untersuchungen zur Apostelgeschichte, pp. 63-81. In this
   volume Dr. Harnack completes his defence of the date 62 A.D. for the
   Acts in favour of which he had already argued in his Apostelgeschichte,
   5 Excurs, 217-221. How strong was the case he made out even in this
   earlier and more tentative argument may be judged by the following
   extract from Neue Untersuchungen, p. 64: Nicht auffallend aber konnte
   es nur sein, dass andere sich durch die starken Argumente für die frühe
   Abfassung der lukanischen Schriften als vollkommen überzeugt erklärten.
   Nicht nur Delbrück hielt mir sofort vor, ich hätte mich in einer von
   mir selbst sicher entschiedenen Frage mit unnötiger Zurückhaltung
   ausgedrückt, sondern auch Maurenbrecher erkannte in meinen
   Beweisführungen die Lösung des chronologischen Problems. In seinem Werk
   "Von Nazareth nach Golgatha" (1909) S. 22-30, gibt er die wichtigsten
   der von mir geltend gemachten Beobachtungen für eine frühe
   Abfassungszeit der Acta zutreffend und eindrucksvoll wieder and
   beschliesst seine Darlegung also: "Die Annahme (eines späteren
   Ursprungs and geschichtlichen Wertlosigkeit der Lukasschriften) ist
   neuerdings immermehr gefallen and schliesslich durch eine gründliche
   Untersuchung von Prof. Harnack in allen Teilen gänzlich widerlegt and
   beseitigt worden. Viel mehr hat sich nach jeder Richtung hin, wenn auch
   nicht die unbedingte Glaubwürdigkeit, so doch das hohe Alter der
   Apostelgeschichte ergeben. Und wenn Prof. H. selbst nur zögernd und
   erst nur in letzten Moment seiner Arbeit die Konsequenz seiner
   Ergebnisse auch für die Datierung zog, so muss man doch sagen, dass nur
   in jener von ihm vorgeschlagenen Weise so wohl der Schlusssatz der Acta
   wie die ganze Tenor des Buchs verständlich wird, und dass daher schon
   um dieses äusseren Zeugnisses willen die Datierung auf d. J. 62 als
   bewiesen und nicht nur als möglich zu gelten hat."'

   [76] Eine Revolution innerhaib der Kritik, p. 65.

   [77] St. Luke, xxiv. 50-53; Acts, xxviii. 29-31.

   [78] Codex Bezae D and the first hand of the Sinaitic Codex '?1 omit
   kai anephereto eis ton ouranon. The difficulty which these words raised
   was probably the reason for their omission.

   [79] An inscription at Pompeii contains the words Synagoga
   Libertinorum,' Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome, p. 310.

   [80] A striking testimony to the authenticity of the Johannine account
   of our Lord's ministry. Had our Lord's mission been confined to Galilee
   up to the last week of His life, as the Synoptic narratives appear to
   suggest, it is almost inconceivable that the home of the Christian
   Church should from the very first have been at Jerusalem.

   [81] St. Luke, xxiv. 52, 53; Acts, ii. 46; iii. 1; v. 12, 25, 42.

   [82] Acts, ii. 32-36; iii. 14, 15, 20, 21, 26; iv. 10, 33; v. 30-32,
   42.

   [83] St. John is singled out on several occasions by name, as being
   second only to St. Peter in influence and authority; see Acts, iii. 1;
   iv. 13; viii. 14. Compare Gal. i. 18; ii. 9; also St. John, xiii.
   23-27; xviii. 15; xx. 3-10; xxi. 20-24. Again the history of the Acts
   confirms the account given in the Fourth Gospel.

   [84] Compare St. Luke, xxiv. 44-49; St. John, xiv. 26; xvi. 13.

   [85] Harnack (Const. and Law of the Church, p. 31) describes this as a
   very old and well-attested tradition.' Apollonius is stated by St.
   Jerome (De viris illust.) to have learnt it from the ancients' and it
   is found in Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 5.

   [86] Philo, In Flaccum and Leg. ad Caium. Philo describes the Jews at
   this time as occupying entirely two out of the five districts of
   Alexandria, and says that in Egypt their numbers amounted to 1,000,000.
   See also Josephus, cont. Apion. ii. 4; B.J. xii. 3. 2.

   [87] Josephus, xiv. 7, Life, 76, B.J. vii. last chapter. In the revolt
   of the Jews in the time of Trajan (116-117) the number of Jews who
   perished in the district of Cyrene is given as 22,000, no doubt an
   exaggeration but pointing to a very large Jewish population.

   [88] Acts, vi. 8, vii. 54-60, viii. 1-3.

   [89] pantes de diesparesan kata tas choras tes Ioudaias kai Samareias
   plen ton apostolon.

   [90] Acts, viii. 5-24.

   [91] Comp. Acts ix. 26-31 with Gal. i. 18.

   [92] kath' holes tes Ioudaias kai Galileias kai Samareias. ix. 31.

   [93] egeneto de Petron dierchomenon dia panton. ix. 32. Comp. xv. 41
   and xviii. 23.

   [94] We are here in presence of one of those strange psychical
   communications of which we have been learning so much in recent years.
   They are far more common than most of us dream of, and come we know not
   how or whence. In the trance into which Peter, exposed on the housetop
   to the full heat of the mid-day sun and faint for lack of food, fell,
   just in proportion to the deadening of the ordinary senses would be the
   sensitiveness of those faculties which lie below the threshold of
   wake-a-day consciousness. First the spirit of the Centurion in his
   anxious search after truth is moved to seek out Peter, as his guide and
   teacher; then the spirit of Peter, while still unconsciously conscious
   of the approach of the messengers who were on their way to seek him,
   receives the intimation, which is the response to his own prayers. Men
   like Peter and John and Paul were in a manner far beyond the normal,
   what we should now call sensitives'; their spiritual faculties attuned
   to constant and intimate intercourse with that Divine Spirit who, their
   Master had promised, should in their hours of doubt and darkness be
   their guide and helper towards light and truth.

   [95] Acts, xi. 1-18.

   [96] Acts, xi. 19-27. These men were of those Hellenist Christians who
   had been driven from Jerusalem by the persecution which followed the
   death of Stephen. The exiles, St. Luke tells, preached the word in
   Phoenicia, Cyprus and Antioch (and no doubt in many other places), but
   at first to the Jews only. Then, after an interval probably of five or
   six years, certain of them, who had meanwhile settled in Cyprus and
   Cyrene, came to Antioch, and, finding that the Greeks were willing to
   listen to their preaching, began with success a work of evangelisation
   among them.

   [97] His aunt Mary resided in Jerusalem, and her house appears to have
   been used as a place of assembly (Acts, xii. 12); indeed there is a
   tradition that the upper room of the Last Supper was in this house.
   Bamabas himself seems to have had property in Jerusalem or its
   neighbourhood. Acts, iv. 37.

   [98] Bar-nabas = son of exhortation; Nabi = a prophet. The Greek form
   huios parakleseos may be illustrated by Acts xiii. 15, where Barnabas
   and Paul are asked by the rulers of the Synagogue if they have any
   logos parakleseos to address to the congregation. Compare also
   parakletos =Comforter, Advocate, Helper, St. John, xiv. 16, 26. In
   accordance with his surname we find that on his arrival at Antioch
   Barnabas parakalei pantas. In Acts xiii. 1 Barnabas is classed as a
   prophet and teacher.'

   [99] Acts, ix. 25-27; Gal. i. 18-21.

   [100] Acts, xi. 26. This seems to be the force of the words
   sunachthenai en te ekklesia.

   [101] The population of Antioch at this time was probably about half a
   million. Ottfried Müller (Antiquitates Antiochenae) has collected all
   that can be learnt from ancient sources about Antioch.

   [102] Josephus (Ant. xviii. 8) and Philo (Leg. ad Caium) tell the whole
   story in detail, and also the fruitless efforts made by Agrippa to
   induce the Emperor to abandon his intention.

   [103] Jos. Ant. xix. 4, 5; B.J. ii. 11. H. Lehmann, Claudius und seine
   Zeit (Leipzig, 1877), 118-121, 161-164. Milman, Hist. of the Jews, ii.
   126-158.

   [104] Jos. Ant. xix. 6. Jost (Geschichte des Judenthums, i. 420 ff.)
   quotes many anecdotes from the Talmud of Agrippa's eagerness to give
   proof of his orthodoxy and piety. See also Fouard, S. Pierre, pp.
   207-212.

   [105] St. Luke, xii. 1-18.

   [106] Supra, pp. 28-9.

   [107] Joyce, South American Archaeology, 1912, p. 76.

   [108] Ramsay, The Letters to the Seven Churches, 1904, pp. 4, 5.

   [109] In sixteen years three great fires destroyed much of Rome and an
   enormous quantity of documents, i.e. in 64, 69 and 80 A.D. There was a
   most destructive fire in the reign of Commodus 191 A.D. Think of the
   meaning of the following facts: Rome was taken and sacked by Alaric,
   410 A.D.; by Genseric, 455 A.D.; by Ricimer, 472 A.D. ; by Vitiges, 537
   A.D.; by Totila, 546 A.D. In 846 A.D. the Saracens plundered Rome. See
   Lanciani, Ancient Rome in the Light of Recent Discoveries, pp. 147-9;
   also The Destruction of Ancient Rome, p. 131.

   [110] Horace Marucchi, Eléments d'Archéologie Chrétienne, vol. i. xiv.
   writes thus: Malheureusement les Actes [des Martyrs] authentiques ont
   presque tous disparu. . . . L'Eglise romaine non possède aucun. Les
   actes de ces martyrs ont dû être détruits pendant la grande persécution
   de Dioclétien; il est certain qu'à cette époque on a brûlé les Archives
   de de 1'Eglise romaine; on a d'ailleurs agi de même en Afrique, ainsi
   que nous 1'apprend S. Augustin.' Of the principal contemporary
   historians of the period dealt with in these lectures--Fabius Rusticus,
   Cluvius Rufus, and Pliny the Elder--not a single line has survived. A.
   Peter (Hist. Rom. frag. pp. 291-324) gives a list of thirty-five
   historical writers upon the period from Caligula to Hadrian (37-138)
   all of whose writings have perished. Of the works of Tacitus only a
   portion have come down to us, and the Histories in a single MS.

   [111] Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome, p. 125.

   [112] In that portion of the fifth book of the Sibylline Oracles which
   was probably written 71-74 A.D. the flight of Nero from Rome is thus
   described; v. 143 pheuxetai ek Babulonos anax phoberos kai anaides.

   [113] Clement Rom. 1 Cor. v.

   [114] See Clemen, Die Himmelfahrt des Isaia, ein ältestes Zeugnis für
   das römische Martyrium des Petrus' in Zeitsch. für Wissensch.
   Theologie, 1896. The discovery among the papiri of Lord Amhurst of the
   Greek text of the Ascension makes the reference clear. kai (t)on dodeka
   (heis) tais chersin autou p(arad)othesetai. Grenfell, The Amhurst
   Papiri. Ascensio Isaiah, etc., 1900.

   [115] Ep. S. Ignatii ad Romanos, c. iv: ouch hos Petros kai Paulos
   diatassomai humin; ekeinoi apostoloi, ego katakritos.

   [116] Quoted by Eus. Hist. Eccl. ii. 25: tauta kai humeis dia tes
   tosautes nouthesias ten apo Petrou kai Paulou phuteian genetheisan
   Rhomaion te kai Korinthion sunekerasate. A comparison with the passage
   from the Ascension of Isaiah, from which a quotation has already been
   made, is most interesting. ho basileus houtos (Nero the matricide) ten
   phuteian hen phuteusousin hoi apostoloi tou agapetou dioxei kai ton
   dodeka heis tais chersin autou paradothesetai.

   [117] Irenaeus, Adv. Haereses, iii. 3; Eus. Hist. Eccl. v. 6.

   [118] Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. v. 6, see also iv. 22. Hippolytus'
   Chronicle was written during the first quarter of the third century and
   was undoubtedly used by Eusebius. For an account of this learned and
   essentially Roman writer see Lightfoot's Apostolic Fathers, part i.
   vol. ii. pp. 317-477. The original Greek of Eusebius' Chronicle or
   Chronography is lost, but it survives in three translations, a Latin
   version by Jerome, a Syriac and an Armenian. The Hieronymian and Syriac
   versions give twenty-five years as the length of Peter's episcopate. On
   the other hand the Armenian has twenty years, but Duchesne (Liber
   Pontificalis, p. v) says: Ann. XX dans le texte arménien, évidemment
   fautif.' The Armenian version has in fact many divergences from the
   Hieronymian, but Lightfoot, who has discussed the matter very
   thoroughly (Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. pp. 212-246), comes to the
   conclusion that these divergences are due probably to the errors and
   caprice of transcribers' (p. 245). Duchesne, Mommsen, and others hold
   the Latin Chronography, known as the Liber Generationis, to be a
   translation from the Greek of Hippolytus' Chronicle dating from about
   234 A.D.

   [119] Eus. Hist. Eccl. ii. 14--the whole of this passage will be
   considered later. For the death: Hist. Eccl. ii. 25, iii. 1, 4.

   [120] Jerome, De Viris Illust. i. Jerome must have had access to the
   Chronography of Julius Africanus, the Chronicle of Hippolytus, the
   Memorials of Hegesippus, and other lost works.

   [121] P. Martin, S. Pierre, sa venue et son martyre à Rome,' Rev. des
   Questions historiques, xiii. 5, xv. 5, xviii. 202. This writer gives an
   array of quotations from Armenian and Syrian (Jacobite and Nestorian)
   authors from the fifth to the thirteenth centuries.

   [122] The oldest parts of the Catacomb of Priscilla are regarded by De
   Rossi, Marucchi, Lanciani and the best authorities as dating from the
   middle of the first century. The most ancient inscriptions are in red
   and many in the Greek language. Among them is one containing only the
   single word . Another on the left side of the main gallery thus:-- a
   third:-- In this catacomb is the mausoleum of the Acilii Glabriones,
   the family of the consul M. Acilius Glabrio, put to death by Domitian
   in 95 A.D. His own tomb has been destroyed. According to the Liber
   Pontificalis Pope Leo IV, in the ninth century, removed from this
   catacomb the bodies of Aquila and Priscilla, with others, into the city
   to protect them from profanation at the hands of the Saracen invaders.
   Marucchi, Archéologie Chédtienne, vol. ii. pp. 586 ff; Le Memorie degli
   Apostoli Pietro e Paolo in Roma, p, 119, pp. 160-164. On p. 162 may be
   seen a copy of the beautiful medallion containing the heads of SS.
   Peter and Paul found by Boldetti in the first-century catacomb of
   Domitilla and now in the Museo Sacro delta Biblioteca Vaticana.

   [123] Allard, Hist. des Persécutions, vol. i. p. 15.

   [124] Roma Sotterranea Christiana (nuova serie) Tom. I.: Monumenti del
   Cemitero di Domitilla sulla Via Ardeatina descritti da Orazio Marucchi,
   1911, p. 9.

   [125] Marucchi, Le Memorie degli Apostoli Pietro e Paolo in Roma, pp.
   180-182.

   [126] G. B. de Rossi, Bullettino di Archeologia Christiana, 1868, p. 1
   ff.; 1874, p. 174; 1877, p. 77 ff. In the Vatican museum this scene is
   depicted on two glasses. Behind the figure striking the Rock is written
   the word Petrus.' There is no doubt a reminiscence here of St. Paul's
   words, 1 Cor. x. 4: epinon gar ek pneumatikes akolouthouses petras; he
   de petra en ho Christos, and of the declaration of Christ: Su ei Petros
   kai epi taute te petra oikodomeso mou ten ekklesian, St. Matt. xvi. 18.

   [127] Les Actes des Martyrs. Supplément aux Acta sincera de Dom
   Ruinart,' par Edmond Le Blant. Mémoires de l'Institut Nat. de France,
   tom. xxx. part 2, p. 81: Les gentils, aux temps de Dioclétien, avaient
   recherché, pour les anéantir, les livres, les écrits religieux des
   fidèles. Cette destruction, qui nous est attestée par des
   procès-verbaux contemporains, fut rigoureusement poursuivi, et
   l'Eglise, après la tourmente, dut pourvoir à la réfection de ses
   archives dévastées. Ce fut souvent à l';aide de souvenirs de traditions
   orales, que l'on dut réconstituer alors nombre d'Acta et de Passiones
   et souvent . . . ces rédactions nouvelles furent accommodées, pour le
   détail, à la mode du temps où elles étaient faites'; p. 81: Ces
   interpolations, à mon avis, ne doivent donc ni déconcerter ni rébuter
   la critique. Sous la couche des inventions, les traits originaux
   existent, et un grand nombre d'entre eux apparaissent come à fleur de
   sol. Il les faut dégager patiemment,' p. 87.

   [128] G. B. de Rossi in an Archaeological Conference held at Rome,
   December 11, 1881, said: Che nella formazione degli Atti dei martiri
   devono esser distinti e considerati molti periodi successivi; it primo
   della relazione contemporanea dei testimoni oculari; il secondo delle
   interpolazioni fatte al testo originale fino dal seculo incerca quarto
   e forse prima: poi vengono le amplificazioni e parafrasi composte dai
   retort nei secoli quinto e sesto: finalmente le abbreviazioni delle
   prolisse parafrasi ad use delle Lectiones liturgicae, e le nuove forme
   di stile date alle vecchie leggende dal seculo decimo in poi per opera
   di scrittori diversi, i cui nome in parte conosciamo; i quali vollero
   togliere ogni oscurità e rossezza al dettato e vestirlo di nuove fogge
   di lingua. In tutte queste trasformazioni naturalmente si venne assai
   alterando l'indole genuina dei documenti; furono aggiunti prolissi
   discorsi, circostanze meravigliose, leggende strane, ma generalmente
   rimase sempre il fondo e la sostanza del primitivo discorso.'
   Bullettino di Arch. Chr. serie IV. 1882, p. 162.

   [129] Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 5. 6. 15; Origen, tom. xiii., comment on
   St. John, c. 17. It is from Origen we learn that the kerugma was known
   to Heracleon. Clement regards the work as genuine, but Origen doubted.

   [130] Carlo Macchi, La Critica Storica e l'origine della Chiesa Romana,
   1903, p. 93: Non tutte le memorie di S. Pietro in Roma hanno per se
   stesse il medesimo valore. Altre sono d'indubitata autenticità; altre
   sono d'autenticità probabile, altre per se stesse neppur di probabile.
   Ma quando anche si prescinda dai monumenti per se stessi autorevoli,
   l'unione di tante memorie in Roma e nella sola Roma è un fatto che non
   può spiegarsi, se non si ammetta quel che abbiamo già dimostrato con
   argotnenti, i quali crediamo the non possano venir dispregiati da una
   critica veramente sincera.'

   [131] Cohors Italica. Vid. Gruter, Inscr. p. 434: Cohors militum
   Italicorum voluntaria, quae est in Syria.'
     __________________________________________________________________

LECTURE III

   Rev. xvii. 18--The great city, which reigneth over the Kings of the
   earth.

   In my previous lectures I have attempted to show from the internal
   evidence of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans that there existed at Rome
   in 57 A.D. a Christian Church of high repute and many years' standing,
   and that this Church had been founded and built up by a man into the
   sphere of whose labours he [St. Paul] had been careful not to intrude.
   Moreover though St. Paul does not mention the name of the man,
   circumstantial evidence has been brought forward making a very strong
   prima facie case in favour of the ancient tradition that he was none
   other than St. Peter.

   To-day I propose to consider how far that tradition in the form in
   which it has been handed down to us by Eusebius and Jerome [132] is
   consistent with the facts of the early Apostolic history contained in
   the Acts and the Pauline Epistles and fits in with the chronological
   framework of that history.

   Eusebius [133] tells us, on the authority of Justin Martyr (a passage
   of whose Apology' [134] he quotes at length), that a certain Simon of
   the village of Gitton in Samaria, whom nearly all the Samaritans
   worshipped, confessing him to be the Supreme God, came to Rome in the
   reign of Claudius Caesar and having there performed many magic rites
   was regarded as a god. After further describing, this time on the
   authority of Irenaeus, the character of this man's teaching, as being
   the fountain-head of all heresy, Eusebius proceeds to say that when in
   Judaea Simon was convicted of his wickedness by the Apostle Peter, and
   later journeying from the east to the west arrived at Rome and was
   there successful in bringing many to believe in his pretensions. Not
   for long, however,' adds the historian, did his success continue; for
   on his steps in this same reign of Claudius, the all-good and most
   beneficent providence of God conducts the mighty and great one of the
   Apostles, Peter, on account of his virtue the leader of all the rest,
   to Rome against so great a corruption of life, who like some noble
   warrior of God armed with divine weapons, brought the precious
   merchandise of the light that had been made manifest from the east to
   those in the west, preaching the true light and the word that is the
   salvation of souls, the proclamation of the Kingdom of God.' [135]

   It is not necessary here to enter into any detailed examination of the
   theories of Christian Baur [136] and his disciples of the Tübingen
   School or of the arguments of Richard Lipsius [137] in their attempt to
   prove that the Roman Petrine legend was without foundation and that
   Simon Magus never had any real existence, but was a lay figure
   concealing the personality of St. Paul; for later research has shown
   that their conception of the course of early Christian History is
   fundamentally false and it is becoming generally discredited. These
   distinguished scholars indeed, while brushing aside the
   pseudo-Clementine literature with one hand, as pure romance invented by
   Essene-Ebionite writers of the third and fourth centuries, at the same
   time laid hold with the other hand on those very fictions, on which the
   Clementine romance is built up, in order to erect thereon a romance of
   their own equally unsubstantial, and no less inconsistent with the
   clear evidence of the earlier authorities that we possess. Dr. Hort as
   long ago as 1884 in his Lectures on the Clementine Recognitions' (pp.
   130-1) declared--all these impossible theories [of the Tübingen School]
   have no other real basis than the assumption that Simon is only St.
   Paul in disguise. The true relations of the Syrian and Roman stories
   are much simpler, according to what seems to me the most natural
   interpretation. Simon at Rome was familiar in the second century; of
   Simon in conflict with Peter in Syria, we hear nothing till the third
   century has well begun.'

   Indeed with regard to this second century evidence, how is it possible
   to set aside the statements of Justin Martyr and Irenaeus ? The
   evidence of Justin is of great weight. He was himself born at Flavia
   Neapolis in Samaria in 103 A.D., a place only a few miles distant from
   the native place of Simon Magus. His account of Simon's earlier
   activity and great success in the neighbourhood of his own home must be
   regarded as first-hand evidence, and it is in exact agreement with the
   other account of that earlier activity which we have in the eighth
   chapter of the Acts, an account which it is more than probable that St.
   Luke derived directly from that best of all witnesses, Philip the
   Evangelist. I have already pointed out that the emphasis with which St.
   Luke dwells upon this episode of the encounter between Peter and Simon
   at Samaria suggests that he had in his mind that later encounter at
   Rome, which would be fresh in the memories of the first readers of the
   Acts. [138] Be this as it may, Justin was himself at Rome for some
   years between 150 and 160 A.D., and wrote his Apology' to the Emperor
   Antoninus Pius in that city. In writing a defence intended for the
   Imperial eyes it may surely be taken for granted that Justin would not
   twice over have ventured (for in a slightly different form in c. 56
   [139] he repeats the statement from c. 26 already quoted) to declare
   that the Magician Simon of Samaria visited Rome in the reign of
   Claudius and that a statue was erected in his honour and that he was
   worshipped as a god, unless it were well known that such had been the
   case. Yet a third time in his Dialogue with Trypho' [140] Justin speaks
   of the Simonians as an existing sect that took their name from the
   arch-heretic. Two points have been pressed against the evidence of
   Justin. The first that he states that Simon had been honoured with a
   statue as a god in the river Tiber, (on an island) between the two
   bridges, having the superscription in Latin Simoni Deo Sancto, which
   is, To Simon the Holy God.' Now in this same island was found in the
   sixteenth century an inscription to the Sabine God Semo Sancus, i.e.
   Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio. It is of course quite possible that Justin saw
   this inscription, and being a Samaritan ignorant of Latin mythology
   mistook this for an inscription referring to Simon Magus. It was a
   natural mistake. That Justin was right in saying that a statue was
   erected to Simon and worshipped is sustained, as will be seen, by other
   evidence. The other point is that while Justin states that Simon was in
   Rome in the reign of Claudius he makes no mention of his encounter with
   St. Peter. The only argument here is that most treacherous and
   worthless of all arguments--the argumentum ex silentio. Justin was not
   writing for our instruction, but was offering a defence of Christianity
   to a Roman Emperor. If anyone has thought that the omission of Peter's
   name here was an argument against his presence in Rome in the reign of
   Claudius, let him read the summaries of Justin's pleading in the latest
   edition of the Apologia' by Mr. A. W. F. Blunt (Camb. Univ. Press,
   1911), and he will see that neither in the twenty-sixth nor in the
   fifty-sixth chapter was there any place for a reference to Peter.

   The evidence of Irenaeus, who was in Rome some ten or fifteen years
   after Justin, is equally striking. Irenaeus writes at some length about
   Simon. He describes the rudimentary gnosticism of his teaching, and,
   like Justin, he mentions the tradition that an image was erected by
   Claudius Caesar to his honour in the figure of Jupiter, which the
   people worshipped, and he speaks of him as the father of all heretics.
   [141] Even these testimonies to the still living fame of Simon, as a
   religious leader whose lofty pretensions and skilful charlatanry had
   made a deep impression at Rome and elsewhere, do not stand alone. The
   discovery in the middle of the last century of a MS. at Mount Athos
   containing a Iarge part of the Philosophumena' or Refutation of all
   Heresies' by Hippolytus, the learned bishop of Portus, has thrown much
   fresh light upon Simon and his teaching. [142] Hippolytus, who is
   described as a disciple of Irenaeus, [143] spent at least twenty years
   of his life at or pear Rome and also travelled widely. He devotes a
   long section of his sixth book, which was probably written about 225
   A.D., to an account of the heresy of which Simon was the author. Of the
   man himself he writes thus [144] : This Simon deceiving many by his
   sorceries in Samaria was reproved by the Apostles and was laid under a
   curse, as it has been written in the Acts. But he afterwards abjured
   the faith and attempted [these practices]. And journeying as far as
   Rome he fell in with the Apostle, and to him, deceiving many by his
   sorceries, Peter offered repeated opposition.' Here then is another
   absolutely clear statement that Simon went to Rome and there
   encountered St. Peter.

   Frankly then the contention that Simon is merely Paul in disguise, Paul
   the heretic in the eyes of all good Jews, whom the orthodox Peter is
   represented as triumphantly pursuing from place to place, has not a
   shred of early evidence behind it, and must be given up. Indeed
   Professor Kirsopp Lake in his recent work on the early epistles of St.
   Paul does not express himself a whit too strongly, when he says The
   figure of a Judaizing St. Peter is a figment of the Tübingen critics
   with no basis in history.' [145] So far indeed from Peter and Paul
   being bitterly opposed, there is every ground for believing that they
   worked at Rome during their latter years in the closest harmony. The
   First Epistle of Peter is saturated with Pauline thoughts and language,
   and its amanuensis was Silvanus, the companion of Paul on his second
   missionary journey. St. Paul twice mentions Mark, the disciple and
   interpreter of Peter, as being with him during his first imprisonment,
   and writing to Timothy immediately before his death shows anxiety to
   have him at his side, because he is profitable to me in the ministry.'
   [146] Whatever misunderstandings concerning their attitude towards
   Judaism or divergences in practice there may have been between the two
   great Apostles in early days, it is evident that they have been greatly
   exaggerated. It was rather on questions of expediency than of principle
   that they differed, and the experience of years spent in earnest work
   had long before the end drawn them together into the friendliest
   co-operation.

   The appearance of Simon Magus at Rome followed by Simon Peter, so far
   from being an extraordinary or even an unusual event, is one in
   complete accord with all that we know from non-Christian sources of the
   way in which during the reigns of Claudius and of Nero religious
   teachers, preachers, and wonder-workers from the East found their way
   to Rome. Oriental cults, especially the worship of Cybele and of Isis,
   were all the vogue. Judaism had great attractions for the Roman upper
   classes. Priests, magicians, soothsayers, astrologers crowded the
   capital and found a ready welcome. Claudius, we are told, was so struck
   by the progress of foreign superstitions' that he thought it an act of
   sound political conservatism to re-establish the haruspices. [147]
   Harnack makes the statement in his Expansion of Christianity' that the
   majority of the Christians with whose travels we are acquainted made
   [Rome] their goal,' and he admits that there are no real grounds for
   doubting that Simon Magus did so. [148] Of prominent Christians who
   were in Rome in the time of St. Peter's and St. Paul's ministry,
   Timothy, Apollos, Silas, Titus, Epaphras, Aristarchus, Mark and Luke
   are mentioned in the salutations of extant epistles, and in all
   probability the names of John and of Barnabas should be added to the
   list. The travels and experiences of Apollonius of Tyana are most
   instructive (even when full allowance has been made for the element of
   romance introduced by his biographer Philostratus), for he was an exact
   contemporary of the Apostles, and a kind of second Simon Magus. His
   vast journeys, which extended from the Ganges to the Pillars of
   Hercules, are a proof of the facilities with which such wonder-working
   teachers of philosophy and religion made their way from place to place,
   and the honour and respect with which they were generally received.
   Apollonius was in Rome in 65 and 66 A.D. [149]

   Of St. Peter's first Roman visit and preaching early tradition has
   handed down few details; a series, however, of witnesses affirm that
   Mark accompanied the Apostle to Rome and there wrote his Gospel. Both
   Irenaeus and John the Presbyter, as reported by Papias, speak of Mark
   as Peter's interpreter,' [150] as do later writers. That Peter should
   have chosen John Mark to go with him is quite what one might expect
   from the narrative of the Acts, for Peter was clearly on terms of the
   closest intimacy with Mary, the mother of Mark and the aunt of
   Barnabas, whose house was a centre of reunion for the Christians of
   Jerusalem. There is no reason for thinking that this was the first time
   that Mark had acted as the Apostle's companion and interpreter ; his
   services would be profitable to the ministry' in Palestine, scarcely
   less than in Rome, and the suggestion that he was a catechist to whom
   the instruction of the Apostle's Greek-speaking converts in the
   elements of the Gospel story was entrusted, is both plausible and
   probable. [151] His surname, Marcus, may be taken as indicating that
   his family had some Roman connexion; he may have been, like Paul and
   Silas, a Roman citizen. Eusebius relates that as a consequence of
   Peter's preaching the power of Simon was soon extinguished and
   destroyed together with the man,' but that the Apostle's hearers were
   not content with listening but once to the unwritten doctrine of the
   Divine Message, but they persisted in supplicating Mark, who was
   Peter's companion and whose Gospel is extant, that he should leave them
   also in writing a memorial of the doctrine that had been orally
   delivered. Nor did they cease their entreaties until they had prevailed
   with the man, and in this way that writing which is called the Gospel
   according to Mark is due to them. And they say that when the Apostle
   through the revelation of the Spirit knew what was done he was pleased
   with the zeal of the men and gave authority for the writing to be read
   publicly in the churches.' [152] This, says Eusebius, is the account
   given by Clement [of Alexandria] in the sixth book of his Hypotyposeis'
   and that it is also corroborated by Papias the bishop of Hierapolis. In
   other parts of his work Eusebius actually gives the quotations to which
   he here refers, from which it appears that he has really combined more
   than one passage of Clement in his statement. [153] The evidence of
   John, as recorded by Papias [154] --that Mark being the interpreter of
   Peter wrote whatsoever he remembered with great accuracy, but not in
   the order in which the things were said or done by the Lord '--is
   interesting, for it seems to point to the Gospel in its present form
   having been compiled from a set of separate lections intended for
   public exposition and for catechetical instruction. Harnack has come to
   the conclusion that internal indications place no impediment in the way
   of assigning Mark at the latest to the sixth decade of the first
   century.' [155] But it is fairly certain that Mark was not at Rome
   during the sixth decade, and there can therefore be no objection to
   accepting the voice of tradition, which makes the Gospel to have been
   written for the use of St. Peter's Roman converts about the year 45
   A.D.

   The evidence of St. Jerome, as to the form of the Petrine tradition,
   which was current in the Rome of Pope Damasus during the latter part of
   the fourth century, now demands our most careful attention, for it is
   of great importance. His words (to which I have already referred) are:
   Simon Peter . . . prince of the Apostles, after an episcopacy of the
   Antiochean Church, and after preaching to the dispersion of those of
   the circumcision, who had believed in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia
   and Bithynia, in the second year of Claudius journeys to Rome to combat
   Simon Magus, and there for twenty-five years he occupied the sacerdotal
   chair, until the last year of Nero, that is the fourteenth.' [156] The
   biographical notice of St. Peter, which appears in the edition of the
   Liber Pontificalis' published about 530 A.D., is, as the Abbé Duchesne
   states, [157] borrowed from St. Jerome, and this notice has remained as
   what may be justly styled the standard Roman tradition ever since. I
   have said that this represents the form of that tradition as it
   obtained at Rome in the pontificate of Damasus (366-384). Damasus has
   been well named the first Christian archaeologist. Some of his many
   beautifully engraved inscriptions, embodying often the results of
   personal research and investigation, above the tombs of the martyrs in
   the catacombs and in the churches of Rome are still extant. [158]
   Tradition connects the name of this Pope, coupled with that of Jerome,
   with the compilation of the original Liber Pontificalis,' as the forged
   letters prefixed to the work testify. Indeed so long and to such an
   extent did this tradition survive that in the thirteenth century and
   later we find the work designated as the Chronica Damasi' or Damasus de
   Gestis Pontificum.' [159] In any case Damasus did make the early
   history of the Roman Church his special study, and Jerome was his
   secretary at the time of his death in 384. Nor was this all. Jerome
   spent some time in his earlier life at Rome, as a student, and he has
   himself left on record, [160] how at that time he visited the
   sepulchres of the Apostles and martyrs in the catacombs, and it must be
   borne in mind that in those days there were in existence very many
   tombs and inscriptions of the highest historical interest, which have
   long since been destroyed, and that others were then accessible, which
   have not yet been unearthed. Lastly in assaying the value of Jerome's
   evidence, as to the received Petrine tradition in the pontificate of
   Damasus, it is a matter of no small interest to know that he must have
   met at Rome in 382-84 and been the companion at the Papal Court of
   Furius Dionysius Filocalus. [161] This man was the artist who engraved
   the Damasene inscriptions, so noted for the peculiar beauty and special
   character of their calligraphy. He was the illuminator and probably the
   editor of the Liberian or Filocalian Catalogue of the Roman Bishops,
   which was compiled and edited in 354 A.D. and which was the basis of
   the later Liber Pontificalis.' [162] With this Liberian catalogue it is
   impossible that Jerome should have been unacquainted, and the
   differences between its form of the Petrine tradition and that given by
   Jerome are of interest and will demand our consideration. What is,
   however, important now to note is that Jerome, the later writer, in
   differing from the Liberian notice of St. Peter must have done so
   intentionally.

   The quotation given above from the De Viris Illustribus' closely
   follows the lines of the passage from the Chronicle of Eusebius about
   St. Peter, which in the Hieronymian version is thus rendered--Peter the
   Apostle . . . when he had first founded the Antiochean Church, sets out
   to Rome, where as bishop (episcopus) of the same city he continues for
   twenty-five years preaching the Gospel. After Peter Linus first held
   the Roman Church for eleven years.' [163] The notice in the De Viris
   Illustribus' adds the detail, which appears later in the Liber
   Pontificalis,' that it was in the second year of Claudius that Peter
   arrived in Rome, and as Peter's death is asserted to have taken place
   in the last year of Nero, the interval gives exactly the twenty-five
   years of the so-called episcopacy, or, as in this case it would be
   better rendered, overseership of the Roman Church. The Abbé Duchesne in
   his monumental work on the Liber Pontificalis,' while stating that it
   is only after the time of Xystus I (117-126) that there is sufficient
   uniformity in the catalogues to inspire confidence in the figures given
   for the duration of the earlier episcopates, writes: As far as regards
   St. Peter the figure of his twenty-five years is as well attested as
   the figures of the years of his successors after Xystus I. I have then
   believed myself able to note it, but without indicating from what date
   one ought to count it, for there are on this point grave incertitudes.'
   [164] With these grave incertitudes let me now deal very briefly. The
   Eusebian History and Chronicle give lists of the Roman bishops, and the
   Chronicle the lengths of their term-years, while the Liberian or
   Filocalian Catalogue gives a list of bishops and their term-years, but
   (as I have already said) with considerable divergences. Both are based
   on earlier authorities--the Eusebian on the lists of Hegesippus and
   Irenaeus, i.e. on documents belonging to the second half of the second
   century; the Liberian on a chronicler, most probably Hippolytus, about
   fifty years later. Now both the Eusebian Chronicle and the Liberian
   Catalogue give twenty-five years as the term of St. Peter's episcopacy,
   but they differ as to the dates of its beginning and its end. We have
   already seen that the Eusebian date-limits are from 42 A.D. to 67 A.D.;
   the Liberian, however, are from 30 A.D. to 55 A.D. The Liberian
   chronicler states that after the Lord's Ascension the most blessed
   Peter received the office of a bishop (episcopatum).' [165] He further
   states that Linus succeeded him at Rome in 56 A.D. At first sight it
   may appear that these two sets of dates are hopelessly inconsistent.
   [166] That this is not necessarily the case, I will now endeavour to
   show.

   First, let me point out that the Liberian Chronicler's account of the
   whole of the early history of the Roman episcopate is full of blunders;
   his errors are not confined to his statement about St. Peter. By him
   Clement is reckoned as the second bishop instead of the third, and
   Anencletus or Cletus is represented as two persons [167] instead of
   one. In the case of St. Peter the Chronicler apparently regards the
   Ascension as being the date of the assumption of a general episcopate
   by the Apostle, who after that date became undoubtedly the acknowledged
   leader of the Twelve. Moreover St. Luke emphatically mentions
   sojourners from Rome, Jews and proselytes as being present at the feast
   of Pentecost when by Peter's preaching 3000 converts were made. But
   what about the other date, 56 A.D.? It will be my aim now to show that
   this date also may be one of real historical significance in the
   life-work of St. Peter.

   The Hieronymian-Eusebian version of the Petrine tradition is indeed, as
   it stands, scarcely less in conflict with the Lukan history than is the
   Liberian. Jerome's statement that before Peter went to Rome in 42 A.D.
   he had been bishop of the Church at Antioch and had preached to the
   Jewish Diaspora in various provinces of Asia Minor is obviously
   irreconcilable with the narrative in the Acts. The explanation however
   of all these difficulties seems to me to lie in the hypothesis of a
   sojourn of Peter at Rome about midway between the sojourn in the early
   part of Claudius and the final sojourn towards the close of Nero's
   reign, which ended with his martyrdom. I propose therefore to examine
   the possibilities of such an hypothesis, and to see whether any
   evidence, circumstantial or otherwise, exists to give it support.

   The sequence of events as given in the Acts has been frequently
   misunderstood. In the eleventh chapter, verses 19-20, St. Luke tells us
   of the rapid spread of the Christian faith at Antioch through the
   efforts of evangelists from Cyprus and Cyrene, men who had once been
   among the Hellenist disciples of Stephen at Jerusalem, and further that
   in this company of the new converts were many Greeks as well as Jews.
   He then proceeds to state that when news of this was brought to the
   Apostles in Jerusalem, they resolved to send, in their name and as
   their representative, Barnabas, as being at once a prominent member of
   the Church at Jerusalem and a Cypriote by nationality, to take charge
   of this important new movement and to assume its leader-ship. Barnabas
   was successful in his mission and having brought Saul from Tarsus to
   help him in his task, by the joint efforts of these two men of special
   gifts and earnest zeal the growth of the Church made such conspicuous
   progress as to attract public notice and to gain for the new sect in
   the mouth of the multitude that scoffing but distinctive nickname of
   Christiani which was to be in the coming centuries a title of honour
   the profession of which would bring to thousands of martyrs terrible
   sufferings and death.

   Between verse 26 and verse 27, however, a certain interval elapsed. The
   phrase now in these days'--as in the opening verse of the sixth
   chapter--is one of those loose chronological expressions common to the
   Lukan writings, implying an uncertain interval of time. In this case
   the statement that certain prophets came down from Jerusalem unto
   Antioch' may be taken to have suggested the insertion at this point of
   the episode with which Chapter xii. opens: Now about that time Herod
   the King put forth his hands to afflict certain of the Church.' The
   departure of the prophets for Antioch was in fact one of the results of
   the persecution of Herod, and as the story of the persecution was
   essential to the writer's purpose he has interpolated it here in the
   midst of his Antiochean narrative, which is resumed at verse 25 of this
   same twelfth chapter. One of these prophets, whose name Agabus is
   given, is stated to have predicted the coming of a great famine over
   all the world, and such was the belief inspired by his utterance that
   the Christian community of Antioch determined to collect a contribution
   for the relief of the brethren that dwelt in Judaea. Now the famine,
   which was, in accordance with Agabus' prophecy, of wide extent
   throughout the Eastern portion of the Roman world, [168] seems to have
   begun in Judaea in the year 45 A.D. and to have reached its height in
   the following year. According to Josephus [169] the famine took place
   when Tiberius Alexander was procurator in Judaea, and his term of
   office did not begin before the latter part of 45 A.D. As this same
   historian gives a circumstantial account of the relief brought
   personally to Jerusalem by Queen Helena, mother of Izates, King of
   Adiabene in 45 A.D., and of her remaining there some considerable time
   distributing corn that she imported from Egypt and figs from Cyprus, it
   is evident that the dearth lasted for at least two years. The
   probability is that the prophecy of Agabus was delivered some time in
   44 A.D. and that with the first reports of a failure of the crops being
   imminent the fund in aid at Antioch was started. The raising of a
   sufficient sum by weekly collections would take some time, and it is
   not likely that the delegates Barnabas and Saul left Antioch until the
   spring of 46 A.D. was sufficiently advanced for a voyage to one of the
   Palestinian ports to be possible. The Feast of Pentecost would have
   been a very fitting time for the arrival of men bringing alms to supply
   the needs of those suffering from the loss of the harvest.

   At this point let us carry our thoughts back to St. Peter, whom we left
   at Rome with Mark, as his companion and interpreter. There exists no
   record to tell us what was the duration of this his first sojourn in
   that city. At this critical stage however of the development of the
   Christian Church the advice and guidance of so trusted a leader must
   have been frequently needed both at Jerusalem and at Antioch, The
   longest stay that St. Paul ever made in one place was at Ephesus, where
   he remained for three years, and three years may be safely regarded as
   the extreme limit of St. Peter's absence in these opening years of the
   reign of Claudius. [170] In any case the news of the famine would be
   sure to hasten his departure, and if, as I myself strongly hold, the
   second visit of Paul to Jerusalem in company with Barnabas, described
   in the second chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, [171] be
   identical with their mission from Antioch as the bearers of the relief
   fund, then in the spring of 46 A.D. they would find both Peter and Mark
   on their arrival already at Jerusalem. The only other member of the
   Twelve present in the Holy City at this juncture seems to have been St.
   John, and no more suitable opportunity could have been afforded for a
   private discussion of the situation raised by the admission into the
   Antiochean Church, without any Jewish restrictions, of a large number
   of Gentile converts, and of an understanding being arrived at upon the
   vital issues that were in question. The five principal representatives
   of what may be styled the old, the moderate and the new schools of
   Christian thought and opinion were now brought together by the
   discharge of a common charitable duty, and the result was an agreement
   on general principles and a working arrangement as to missionary
   spheres, which approved itself, if not to the Judaistic extremists, to
   the recognised leaders Peter, John and James no less than to Paul and
   Barnabas, as satisfactory.

   The measure of Peter's satisfaction may be gathered from the fact that
   John Mark accompanied the two delegates on their return to Antioch,
   probably in the spring of 47, and that some months later, but before
   the period for sailing was over, Barnabas and Saul set out on their
   missionary journey to Cyprus, taking Mark with them. Their work in
   Cyprus, for they went through the whole island, would occupy them till
   the spring, when they crossed to Perga in Pamphylia where Mark left
   them and returned to Jerusalem. Many reasons have been suggested as the
   cause of this abandonment at this time. It may have been due in part to
   dissatisfaction with Paul's methods of teaching, more probably to a
   feeling that now the Cyprian mission was over it was his duty to return
   once more to the side of his old leader in that new sphere of work with
   Antioch as its centre which Peter had probably been, to Mark's
   knowledge, for some time planning. [172]

   No tradition from early Christian times is stronger or more persistent
   than that which asserts that before Peter entered upon his Roman
   episcopate,' he for seven years filled a similar office at Antioch.
   [173] Now if the so-called Roman episcopate be taken to date strictly
   from the second year of Claudius, it is quite clear that Peter did not
   spend seven years at Antioch previously. So it has come to pass that
   even those who have been willing to accept the Roman visit of 42 A.D.
   as historical have dismissed the Antiochean tradition as baseless
   fable. But in my opinion no tradition of this character can have come
   into existence and held its ground as this did without there being a
   genuine substratum of truth in it. The real difficulty is the
   chronological one. Can this be overcome? I believe it may be. If Peter
   sojourned at Rome a second time in the years 54-56 A.D., and I hope to
   show grounds for believing that he may have done so, then there is no
   reason why the seven years that preceded this (47-54 A.D.) should not
   have been years during which Peter made Antioch the centre of his
   missionary work, a starting-point for journeys to Mesopotamia in the
   east or even to Cappadocia and Pontus in the north, an abode from which
   visits to the feasts at Jerusalem could be easily undertaken. It is
   certain that he was in Antioch at the same time as Paul and Barnabas
   after the return of the latter from their first missionary journey in
   the autumn of 49 A.D. [174] The account, which Paul gives in the second
   chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, of the dispute he had with
   Peter concerning the question of eating with the Gentiles, would indeed
   lead one to think that the Apostle's stay at that time had been one of
   some duration. As St. Luke from the thirteenth chapter of the Acts and
   onward confines his narrative entirely to the missionary life of St.
   Paul, it is with gratitude that we welcome these flashes of light from
   the autobiographical portions of the Pauline epistles, which from time
   to time suddenly illumine the darkness of these early decades of the
   first century, through which we are pain-fully striving to grope our
   way, and, however evanescent, prove to us at any rate that for the
   moment we are walking upon the right track. There is probably no
   epistle which is so rich in passages of this kind as St. Paul's First
   Epistle to the Corinthians. It is generally agreed that this epistle
   was written at Ephesus towards the end of St. Paul's stay of three
   years in that city. Now the recent discovery of an inscription at
   Delphi [175] practically fixes the date of Gallio's proconsulship in
   Achaia as 52 A.D., and with it the chronology of this part of St.
   Paul's life. The date of the First Epistle to the Corinthians can
   therefore be given with something approaching to certainty. It was
   written towards the end of the year 55 A.D. Now one of the chief
   objects of this epistle was to reprove the Corinthians for their
   divisions and party spirit. There was a party there which called itself
   by the name of Cephas. Again there is a direct reference to the fact
   that Cephas was accompanied in his missionary journeys by his wife.
   [176] What other explanation can be given of such statements than the
   obvious one, that Peter had been paying a visit of such duration to
   Corinth as to have created a following who boasted themselves
   distinctively, as being the disciples of one whom they looked upon as a
   super-eminent Apostle.' [177] Further a chance reference is made to
   Barnabas, as working for his maintenance, [178] a reference which would
   be meaningless unless the Corinthians were acquainted with Barnabas
   personally and had seen him so working. That Peter was really regarded
   in the second century as a founder of the Corinthian Church conjointly
   with Paul is proved by the quotation, preserved by Eusebius, from a
   letter of Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, to Soter, bishop of Rome, who
   speaks of the plantation of Peter and Paul at Rome and at Corinth. For
   they both together here in Corinth planted us and taught alike; and
   both together in Italy taught alike, and then were martyred about the
   same time.' [179]

   These almost casual references preserved in the First Epistle to the
   Corinthians relating to an event of much significance in the history of
   an important Church, to which an eminent bishop of that Church bears
   witness as a recognised and established tradition about a century
   later, bring before us in a startling way how widespread were the
   activities of Peter and other members of the Apostolic band in those
   years when the narrative of the Acts is dumb as to their very
   existence, and therefore how little right we have to express ourselves
   dogmatically and without reservation upon questions of first-century
   Christian history, of which our knowledge is so utterly fragmentary, or
   to reject unceremoniously traditions which, if carefully sifted, will
   generally be found to contain some precious bits of authentic
   historical fact. The particular episode of Petrine history with which I
   am now dealing affords an excellent illustration of these remarks.

   Granted then that the natural interpretation of certain passages of the
   First Epistle to the Corinthians implies that both Peter and Barnabas
   were in Corinth and working there in the autumn of 54 A.D., it may well
   be asked is it not strange that these two Apostolic men of all others
   should have thus gone apparently out of their way to visit a Church so
   recently founded by the efforts of St. Paul, and which should have been
   regarded as in his special charge ? The reply is that not by a single
   word does St. Paul make any complaint on the subject. What then is the
   explanation ? It is, I believe, that Peter on hearing of the death of
   Claudius on October 13, 54 A.D., had thought the time opportune for
   revisiting his Roman converts and had asked Barnabas to accompany him.
   They had stopped at Corinth simply as a convenient halting-place, being
   the half-way house between Syria and Italy. And now let us turn to
   tradition. There are many traditions which associate Barnabas with Rome
   and Italy. The forms in which they have come down to us are, like most
   of the fifth and sixth century Acts, Passions and Travels, full of
   chronological errors and contain many impossibilities and
   contradictions due to the later inventions and interpolations of
   hagiographers careless or ignorant of history and anxious only to
   glorify the memory of the particular saint or martyr in whom for local
   or other reasons they are interested. But as the learned French writer,
   Edmond le Blant, [180] who is a specialist on this subject, well says
   These interpolations, in my opinion, ought not either to disconcert or
   to repel criticism. Under a layer of invention the original traits
   exist, and a great number of them appear on the very surface. One must
   extricate them patiently.' The earliest reference to Barnabas [181] is
   that found in the Clementine Recognitions.' [182] This work, an
   Ebionite romance of a much later age than Clement the supposed writer,
   is prefaced by an account of Clement's early life at Rome. The author
   says that Clement was converted by the preaching of Barnabas, who
   afterwards introduced him to St. Peter. The object of the author of the
   Recognitions' is to magnify the authority and orthodox teaching of
   Peter, so that the introduction here of Barnabas, who is never
   mentioned again, is purely gratuitous, and indeed inexplicable in such
   a narrative unless the fact recorded were one based on a received and
   ancient tradition too well known to be ignored. The mention of
   Barnabas' preaching has nothing to do with the story. The insertion
   thus of this incident without cause in an Ebionite document of Eastern
   origin strongly speaks for its authenticity. The traditions represent
   Barnabas as having preceded Peter [183] as a preacher at Rome, and it
   is quite possible that he may now have left Corinth some weeks or
   months before Peter followed him, and that one of the first-fruits of
   his ministry in the Imperial City was the conversion of the man who was
   to occupy so important a place in the history of the Church in Rome
   during the latter half of the first century. [184]

   If certain passages of St. Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians have
   suggested that St. Peter visited Corinth in 54 A.D., certain other
   passages of the Epistle to the Romans, sent by St. Paul from Corinth to
   its destination in the early spring of 57 A.D., suggest no less
   strongly that he [Paul] had been recently hindered from going to Rome
   by the presence in that Church of one who was its founder. And here I
   would venture to say that we may rest assured that the principle not to
   build on another man's foundation' [185] was an Apostolic and not
   merely a Pauline rule of action. That Peter went to Corinth with any
   intention of interfering with Paul's great work in that town, or of
   placing himself before the Corinthians as a rival and superior to the
   Apostle of the Gentiles, is inconceivable. But just as Paul proposed in
   Peter's absence to pay a passing visit to Rome on his way to Spain in
   order that he might be refreshed by personal intercourse with those of
   whose faith in Christ he had heard so much, and that he might in his
   turn be able to impart to them some spiritual gift, [186] so would
   Peter be anxious to break his voyage to Rome at the Isthmus of Corinth,
   so as to make acquaintance during a brief sojourn with a Christian
   community in whose first conversion and establishment as a Church his
   own Roman disciples, Aquila and Prisca, had played so considerable a
   part.

   Now St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans twice emphatically declares
   that though he had for some time longed to visit Rome, he had been many
   times hindered, and the cause is plainly stated, i.e. that it was his
   settled practice not to trespass in another man's sphere of work. As I
   do not wish to go over old ground, I shall assume that the other man'
   here referred to is St. Peter. But this being granted, the more often I
   read over these autobiographical passages from this epistle the more
   thoroughly am I convinced that the writer is not here simply alluding
   to so distant an event as the preaching of that Apostle in the Imperial
   City in the early days of Claudius, but to Peter being actually present
   at Rome in person at the times when otherwise he, Paul, might have been
   able to carry out his wished-for visit. For such a friendly visit of
   short duration need not, as I have already said, any more than the
   contemplated visit on the way to Spain, have been regarded as a
   building upon another man's foundation.' The often-times' of c. i. 13
   and the many times' of c. xv. 22 are practically confined within
   somewhat narrow limits. Paul after what he must have learned from
   Aquila and Prisca would scarcely have thought of adventuring himself in
   Rome before the death of Claudius. At that date be was in Ephesus, a
   city that was in direct and constant communication with the capital,
   and during the next two years he might have found several opportunities
   for undertaking a voyage to Rome: one, for instance, when from Ephesus
   he paid that second visit to Corinth of which there is no record in the
   Acts, but which is mentioned in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians.
   [187] Another, and a most tempting one, when his tried friends and
   fellow helpers, Aquila and Prisca, returned home after the tumult. Yet
   a third when after leaving Ephesus he went to Macedonia and then
   apparently followed the Via Egnatia to Illyricum before making that
   third sojourn in Corinth, when he wrote the Epistle to the Romans. If
   he were hindered from doing so, it was because precisely during this
   period Peter was himself in Rome.

   I now turn to the evidence of the Liberian or Filocalian Catalogue of
   354 A.D., which has been traced back by those who speak with the
   highest authority upon the subject to the lost Chronicle of Hippolytus,
   written about 234 or 235 A.D. [188] The Liberian Catalogue makes
   several palpable blunders in the early part of its list of the Roman
   bishops, as I have already said, but the most curious is that which
   makes the twenty-five years of St. Peter's episcopate to begin in 30
   A.D. and to end in 55 A.D. Now this last date can scarcely be intended
   as that of St. Peter's martyrdom, for the Chronicler goes on to say
   that he suffered with St. Paul on June 29 in the reign of Nero, showing
   clearly his acquaintance with the common tradition. But the fact that
   the names of the Consuls (in a corrupted form) for the year 55 are
   correctly given is a piece of strong circumstantial evidence that this
   date was one of special importance in the early history of the Roman
   Church. [189] The assertion that Linus at this time succeeded Peter as
   bishop supplies, I believe, a clue by which to arrive at a solution of
   the difficulty. Later writers and the Liber Pontificalis' itself
   mention both Linus and Anencletus as having been ordained by Peter as
   bishops and as having exercised the duties of that office in his name
   during his lifetime, [190] and there is likewise a tradition that
   Clement also was ordained bishop by Peter in his lifetime. This is a
   quite possible representation of what really took place. The date 55
   A.D. occupied a permanent place in the records of the Roman Church
   because at this date Peter personally gave to that Church its local
   organisation by appointing out of the general body of presbyters an
   inner presbyteral council entrusted with special pastoral duties of
   administration and overseership, the members of which bore the name of
   episcopi, which as St. Peter himself in his first epistle tells us was
   virtually the equivalent of pastores. Not until after the death of St.
   Peter however did this administrative episcopal body deem it necessary
   to select one of their number to succeed him as presiding episcopus and
   chief pastor of the Church.

   There is one event which should, I think, be connected with this visit
   of St. Peter in 55 A.D., of considerable interest. It has generally
   been assumed that the mass of the early Christians belonged to the
   lowest classes and that many of them were slaves. This is no doubt to a
   certain extent true, but not by any means altogether so. Aquila and
   Prisca may have belonged to the freedman' class, but they were
   well-to-do people, and it is probable that Prisca was Roman by birth
   and a person of some position. Again after dismissing all that is
   worthless and utterly fictitious in the account given of Clement's
   family and their adventures in the so-called Clementine literature,
   that literature bears evidence that long after his death Clement was
   given a place apart among the men of the sub-apostolic age not merely
   because he was a disciple of St. Peter or the author of a well-known
   epistle, but because he was connected by ties of relationship with the
   Imperial house. It seems unlikely that Ebionite writers in Eastern
   lands should have gone out of their way to lay stress on this
   relationship, unless it had some foundation in fact. To this matter I
   shall return later.

   The case of Julia Pomponia Graecina, the wife of Aulus Plautius, the
   conqueror of Britain, is exceedingly interesting. It is best told in
   the words of Tacitus--Pomponia Graecina, a distinguished lady, wife of
   the Plautius who returned from Britain with an ovation, was accused of
   some foreign superstition and handed over to her husband's judicial
   decision. Following ancient precedent, he heard his wife's cause in the
   presence of kinsfolk, involving, as it did, her legal status and
   character, and he reported that she was innocent. This Pomponia lived a
   long life of unbroken melancholy. After the murder of Julia, Drusus'
   daughter, by Messalina's intrigues, for forty years she wore only the
   attire of a mourner, with a heart ever sorrowful. For this, during
   Claudius' reign, she escaped unpunished, and it was afterwards counted
   a glory to her.' [191] It had been long surmised that the foreign
   superstition' of which this lady was accused was the profession of
   Christianity. At that time Christianity was still regarded by the Roman
   authorities as a mere sect of Judaism, and Judaism being a religio
   licita Pomponia would be entitled to acquittal. Possibly public rumour
   was already beginning to accuse the Christians, as distinguished from
   the Jews, of indulging in impure and impious orgies, but if this were
   the ground of the accusation, it would not be difficult to refute it.
   The discovery by the famous archaeologist Giovanni Battista De Rossi in
   1867, in the very ancient crypts of Lucina in the catacomb of
   Callistus, of a Christian sepulchral inscription bearing the name, only
   slightly injured, of a Pomponius Graecinus is a piece of testimony of
   considerable weight. He may well have been a great-nephew of the
   Pomponia Graecina of Tacitus, for De Rossi dates the inscription as
   belonging to the second half of the second century. The conjecture then
   that Pomponia Graecina, who was not only a friend but a relative of
   Julia and of the Claudian family, was a Christian convert is rendered
   very probable. It is worthy of note that the death of Julia, when
   Pomponia's mourning began, was in 43 A.D. during St. Peter's first
   visit to Rome, and that her trial before the family tribunal occurred
   in 57 A.D. or about a year (according to the hypothesis I have been
   endeavouring to sustain) after the second visit of the Apostle. It may
   well have been her intercourse with him that led to this public notice
   being taken of her addiction to a foreign superstition.'
     __________________________________________________________________

   [132] Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. book ii. cc. xiii, xiv, xv; Jerome, De
   Viris Illustribus. The evidence of Eusebius, it must be remembered, was
   based upon a wide acquaintance with earlier Christian literature and
   with a mass of official Church documents and state papers, as well as
   local traditions now lost to us, and that Jerome had studied Eusebius'
   works, and that he had access to the Eusebian sources. Eusebius for
   example tells us that he was acquainted with the five books of the
   Commentaries of Hegesippus, a Hebrew Christian who journeyed to Rome
   from the East expressly to learn what was the true doctrine taught
   there (Hist. Eccl. iv. 22). It appears that when at Rome Hegesippus
   drew up a list of the Roman bishops. See Bright, Introd. to Eusebius'
   Eccl. History, pp. xxviii-xxix; Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers, Clement
   of Rome, i. 202-3; Lawlor, Eusebiana.

   [133] Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. ii. 13. 14.

   [134] Justin, Apologia, i. 26.

   [135] ou men eis makron auto tauta prouchorei. Para podas goun epi tes
   autes Klaudiou basileias, he panagathos kai philanthropotate ton holon
   pronoia ton karteron kai megan ton apostolon, ton aretes heneka ton
   loipon hapanton proegoron, Petron, epi ten Rhomen hos epi telikouton
   lumeona biou cheiragogei, hos hoia tis gennaios Theou strategos tois
   theiois hoplois phraxamenos, ten polutimeton emporian tou noetou photos
   ex anatolon tois kata dusin ekomizen, phos auto kai logon psuchon
   soterion, to kerugma tes ton ouranon basileias euangelizomenos.
   Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. ii. 14.

   [136] See Baur's Kirchengeschichte der drei ersten Christl.
   Jahrhunderten; Paulus der Apostel Jesu Christi; Die Christus Partei in
   Korinth &c.

   [137] Lipsius, Die Apokryphen Apostelgeschichten und Apostellegenden,
   Quellen d. röm. Petrus Sage and other works.

   [138] See p. 38.

   [139] proeballonto allous Simona men kai Menandron apo Samareias ohi
   kai magikas dunameis poiesantes pollous exepatesan kai eti apatomenous
   echousi. kai gar par humin, hos proephemen, en te basilidi Rhome epi
   Klaudiou Kaisaros genomenos ho Simon kai ten hieran sunkleton kai ton
   demon Rhomaion eis posouto kateplexato hos theos nomisthenai, kai
   andrianti, hos tous allous par humin timomenous theous, timethenai..
   Apol. 56.

   [140] Dial. cum Trypho. 126.

   [141] Irenaeus, Adv. Haer. (Library of Ante-Nicene Fathers, tr. by
   Keble), p. 68; Irenaeus speaks of the Simonians as an existing sect, i.
   33.

   [142] Hippolytus, Philosophumenos, vi. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
   12, 13, 14, 15.

   [143] Photius speaks of him as a disciple of Irenaeus.

   [144] Philos. vi. 15.

   [145] Kirsopp Lake, Early Epistles of St. Paul, p. 116. See the
   Introduction to Dr. Bigg's First Epistle of St. Peter (Int. Crit.
   Commentary), pp. 52-67.

   [146] 2 Tim. iv. 11.

   [147] Renan, Hibbert Lectures, p. 54. See Lehmann, Claudius und seine
   Zeit, p. 326: Widersetzte er (Claudius) sich energisch, wiewohl
   erfolglos der mystischen Richtung der Zeit, welche sich namentlich in
   der Vorliebe für Superstitions peregrinae kundgab.'

   [148] Harnack, Expansion of Christianity (Eng. tr.), i. 463.

   [149] Philostratus, Apollonius of Tyana, iv. 35-41; Justin, Irenaeus
   and Hegesippus were all Eastern Christians who came to Rome. Also the
   Jews, Josephus and Philo.

   [150] The testimony of Irenaeus (Cont. Haer. iii. i. 1) will be found
   in Eusebius Hist. Eccl. v. 8; that of Papias, 39. See Chapman, Journ.
   of Theol. Stud. July 1905, p. 563 ff.; Harnack, Neue Untersuchungen zur
   Apost. Geschichte, pp. 88-93; Macchi, Critica Storica e 1'origine della
   Chiesa Romana, pp. 25-29.

   [151] See The Composition of the Four Gospels by Rev, A. Wright, ch.
   iii, St. Mark a Catechist.'

   [152] Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. ii. xv.: paraklesesi de pantoiais Markou,
   hou to Euangelion pheretai, akolouthon onta Petrou liparesai, hos an
   kai dia graphes hupomnema tes dia logou paradotheises autois
   kataleipsoi didaskalias, me proteron te aneinai, e katergasasthai ton
   andra, kai taute aitious genesthai tes tou legomenou kata Markon
   euangeliou graphes. Gnonta de to prachthen phasi ton apostolon,
   apokalupsantos auto tou pneumatos, hesthenai te ton andron prothumia,
   kurosai te ten graphen eis enteuxin tais ekklesiais.

   [153] The clause above beginning phasi ton apostolon is Eusebius' own,
   derived not from the Hypotyposeis book vii. quoted Eccl. Hist. vi. 14,
   but from some other source. The words of Clement in the Hypotyposeis
   are remarkable--huper epignonta ton Petron protreptikos mete kolusai
   mete protrepsasthai. Eusebius seems to have had in his mind another
   passage of Clement from Adumb. in 1 Peter v. 13 (quoted by Harnack,
   Neue Untersuchungen, p. 89)--Marcus, Petri sectator, praedicante Petro
   evangelium palam Romae coram quibusdam Caesareanis equitibus et multa
   Christi testimonia proferente, petitus ab eis, ut possent quae
   dicebantur memoriae commendare, scripsit ex his, quae a Petro dicta
   sunt, evangelium quod secundum Marcum vocitatur.'

   [154] Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. iii. 39.

   [155] Harnack, New Untersuchungen, p. 88. The difficulties in accepting
   the Gospel of St. Mark, as we now possess it, as the common narrative
   source of St. Matthew and St. Luke, appear to me well-nigh insuperable.
   But if we suppose that this Gospel is a revised continuous narrative
   formed from a number of separate lections or instructions written by
   Mark previously for the use of Greek-speaking converts in Judaea, the
   difficulty is largely removed. If St. Luke had completed the Acts in 62
   A.D., it is highly probable that he composed his Gospel at Caesarea
   during St. Paul's captivity under Felix. Such a set of catechetical
   instructions correspond almost exactly to the type of diegesis of which
   Luke speaks in his preface. He would find the Marcan lections,
   embodying as they did the teaching of St. Peter, almost certainly in
   the possession of such a leader among the Hellenist teachers as Philip
   the Evangelist, who was residing at Caesarea at the same time as Luke.

   [156] Simon Petrus . . . princeps Apostolorum, post episcopatum
   Antiochensis ecclesiae et praedicationem dispersionis eorum qui de
   circumcisione crediderant, in Ponto, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia et
   Bithynia, secundo Claudii anno ad expugnandum Simonem Magum Romam
   pergit, ibique viginti quinque annis cathedram sacerdotalem tenuit,
   usque ad ultimum annum Neronis, id est decimum quartum. De Viris
   Illust. i.

   [157] Duchesne, Liber Pontificalis, i. 51, 119.

   [158] Marucchi, Eléments d'Archéologie Chrétienne, 226-240; Lightfoot,
   Apostolic Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 296.

   [159] Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 304.

   [160] Dum essem puer et liberalibus studiis erudirer, solebam cum
   caeteris eiusdem aetatis et propositi, diebus dominicis sepulchra
   Apostolorum et martyrum circuire, crebroque cryptas ingredi, quae in
   terrarum profunda defossae, ex utraque parte ingredientium per parietes
   habent corpora sepultorum, et ita obscura sunt omnia, ut propemodum
   illud propheticum compleatur: Descendant ad infernum viventes (Ps. liv.
   16); et raro desuper lumen admissum horrorem temperet tenebrarum, ut
   non tam fenestram quam foramen demissi luminis putes et caeca nocte
   circumdatis illud Virgilianum proponitur: "Horror ubique animos, simul
   ipsa silentia terrent."' Migne, P.L. t. xxv. c. 375. In Ezeck. xii. 40.

   [161] Marucchi, Eléments d'Archéologie Chrétienne, i. 230, 235; De
   Rossi, Roma Sotterranea, i. 118 ff, ii. 196 ff.; Lightfoot, Apost.
   Fathers, part i. vol. i. pp. 64, 249.

   [162] Duchesne, Liber Pontificalis, i. 4; Lipsius, Die Bischofslisten
   des Eusebius' in Neue Studien zur Papstgeschichte,' Jahrb. f. Protest.
   Theol. vi. 233 ff. 1880; Mommsen, Ueber den Chronographen vom Jahre
   354' in Abhandlungen der Philol. Hist. Classe d. K. Sächs. Gesellschaft
   der Wissenschaften, 1854; Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i.
   Early Roman Succession,' pp. 199-345; vol. ii. Hippolytus of Portus,'
   pp. 317-477.

   [163] Petrus Apostolus . . . cum primum Antiochenam Ecclesiam
   fundasset, Romam proficiscitur, ubi Evangelium praedicans xxv annis
   eiusdem urbis Episcopus perseverat. Post Petrum primus Romanam
   ecclesiam tenuit Linus annis xi.' See Schoene, Die Weltchronik des
   Eusebius in ihrer Bearbeitung durch Hieronymus.

   [164] Duchesne, Liber Pontificalis, ccxviii: En ce qui regarde Saint
   Pierre le chiffre de ses vingt-cinq années est aussi bien attesté que
   les chiffres d'années de ses successeurs depuis Xystus I^er. J'ai donc
   cru pouvoir le noter, mais sans indiquer, à partir de quelle date il
   faut le compter, car il y a, sur ce point, de graves incertitudes.'

   [165] Post ascensum eius beatissimus Petrus episcopatum suscepit';
   . . . Linus fuit temporibus Neronis, a consulatu Saturnini et
   Scipionis' (A.D. 56).

   [166] See the authorities above quoted: Duchesne, Mommsen, Harnack,
   Lipsius, Lightfoot, De Rossi, &c.

   [167] The evidence for the order of succession (as given by Irenaeus
   and Hegesippus), Peter, Linus, Anencletus (or Cletus), Clemens is very
   strong. Lightfoot's judgment is--We have to reckon with three
   conflicting statements, as far as regards the position of Clement in
   the Roman succession--a tradition, the Irenaean--a fiction, the
   Clementine--and a blunder, the Liberian or perhaps the Hippolytean.
   Under these circumstances we cannot hesitate for a moment in our
   verdict. Whether the value of the tradition be great or small, it alone
   deserves to be considered. The sequence therefore which commends itself
   for acceptance is Linus, Anencletus or Cletus, Clemens, Euarestus'
   (Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 66).

   [168] Sir W. M. Ramsay writes (St. Paul the Traveller, pp. 48-49): The
   famine appears to me to be singularly well attested considering the
   scantiness of evidence for this period. Suetonius alludes to assiduae
   sterilitates causing famine prices under Claudius, while Dion Cassius
   and Tacitus speak of two famines in Rome, and famine in Rome implied
   dearth in the great corn-growing countries of the Mediterranean;
   Eusebius mentions famine in Greece and an inscription perhaps refers to
   famine in Asia Minor.'

   [169] As to the famine in Judaea Josephus is full and explicit (Ant.
   iii. 15. 3; xx. 2. 5 and 5. 2). The story of Queen Helena's munificence
   is told also by Eusebius (Hist. Eccl. ii. 12). Ramsay in a note on the
   date of the famine says that Tiberius Alexander's entry into office
   cannot be fixed with absolute certainty: July 45 A.D. is the earliest
   admissible date and 46 A.D. is far more probable' (St. Paul the
   Traveller, p. 68). In the article on Chronology' in Hastings's
   Dictionary of the Bible, Mr. C. H. Turner gives 46 A.D. as the date of
   the visit of the Antiochean delegates.

   [170] Both the Latin (Hieronymian) and Syriac translation of Eusebius'
   Chronicle make Peter to have gone to Rome in the second year of
   Claudius and to Antioch two years later (ed. Schoene, p. 211). This two
   years may represent the time actually spent in Rome according to
   tradition.

   [171] Gal. ii. 1-10. For an eminently fair and thorough examination of
   the arguments for identifying the Galatian visit after fourteen years'
   with (1) the visit of Paul and Barnabas described in Acts xi and (2)
   with the visit to the Council described in Acts xv, see Professor
   Kirsopp Lake, The Early Epistles of St. Paul, pp. 274-293. Professor
   Lake after stating the case for the identification with (1) says To my
   mind it is extremely strong' (p. 281). Again after weighing the
   objections against (1) and (2) he concludes my own view is that the
   objections [against] placing Gal. ii. at the time of the famine are
   much less serious, but I recognise that they are real, and prevent one
   from claiming the right to feel quite certain on the subject' (p. 293).
   It will be seen that, in the circumstances under which I suppose the
   interview to have taken place, the case for the identification is much
   strengthened.

   [172] It is a curious fact that Barnabas and Paul made no attempt to
   preach in Pamphylia either on the outward or the return journey, nor is
   there any evidence to show that Paul ever revisited that country. The
   idea suggests itself that Pamphylia may already have become another
   man's sphere.' Possibly Peter himself may have paused on his voyage
   back from Rome to preach to the Jewish Diaspora scattered along the
   Southern coast of Asia Minor. If so, Mark's refusal to proceed to
   Pamphylia would be explained on this ground.

   [173] The Liber Pontificalis, both in its original form as restored by
   Duchesne and in its later recension, gives seven years as the length of
   the Petrine episcopate at Antioch. Duchesne, Liber Pontificalis, i. 51,
   118; also St. Gregory, Ep. vii. 40.

   [174] Certain, that is, if the second visit of Paul to Jerusalem be
   identical with that in Galatians ii, which I am now assuming. It cannot
   fail to strike anyone how much more fittingly the dispute between Peter
   and Paul falls into its place with this assumption, than if it be
   regarded as occurring after the Council of Jerusalem. Indeed the
   difficulty of regarding this meeting as happening at this later time
   just after the Apostolic decree had been drawn up is so overwhelmingly
   great that some authorities, i.e. Harnack, Zahn, and Turner (Hastings's
   Dict.) have felt compelled to suggest that the order of events has been
   inverted by St. Paul. See Kirsopp Lake, Early Epistles of St. Paul, p.
   294 ff.

   [175] See Revue d'Histoire et de la Littérature Religieuses, Mars-Avril
   1911: E. Ch. Babut, p. 139 ff., describes the discovery by M. Ed.
   Bourget of four fragments of a letter of Claudius to the city of
   Delphi. In the inscription, part of which is obliterated or wanting,
   the twenty-sixth salutation of Claudius is mentioned and Gallio is
   Proconsul. M. Babut shows that the date must lie between narrow limits.
   Claudius had his twenty-seventh salutation on August 1, 52 A.D., and
   the twenty-sixth salutation probably not before April or May of that
   year. Also consult Adolf Deissmann's St. Paul (Eng. tr. 1912), where a
   facsimile of the inscription is given and the Proconsulate of Gallio
   forms the subject of a special Appendix, p. 235 ff.

   [176] 1 Cor. i. 12; iii. 22; ix. 5.

   [177] 2 Cor. xii. 11: husteresa ton huperlian apostolon.

   [178] 1 Cor. ix. 6.

   [179] Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. ii. 25: tauta kai humeis dia tes tosautes
   nouthesias ten apo Petrou kai Paulou phuteian genetheisan Rhomaion
   tekai Korinthion sunekerasate. Kai gar ampho kai eis ten hemeteran
   Korinthon phuteusantes hemas, homoios edidaxan; homoios de kai eis ten
   Italian homose didaxantes, emarturesan kata ton auton kairon. See also
   Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. iv. 23 and Kirsopp Lake, Early Epistles of St.
   Paul, p. 112.

   [180] Les Actes des Martyrs. Supplement aux Acta Sincera de Dom
   Ruinart' (part 2, p. 87).

   [181] The traditions about Barnabas have been collected and fully
   treated by Braunsberger. Der Apostel Barnabas. Sein Leben and der ihm
   beigelegte Brief. Mainz, 1876. See also Harnack in the Theologische
   Literaturzeitung, 1876, No. 19, 487 ff. and Lipsius, Die Apokryphen
   Apostelgeschichten und Apostellegenden, 2er Band, 2e Hälfte, 270 ff.
   The chief document relating to Barnabas' work first at Rome then at
   Milan is entitled Datiana historia Ecclesiae Mediolanensis ed. Biraghi,
   Milan 1848. Braunsberger's conclusion is that the preaching of Barnabas
   in North Italy was zwar nicht sicher, aber sehr wahrscheinlich' (p.
   83).

   [182] Hort in his lectures on the Clementine Recognitions shows that
   this pseud-epigraphic writing, and the Clementine Homilies, which
   closely resemble it, are two separate Ebionite versions of a much
   earlier work known as the Circuits of Peter--Periodoi Petror. See also
   Salmon's article in Smith and Wace's Dict. of Christian Biography. The
   date of these versions is about the end of the third century, of the
   Periodoi about a century earlier. Both had their origin in the East.

   [183] In the Datiana historia the Barnabas story as told by the author,
   after relating Barnabas' work with Paul at Antioch and the choice made
   of him and Paul as Apostles to the Gentiles in the fourteenth year
   after Christ's Passion, and his first missionary journey, and second
   visit to Cyprus after his separation from Paul, proceeds to state that
   thereon--in the first year of Claudius, eight years after Christ's
   ascension--he takes ship with some of his disciples for Rome--velut
   totius orbis dominam visere cupiens,' where he, as the first Apostle,
   proclaims the Word of God and among others converts Clement, afterwards
   the third successor of Peter in the Roman episcopate (Lipsius, ii. 2,
   p. 311). Here it is obvious that the chronology contradicts itself. It
   ought to be the first year of Claudius Nero, i.e. 55 A.D. If the eight
   years be counted from Barnabas' appointment as an Apostle of the
   Gentiles, 47 A.D., we arrive at the same date.

   [184] A prima-facie case is made out for the authenticity of the
   tradition of Barnabas' preaching in Rome and North Italy from the fact
   that it was so greatly in the interest of the upholders of the Petrine
   origin of the Roman Church to suppress it; as Harnack points out, its
   existence musste dem römischen Bischofe höchst unbequem werden: denn
   sie drohte die einzigartige Bedeutung des Petrus für das Abendland and
   die einzigartige Stellung Roms im Abendlande zu gefärhrden.'--Literatur
   Zeitung, 1876. No. 19, 488.

   [185] Rom. xv. 20.

   [186] Rom. i. 10-12, xv. 23, 24.

   [187] 2 Cor. xii. 24 and xiii. 1.

   [188] See pp. 49, n. 2, 71, supra.

   [189] Petrus, ann. xxv. mens. uno, d. viiii. Fuit temporibus Tiberii
   Caesaris et Gai et Tiberi Claudi et Neronis, a cons. Minuci [vinicii]
   et Longini [A.D. 30] usque Nerine at Vero [Nerone et Vetere A.D. 55].
   Passus autem cum Paulo die iii. Kal. Iulias, cons. ss, imperante
   Nerone. Linus, ann. xii. m. iiii, dies xii. Fuit temporibus Neronis, a
   consulatu Saturnini et Scipionis [A.D. 56] usque Capitone et Rufo [A.D.
   67] (Light-foot, Apost. Fathers, I. i. p. 253).

   [190] Hic [Petrus] ordinavit duos episcopos, Linum et Cletum, qui
   praesentaliter omne ministerium sacerdotale in urbe Roma populo vel
   supervenientium exhiberent; beatus autem Petrus ad orationem et
   praedicationem, populum erudiens, vacabat. . . . Hic beatum Clementem
   episcopum conservavit, eique cathedram vel ecclesiam omnem disponendam
   commisit.--Duchesne, Liber Pontificalis, i. 118. See evidence of
   Epiphanius derived from Hegesippus, Lawlor, Eusebiana, p. 9.

   [191] Pomponia Graecina, insignis femina, Plautio qui ovans se de
   Britanniis rettulit nupta ac superstitionis externae rea,
   mariti·iudicio permissa; isque prisco instituto, propinquis coram, de
   capite famaque coniugis cognovit et insontem nuntiavit. Longa huic
   Pomponiae aetas et continua tristis fuit; nam post Iuliam Drusi filiam
   dolo Messalinae interfectam per quadraginta annos non cultu nisi
   lugubri, non animo nisi maesto egit; idque illi imperitante Claudio
   impune, mox ad gloriam vertit.--Tacitus, Ann. xiii. 32.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   LECTURE IV

   Acts xxviii. 15--Whom when Paul saw, he thanked God and took courage.

   The hope expressed by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans that he
   might, after accomplishing his mission of alms-bearing to Jerusalem, be
   able shortly to pay a passing visit to the Roman Christians on his way
   to Spain, [192] was not to be realised in the way that he proposed. The
   journey to Jerusalem was overshadowed from the first by dark
   forebodings, [193] and it proved disastrous for a lengthened period to
   all his plans of active missionary work. It lies outside the scope of
   these lectures to relate in detail all that happened to St. Paul
   between his arrival at Jerusalem to keep the Pentecost feast of 57 A.D.
   and the early spring of 60 A.D. [194] when at length he entered Rome as
   a prisoner. It is, however, necessary for a right understanding of the
   character of St. Paul's captivity in the Imperial Capital to consider
   with some care what St. Luke has to tell us about his treatment by the
   Roman authorities during his earlier captivity in Caesarea. There are
   few passages in ancient historical literatures more clearly the work
   not merely of a contemporary writer but of an observant eye-witness
   than is the narrative contained in the last seven chapters of the Acts.
   These chapters abound in first-hand material for the history of the
   time, and incidentally are valuable for the side-lights that they throw
   upon many features of the Roman provincial administration and legal
   procedure, and upon the state of Judaea in the years 57 to 59 A.D.

   St. Paul here appears in an historical setting, the truth-fulness of
   which we can estimate by a comparison with the narrative of the period
   of Felix and Festus contained in Josephus' writings, and in the less
   detailed but more pungent references of Tacitus. It was the period when
   the great revolt was preparing. Probably there was no provincial post
   that was more difficult and less desirable than that of Procurator of
   Judaea. The celebrated character-sketch of Felix given by Tacitus,
   [195] in the practice of all kinds of lust and cruelty he exercised the
   power of a king with the temper of a slave,' no less than the fierce
   accusations brought against this Procurator by Josephus of cruelty,
   rapacity, and treachery, [196] are tinted with prejudice and
   exaggeration. The judgment of Mr. Henderson, the historian of Nero's
   Principate, is very different. [197] Alike in Jerusalem and in the
   country generally Felix found a widespread turmoil and insecurity
   alikeof person and of property. Bands of robbers were roaming up and
   down, sweeping in adherents from every class of malcontent debtor and
   malefactor. The sect of the Zealots, founded years before by one Judas
   of Galilee, were hardly distinguishable from the Sicarii, those robbers
   and murderers whose evil deeds load the page of Josephus, and both
   plagued the unhappy land, as they disturbed the unfortunate Governor's
   peace. Felix acted vigorously. Robber bands were dispersed yet always
   reappeared. Daily assassinations in Jerusalem defied the Roman
   garrison. The mob was always the credulous prey of any fanatic. One Jew
   from Egypt gathered thousands together on the Mount of Olives promising
   them that the walls of the city shall fall at his bidding as those of
   Jericho before Joshua's trumpets, and his adherents' excited belief,
   stimulated by their lust and hope of rapine and of plunder, was only
   chilled by Felix' appearance at the head of Roman troops. The mob was
   scattered, but the leader escaped. . . . Wherever Felix appears in the
   history of these troubled years, we find him struggling with disorder,
   and crushing, so far as he could with the small force at his disposal,
   both brigandage in the country and rioting in the city. Difficult cases
   he duly refers to Nero. Pending decision he will keep the peace firmly.
   There is no good evidence to warrant the accusations of cruelty and
   lust so lightly brought against him.' How accurately the Lukan
   narrative pictures this state of things.' [198] The strong Roman
   garrison in Fort Antonia keeping watch and ward over the faction-torn
   city at the time of the Feast. The swoop of the tribune Lysias to
   rescue Paul from the hands of the raging and howling crowd in the
   Temple Courts. His mistake in thinking that his prisoner was the
   Egyptian.' The scene on the stairs and within the fort. The growing
   respect of the officer as he notes that the man whom he had taken to be
   a leader of banditti can speak Greek, then that he is, though a Jew by
   race, not merely an inhabitant but a citizen of a famous Greek
   university city, and lastly, most important of all, that he inherits
   from his father the privileges of Roman citizenship. His own naive
   remark with a great sum obtained I this citizenship' only enhancing the
   superior position of the man who can reply but I was Roman born.' [199]
   The scene in the Sanhedrin is quite explicable when we read in
   Josephus, about this time King Agrippa gave the High-Priesthood to
   Ishmael, the son of Fabi. And now arose discussions between the high
   priests and the leading men of the multitude of Jerusalem . . . and
   when they met together, they cast reproachful words and threw stones at
   one another.' [200] If Ananias were High Priest de facto, while Ishmael
   was High Priest de jure, the exclamation of Paul, I wist not that he
   was High Priest,' was not unjustifiable. [201] Again the request of the
   chief priest to Lysias that Paul should again appear before the
   Council, and the plot that was made whereby forty assassins were bound
   together by an oath to waylay and murder him, is quite in accordance
   with the evidence of Josephus, when he tells us that precisely at this
   period robbers went up with the greatest security to the festivals and
   having their weapons concealed [under their garments] and mingling
   themselves with the multitude, they slew both their own enemies and
   those whom other men wanted them to kill for money.' [202]

   The reticences of St. Luke upon many points on which we should like to
   have fuller information are quite as remarkable as his accuracy. We
   would gladly know more about the causes which secured for St. Paul such
   favoured and even indulgent treatment for four or five years at the
   hands of the succession of Roman officials with whom he was brought in
   contact. [203] How was it, one asks, that he was able during the whole
   of this time to find sufficient means to meet the heavy expenses that
   must have been thrown upon him? Had Paul been a mere penniless Jewish
   preacher of a new superstition, an ordinary commonplace enthusiast of
   no position or resources, it is practically certain that he would not
   have received so much attention from Procurators like Felix and Festus,
   or such courtesy as was shown by the tribune Claudius Lysias and the
   Centurion Julius. At Fort Antonia he was allowed to receive visitors
   and to bid a centurion conduct his nephew to the presence of his
   superior officer. Does this visit of his nephew signify that some
   change had taken place in Paul's relations with his family, that that
   family was one of distinction and wealth, and that money had come to
   Paul possibly on the death of his father? We do not know. We can only
   conjecture, but the fact remains that in dealing with him the Roman
   authorities treated him as if he were a person of some consequence.

   The first mark of this was exhibited in the extraordinary precautions
   taken to ensure Paul's safe convoy to Caesarea. Four hundred and
   seventy troops--legionaries, horsemen, and light-armed
   auxiliaries--were sent to make a swift night march to Antipatris, and
   then the horsemen continued the journey apparently without a halt to
   Caesarea. The next was when Felix, after declining to condemn Paul,
   when the High Priest in person with a deputation of the Sanhedrin
   brought their threefold accusation against the Apostle by the mouth of
   a trained advocate, not only deferred the trial indefinitely on the
   pretext that he must wait until Claudius Lysias also could appear and
   give evidence, but he ordered that Paul, while kept in charge, should
   be treated with indulgence, and leave was given to any of his friends
   to minister unto him. [204] The reason given by St. Luke why Felix thus
   deferred the trial and treated Paul well was that he had more accurate
   knowledge concerning the Way,' [205] i.e. the Christian religion,
   implying more accurate knowledge than to be deceived by the prejudiced
   ex parte statements of the Jewish accusers. The explanation lies in the
   verse which follows: and after certain days Felix came with Drusilla
   his wife, who was a Jewess, and heard him [Paul] concerning the faith
   in Christ.' And during the long interval of two years that he kept him
   in captivity, hoping,' says St. Luke, that money would be given him of
   Paul, he sent for him the oftener and had communion with him.' [206]
   Now these statements point to two things: first, that Felix knew about
   Paul and Christianity from Drusilla, and, secondly, that from what
   Drusilla told him he was sufficiently interested in the man and his
   teaching to have repeated private interviews with him, and further that
   he believed him to be possessed of sufficient means to offer him a
   bribe to secure his release. No Roman governor, more especially a man
   of the type of Felix, would have such consideration as all this implies
   for a commonplace prisoner. At this time of political unrest and
   ferment in Judaea the Procurator's relations with the Jewish leaders
   were sufficiently strained without his extending his protection to a
   man against whom they displayed such fierce animosity. It would not
   have been difficult for him to condemn Paul as a disturber of the
   peace, and it was his interest to do so. At the same time he clearly
   was afraid to release him, lest he should provoke one of those
   outbursts of Jewish fanaticism which actually took place in Caesarea
   itself after St. Paul had been confined in the barracks attached to
   Herod's palace for two years. The stern way in which in this year 59
   A.D. the Governor dealt with the Jewish rioters led to a deputation of
   the principal Jewish inhabitants of Caesarea going to Rome to accuse
   him for his misdeeds and harshness before Nero himself, and finally to
   Felix' recall to Rome to answer the charges brought against him. [207]
   It is perhaps no wonder that in such a crisis of his life the accused
   man, who only narrowly escaped condemnation by the powerful influence
   of friends at court, should have desired,' as St. Luke tells us, to
   gain favour with the Jews by leaving Paul bound.' [208] There is a
   curious Western reading here, which possibly records an ancient
   authentic tradition that Felix left Paul in confinement because of
   Drusilla.' [209] As Drusilla was the sister of Agrippa II, who had an
   official residence in Jerusalem and in whose hands was the appointment
   of the High Priest, she may well have counselled her husband, for her
   brother's sake even more than for his own, not to irritate Jewish
   fanaticism by any act that might fan it in its present state of fever
   heat to yet further deeds of violence.

   Festus on his arrival was confronted by a difficult and critical
   situation. But he was a firm and just magistrate and was determined
   that the prisoner should despite the clamours of the Jews have a fair
   trial in his presence. The principal charge brought against Paul was
   the crime of majestas--the inciting of the Jewish communities through
   the world to treason against Caesar. The other accusations--the being a
   ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes and a profaner of the
   Temple--on the other hand were, in the scornful words of the Procurator
   to King Agrippa, only certain questions of their own superstition.'
   [210] These charges, St. Luke tells us, they failed to prove, and the
   Apostle no doubt hoped that the Governor would pronounce judgment in
   his favour. But Festus, aware of the excited state of Jewish feeling,
   was naturally anxious not at the very outset of his official term to
   get himself into disfavour with these embittered representatives of the
   dominant faction at Jerusalem, and he asked Paul whether he would be
   willing to go up to that city, there to be judged by him. But the
   Apostle was determined not thus to place himself in the midst of
   enemies thirsting for his life and utterly unscrupulous about the means
   employed; he was sick, too, of delay, and he no longer hesitated. To
   the Jews I have done no wrong, as thou well knowest,' he replied to the
   Governor (I am somewhat paraphrasing the actual words as recorded), and
   if I have committed any offence against Caesar, I, as a Roman citizen,
   should be tried not at Jerusalem but before Caesar's judgment seat. As
   you do not acquit me of treason, I claim my right of appeal--ad
   Caesarem appello.' [211] On this the Procurator, after a conference
   with his assessors [212] (consiliarii) on the legal aspects of the
   case, quashed all further proceedings in Judaea, Thou hast appealed to
   Caesar, to Caesar shalt thou go.'

   I have dwelt at some length on the circumstances which brought about
   Paul's visit to Rome, in order to make it clear that the charge against
   him was political, not religious, the offence one of majestas, not of
   preaching new doctrines subversive of the Jewish law. And it is
   noteworthy that even in regard to the political charge both Festus and
   King Agrippa were agreed that Paul had done nothing worthy of death or
   of bonds. He had however appealed to Caesar, and so he obtained, not
   indeed his liberty, but an escape from an irksome confinement in the
   midst of his deadly foes, and a prospect of at length making
   acquaintance with that Church in Rome which he had so many years been
   longing to visit. Whatever the risks, he would gladly face them, for
   his deep faith assured him that he was going to Rome as God's appointed
   instrument to do good work in Christ's Name amidst the thronging
   population of that great world-centre of Imperial rule. Those words
   that came to him, as on that first night of his incarceration in Fort
   Antonia he beheld in mystic vision the Lord Jesus standing at his
   side--Be of good cheer, for as thou hast testified concerning me at
   Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness even at Rome' [213] --had, we may
   well believe, been his comfort and stay during the whole of those two
   weary years spent to all appearance so uselessly in the guard-rooms of
   Herod's palace at Caesarea. Now, at last, the opportunity had come of
   bearing witness in the presence of Caesar him-self: an opportunity
   embraced with his whole heart and soul, even though the witness should
   be that witness which is crowned with the martyr's death.

   The Apostle left Caesarea some time during the month of August, 59
   A.D., only after many hardships and life-anddeath perils to be
   shipwrecked in November on the coast of Malta. Compelled with his
   companions in misfortune to winter on the island, it was not until the
   end of February 60 A.D. that Paul landed at Puteoli, a centre of the
   corn traffic with Alexandria and the chief commercial sea-port of Italy
   and Rome. [214] In this busy and prosperous place thronged with seamen
   and traders of many nations the Apostle found a body of Christians who
   gave a right brotherly welcome to him and his companions, Luke and
   Aristarchus, and entertained them seven days. Of the origin of this
   Christian community the Acts tells us nothing, but its presence here
   will occasion no surprise to those who have followed the arguments of
   the previous lectures. It is but one proof more of the early
   evangelisation of Rome and other towns in Italy.

   From Puteoli the company of prisoners with their military guard
   journeyed along the Appian Way to Rome. But the news of the approach of
   the Apostle had already reached the Christians of the capital, and two
   separate deputations came to greet him, one as far as Appii Forum, one
   of the regular halting places on this route, the other to Tres Tabernae
   still nearer Rome. [215] Probably among these delegates were a number
   of those whose names are so affectionately mentioned in the Epistle to
   the Romans, Ampliatus, Urbanus, Stachys and the rest, and surely Aquila
   and Prisca, his old and tried friends. St. Luke mentions no names, but
   his one brief statement of the effect of this meeting upon the way-worn
   and much burdened Apostle is worth a whole volume. In the midst of a
   strange and foreign land, a prisoner in bonds, Paul was feeling
   perhaps, as was natural, somewhat lonely and depressed, but at the
   sight of his friends his spirit revived. How expressive are the words
   whom when Paul saw, he thanked God and took courage.' [216]

   The Apostle after his entrance into Rome was conducted by the centurion
   Julius to an officer who bore the title of the Stratopedarch. [217]
   This centurion, in whose charge St. Paul with his fellow-prisoners had
   been for the seven months since they left Caesarea, is described in the
   Acts as being of the Augustan band (speira Sebaste) or as it probably
   should be more correctly translated, of the Imperial Service Corps.
   That great authority, Dr. Mommsen, has been able to give an explanation
   of the meaning of these unusual terms, which affords one more example
   of the marked accuracy of St. Luke in his references to Roman or local
   officials. Professor Ramsay has thus summarised Mommsen's conclusions.
   [218] Augustus had reduced to a regular system the maintenance of
   communications between the centre of control in Rome and the armies
   stationed in the great frontier provinces. Legionary centurions, called
   commonly frumentarii, went to and fro between Rome and the armies and
   were employed for numerous purposes between the Emperor and his armies
   and provinces. They acted not only for commissariat purposes (whence
   the name) but as couriers and for police purposes, and for conducting
   prisoners. They all belonged to legions stationed in the provinces, and
   were considered to be on detached duty when they went to Rome; and
   hence in Rome they were "soldiers from abroad"--peregrini. While in
   Rome they resided in a camp on the Coelian Hill called Castra
   Peregrinorum. In this camp there were always a number of them present,
   changing from day to day, as some came and others went away. This camp
   was under the command of the Princeps Peregrinorum, and it is clear
   that the Stratopedarch in Acts is the Greek name for that officer.'

   Julius in any case had now fulfilled his duty and handed over his
   prisoners to his chief. But the exceptionally favoured treatment now
   accorded to Paul by the Roman authorities in the capital itself was
   even more remarkable than that which had been shown to him in Judaea,
   and it may be added throughout his voyage. I have already spoken of the
   behaviour of Felix to him as a proof that the Apostle was regarded as a
   man of some distinction, and that at this period of his life he was in
   no lack of means. This impression is deepened as the narrative of the
   captivity proceeds. Festus and his assessors would not have been likely
   to have troubled themselves to send to Caesar's judgment seat a poor
   and obscure man. The courtesy of Julius to him and the privileged
   position he occupied during the voyage must have been due in the first
   instance to instructions given by the Governor. It can only have been
   by express permission that Luke and Aristarchus were allowed to
   accompany the Apostle in the vessel, a most unusual thing. [219] And it
   was the same upon his arrival at Rome. From the very first the prisoner
   was suffered to abide by himself with the soldier that guarded him,'
   and to call together the chief of the Jews to meet him twice in the
   friend's house [220] in which for a short time he remained, and then
   for the whole of the next two years of his light captivity he lived in
   his own hired house, receiving freely and without hindrance all who
   came in to him. Where this friend's house or this hired dwelling was
   situated we have no hint, but it must have been in the immediate
   neighbourhood of, perhaps even within, the extensive barracks of the
   Praetorian Guard outside the Collin Gate, for this would be necessary
   for the convenience of the change of the guards to whom he was chained.
   The custodia militaris at its best was most irksome, and as we learn
   from his epistles was felt to be so by the Apostle, but he had at least
   the opportunity, which was so near to his heart, of being able to have
   unrestricted intercourse with his Roman friends, and to preach the
   Gospel to all who wished to hear him. This liberty, which, as we have
   seen, was conceded at once after his arrival, can only have been due to
   the contents of the official report--the literae dimissoriae and
   relatio--sent by Festus concerning the prisoner, which would be handed
   by Julius to the Stratopedarch and by him in his turn to Burrhus, who
   was in 60 A.D. still sole Praetorian Prefect. [221]

   Three days only had passed before St. Paul saw the leading men of the
   Jewish synagogues gathered round him in the room where he was confined.
   So eager was he to be at work again in his Master's business that he
   must have sent out the invitations to the heads of the six or seven
   independent Jewish congregations in Rome immediately after his arrival.
   Apostle of the Gentiles as he was, he always adhered to his unbroken
   rule--to the Jew first. His words at the opening of his Epistle to the
   Romans acquire added force in the new situation in which he now found
   himself--as much as in me lies I am ready to preach the Gospel to you
   also in Rome. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel; for it is the power
   of God unto salvation to every one that believeth, to the Jew first and
   also to the Greek.' [222] These words were indeed addressed to the
   Christians of Rome, but he knew well how small a number out of the
   great Jewish population in that city had been converted to the Gospel,
   and even at a distance the thought saddened him, and his heart yearned
   towards them, the more so because he felt keenly the prejudice which
   his preaching to the Gentiles had aroused against him in the minds of
   his countrymen further east. There are few more touching passages in
   the writings of St. Paul, none which reveal the innermost depth of his
   soul more fully than portions of the ninth and tenth chapters of the
   Epistle to the Romans. No estimate of St. Paul is complete which does
   not take account of these impassioned utterances: I say the truth in
   Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing witness with me in the Holy
   Ghost, that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain in my heart. For I
   could wish that I myself were anathema from Christ for my brethren's
   sake, my kinsmen according to the flesh. . . . Brethren, my heart's
   desire and my supplication to God is for them that they may be saved.'
   [223] And now, as the chiefs of the Roman synagogues stand around him,
   he endeavoured to persuade them that it was not for anything that he
   had done against the Jewish people or contrary to the customs of the
   fathers that he had been put upon his trial and compelled to appeal to
   Caesar. On the contrary, he wished to make it clear to them that all
   the proceedings against him were due to a misunderstanding,
   because--and in these words lies the whole force of his apology--for
   the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.' The reply was a purely
   non-committal one. The Jews declared that they had received from Judaea
   no letters concerning Paul, nor had any of the brethren that came to
   Rome spoken harm of him. They were therefore quite ready to hear what
   he had to say and appointed a day for a conference. But they added,
   with a cold hostility which must have chilled any hopes he may have had
   of the issue of his appeal, as concerning this sect it is known to us
   that it is everywhere spoken against.' [224] This declaration was no
   doubt strictly correct, and is of great importance. It shows that
   already those charges of atheism,' immorality, and of abominable
   practices at their feasts, which were shortly to be so freely brought
   against them, were being widely accepted, and that the Jews them-selves
   were taking pains to dissociate Judaism from any connexion with the new
   sectaries, whom they disowned. The period during which the Christians
   were to find shelter beneath the privileges accorded by the Imperial
   Government to the Jewish people and religion was well-nigh over. The
   essential note of the Christianity preached by Paul was universalist,
   that of the Judaism protected by Roman law was national and
   particularist: between the two there could be no reconciliation. No
   wonder that when a body of Jewish delegates more numerous apparently
   than the first gathered in the Apostle's room, they remained
   unconvinced by his arguments. These chiefs of the Synagogues were not
   of the stuff of which converts are easily made, and though St. Luke
   says they reasoned among themselves and had clearly some difference of
   opinion, yet of their generally unbending attitude the scathing words
   with which the Apostle closed the interview are a proof that he
   regarded all his efforts as thrown away and futile. [225] It was a
   repetition of what had happened at Antioch in Pisidia and elsewhere,
   and there his previous experiences cannot have given him much
   encouragement that now, as a prisoner accused by the Jews of Jerusalem,
   he would meet with more success. In any case his breach with official
   Judaism in Rome seems to have been final. At this point the actual
   narrative of the Acts ceases. The next two verses, which state that he
   (Paul) abode two whole years in his own hired dwelling, and received
   all that went in to him, preaching the Kingdom of God the things
   concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, none forbidding
   him,' [226] are a kind of appendix. The brief summary of events which
   it contains forms--as did the last verses of the Gospel with the
   opening passage of the Acts--a bridge of connexion with another
   narrative, in which the author intended to take up the story at the
   point where it is left, i.e. the departure of the Jewish delegates, and
   continue it in a third treatise in fuller detail.

   This abrupt breaking off of the Lukan history at a most interesting
   point is much to be regretted. We are not however left without
   information about St. Paul's personal condition, his missionary
   activity, and his relations with the outside world during the two years
   he spent in his hired house. Four epistles were written by the Apostle
   during this period, containing a number of references to his life and
   to the friends who were with him or helping him. Of these a group of
   three, the Epistles to the Colossians and Philemon and the circular
   epistle (commonly called) to the Ephesians, were clearly dictated in
   rapid succession and were dispatched together, somewhere about the
   middle of the imprisonment. The fourth epistle, to the Philippians, is
   later; internal evidence points to a date not long before the final
   trial and release.

   The tone of the group of three is on the whole cheerful and full of
   confidence. The Apostle is surrounded by a number of his most trusted
   disciples and fellow-workers. In each of these epistles he refers to
   his bonds, but in every case not to complain, nay, rather to give added
   weight to his advice or his pleading. To the Colossians he writes: Pray
   for us that God may open unto us a door for the Word, to speak the
   mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds, that I may make it
   manifest as I ought to speak,' while in a corresponding passage of the
   circular epistle lie asks for the prayers and supplications of his
   readers, on my behalf that utterance may be given to me in opening my
   mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of the Gospel for which
   I am an ambassador in chains; that in it I may speak boldly, as I ought
   to speak'--passages which testify that his whole thoughts at this time
   were directed to the opportunity--the door--which his position gave him
   for preaching the Gospel in the very heart of the world's capital.
   [227] Notice on the other hand the force of the appeal with which the
   Epistle to the Colossians closes--the salutation of me Paul with mine
   own hand. Remember my bonds,' [228] or in that most delightful passage
   from the beautiful epistle to Philemon, in which he so tenderly and
   affectionately pleads with the master at Colossae to receive back the
   slave Onesimus, who had run away from him and robbed him, but had now
   been converted by Paul at Rome and so become Philemon's brother in the
   faith. Wherefore, though I have all boldness in Christ to enjoin thee
   that which is befitting, yet for love's sake I rather beseech, being
   such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Christ Jesus:
   I beseech thee for my child, Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my
   bonds, Onesimus, who was aforetime unprofitable to thee, but now is
   profitable to thee and to me; whom I have sent back to thee in his own
   person, that is my very heart; whom I would fain have kept with me,
   that in thy behalf he might minister to me in my bonds of the Gospel.'
   A few verses further on the declaration if he have wronged thee at all
   or oweth thee ought, put that to my account: I Paul write it with mine
   own hand, I will repay it' affords one more testimony to those already
   given that the Apostle at this time did not lack means. One reason for
   St. Paul's cheerfulness was, no doubt, that his release was approaching
   and not far distant, otherwise he would not have concluded his letter
   to Philemon with the words Withal prepare for me a lodging: for I hope
   that through your prayers I shall be granted unto you.' The other
   reason was that he had at his side at this time a body of faithful
   friends, [229] who were a comfort to him. Aristarchus and Luke, who
   accompanied the Apostle on his voyage probably in the capacity of
   slave-attendants, still continued their willing service. Aristarchus is
   mentioned as my fellow-prisoner,' Luke as the beloved physician.'
   Epaphras, a native of Colossae, one of those who had originally carried
   the Gospel to that town, had arrived in Rome bringing news of the state
   of the Church of which he was so prominent a member. He also is styled
   by the Apostle his fellow-prisoner,' and possibly all these three lived
   with him in his hired house. Then, too, Tychicus of Ephesus had joined
   him in company with Paul's specially loved disciple Timothy, whom we
   now find acting as his amanuensis. In addition to these were Jesus
   surnamed Justus, one of the few among the circumcision who had been a
   fellow-worker and a comfort to him, and Demas, of whom we know nothing,
   except that he some years later deserted him.

   One name remains which deserves a longer notice.

   Mark, the cousin of Barnabas, saluteth you, touching whom ye received
   injunctions, if he come unto you receive him,' the very phraseology of
   this salutation sent by St. Paul to the Colossians suggests that more
   lies behind the words than they actually express. Since Barnabas and
   Paul parted in anger at Antioch in 50 A.D. because of Mark, and Paul
   chose Silas to be his fellow missionary, while Barnabas took Mark and
   sailed to Cyprus, no mention is made of the latter in the Acts at all
   nor in the pre-captivity epistles of Paul. What was he doing during the
   interval, and how are we to account for this greeting being sent by
   Paul from Rome in Mark's name in 61 A.D. to the Church at Colossae?

   In studying the history of the Apostolic age it should always be
   remembered that the character of our extant authorities only too often
   has caused a one-sided and very warped view of the expansion of
   Christianity (during the period of which we are treating) to be taken.
   The happy fact that St. Paul found a sympathetic biographer in his
   disciple and companion St. Luke, and still more the fact that, owing to
   his exceptional power and weight as a writer, a very considerable
   collection of his letters have survived the general destruction of
   early Christian literature, has led to a quite false estimate being
   formed of the widespread and successful activity of other leading
   missionaries and preachers of the Gospel. The influence they exerted
   and the large area covered by their work have been too much overlooked
   and ignored. The late Professor Bigg was one of the few who have shown
   a really comprehensive grasp of what actually took place. In his
   admirable Introduction to the First Epistle of St. Peter' he has
   pointed out how small a portion of Asia Minor was ever visited by St.
   Paul. He also suggests not only that many of the Churches in that part
   of the Empire were planted at an early date but that the reason why St.
   Paul deliberately refrained from entering Asia, Mysia and Bithynia on
   his second missionary journey was that those provinces were already
   being evangelised by others. [230] To say this is no disparagement to
   St. Paul, he would be the last to wish to take credit for other men's
   labours, and he himself expressly states in his Epistle to the
   Colossians that neither the Christians of that city nor those of
   Laodicea had seen his face in the flesh! [231]

   Now the emphatic mention by St. Paul in this epistle of Mark as
   Barnabas' cousin (with the enigmatic parenthesis that follows) appears
   to me to be one of those seemingly incidental notices, which, when
   placed in its right setting, is then seen to be the central link in a
   chain of circumstantial evidence drawn from a variety of sources. Once
   more I ask, therefore, What had been the history of Mark since in 50
   A.D. he sailed with Barnabas for Cyprus? According to one of the best
   authenticated traditions of these early times he went to Alexandria and
   spent some years in organising the Church in that great city and in
   evangelising the neighbouring districts of Egypt. [232] Another
   tradition of a less trustworthy character, but reasonably probable,
   relates that Barnabas himself went in the first instance with Mark to
   Alexandria. [233] It is quite likely that this choice by Barnabas of
   Egypt as the scene of Mark's missionary labours may have been dictated
   by the fact that it lay outside the Pauline sphere of activity. Now
   Eusebius tells us--and he had exceptional opportunities of obtaining
   accurate information about the Alexandrian Church--that in the eighth
   year of Nero's reign Annianus succeeded Mark the Evangelist in the
   administration of the Church in Alexandria. [234] The date of Mark's
   leaving Egypt thus corresponds with the date at which we find him in
   Paul's company at Rome, i.e. 61 A.D. When he is introduced to us it is
   as one about to journey to Colossae with the Apostle's commendation.
   But the question again naturally arises, why should he from Alexandria
   have gone out of his way to Rome in order to visit Colossae, what was
   his object? Those words of St. Paul--Mark, the cousin of Barnabas,
   about whom ye received injunctions'--gives, I think, the answer. If
   Mark is thus described to the Colossian Christians as the cousin of
   Barnabas,' it follows that Barnabas was well known in Colossae, and
   that the injunctions referred to were Barnabas' injunctions, and, if
   so, that Barnabas himself had been with Paul and had been one of those
   who had furnished him with information about the state of the Asian
   Churches. The course of events, that the passage suggests to me, is
   this. One of the objects of the Epistles to the Colossians and
   Ephesians was to give comfort to the hearts of these Asian Christians,
   who were afflicted by hearing of St. Paul's imprisonment at Rome.
   Barnabas, at Colossae, on receiving the news had resolved to go to his
   old friend in this crisis of his fate and at the same time revisit the
   scenes of his previous labours in Rome and in Italy. He travelled by
   Alexandria to see Mark, and finding that the work of organisation there
   was satisfactorily advanced, it was agreed between them that Mark
   should seek a new field for his energies in Asia Minor and that
   Barnabas should write to prepare the minds of the Colossians for his
   cousin's coming among them. Meanwhile, as Pauline influence was still
   strong in the Asian cities--he first took Mark with him to Rome to
   effect a reconciliation between him and Paul and secure a few words of
   commendation from the Apostle, as a further credential to the former
   deserter. It has been pointed out above that the traditional date of
   Mark's departure from Egypt synchronises with the date at which we find
   him at Rome with St. Paul making ready shortly to depart for Colossae.
   The presence of Barnabas at Rome at this time is vouched for by the
   Gnostic Acts of Peter [Actus Petri Vercellenses], which state that
   Barnabas accompanied Timothy, when the latter was sent a little later
   by Paul to Macedonia as the bearer of the Epistle to the Philippians.
   [235] The same argument holds good here as in the case of the mention
   of Barnabas in the opening of the Clementine Recognitions'; his name
   would never have been introduced in documents written expressly to
   exalt the position of St. Peter, unless he had actually visited Italy
   and worked there. There are strong grounds for believing that Timothy
   after carrying out his mission to Philippi went on to Ephesus and made
   that town the centre of his ministerial activity for some years. The
   Pastoral Epistles represent Timothy and Mark as together a few years
   later in this same district. In a future lecture I shall bring forward
   reasons of considerable weight for holding that the Epistle to the
   Hebrews was written by Barnabas and sent by him to Rome from some place
   not far from Ephesus, where he had been in touch with Timothy. [236]
   There is much that is disputable in all this, but all critics who
   approach the subject with an open mind must at least admit that a
   cumulative presumption has been established in favour of the conclusion
   that Barnabas and Mark were together in Italy and Rome in 61 A.D. and
   afterwards in Colossae.

   At the time when the Epistle to the Philippians was written the
   circumstances and surroundings of St. Paul had undergone a complete
   change. He had no longer around him a group of trusted friends and
   companions. Only Timothy (whom in the opening salutation we find as
   sharing with Paul the responsibility of joint authorship of the
   epistle) is left of those mentioned in the earlier epistles, the rest
   being probably dispersed on various missions. The situation is in fact
   precisely similar to that described in the Second Epistle to Timothy,
   and curiously it was at the time of his trial in each case that the
   Apostle has to complain of being thus left alone. [237] As on the
   occasion of his second trial he sorrowfully writes only Luke is with
   me,' so now of his intimate disciples there is only Timothy.
   Epaphroditus, the bearer of a gift from the Church of Philippi to the
   Apostle, was indeed still in Rome, having been detained by a sickness
   that had been well-nigh unto death, but he was about to return as the
   bearer of the epistle, and such was the unselfishness of St. Paul,
   moved as he was by the tenderest feelings of gratitude and affection
   towards these Philippians, who had always from the very first been the
   most liberal and helpful of all the Churches that he founded, that he
   was ready to spare even Timothy from his side to go with Epaphroditus
   to testify to the Apostle's deep sense that once again they had borne
   his needs in kindly remembrance. He has no one like-minded' with
   Timothy to fulfil this office, and he promises that as soon as I shall
   see how it will go with me' he will send this beloved disciple, of whom
   he touchingly says ye know the proof of him, that as a child serveth a
   father, so he served with me in the furtherance of the Gospel.' [238]

   Those words, as soon as I shall see how it will go with me,' tell their
   own tale. St. Paul was no longer in his own hired house' but in the
   Pretorian camp, where he was in closer confinement while his case was
   being brought at last before the Imperial Appeal Court. This alone can
   be the meaning of the passage, now I would have you know, brethren,
   that the things that are happening to me have rather turned out unto
   the progress of the Gospel, so that my bonds became manifest in Christ
   in the whole Praetorium and to all the rest; and that most of the
   brethren in the Lord, being confident through my bonds, are more
   abundantly bold to speak the Gospel without fear.' [239] The publicity
   of the trial, in fact, and the opportunity that it gave the Apostle in
   the course of his defence against the charges brought against him to
   set forth the true nature of the faith that he preached had caused the
   message of the Gospel to be known throughout the Imperial Court, the
   Praetorian Guards, and generally in Rome. The whole tone of the epistle
   shows that so far all had gone well, that the brethren were filled with
   confidence that the issue would be favourable, and that Paul himself,
   although not free from serious anxiety and quite prepared for death
   should it come, is full of hope that he will speedily be released and
   be able once more to revisit his beloved Philippians. [240]

   This Epistle differs widely in character and contents from those to the
   Colossians and Ephesians. In the latter St. Paul was combating certain
   subtle forms of heretical belief of a gnostic character which had been
   creeping in and making headway among the mixed Greek and Oriental
   populations of a group of Asian Churches, to whom he him-self, though
   well known by name and repute was, except at Ephesus itself, personally
   a stranger. To Philippi he writes, as a Roman citizen to Roman
   citizens, as a friend to dear friends, as an Apostle to a body of
   personal disciples who had above all others shown him unceasing
   sympathy and kindness. His Epistle is primarily a letter of thanks
   called forth by the gift of money that had been sent to him by the
   hands of Epaphroditus. [241] Such a letter was bound to be rich in
   personal references and allusions. I have already referred to those
   which relate to the hopes and fears aroused by his pending trial. He
   had however other troubles that worried him. Despite all he had endured
   and was enduring for the Gospel's sake, it is clear that there was a
   Judaising faction among the Roman Christians, who even now could not
   abate their opposition and spite against the Apostle of the Gentiles.
   Most of the brethren in the Lord,' he writes, being confident through
   my bonds, are more abundantly bold to speak the word of God without
   fear. Some indeed preach Christ of envy and strife; some also of good
   will; the one do it of love, knowing I am set for the defence of the
   Gospel; but the other proclaim Christ of faction, not sincerely,
   thinking to raise up affliction for me in my bonds. What then? Let but
   in every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ be proclaimed;
   and therein I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.' Who they were of whom he
   is here speaking is revealed in the later warning: Beware of the dogs,
   beware of the evil workers, beware of the concision; for we are the
   circumcision, who worship by the spirit of God and glory in Jesus
   Christ and have no confidence in the flesh.' [242]

   Among the Philippian Christians there had been discords, the opening of
   the fourth chapter pointing to the existence of acute dissensions
   between two women, named Euodia and Syntyche, possibly deaconesses, and
   probably each of them with a following. I exhort Euodia and I exhort
   Syntyche,'' writes the Apostle, the word exhort being repeated, as
   being addressed to each separately, to be of one mind in the Lord.' He
   then proceeds, Yea, I beseech thee also, true yokefellow, help them [to
   be reconciled]; seeing that they laboured with me in the Gospel
   together with Clement also and my other fellow-workers, whose names are
   in the book of life.' These words have caused much difficulty to
   commentators, and have been interpreted in many different ways. To
   myself their meaning does not seem doubtful. The passage is a sudden
   parenthesis and is addressed by St. Paul to Timothy, the man whose name
   is coupled with his own at the beginning of the Epistle, and who was
   sitting at his side as his amanuensis. He was his yoke-fellow, since he
   was sharing with him the duty and the burden at that very moment of a
   common task. He commends him to the Philippians in the words I have no
   man like-minded, who will truly care for your state.' The word here
   descriptive of the character of that care which Timothy alone could be
   trusted to give, be it noted, is the same word which is used as the
   epithet qualifying the yoke-fellow' of chapter iv. 3, a word which in
   the original Greek signifies genuine.' This identity of epithet is of
   some evidential significance in support of the identification of the
   yoke-fellow with Timothy, and it is strengthened when we find that the
   Apostle again uses this same epithet in the opening salutation of the
   First Epistle to Timothy, where he addresses that disciple as my true
   [or genuine] child in the faith.' [243]

   The appeal of St. Paul to his true yoke-fellow' to strive to heal the
   dissensions between the two women Euodia and Syntyche is accompanied by
   the suggestion that he should secure the help of Clement and the rest
   of my fellow-workers' in the task of conciliation. Who this Clement
   was, we do not know. Origen, Eusebius and others regard this passage as
   a reference to the well-known Clement, who wrote in the name of the
   Roman Church an Epistle to the Corinthians, but it is extremely
   doubtful whether they had any sound historical authority for their
   statement. The name of Clement was not uncommon, and this Clement may
   have been one of the leading Christians in Philippi. Nevertheless it is
   not at all impossible that he may have been the Roman Clement. The
   title fellow-worker'--sunergos--is frequently used by St. Paul of those
   like Timothy, Titus, and others, sent out by him on some mission as his
   delegates. Clement may have been thus sent to Philippi by Paul. It will
   be observed that he alone is named, and this implies that he stood
   apart from the rest as a person of some authority. The final salutation
   is of some interest. The brethren who are with me salute you'--the
   brethren here being those of his companions, not inhabitants of Rome,
   who were still at his side. All the saints'--i.e. the body of Roman
   Christians--salute you, but especially those of Caesar's household.'
   Why especially? Surely because Paul was now during his trial confined
   in the barracks close to the palace, and he had therefore special
   opportunities of intercourse at this time with those members of the
   Roman Church who belonged to the vast Imperial household--numbering
   many thousands of freedmen and slaves. This phrase and the earlier one,
   my bonds have become manifest in Christ in the whole Praetorium,'
   supplement and partly explain one another. The spread of the Gospel
   among Caesar's household was no new thing. Already in his Epistle to
   the Romans St. Paul had sent his salutations to those who were of the
   households of Aristobulus and of Narcissus. These households had almost
   certainly even in 57 A.D. been incorporated in the household of the
   Emperor. [244]

   Over the further progress and issue of the trial a veil falls. It was
   during the early months of this year 62 A.D. that Burrhus died, and a
   little later Seneca retired from public life. Burrhus had been sole
   Praetorian Prefect, but Nero now reverted to the usual custom of
   appointing two. One of these, Sofonius Tigellinus, has left an infamous
   name as a man who encouraged the cruel propensities of Nero and
   pandered to all his vicious excesses. It is probable therefore that the
   trial of Paul took place while Burrhus was still prefect, and that it
   may have been furthered by the friendly offices of Seneca. [245] That
   he was acquitted at the beginning of 62 A.D. there can be no reasonable
   doubt. Clement of Rome, a contemporary, affirms that Paul after-wards
   travelled to the far West, and the fragment of the Muratorian Canon,
   about 200 A.D., states that he carried out his intention of visiting
   Spain. The Pastoral Epistles also refer to extensive journeyings of the
   Apostle later still in Asia Minor. What probably occurred was that when
   Paul was brought before the Court the charges preferred against him in
   the literae dimissoriae of Festus would be read and considered, and
   then an interval of time would be given for the appearance of
   witnesses. Then, as no witnesses came, and the relatio of Festus was
   found to be favourable, a dismissal followed. [246]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [192] Rom. xv. 24.

   [193] Acts, xix. 22-24; xxi. 4, 11-14; Rom. xv. 30, 31.

   [194] These dates can, now that the discovery of an inscription at
   Delphi makes it practically certain that Gallio was proconsul in Achaia
   in 52 A.D., be regarded as ascertained results.

   [195] Tac. Hist. v. 9: Antonius Felix per omnem saevitiam et libidinem
   ius regium servili ingenio exercuit'; Ann. xii. 54: Cuncta malefacta
   sibi impune ratus tanta potentia subnixo.'

   [196] Josephus, Ant. xx. 8; Bell. Jud. ii. 13.

   [197] Henderson, Life and Principate of the Emperor Nero, pp. 364-5.

   [198] The witness to Felix' or Festus' endeavours of the other
   contemporary writer, St. Luke, is far more trustworthy. His
   Christianity secured to him a greater neutrality in his attitude alike
   to Jew and to Roman, and his simple tale of proceedings in which both
   were concerned is of the highest historical merit, striking with at
   least one shaft of clear light into the enwrapping mist of prejudice
   and hatred.'--Henderson, p. 363.

   [199] Acts xxi. 37-40; xxii. 22-30. Tarsus was an urbs libera.

   [200] Josephus, Ant. xx. 8. 8. See also Milman, Hist. of the Jews, ii.
   171-2.

   [201] Acts, xxiii. 5.

   [202] Acts, xxiii. 12-22. Josephus, Ant. xx. 8. 5; Bell. Jud. ii. 13.
   3.

   [203] See Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, pp. 310-313; also pp. 30-37.

   [204] The confinement of Paul both at Caesarea and Rome was not the
   severe confinement of a prison, custodia publica,, but the lighter one,
   custodia militaris, where the prisoner was bound by a chain to an
   attendant guard. There were however degrees of the custodia militaris
   and the word here used for indulgence--anesis--is the same as is used
   by Josephus (Ant. xviii. 6-10), where he describes how Caligula on his
   accession did not liberate Agrippa (Herod Agrippa I) from custody (he
   had been put in chains by Tiberius) yet gave him indulgence or
   relaxation--teresis meta aneseos.

   [205] Acts, xxiv. 22: akribesteron eidos ta peri tes hodou.

   [206] Acts, xxiv. 26: elpizon hoti chremata dothesetai hupo tou Paulou;
   dio kai puknoteron auton metapempomenos homilei auto.

   [207] Josephus, Ant. xx. 8--9: Porkiou de Phestou diadochou Pheliki
   pemphthentos hupo Neronos, hoi proteuontes ton kata ten Kaisareian
   katoikounton Ioudaion eis ten Rhomen anabainousi Phelikos
   kategorou_tes; kai pantos an ededokei timorian ton eis Ioudaious
   adikematon, ei me polla auton ho Neron to adelpho Pallanti
   parakalesanti sunechorese, malista de tote dia times echon ekeinoi

   [208] The reading of Cod. 137 is ton de Paulon eiasen en teresei dia
   Drusillan.

   [209] There occurs in Josephus, Ant. xx. 7. 2, a passage in which he
   says: When Felix was Governor of Judaea, he saw this Drusilla and fell
   in love with her, for she did indeed exceed all other women in beauty,
   and he sent to her a person whose name was Simon, one of his friends, a
   Jew, born in Cyprus, who pretended to be a magician and endeavoured to
   persuade her to leave her present husband and marry Felix.' As Drusilla
   had required her first husband to become a Jewish proselyte and submit
   to circumcision, so it was thought that her subsequent desertion of him
   for the Gentile, Felix, could only have been brought about by magic
   arts. She was, however, at the time of her marriage with Felix still a
   girl in her teens, and this Magian may have been the instrument
   employed by the unscrupulous Felix to cajole her into an act which as
   an Herodian princess must have been repugnant to her. But who was this
   Simon, a Jew of Cyprus, who pretended to be a magician? Professor
   Rendel Harris in the Expositor, v. pp. 190-4 (1902), identifies him
   with Elymas the Sorcerer of Acts xiii. 8. Now Codex Bezae for Elumas
   reads Etoimas, and this reading is confirmed by several other Western
   authorities who read either etoimos or its equivalent paratus.' Ramsay
   adopts Etoimos as the correct name in St. Paul the Traveller (p. 74).
   And there is the same uncertainty in the text of Josephus. The
   Ambrosian MS. A has Atomon for Simona, also the Epitome of Josephus at
   Vienna. Etoikos and Atomos are, it may reasonably be assumed, different
   forms of this man's name. Was he then one source of Felix' more
   accurate knowledge' of Paul and The Way?

   [210] Acts, xxv. 19: zetemata tina peri tes idias deisidaimonias. The
   profanation of the Temple was also an offence against Roman
   Law--Judaism being a religio licita.

   [211] It is more than probable that St. Paul was acquainted with the
   Latin language. The employment of Tertullus before Felix shows that the
   pleading was in Latin.

   [212] Acts, xxv. 12: sullalesas meta tou sumbouliou. This body was
   composed of consiliarii or assessores, in Greek paredroi. Suet. Tib.
   33; Galba, 19; Josephus, Bell. Jud. ii. 16. 1.

   [213] Acts, xxiii. 11. See Ramsay's article in the Expositor, March
   1913: Suggestions on the History and Letters of St. Paul,' pp. 269-76.

   [214] Puteoli shared with Ostia the trade between Rome and the
   provinces, more especially the corn supply. It was originally named
   Dicaearchia. Three years after St. Paul, the historian Josephus (as he
   himself tells us) on his way to Rome had experiences extraordinarily
   similar to those of the apostle. He writes: I reached Rome after an
   extremely perilous voyage; for our ship, having foundered mid-way in
   the Adriatic, we, to the number of about six hundred, had recourse to
   swimming and had already remained the entire night in the water, when,
   at daybreak, a vessel from Cyrene providentially hove in sight, and
   received on board myself and others, eighty in all--more fortunate than
   our companions. Thus rescued from destruction, I landed at Dicaearchia,
   called by the Italians Puteoli.' This passage is interesting, for here
   as in Acts xxvii. 27 we find the term Adriatic' applied to the sea
   between Greece and Cyrenaica. Comp. Strabo, ii. 123: Ionion pelagos, ho
   nun Adrias. Also the number on board St. Paul's ship, 276, is seen not
   to be excessive as compared with the 600 with whom Josephus voyaged.

   [215] Appii Forum was 41, Tres Tabernae 23 miles from Rome. Ab Appii
   Foro hora quarta: dederam aliam paullo ante Tribus Tabernis.'--Cicero,
   ad Atticum, ii. 10.

   [216] Acts, xxviii. 15: ohus idon ho Paulos eucharistesas to theo
   elaben tharsos;

   [217] It is generally admitted that the words ho hekatontarchos
   paredoke tous desmious to stratopedarche, though wanting in A B, formed
   part of the original text.

   [218] Berlin. Akad. Sitzungsberichte, 1895, pp. 501 ff; Ramsay, St.
   Paul the Traveller, pp. 315 and 347-8.

   [219] Ramsay quotes Pliny, Ep. iii. 16, as relating that when Paetus
   was brought a prisoner from Illyricum to Rome his wife Arria, despite
   her entreaties, was not allowed to accompany him, but he was permitted
   to take certain slaves to wait on him, and he raises the question
   whether Luke and Aristarchus may not have voluntarily accompanied Paul
   in the capacity of slaves.

   [220] St. Luke (Acts xxviii. 23) speaks of the place where St. Paul
   received the Jewish leaders as he xenia, and appears to distinguish it
   from to misthoma, the hired lodging in which he spent the next two
   years (Acts xxviii. 30). xenia suggests a room in a friend's house.
   Comp. Philem. 22 and Acts xxi. 16.

   [221] The literae dimissoriae or apostoli stated the simple fact of the
   claim made by the appellant. When the appeal was made to the Emperor,
   the letter was called relatio. The report thus sent included all the
   depositions necessary for the elucidation of the case. Buss, Roman Law
   and the Hist. of the N.T. p. 399. Usually there were two Praetorian
   Prefects, but since 52 A.D. Sextus Afranius Burrhus had held the sole
   command. His appointment was due to Agrippina, who wished to have a man
   she could trust at the head of the Praetorian Guard on the death of
   Claudius. He was a worthy, straightforward man, who with Seneca
   exercised a great influence for good upon Nero during the first five
   years of his reign, the quinquennium Neronis, which the Emperor Trajan
   is reported to have praised above any other period in the reigns of his
   predecessors. Burrus was shortly after his to fall into disfavour. He
   died in 62 A.D. Some said he was poisoned by the Emperor, and his death
   was followed by Seneca's retirement. After Burrhus' death two
   Praetorian Prefects were appointed, one of them the notorious Sofonius
   Tigellinus, a cruel, venal, and vicious man, who pandered to all Nero's
   lusts and extravagances.

   [222] Romans, i. 15, 16.

   [223] Rom. ix. 1-3; x. 1.

   [224] Acts, xxviii. 17-21.

   [225] The passage quoted Is. vi. 9, 10 is remarkable as having been
   spoken at least twice by our Lord in regard to the Jewish reception of
   His message, St. Matt. xiii. 14, St. Mark iv. 12, St. Luke viii. 10 and
   St. John xii. 40. St. Paul used it of Israel's rejection of the Gospel
   in his Epistle to the Romans (Rom. xi. 8) as here.

   [226] Acts, xxviii. 30, 31. Comp. St. Luke, xxiv. 50-53, Acts, cc. i.
   and ii. Ramsay holds that, in the expression ton proton logon trans.
   R.V. the former treatise' with the first' in the margin; St. Luke did
   not use proton as an equivalent for proteron If this were the case, the
   first' may be regarded as implying, in addition to a second treatise,
   also a third. Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, pp. 27-28. See also his
   Article in Expositor, March 1913, pp. 268-70, 281-4.

   [227] Col. iv. 3; Eph. vi. 19, 20.

   [228] Col. iv. 18; Philemon 8-13, 19, 22.

   [229] Aristarchus, Col. iv. 10, Philem. 23. Luke, Col. iv. 14, Philem.
   23. Epaphras, Col. i. 7, iv. 12, Philem. 23. Timothy, Col. i. 1,
   Philem, 1. Tychicus, Col. iv. 7, 8, Eph. vi. 21, 22. Onesimus, Col. iv.
   9, Philem. 10. Mark, Col. iv. 10, Philem. 23.

   [230] Bigg, Internat. Commentary, Epistles of St. Peter and St. Jude,
   pp. 73-4.

   [231] Col. ii. 1.

   [232] Eus. Hist. Eccl. ii. 16. 24. Also in the Hieronymian version of
   Eusebius' Chronicle; Schöne, ii. 155; Lipsius, Die Apokryphen
   Apostelgeschichten und Apostellegenden, ii. 2nd half, p. 322 ff.

   [233] Periodoi Barnaba, c. 26 (Tischendorf, p. 73). Mark is supposed to
   be the narrator. elthontes de epi ton aigialon [of the village Limnes
   in Cyprus] heuromen ploion Aiguption kai anelthontes eis auto
   katechthemen en Alexandreia kakei emeina ego didaskon tous echomenous
   adelphous . . . . .

   [234] Eus. Hist. Eccl. ii. 24.

   [235] The Actus Petri Vercellenses are portions of the Periodoi Petrou
   which formed the basis of the Clementine Recognitions and Homilies,
   found in the Latin Cod. Vercellensis. See Lipsius, vol. ii. 1st half,
   pp. 174 ff; also vol. ii. 2nd half, p. 272. Speaking of the departure
   of Paul into Spain the passage runs praeterea quod non esset Romae
   Paulus neque Timotheus neque Barnabas, quoniam in Macedoniam missi
   erant a Paulo.'

   [236] Tim. i. 19, 20; vi. 12-14; 2 Tim. ii. 11; comp. Heb. xiii. 23.

   [237] Phil. ii. 11; comp. 2 Tim. iv. 9-11.

   [238] Phil. ii. 19-30.

   [239] Phil. i. 12-15. See Lightfoot, Epist. to Philippians, pp. 97-102;
   Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller, pp. 356-360; Expositor, March 1913, pp.
   277-80.

   [240] Phil. i. 19-25; also ii. 17 and 24.

   [241] The supposition that Paul at this time was in no lack of
   financial resources is fully borne out by the language of the passage
   in which be expresses his gratitude to the Philippians for their kindly
   thought in providing for his necessities. His words are quite plain on
   this point: Not that I speak in respect of want,' and again: Not that I
   seek for the gift, but I seek for the fruit that increaseth to your
   account. But I have all things and abound: I am filled, having received
   from Epaphroditus the things that came from you. . . .' The whole
   passage is worth careful study. Phil. iv. 10-20.

   [242] Phil. i. 14-18; iii. 2, 3.

   [243] Phil. iv. 3: gnesie sunzuge; ii. 20: oudena gar echo isopsuchon,
   hostis gnesios ta peri humon merimnesei; 1 Tim. 1: Timotheo gnesio
   tekno en pistei.

   [244] Supra, p. 26.

   [245] The very remarkable coincidence in thought and phrase between the
   writings of Seneca and Paul led to a tradition arising of actual
   intercourse between them, and even of Seneca having secretly become a
   Christian. Ithas been shown conclusively by Lightfoot (in his
   Commentary on the Epistle to the Philippians) and others that there are
   no grounds for such a supposition. It is however possible that he may
   have heard of St. Paul from Burrhus, from his brother Gallio, or
   others, and have been interested in a man whose language and moral
   sentiments were in certain respects so closely akin to his own. As
   Seneca was Consul suffectus during Paul's imprisonment he must have had
   some acquaintance with the case. That a member of the Annaean gens in
   the next century was a Christian seems to be proved by an inscription
   discovered at Ostia in January 1887. D. M.
   M. ANNIO
   PAVLO PETRO
   M. ANNEVS PAVLVS
   FILIO CARISSIMO See Lanciant, Pagan and Christian Rome, p. 17.

   [246] Clement, 1 Ep. to Car. c. v.: epi to terma tes duseos. Murat.
   Canon, lines 37, 38: Sed profectione Pauli ab urbe ad Spaniam
   proficiscentis.' There was a law of Claudius, which permitted the
   discharge of a prisoner if the prosecutors did not put in an appearance
   after a certain time. Dion Cassius, lx. 28.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   LECTURE V.

   1 Peter iv. 16: If a man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed,
   but let him glorify God in this name.'

   The reasons that were given at the close of the last lecture for
   holding that St. Paul was released from his bonds and left Rome at the
   beginning of the year 62 A.D. are greatly strengthened by the
   consideration of certain facts recorded by Josephus. He tells us that
   during the short procuratorship of Festus a serious quarrel had arisen
   between King Agrippa and the priestly party at Jerusalem. Agrippa had
   built a lofty tower to his palace, from the top of which he was able to
   overlook the Temple courts. This the Jews bitterly resented, and in
   their turn erected a high wall to block out the view. Agrippa thereupon
   applied to Festus, who at first commanded the Jews to pull down the
   wall and then, fearing an outbreak of violence, afterwards permitted
   them to send an embassy to lay the matter before Caesar. This embassy
   consisted of twelve persons headed by the High Priest Ishmael, son of
   Fabi, and Hilkiah the treasurer. The probable date of their arrival in
   Rome was April or May, 62 A.D., for Festus died in the spring of this
   year. Nero had just married his mistress, the beautiful and profligate
   Poppaea Sabina, to satisfy whose ambition he had first divorced his
   long-suffering wife Octavia and was within a few weeks to order her
   murder. Now Poppaea was, if not actually a Jewish proselyte, one of
   that outer circle of adherents to Judaism known as God-fearers.' Her
   influence with the Emperor was now exerted on behalf of the Jewish
   embassy, with the result that Nero decided in their favour. Ishmael and
   Hilkiah were, however, retained at Rome as hostages, a very necessary
   precaution, for Agrippa on hearing the news had at once deposed Ishmael
   from the High Priesthood, and Jerusalem was in a very disturbed state.
   [247] Had these two men been in Rome at the time of Paul's trial, they
   would have been important witnesses in support of the charges against
   him, and it would not have been difficult with the help of Poppaea to
   secure his condemnation. [248]

   The growth of a bitter feeling of hostility between the Jews and the
   new Christian sect which had sprung up out of their midst was in this
   sixth decade of the first century becoming more accentuated. The men of
   the synagogues hated this new faith, which had for a number of years
   found shelter under the protection of the privileges accorded to
   Judaism, as a religio licita, throughout the empire, but which by its
   principle of universalism struck a blow at the very foundations of
   Judaic exclusiveness. And it was against the Jewish converts, much more
   than against the far larger number of Gentiles who had embraced the
   Gospel, that their anger was especially directed. The Jewish Christians
   were in the eyes of their orthodox fellow-countrymen traitors to their
   race and to the traditions of their fathers. Hence the vindictive spite
   with which St. Paul was pursued, and the fierce outburst of fanaticism
   at Jerusalem which in this very spring of 62 A.D. had led to the
   stoning of St. James the Just. [249] The animosity of the Roman Jews
   was probably much less pronounced than that of the fierce priestly
   fanatics in Judaea, but they would naturally be anxious not to add to
   the hatred and contempt in which they were held by all classes of the
   population of Rome, by allowing public opinion to regard Christianity
   as a mere sect of Judaism. [250] About this time it is certain that the
   distinction between Jew and Christian began to be generally recognised,
   and rumours to spread abroad, which probably had their origin in Jewish
   malice, by which the Christians were accused of holding impious orgies
   and horrible Thyestean feasts and of being a secret society of
   anarchists and criminals. It is not difficult to see that such slanders
   might be based upon distorted versions of Christian teaching, of the
   baptism of infants in the Catacombs, and of the nocturnal meetings of
   the brethren for the holding of the Agape meal and the partaking of the
   Eucharist. [251]

   The exact date of the last visit of St. Peter to Rome cannot be fixed
   with certainty, but a number of considerations point to the year 63
   A.D. as the time of his arrival. That St. Peter was martyred in Rome
   towards the end of the reign of Nero is a fact, as I have previously
   shown, established by overwhelming evidence. [252] That he resided
   there for some length of time before his death is witnessed to by a
   weight of tradition which only prejudice and prepossession can put on
   one side, as without evidential value. By some curious perversity of
   critical aberration it was precisely the Ebionite fictions, which have
   come down to us in the 3rd century pseudo-Clementine literature, which
   Baur and Lipsius and their followers adopted as historical, accepting
   their representation of Peter and Paul as the heads of two rival and
   hostile Christian factions and as passing their lives in continuous and
   acute conflict, while rejecting the tradition universally accepted in
   every part of the Christian world for fifteen centuries, which regarded
   these two Apostles as the joint founders of the Roman Church, working
   in harmony for the common cause, and sealing their testimony by death
   in the city where both alike spent their last days. This Tübingen
   theory, worked out with much literary ingenuity and all the resources
   of erudition, had for some decades a great vogue, but being
   fundamentally false it could not live long when tested by the results
   of scientific archaeological research, and has at length been
   practically abandoned. Christian archaeology indeed has during the past
   half century made giant strides, especially at Rome itself, and the
   accumulating evidence furnished by the excavations and explorations in
   the Catacombs and elsewhere has been most illuminating, and tends more
   and more by the testimony of still existing monuments, tombs, and
   inscriptions to verify the general correctness of early Christian
   tradition. [253]

   St. Peter's final sojourn in Rome has a permanent record in the first
   Epistle bearing his name, which is from the historian's standpoint a
   document of the utmost value. Its authenticity was never questioned in
   ancient times and the external witness to its genuineness is
   unimpeachable. [254] If on subjective grounds doubts have been thrown
   on its authorship, its date and the place from which it was written, it
   has been simply because its contents, being on the face of them that
   which they claimed to be--Petrine, Neronian, and Roman--naturally
   clashed with theories which denied to it any of these attributes. With
   the death and burial of the Tübingen fictions, let it be hoped that the
   doubts about the genuineness of this Epistle may also find decent
   interment.

   The salutation of the Epistle is addressed to the elect sojourners of
   the Dispersion, in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, in
   other words to the Jewish Christians scattered throughout the four
   Roman provinces (for Pontus and Bithynia formed one province) which lay
   north and west of the Taurus mountain range. [255] This region then, it
   may be assumed, had been the scene of Peter's missionary labours for a
   number of years before the visit to Rome during which the epistle was
   written. Taken in conjunction with the strong body of evidence from
   other sources for a residence of St. Peter in Rome during the latter
   part of Nero's reign, [256] and with the internal evidence of the
   epistle itself--that it was written in that city during the earlier
   stages of the persecution which followed the great fire of 64 A.D., the
   words of ch. v. v. 13, the Church (or the sister) which is in Babylon
   elect together with you saluteth you,' are not difficult of
   interpretation. To Jewish readers the term Babylon, as symbolically and
   figuratively connoting the great city of oppression and corruption on
   the Tiber, was, if one may judge by the use made of it in the
   Apocalypse, so familiar as to be at once intelligible. The 5th book of
   the Sibylline Oracles, in a passage of Jewish origin referring to the
   misdeeds of Nero, and possibly written not long after the fall of
   Jerusalem, likewise employs the name Babylon for Rome simply and
   directly, as St. Peter does. [257]

   The epistle is remarkable for the extent of its indebtedness to other
   New Testament writings, and especially to those of St. Pau1. [258]
   There is no lack of originality in either thought or diction in this
   essentially Petrine document, but St. Peter's mind appears to have been
   one of those that absorbed what he had heard or read so completely that
   he reproduced it almost unconsciously, and yet in reproducing
   transformed the borrowed phrase or idea, so as to make it his very own.
   It is peculiarly interesting to note that this Epistle plainly
   testifies that the Apostle was intimately acquainted with those two
   great epistles of St. Paul, the Epistles to the Romans and to the
   Ephesians, [259] and that he was deeply impressed by them. This being
   so, it follows not only that there was at this time no opposition
   between Peter and Paul, such as fills the foreground of Christian
   Baur's imaginative representation of the relations between the two men,
   but that any earlier divergencies of view had been replaced by the
   closest agreement and by practical identity in the general character of
   their teaching. Further the fact that the language of these two
   Epistles, Ephesians and Romans, should have been thus fresh in the
   memory of St. Peter, when dictating his own letter, is one of those
   undesigned coincidences which afford the strongest circumstantial proof
   that the historical setting is in exact accordance with that
   traditional interpretation of documentary evidence which I have been
   endeavouring to show is the correct interpretation. St. Paul, as we
   have seen, had sent from Rome in 61 A.D. an Epistle to the Church in
   Colossae and another circular epistle, commonly called the Epistle to
   the Ephesians, but in reality addressed to a whole group of Asian
   Churches. In the Epistle to Colossae the Apostle in sending the
   salutation of Mark, the cousin of Barnabas, who was then with him
   states that he (Mark) was about to visit them, and he gives to him his
   commendation. [260] St. Peter in writing, also from Rome, to these same
   Asian Churches a few years later adds to the salutation from the Church
   that of Marcus my son.' [261] Now St. Peter, according to the opening
   passage of his Epistle, had been working himself in Asia Minor in the
   years preceding this last Roman visit. The natural inference therefrom
   is that Mark had, while journeying through those Churches to which the
   Epistle of the Ephesians had been sent, joined himself to his old
   chief, and then accompanied him once again to Rome, as his interpreter.
   The many references to the Epistle to the Ephesians by St. Peter in
   these circumstances are not more than what might reasonably be
   expected. Moreover in. Christian Rome, the Apostle on his arrival so
   soon after Paul's release would find himself in a Pauline atmosphere,
   and being a man keenly susceptible to influences from without,
   familiarity with the Epistle to the Romans could scarcely fail to
   exercise that profound effect upon his mind which is reflected in his
   utterances. But not only was Mark a living bond between the two
   Apostles at this period; the concluding paragraph of this Epistle seems
   to imply that Silvanus also, Paul's former missionary associate, had
   been with Peter in Asia Minor, that he had accompanied him to Rome,
   that he was now acting as his amanuensis in writing his epistle to the
   Churches of the Dispersion, and that he was destined to be its bearer.
   The words through Silvanus, a faithful brother in my judgement, have I
   written to you briefly' stand at the beginning of the short postscript
   to the epistle, which was in all probability written by St. Peter in
   his own hand, and it has been taken to signify that in the body of the
   epistle the more cultured scribe was allowed more or less a free hand
   in putting into literary form the rough-hewn Greek which fell from the
   lips of the Apostle. [262]

   An event took place when St. Peter was in Rome, but some months before
   he wrote his Epistle, which was fraught with terrible consequences to
   the Christians. On July 19, 64 A.D., a fire broke out at the end of the
   Great Circus adjoining the Palatine and Caelian Hills, amidst shops
   containing inflammable wares. For nine days the conflagration raged,
   with most disastrous results. Of the fourteen districts into which Rome
   was divided, four only escaped uninjured, three were totally destroyed,
   in the other seven only a few scarred and half-ruined houses remained.
   Nero was at Antium at the time, but he hurried to Rome only to see his
   own palace buildings on the Palatine and Esquiline, filled with works
   of art, consumed by the flames. From 400,000 to 500,000 persons found
   themselves homeless and most of them destitute. The Emperor threw
   himself with energy into the formidable work of dealing with such an
   emergency. He opened to the people the Campus Martins, the public
   buildings of Agrippa and his own gardens, where he erected temporary
   shelters for the homeless. He brought up supplies of corn and lowered
   the price. The Sibylline Oracles were consulted and propitiations
   offered to the Gods. But in spite of all these acts, which should have
   won him popularity, manifold rumours were soon afloat attributing the
   fire to incendiaries carrying out Nero's own orders. It was commonly
   believed that he wished the ancient city to be burnt down, with its
   dark, narrow, close-packed streets in order that he might build a new
   one to be called after his own name. [263]

   The work of rebuilding in any case was one in which he delighted and on
   which he lavished vast sums of money. Broad, well-built streets of
   stone brought from the quarries of Gabii and Alba, with long
   colonnades, replaced the narrow and tortuous alleys which had
   disappeared. Above all he now appropriated an immense area for the
   erection of a magnificent palace for himself, to which the name of the
   Domus Aurea was given, surrounded by open fields, woods and lakes, in
   which nature and art vied with each other in creating a scene of
   perfect sylvan beauty. All this is told us by Tacitus, who then
   proceeds to describe the effect upon the public mind of all this
   activity on the part of the Emperor:--but neither man's efforts to give
   relief, nor the largess of the prince, nor the propitiations of the
   Gods were able to dissipate belief in the sinister report that the fire
   had been ordered. Wherefore to efface the rumour, Nero contrived that
   accusations should be brought against a set of people hated for their
   abominations, whom the populace called Christians, and subjected them
   to the most exquisite torments. The author of this name, one Christus,
   had in the reign of Tiberius been executed by the procurator Pontius
   Pilatus; and the pernicious superstition, though repressed for the
   moment, began to break out afresh, not only in Judaea, the origin of
   that evil, but also in Rome, where all things horrible and shameful
   from every quarter collect together and are practised.' [264]

   With these sentences Tacitus begins the famous passage, so full of
   difficult and debateable points, in which he describes the Neronian
   persecution of the Christians. Before, however, proceeding further, and
   as a necessary preliminary to any detailed consideration of the passage
   as a whole, I wish to point out what seems to me a fundamental error on
   the part of almost every writer upon the subject: the error of
   connecting the criminal process set on foot by Nero against the
   Christians, and its culmination in the horrible fete in the Vatican
   Gardens too closely with the Great Fire, either as regards the time or
   the character of the charges. Most writers assume that the Christians
   were accused of being incendiaries almost as soon as the last flames
   were extinguished, and that the Vatican holocaust took place in the
   month of August 64 A.D. Now such a supposition runs directly counter to
   the Tacitean narrative and derives no support from any other source.

   The section of Book XV of the Annals' comprising seven chapters (38-44)
   forms a continuous story and treats of a considerable interval of time.
   The words wherefore to efface the rumour' . . . are in strict
   dependence on the sentence that precedes them--but neither man's
   efforts to give relief, nor the largesses of the prince, nor the
   propitiations of the Gods were able to dissipate belief in the sinister
   report that the fire had been ordered.' With the utmost distinctness
   and clearness of which language is capable Tacitus here declares that
   Nero did not try to shift odium from himself by inflaming odium against
   the Christians, until he had exhausted all the means for gaining
   popularity and diverting the suspicions of the crowd, which the
   historian has just recapitulated. Now it is simply impossible that the
   gigantic administrative task, first, of providing food and temporary
   shelter for some hundreds of thousands' of homeless and destitute
   persons, and, afterwards, of clearing away the ruins and debris of so
   vast a conflagration, of laying out and planning new and spacious
   streets and of setting to work to build them with stone brought from
   distant quarries, can have been carried out in less than five or six
   months. In all probability the Emperor did not give instructions for
   the prosecution of the Christians until the early part of 65 A.D.

   It is no objection that the whole of this section (i.e. cc. 38-44) is
   included in what appears to be the Tacitean narrative of the events of
   the year 64, while the account of the happenings of the year 65 begins
   at chapter 48. It is the ordinary practice of this historian thus to
   group together so as to form a single and complete episode in his
   narrative a series of events having close connexion with one another
   but really spread over a considerable space of time. A conspicuous
   instance occurs in the account of the Pisonian conspiracy and its
   suppression, which follows that of the fire and fills the last
   twenty-six chapters of Book XV. The history of the year 65 seems to
   begin in chapter 48 with the words Silius Nerva and Atticus Vestinus
   then enter on the consulship, when a conspiracy was begun and at once
   gathered strength, into which senators, knights, soldiers even women
   had vied with one another in giving in their names, partly through
   hatred of Nero, partly through a liking for C. Piso.' [265] But Tacitus
   in thus writing had apparently forgotten that he had already spoken of
   the conspiracy of Piso as being in existence in the year 63 A.D., and
   it is evident therefore that the narrative of the growth of the plot
   given in chapters 48 to 53 covers the whole intervening period. The
   statement that one of the leaders, Subrius Flavus, had formed a sudden
   resolution to attack Nero when his house was in flames and he was
   running hither and thither unattended in the darkness' shows that as
   far back as the crisis of the conflagration the Emperor only escaped by
   the lack of nerve of his would-be assailant. It will thus be seen that,
   while seeming to compress the rise and fall of the Pisonian conspiracy
   into the first few months of 65 A.D., Tacitus is really telling of the
   long-drawn-out drama of some two or three years. The two sections
   therefore of the Annals,' (1) that dealing with the fire, the
   rebuilding and the persecution, and (2) that which treats of the doings
   of the conspirators after the failure of Subrius Flavus, are
   overlapping narratives and really contemporary. What influenced Nero at
   this juncture to select the Christians as his victims can only be
   conjectured. Possibly the suspicions of the Roman crowd had fallen upon
   the Jews, the objects at once of their detestation and contempt, as
   being incendiaries, partly because their own Ghetto across the Tiber
   was one of the few uninjured quarters of the city, and partly because
   the hated race were at that time in especial favour at the Court. The
   Jews on their part, alarmed at being the objects of popular anger,
   would not be slow to use the influence of Poppaea with the Emperor, and
   to suggest that the blame should be thrown on the Christians, a sect
   from which they were anxious to be dissociated and on which they would
   be only too glad to wreak their spite. [266] A plausible reason would
   easily be found in distorted versions of the utterances of Christian
   prophets' and preachers concerning that approaching destruction of the
   world by fire, in which all Christians at that time firmly believed.
   However this may have been, the charge of incendiarism, if ever
   preferred, was only a pretext; it was as malefactors and criminals that
   the Christians suffered. An examination of the extant authorities will,
   I think, bear out this contention.

   In the first place comes the all-important passage of Tacitus (xv. 44),
   a part of which has been already given. After his reference to the
   origin of Christianity he continues thus: those therefore who confessed
   were first brought to trial, afterwards by the information derived from
   them, an immense multitude were joined with them, not so much for the
   crime of incendiarism, as for hatred of the human race. To their deaths
   mockeries were added, so that covered by the skins of wild beasts they
   were torn to pieces by dogs and perished or were affixed to crosses or
   set on fire and, when day had fallen, were burnt so as to serve as an
   illumination for the night. Nero had offered his gardens for the
   spectacle, and was exhibiting a public show in the circus. He mingled
   with the people in the dress of a charioteer, standing in a car. Hence
   compassion began to arise, although towards criminals deserving the
   extremest forms of punishment, on the ground that they were destroyed
   not for the public good but to gratify a single man's savage cruelty.'
   [267]

   Since the publication of Mommsen's article Der Religionsfrevel nach
   römische Recht' in 1894, [268] the views of the writer, as the greatest
   authority upon the history of the early Empire, gained wide acceptance,
   and have now a large and growing number of adherents. According to this
   view stated briefly the early persecutions of the Christians were mere
   matters of police and were dealt with by the summary powers, coercitio,
   possessed by the executive magistrates at Rome and by the governors,
   proconsuls, procurators and their deputies, in the provinces. Now the
   subject of this article is in no sense specially the Neronian
   persecution or the interpretation of the passage of Tacitus which we
   are considering. It is a paper of a general character, dealing with
   what I may call the normal procedure of the Roman State in its
   treatment of religious offences, and no doubt it gives a perfectly
   correct account of the ordinary repressive measures which were
   continually being exercised against the Christians, as Christians,
   certainly after the time of Trajan's rescript, but to some extent
   during the whole of the FIavian period also. [269] But the Neronian
   persecution was not a normal repressive measure, such as those with
   which Mommsen is concerned. The persecution of 65 A.D. was the first
   act of hostility of the Roman State against those professing the
   Christian faith, and it was the personal act of the Emperor himself. No
   one can read Chapter 44 of Book XV of the Annals' without admitting
   this. From first to last Tacitus lays stress upon the personal part
   taken by Nero in the whole of the proceedings. The account opens with
   the statement Ergo abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos et quaesitissimis
   poenis adfecit, quos per flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos
   appellabat,' and in the closing scene hortos suos ei spectaculo Nero
   obtulerat.' That in the popular view Nero was the prime mover
   throughout could scarcely be more strongly expressed than in the words
   in saevitiam unius.'

   The evidence of Suetonius is scarcely less direct. His biography of
   Nero strikes a kind of balance between the praiseworthy and beneficent
   deeds of the Emperor and the much longer list of black crimes and
   histrionic follies, apparently with the object of showing that the
   latter far outweigh the former. Among the good and commendable deeds
   comes the brief notice--the Christians, a race of men holding a strange
   and noxious superstition, were visited with punishments.' [270] The
   impious sect was only worthy of mention because the severity of their
   punishment reflected a certain measure of personal credit upon Nero's
   administration. That of Tertullian is remarkable. In his Apology' to
   the Emperor Septimus Severus he writes: Consult your records
   [commentarios]; there you will find Nero first savagely attacked with
   Caesarean sword this sect then rising chiefly at Rome. But of such an
   initiator of our condemnation we are even proud. For he who knows that
   man can understand that nothing except what is great and good was
   condemned by Nero.' Again in the Scorpion'--we have read the lives of
   the Caesars; Nero was the first to stain with blood the rising faith at
   Rome.' [271] Tertullian was himself a jurist learned in the law, and as
   the quotations above testify, he bases his statements and arguments
   upon documentary evidence, both the works of historians and state
   records. Since, therefore, the Emperor personally initiated the
   persecution of the Christians in 64-65 A.D.--ergo abolendo rumori Nero
   subdidit reos,' as Tacitus says--the trial must have taken place in the
   imperial court presided over in the Emperor's absence by the Pretorian
   prefects and their assessors of the Imperial Council. [272] Probably in
   this matter Tigellinus took the leading part; the character of the
   final tragedy in the Vatican Gardens was quite in accord with what we
   are told of the fiendish ingenuity of his cruelty. There is abundant
   evidence to show that Tigellinus after 62 A.D. was not merely the
   instigator of many of Nero's crimes but the active and merciless agent
   in the execution of them. [273]

   If Nero then, in the course of the winter months of 64-65 A.D., by his
   personal initiative brought the Christians to trial before his court,
   knowing them to be held in general odium for their crimes, in order to
   divert public attention from the widely accredited rumour that it was
   by his secret orders that the city had been set on fire, let us now
   proceed to examine the highly condensed and somewhat enigmatic
   narrative of Tacitus with the view of further investigating the
   character of the charges brought against the accused. In the first
   place let us clear our minds of a misapprehension. Negatively they were
   not accused of having had any hand in the actual conflagration of July,
   64 A.D. Not a single writer, Christian or pagan, who refers to the
   Neronian persecution ever suggests that it had any connexion with the
   fire, with the single exception of the late fourth-century
   chronographer, Sulpicius Severus, who, however, contents himself with
   an almost slavish reproduction of Tacitus. [274] Neither Tertullian nor
   Orosius, who were well acquainted with the works of Tacitus and with
   other documentary sources no longer accessible to us, shows any sign of
   being aware of any correlation between the charges against the
   Christians and the burning of Rome. [275] There is not a trace in the
   contemporary writings--1 Peter, Hebrews, the Apocalypse or 1
   Clement--that such an accusation was made.

   This being so, what then is the meaning of those therefore who
   confessed were first brought to trial, afterwards by the information
   derived from them an immense multitude were joined with them, not so
   much for the crime of incendiarism as for hatred of the human race'?
   Now in the first place it is surely plain that had any Christians
   confessed to the crime of setting fire to Rome in July, 64 A.D., and
   had they implicated the general body of their fellow-Christians in
   their guilt, there would have been no need of any subsidiary charges;
   exemplary punishment would have been summary and immediate, and Nero's
   name would at once have been freed from the stigma that rested upon it.
   But it was not freed. There is something approaching unanimity in the
   verdict of the writers of succeeding centuries (for Tacitus scarcely
   conceals what was his personal opinion) in ascribing the fire to Nero,
   and what is more important for our present contention of contemporaries
   also. The above-named Subrius Flavus, a tribune of the Pretorian guard,
   when on his trial before Nero, as a conspirator, in April 65 A.D., did
   not scruple to tell the Emperor to his face that he was an incendiary,
   and Tacitus is at pains to state I have given the man's very words.'
   [276] Pliny the Elder also, in his Natural History' published before 79
   A.D., writing upon the longevity of certain trees remarks that they
   lasted until the fires of the Emperor Nero with which he burnt the
   city. . . ,' and he concludes in words that leave not the smallest
   doubt as to his conviction in this matter, They would have remained
   afterwards by cultivation green and young had not that Prince hastened
   the death even of trees.' [277]

   The incendiarism of which the Christians were accused and of which they
   made open confession was an incendiarism in will not yet realised, but
   in their firm and absolute conviction immediately to come, and
   meanwhile eagerly watched for and desired. In Christian circles this
   one belief during the early decades of the second half of the first
   century overpowered all others, and transformed all men's ideas and
   their outlook upon life, that the second Advent of Christ was at hand,
   and it would be preceded by the destruction by fire of the world and
   with it the great city of Rome. In every part of the New Testament
   there are evidences that the Christians of the period with which we are
   dealing expected that the end of all things' [278] would be consummated
   in their own lifetime, and the Apocalyptic literature of the time
   dwells not only upon the fire which was to burn up the world and all
   its wickedness, but also upon the sign that the final judgment was at
   hand, by the appearance in bodily form of Antichrist, the incarnation
   of Belial or Satan, and there is evidence to show that the enormities
   of Nero had before the end of his reign led Christians to identify him
   as Antichrist personified. [279] The open expression of such views at
   such a time would not escape the notice of Tigellinus' secret police,
   and the offenders, no doubt, when arrested (exactly as Tacitus reports)
   made no attempt to deny or explain away the language they had used.
   Confessing that they were Christians and that a belief in the
   approaching destruction by fire of wicked Rome and of the world of
   which it was the head was to them as Christians an article of faith, it
   is easy to see how by their information' the whole body of Christians
   became included in the accusation. That afterwards under torture some
   of the more weak-kneed prisoners may have turned traitors and furnished
   the government with the names and meeting-places of their fellow
   disciples, and in the stress of agony may even have given false
   evidence concerning the crimes with which popular opinion charged them,
   is not impossible. The language of the Epistle to the Hebrews rather
   supports such an hypothesis, as do certain passages of The Shepherd' of
   Hermas. [280] The proceedings against the Christians for the use of
   language threatening a coming judgment upon the world and its
   destruction by fire can be paralleled by the account given by
   Philostratus of the visit of the sophist and wonder-worker, Apollonius
   of Tyana, to Rome in 66 A.D. We read how Tigellinus, who controlled the
   sword of Nero, expelled from Rome' the cynic Demetrius, a friend of
   Apollonius, for destroying the Baths by his language, and secretly he
   [Tigellinus] began to keep his eye on Apollonius against the time when
   he should say something unguardedly that could be taken hold of. . . .
   All the eyes that Government sees with were turned to scrutinise him:
   his discourses or his silences; his sitting or walking; what he ate and
   with whom--all was reported. . . .' Finally, we read a little further
   on that Apollonius was overheard saying concerning the Emperor: Pardon
   the gods for taking pleasure in buffoons,' and on this being reported.
   Tigellinus sent officers to arrest him, and he had to defend himself on
   a charge of sacrilege against Nero.' The representation here given of
   the power and methods of procedure of Tigellinus and of the action that
   he took in the year 66 in regard to Apollonius and his companion
   furnishes us with the means of filling in with detail the story of what
   happened to the Christians in the preceding year told by Tacitus in
   barest and briefest outline. [281]

   The offences with which the Christians were charged under Nero appear
   to have been, according to Tacitus, of the same character as those of
   which Pliny the Younger speaks in his famous letter from Bithynia to
   the Emperor Trajan, as the crimes adhering to the name,' [282] and
   which we find described in the writings of the second-century Christian
   Apologists, perhaps more succinctly than any other by Athenagoras
   (about 177 A.D.), who writes Three things are alleged against us:
   Atheism, Thyestean feasts, Oedipodean intercourse.' The refusal to take
   part in the ceremonies or to recognise the gods of the national
   religion constituted the crime of Atheism. The secret assemblies, the
   bringing of children to them for the rite of baptism, the words of
   consecration in the Holy Eucharist, the salutation with a holy kiss,'
   were travestied by the enemies of Christianity into charges of murder,
   cannibalism, and promiscuous intercourse, which were accepted as true
   by public opinion already in the days of Nero, and which still remained
   a fixed article of popular belief and execration when Tertullian wrote
   his Apology' about a century and a half later. [283] These were the
   flagitia to which Tacitus attaches the epithets atrocia and pudenda,
   abominations horrible and shameful.

   That the Christians were also condemned for the crime of magic' may he
   inferred from the fact that their religion is styled by Tacitus a most
   pernicious superstition--exitiabilis superstitio--and by Suetonius a
   strange and maleficent superstition -- superstitio nova ac malefica --
   (the word maleficus having juristically the special signification of a
   magician or sorcerer), and the punishment in the Vatican Gardens was
   that specially assigned to those convicted of practising magical arts.
   [284]

   The crime of hatred of the human race,' however, was the charge which
   included all these other accusations, and henceforth during the
   succeeding centuries was to render the mere name of Christian a
   sufficient ground for summary punishment. This charge, as we have seen,
   may have originated in the suggestions of Jewish malice, sustained by
   the reports which no doubt reached the ears of the authorities--through
   the agency of some of that host of spies and informers (delatores)
   employed by Tigellinus--of the incendiary discourses in which certain
   noxious religious fanatics, called Christians by the populace, were
   openly expressing their belief in the imminent destruction of the world
   and its inhabitants by fire without any concealment of the joyful
   anticipation with which they awaited the Divine judgment that was
   impending over a city which was in their eyes the home of iniquity and
   of every sort of blasphemy. But when those first arrested were brought
   before the magistrates it was soon found that the fiery words of these
   enthusiasts were not nearly so damning as the principles in which they
   gloried and which forbade them to recognise the national gods or the
   religion of the Roman people, or to take part in any of the public
   religious ceremonies or spectacles, or in that worship of the genius of
   Caesar, who was the personification of the state. Thus that law of
   maiestas, which in the reign of Tiberius had been such a powerful
   instrument for the assertion of the imperial authority, and which after
   a period of disuse had been revived by Nero in 62 A.D., to be during
   this very spring of 65 A.D. employed by him with such terrible effect
   in securing the condemnation of those implicated rightly or wrongly in
   the Pisonian conspiracy, was no less a ready implement in the hands of
   Tigellinus for striking at the humbler Christians as enemies of the
   Roman state. It is of this lex de maiestate that Tertullian writes in
   his appeal ad Nationes' (c. 7) under Nero condemnation [of this Name]
   was firmly established.' And a few lines further on, Although all his
   other acts were rescinded this Neronian ordinance alone remained
   permanent.' [285] Henceforth the mere confession that he was a
   Christian rendered a man an outlaw. It has been argued that the name of
   Christian' was not yet in common use in the days of Nero, and that
   Tacitus and Suetonius being writers of the second century may have
   employed the term proleptically. Apart from the fact that both these
   historians drew their material from contemporary sources, St. Peter in
   his first epistle, which, as we hold, was written while the Neronian
   persecution was gathering force, distinctly says If a man suffer as a
   Christian let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this
   Name,' and, the Acts of the Apostles already completed before 62 A.D.,
   it testifies not only that the word was popularly used in Antioch about
   40 A.D., but that it was familiar to a man in the position of King
   Agrippa in 59 A.D. With the constant intercourse between Antioch and
   the capital, the nickname would be carried to Rome probably quicker
   than to any other place, and the familiar Latin form of the word would
   be speedily popularised even so early as the time of Claudius. [286]
   Pliny in his letter to Trajan most clearly points out that condemnation
   of Christians for the name only was already of long standing in 112
   A.D. His chief object in writing to the Emperor was to know whether he
   was to punish for the Name itself, if crimes were wanting, or for the
   crimes adhering to the Name.' [287]

   Let us now see how far the evidence from contemporary Christian sources
   confirms that derived from Pagan authorities of a later date. That of
   the 1st Epistle of St. Peter has already been quoted to show that in 65
   A.D. Christians were punished for the name. This epistle was written in
   an atmosphere of persecution. The Apostle as one who has been an
   eyewitness of persecution in Rome sends a letter of exhortation and
   warning to the Judaeo-Christians of the Roman provinces of Asia Minor,
   who were at the time he was writing passing through trials of the same
   character as those which their brethren in the capital had just been
   experiencing. Three times does Peter refer to the charge of being
   evildoers or malefactors, [288] twice to the ordeal of punishment by
   fire. [289] His exhortations are largely directed to the object of
   entreating his readers to prove by the goodness of their lives and
   their obedience to lawful authority that the accusations of being
   criminal evildoers was unfounded. [290] But on the other hand if ye be
   reproached by the name of Christ, blessed are ye'; if a man suffer as a
   Christian, let him not be ashamed but let him glorify God in this
   name.' [291] The testimony of the Epistle to the Hebrews, which was
   most probably sent from Asia Minor to Rome in the following year 66
   A.D., and of the Apocalypse, of the date 70 A.D., is similar to that of
   St. Peter in that both refer to the severity of the sufferings which
   the Roman Christians had endured, and also to the fact that the
   persecution which had begun in Rome had afterwards spread to Asia
   Minor. The evidence that Tacitus did not exaggerate either the horrors
   of the scene in the Vatican Gardens nor the large number of those who
   perished is abundantly corroborated. Ye endured'--says the Epistle to
   the Hebrews--a great conflict of sufferings; partly being made a public
   spectacle by insults and afflictions: and partly by becoming partakers
   with them that were so used,' [292] while the writer of the Apocalypse,
   to quote only one of many passages, speaks of the woman seated on the
   Seven Hills as drunken with the blood of the Saints and of the martyrs
   of Jesus.' [293] Still more remarkable are the added details given by
   Clement of Rome in what seems to be the description of an eyewitness.
   Enough of ancient examples,' he writes, let us pass on to the athletes
   of very recent times, let us take the noble examples of our own days.'
   Then after telling of the deaths of St. Peter and St. Paul he
   proceeds:--to these men {the Apostles] of holy living was gathered
   together a great multitude of the elect, who having suffered through
   jealousy many insults and tortures, became very splendid examples
   amongst ourselves. Persecuted through jealousy, women after having
   suffered, in the guise of Danaids and Dirces, terrible and monstrous
   outrages, attained the goal which made sure to them the race of faith,
   and those who were weak in body received a noble reward.' [294]

   I have already shown that the arrest of the first batch of accused
   Christians cannot have taken place till several months after the fire
   of July 64, probably in the early spring of 65 A.D. The language of
   Tacitus may be held to imply that there were, as in the case of Pliny's
   proceedings in Bithynia, several questionings and trials of the
   prisoners, and some time would elapse between the first confessions of
   which the historian speaks and the final seizing of the immense
   multitude' for the holocaust in the Gardens. One thing, moreover, may
   be regarded as certain: that such a nocturnal spectacle would not have
   been planned so long as the night air was chilly, nor would Nero with
   his scrupulous care for the preservation of his divine voice [295] have
   appeared at night in the open on a car in the garb of a charioteer in
   cold weather. But if this were the case then an additional motive
   appears for the arresting in the spring of 65 A.D. of this crowd of
   humble Christians in order that their execution might be a spectacle to
   glut the eyes of the Roman populace. In the middle of April the plot of
   the Pisonian conspirators to take Nero's life during the festival of
   Ceres was discovered. He grasped at the opportunity of getting rid of a
   number of illustrious and wealthy men, the confiscation of whose goods
   helped to fill his treasury, depleted by the building of the Domus
   Aurea and other extravagances. Some undoubtedly were guilty, but once
   more public opinion condemned Nero. He was perpetually,'says Tacitus,
   under the lash of popular talk, which said he had destroyed men of
   rank, who were innocent, out of jealousy or fear.' [296] Thus
   confronted with a fresh crop of disquieting rumours, while those of his
   complicity in the conflagration were still current, it may well be that
   he sought at the great fetes that were given in gratitude for his
   escape from death to win a fleeting popularity and divert criticism
   from himself by devising the spectacle of the illumination with living
   torches and of the rest of the unspeakable barbarities of that night.
   But if so, the arrest of the ingens multitudo must have been
   synchronous with the trials and condemnation of the Pisonian
   conspirators. May it not be that in this fact may be found the
   explanation of that passage of Tacitus in which he relates how Nero
   sent out bodies of soldiers in every direction, and how in long
   succession troops of prisoners in chains were dragged along and stood
   at the gates of the imperial gardens'? [297] Mr. Henderson in his Life
   and Principate of Nero,' [298] commenting on these trials of April 65
   A.D., says The temporary measures of repression and punishment were
   grossly exaggerated . . . . Forty-one persons in all were implicated;
   of these twenty were certainly guilty, sixteen of them suffered death,
   the others were acquitted--only one certainly innocent person was
   slain.' Who then were these troops of prisoners in chains? Is it not
   possible that the ingens multitudo who were arrested and convicted in
   chapter 44 are identical with the continua et vincta agmina of chapter
   58? If the two events were really contemporaneous, Tacitus may have
   misread some record and converted Christian prisoners into Pisonian
   conspirators.

   In dealing with the question of the Neronian persecution and its date,
   one important authority cannot be neglected, that of Orosius, who wrote
   his Historiae adversus Paganos under the direction of his master and
   friend St. Augustine (410-20). In the seventh book of his history, in
   which is found the account of the fire and the persecution, Orosius
   shows himself to be thoroughly acquainted with the writings of
   Suetonius, Tacitus, and Josephus, all of which he quotes by name. The
   passage which specially concerns us runs as follows: The boldness of
   his [Nero's] impiety towards God increased the mass of his crimes, for
   he was the first at Rome to visit the Christians with punishments and
   deaths, and through all the provinces he commanded that they should be
   tortured with a like persecution, and having endeavoured to extirpate
   their very name he killed the most blessed Apostles Peter by the cross,
   Paul by the sword. Soon calamities in heaps began on every side to
   oppress the wretched state, for in the following autumn so great a
   pestilence fell upon the city that according to the registers [in the
   temple] of Libitina there were thirty thousand funerals.' These last
   words are a direct quotation from Suetonius, who however as usual gives
   no date to the pestilence. This is however given by Tacitus, who thus
   concludes his narrative of the events of 65 A.D.: The Gods also marked
   by storms and diseases a year made shameful by so many crimes. Campania
   was devastated by a hurricane. . . . the fury of which extended to the
   vicinity of the City, in which a violent pestilence was carrying away
   every class of human beings . . . houses were filled with dead bodies,
   the streets with funerals.' [299]

   Orosius thus confirms the evidence of 1 Peter, the Hebrews, and the
   Apocalypse, that a general persecution in the provinces was concurrent
   with that in Rome; and his express statement that the pestilence
   happened in the autumn following the persecution fixes the date of the
   trials and execution of the Christians, as having taken place in the
   earlier part of 65 A.D.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [247] Josephus, Ant. xx. 8. 11: te gunaiki Poppaia, theosebes gar en,
   huper ton Ioudaion deetheise charizomenos, he tois men deka prosetaxen
   apienai. Poppaea was buried after the Jewish custom, Tac. Ann. xvi. 6;
   Hist. i. 22.

   [248] The above was not an isolated act of interference by Poppaea on
   behalf of the Jews. Josephus in his autobiography tells us of the hard
   case of certain priests who were his friends. They had been sent in
   irons to Rome by Felix to be tried before Caesar, and remained there in
   strict confinement without trial for some four years. Josephus
   describes how in 63 A.D. he went to Rome to see if he could do anything
   on their behalf. After a perilous voyage, in which he was shipwrecked
   in the Adriatic, he finally, like St. Paul, landed at Puteoli, and
   there met a Jewish actor, named Aliturus, who was a favourite with
   Nero. By this man's help he obtained an introduction to Poppaea, who
   not only secured for him the liberation of the priests but gave to him
   some costly presents before his return to Judaea.--Josephus, Vita, c.
   3. Josephus tells us that he was at this time twenty-six years of age,
   and as he was born in the year of the accession of Caligula, i.e. 37
   A.D., this fixes the date of his voyage to Rome as 63 A.D.

   [249] Josephus, Ant. xx. 9. 1; Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. ii. 23.

   [250] It was not until the second century that the hatred between Jew
   and Christian became irreconcilable. In the period we are considering
   the Christians had no enmity against the Jews, as a race. Despite the
   bad treatment he received at their hands at Antioch in Pisidia,
   Iconium, Thessalonica, Corinth, Ephesus, and, above all, at Jerusalem,
   St. Paul always showed the strongest affection for his
   fellow-countrymen, and in his preaching held fast to the rule the Jew
   first.' But Tertullian's words synagogas Iudaeorum fontes
   persecutionum' were true always. Tert. Scorp. 10.

   [251] The well-known Roman archaeologist, Orazio Marucchi, has
   discovered in the 1st-century cemetery of Priscilla on the lower floor
   an ancient baptistery that he has identified with the Coemeterium ad
   Nymphas Beati Petri ubi baptizaverat,' Acta Liberii [according to their
   Acts the Martyrs Papias and Maurus were interred via Nomentana ad
   nymphas Beati Petri ubi baptizabat']. In any case this baptistery dates
   from the first century and the local traditions in the Acta are
   generally correct. Marucchi, Eléments d'Archéologie Chrétienne, ii.
   385-6, 457-61; also Le Memorie degli Apostoli Pietro e Paolo in Roma,
   pp. 93-102. The language of Tacitus (Ann. xv. 44) and Suetonius (Nero,
   31, 39) testifies that the charges against the Christians in the time
   of Nero were of the same kind as those mentioned in detail at a later
   date by Justin Martyr, Dial. c. Tryph. 10, 17, 108; I Apol. 26;
   Athenagoras, Apol. 3; Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. vi. 1 (as to the charges
   brought against the Christians at Lyons).

   [252] See pp. 47-51.

   [253] G. B. de Rossi, Roma sotterranea cristiana, 4 vols. 1864-1877;
   Inscriptiones Christianae urbis Romae VIIº saeculo antiquiores,
   1864-1888. De Rossi examined over 15,000 epitaphs in the Catacombs.
   Bullettino di archeologia cristiana, 1863-1894, etc. Nuovo Bullettino
   di archeologia cristiana (edited by Orazio Marucchi), 1895; Orazio
   Marucchi, Eléments d'archéologie chrætienne: I. Notions générales,' II.
   Itinéraire des Catacombes,' III. Basiliques et églises 1906-9. Roma
   sotterranea Christiana (Nuova serie) Cimitero di Domitilla,' No. 4,
   1909; Le Memorie degli Apostoli Pietro e Paolo in Roma, 1903, etc.; P.
   Wilpert, Principienfragen der christlichen Archäologie, 1892; R.
   Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome, 1892, and New Tales of Old Rome; J.
   S. Northcote and W. R. Brownlow, Roma Sotterranea, 2 vols. 1879.

   [254] On this point Renan (L'Antéchrist, Introd. p. vii) may be quoted:
   La I Petri est un des écrits du Nouveau Testament qui sont le plus
   anciennement et le plus unanimement cités comme authentiques.' 1 Peter
   is quoted in the Epistle to the Hebrews, of which the date is probably
   66 A.D., and in Clement, 1 Corinthians, an epistle written by a
   disciple of St. Peter.

   [255] There was regular intercourse between Rome and the seaports of
   provincial Pontus, especially Sinope. Possibly, as Dr. Hort suggests,
   Silvanus may have had special personal reasons for beginning his
   journey as the bearer of the Epistle from this point. As Bithynia
   adjoined Pontus and formed part of the same province the route of
   Silvanus would be a circuit ending at a point not far from that at
   which it began. See Dr. Hort's special note on The Provinces of Asia
   Minor included in St. Peter's address': Hort, 1st Epistle of St. Peter,
   pp. 157-185; also the very interesting Introduction to Bigg's 1st
   Epistle of St. Peter, pp. 67-80.

   [256] See Dr. Chase's article on Peter in Hastings's Dictionary of the
   Bible, in which references will be found to the literature bearing on
   the subject.

   [257] The Sibylline Oracles, Book v. p. 143: Pheuxetai ek Babulonos
   anax phoberos kai anaides.. The subject of this passage is the flight
   of Nero from Rome. Zahn gives the date 71-74 A.D. in Zeitschrift für
   Kirchliche Wissenschaft und Leben, 1886, p. 337 ff.

   [258] St. Peter in many passages shows an acquaintance with the Epistle
   of St. James. In this there is nothing remarkable, considering the
   close association of the two early Christian leaders. Far more striking
   are the numerous echoes and reflections of our Lord's sayings, as they
   are recorded in the four Gospels. These Petrine reminiscences of the
   Master's words do not, however, seem to be derived from any canonical
   gospel we now possess. Possibly St. Peter made use of some
   pre-canonical source, i.e. that which the critics have named Q.' Far
   more probably he was in the habit of quoting from memory in his
   preaching the sayings of Jesus, which his love for the speaker had
   enshrined in his mind unforgettably. It is not unlikely that 1 Peter
   contains many phrases and thoughts which may have their source in
   sayings of the Lord unrecorded in the extant Gospels. It is noteworthy
   that the phraseology of 1 Peter contains several coincidences with that
   of the Fourth Gospel, a piece of evidence strongly testifying to the
   historical character of the Johannine record.

   [259] In the Authorised Version of 1 Peter will be found more than
   forty marginal references to Romans, more than twenty to Ephesians.

   [260] Col. iv. 10.

   [261] 1 Pet. v. 13.

   [262] 1 Pet. v. 12: dia Silouanou humin tou pistou adelphou, hos
   logizomai, di oligon egrapsa. Compare the words of Dionysius of Corinth
   quoted in Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. iv. 2. 11, who speaks of the epistle of
   Clement as hemin dia Klementos grapheisan.. The Epistle was sent in the
   name of the Church of Rome, but the general assent of antiquity makes
   Clement to have been the author. He had no doubt general instructions
   agreed upon by the Presbyterate, i.e. by Bishop Linus and the body of
   episcopi who were his coadjutors and of whom Clement was one. He
   appears, according to Hermas, to have acted as the secretary of the
   Presbyterate in their intercourse with foreign churches and to have
   been given a free hand in the actual composition of the letter. To a
   less extent this was probably the case with Silvanus in his
   transcription of Peter's dictation.

   [263] See Tacitus, Ann. xv. 38--41; Suet. Nero, p. 38; Dion Cassius,
   lxii. 16--18; Pliny, Nat. Hist. xvii. 5. Of these Suetonius, Dion and
   Pliny agree in ascribing the crime of incendiarism to Nero. Tacitus
   does not commit himself to any positive statement: sequitur clades
   forte an dolo principis incertum, nam utrumque auctores prodidere.' The
   legend of Nero's fiddling while Rome burned' is probably a fiction, but
   there must always be strong doubts whether or no he was the author of
   the fire.

   [264] Tac. Ann. xv. 44: sed non ope humana, non largitionibus principis
   aut deum placamentis decedebat infamia, quin iussum incendium
   crederetur. Ergo abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos et quaesitissimis
   poenis adfecit, quos per flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos
   appellabat. Auctor nominis eius Christus Tiberio imperitante per
   procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio adfectus erat; repressaque in
   praesens exitiabilis superstitio rursum erumpebat, non modo per
   Iudaeam, originem eius mali, sed per urbem etiam, quo cuncta undique
   atrocia aut pudenda confluunt celebranturque.' Subdidit reos' means
   brought to trial with the malicious object of shifting the hatred of
   the people from himself upon the Christians.'Compare Ann. 1. 6: quod
   postquam Sallustius Crispus . . . comperit metuens ne reus subderetur,
   iuxta periculoso ficta seu vera promeret.'See also Suetonius, Nero, 16:
   affiicti suppliciis Christiani, genus hominum superstitionis novae ac
   maleficae'; and Pliny in his letter to the Emperor Trajan: nomen ipsum,
   si flagitiis careat, an flagitia cohaerentia nomini puniantur' . . .
   nihil aliud inveni quam superstitionem pravam et immodicam.'

   [265] Ineunt deinde consulatum Silius Nerva et Atticus Vestinus, coepta
   simul et aucta coniuratione, in quam certatim nomina dederant senatores
   eques miles, feminae etiam, cum odio Neronis tum favore in C. Pisonem,'
   Ann. xv. 48. Cf. xiv. 65: Romanus secretis criminationibus incusaverat
   Senecam ut C. Pisonis socium. . . . Unde Pisoni timor, et orta
   insidiarum in Neronem magna moles sed inprospera.' In xii. 56, 57
   Tacitus speaks of the piercing by Claudius of (Monte Salviano) the
   mountain intervening between Lake Fucinus and the river Liris with the
   object of creating an outlet for the lake into the river, and he seems
   to place the execution of the work and fetes attending its inauguration
   all in the year 53: sub idem tempus inter lacum Fucinum amnemque Lirim
   perrupto monte, quo magnificentia operis a pluribus viseretur etc.'
   Suetonius tells us that the work employed 30,000 men for eleven years,
   Claud. 20. See also Pliny, Nat. Hist. xxxvi. 15, 24.

   [266] Allard, Hist. des Persécutions, pp. 42-3; Renan, l'Antéchrist,
   pp. 154-5; 1 Clement, 5, dia zelon kai phthonon. Nero must have been
   well aware of the existence of the Christians, many of whom were to be
   found in his own household. Difficulties must have arisen at times with
   the freedmen and slaves who refused to take part in any pagan
   ceremonies or sacrifices or to attend public spectacles.

   [267] Igitur primum correpti qui fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum
   multitudo ingens haud proinde in crimine incendii quam odio humani
   generis coniuncti sunt. Et pereuntibus addita ludibria, ut ferarum
   tergis contecti laniatu canum interirent, aut crucibus adfixi aut
   flammandi, atque, ubi defecisset dies, in usum nocturni luminis
   urerentur. Hortos suos ei spectaculo Nero obtulerat et circense
   ludicrum edebat, habitu aurigae permixtus plebi vel curriculo
   insistens. Unde quamquam adversus sontes et novissima exampla meritos
   miseratio oriebatur, tamquam non utilitate publica sed in saevitiam
   unius absumerentur' (Ann. xv. 44). Correpti = (1) seized by violence;
   (2) dragged violently to trial. Compare continua hinc et vincta agmina
   trahi ac foribus hortorum adiacere. Atque ubi dicendam ad causam
   introissent' (Ann. xv. 58) of the Pisonian conspirators. Fatebantur can
   only mean made open confession.' Indicio eorum: this may possibly mean
   that some turned renegades (see Heb. vi. 5, 6), but it includes
   information of all kinds. Many no doubt made no concealment about their
   being Christians and the views that they held as to the approaching
   destruction of all things by fire. It may also mean that papers and
   other proofs were found by search of the houses of the accused.
   Coniuncti: this is the reading of MS. Med. and on the ground that the
   more difficult reading should be preferred, I adopt it with Henderson,
   Ramsay, Boissier and others, and also because it seems to me to give
   the right interpretation of the words that precede, haud proinde in
   crimine incendii quam odio humani generis.' The other reading is
   convicti.

   [268] Der Religionsfrevel nach römische Recht' (Historische Zeitung,
   1890, t. lxiv. 389 ff) (see also Expositor, 1893, vol. viii. 1-7).

   [269] Among the many modern writers on early Christian persecution the
   following works are specially deserving of mention: Mommsen, Römisches
   Strafrecht, 1899; Arnold, Die Neronische Christenverfolgung, 1888;
   Schiller, Gesch. des Röm. Kaisserreichs unter der Reg. des Nero, 1872;
   Allard, Histoire des Persécutions pendant les deux premiers siècles,
   1892; Callewaert, Les premiers Chrétiens, furent-ils persécutés par
   édits ou par mesures de police?' (Rev. d'hist. ecclés. Louvain 1901, p.
   771 ff; 1902, p. 6 ff, 326 ff, 601 ff); Duchesne, La prohibition du
   Christianisme dans l'Empire romain' (Misc. di storia ecclesiastica a
   stud. ausil. 1902, i. 1); Le Blant, Les persécutions et les martyrs,
   1903; Guérin, Etude sur le fondement jurid. des persécutions dirigées
   contre les Chrétiens pendant les deux premiers siècles de notre ère'
   (Rev. Hist. de droit franc. et étrang. 1895, pp. 600, 713); Renan,
   L'Antéchrist, 1873; Boissier, Fin du Paganisme, 1892; Parfumo, Le fonti
   e i tempi dello incendio Neroniano, 1905; Ramsay, The Church and the
   Empire, 4th edit. 1905; Christianity in the Roman Empire' (Expositor,
   1893, viii, pp. 8-21, 110-119, 282-296); Hardy, Christianity and the
   Roman Government, 1894; Henderson, Life and Principate of the Emperor
   Nero, 1902; Klette, Die Christenkatastrophe unter Nero, 1907.

   [270] Afflicti suppliciis Christiani, genus hominum superstitionis
   novae et maleficae' (Suet. Nero, 16). These words occur in the midst of
   a number of sumptuary regulations enforced by Nero. The epithet
   maleficae suggests that one of the charges was that of sorcery or
   magic.

   [271] Tertullian, Apol. c. 51, 21; Scorp. c. 15; Ad Nat. 1, 7: sed tali
   dedicatore damnationis nostrae etiam gloriamur.' The word dedicator in
   Tertullian's writings has the signification auctor, initiator, see
   Oehler's Index Verborum in his edition of Tertullian's works. In the
   passage from Scorp. occur the words si fidem commentarii voluerit
   haereticus, instrumenta Imperii loquentur.'

   [272] Tac. Ann. xiv. 51, 60; xv. 37, 50, 72; xvi. 19, 20; Hist. i, 72;
   Suet. Galba, 15; Plutarch, 0tho, c. 2; Tac. Ann. xv. 58: Atque ubi
   dicendam ad causam introissent . . . pro crimine accipi cum super
   Neronis ac Tigellini saevas percontationes, Faenius quoque Rufus
   violenter urgeret.' The trial of the Pisonian conspirators thus took
   place before Nero and the two Pretorian Prefects, April 65. A little
   afterwards Seneca was accused of complicity, and his answers to the
   charge were brought by a tribune to the Court. Tacitus (Ann. c. 61)
   thus relates it: Ubi haec a tribuno relata Bunt Poppaea et Tigellino
   coram, quod erat saevienti principi intimum consiliorum. . . .

   [273] See Juvenal, Sat. i, 155-157:

   Pone Tigellinum: taeda lucebis in illa,

   Qua stantes ardent, qui fixo gutture (pectore) fumant

   Et latum media sulcum diducit arena.
   On this passage an ancient Schol. comments: In munere Neronis arserunt
   vivi de quibus ille iusserat cereos fieri, qui lucerent spectatoribus.
   . . . Maleficos homines taeda, papyro, cera super vestiebat, sicque ad
   ignem admoveri iubebat ut arderent.'

   [274] Sulp. Sev. Chron. ii. 29.

   [275] This negative evidence of Tertullian comes out the more forcibly
   as his Apology was addressed to the Emperor Septimius Severus, and to
   the chief magistrates of the Roman Empire. Orosius roundly charged Nero
   with being the incendiary: denique urbis Romae incendium voluptatis
   suae spectaculum fecit' (Hist. adv. Paganos, vii. 7).

   [276] Ipsa rettuli verba,' Tac. Ann. xv. 67.

   [277] Duraveruntque, quoniam et de longissimo aevo arborum diximus, ad
   Neronis principis incendia quibus cremavit Urbem, annis CLXXX . . .
   postea cultu virides iuvenesque ni Princeps ille accelerasset etiam
   arborum mortem,' Pliny, Hist. Nat. xvii. 1.

   [278] 1 Thess. iv. 16-18; 2 Thess. i. 7-10; 1 Cor. xv. 51-2; Rom. xiii.
   11-13; Tit. ii. 12, 13; Heb. ix. 37; 1 Pet. iv. 7; 2 Pet. iii. 10-12;
   Rev. xviii. 1-21, xxii. 10-12, 20.--See Turner, Studies in Early Church
   History, pp. 226-7.

   [279] Rev. xiii., xvi. 10, 19, xvii. 5-9; Ascension of Isaiah [80-90
   A.D.] 14 (2, 5) and 18. Orac. Sibyllina, iii. 63-93 [about 80 A.D.],
   iv. 179-182, v. 158-162. There are many other passages of
   Judaeo-Christian origin which are difficult to date, as the books in
   their present form contain many ancient fragments. See also Apoc. of
   Baruch, xxxvi.-xl., which Dr. Charles dates before 70 A.D., and iv.
   Esdras a little earlier.

   [280] Heb. vi. 4-6, x. 26-29, 39. The title of Confessores was one in
   which the Christians of later centuries gloried. Compare 1 Tim. vi.
   12-13. Compare Hernias, Pastor, Sim. ix. 21. 3, 28. 4, Vis. iii. 2. 1,
   the persecution to which Hermas refers was probably that of Nero.

   [281] The translation from Philostratus' Apollonius is that of Prof. J.
   S Phillimore, recently published by the Clarendon Press, 1912, vol. ii.
   43-45, bk. iv. cc. 42, 43, 44. Prof. Phillimore in his Preface sides
   with the majority of critics in asserting that this work of
   Philostratus is a Romance. At any rate, many sections of it may
   undoubtedly be regarded as imaginative fiction, But, as in the Acta
   Sincera of the Martyrs, the romance is built upon a basis of historical
   fact, and the fictitious details fill in the framework of a real
   biography. The portion of the book which treats of Apollonius' visit to
   Rome in 66 A.D. gives strong evidence of its historicity. The name of
   the consul Telesinus, the inauguration of the Gymnasium and Baths by
   Nero and his later departure for Greece, the personality of Demetrius
   the Cynic, and the character and activity of Tigellinus are all
   historical. The original Greek of two important passages stands thus:
   Tigellinos gar, huph' ho to xiphos en tou Neronos, apelaunen auton tes
   Rhomes . . . apangelthentos de to Tigellino ton logon touton pempei
   tous axontas auton es to dikasterion hos apologesaito me apebein es
   Nerona.

   [282] Flagitia cohaerentia nomini,' Plin. Ep. x. 97.

   [283] Athenagoras, Supplicatio 3; also Justin Martyr, 1 Apol. 26, 2
   Apol. 12, 13; Dial. c. Tryph: 10, 17, 108; Tertullian, Apo1. 2, 4, 7,
   8, 39; Ad Nat. 2. In the account of the persecution at Lyons and
   Vienne, 177 A.D., which has been preserved by Eus. Hist. Eccl. v. i.,
   the same charges are brought forward: katepseusanto hemon Thuesteia
   deipna kai Oidipedeious mixeis.

   [284] Gebhardt, Acta Martyrum Selecta, 119: Magi estis quia novum
   nescio quod genus religionis inducitis.' Cod. Iust. ix. tit. 18: de
   maleficis et mathematicis.' Suetonius, Nero, 16: Afflicti suppliciis
   christiani, genus hominum superstitionis novae et maleficae.' Paulus,
   Sent. v.: Qui sacra impia nocturnave ut quem obtruncarent, defigerent,
   obligarent, fecerint faciendave curaverint, aut crucibus suffiguntur
   aut bestiis obiiciuntur. . . . Magicae artis conscios summo supplicio
   adfici placuit, id est bestiis obiici aut crucibus suffigi; ipsi autem
   magi vivi exuruntur.'

   [285] Tertullian, Ad Nat. i. 7: Principe Augusta nomen hoc ortum est,
   Tiberio disciplina eius inluxit, sub Nerone damnatio invaluit. . . . Et
   tamen permansit erasis omnibus hoc solum "institutum Neronianum" iustum
   denique ut dissimile sui auctoris.' The lex de maiestate was a
   juridical creation of Tiberius and so would not be affected by the
   rescissio actorum of the latter after his death: addito maiestatis
   crimine, quod tunc omnium accusationum complementum erat,' Tac. Ann.
   iii. 38. Nero himself was spoken of by Pliny the Elder as hostis
   generis humani' (Hist. Nat. vii. 8. 45. 46). Attilio Profumo in his
   learned work Le Fonti ed i Tempi dello Incendio Neroniano (p. 227),
   commenting on the passage above quoted from Tertullian's Ad nationes,
   thus states the conclusions at which he arrived: (1) Non esser mai
   esistita nè legge nè altra disposizione giuridica qualsiasi che
   colpisse nominativamente e solo, come tali, Christiani. (2) Le
   persecuzioni contro di essi furono sempre fatte in forma giuridica e
   legale, applicando loro 1' "institutum" delle tre accuse--suntuaria, di
   sacrilegio, di maestà--detto "Neronianum"; "istituto" non già esclusivo
   per essi, ma ad essi solo e sempre applicato. (3) La natura dell'
   "Institutum" istesso, spiega i periodi di persecuzione e di pace che si
   alternavano per i Cristiani, senza bisogno di fare o di annullare legge
   alcuna; dappoichè era affidita alla suprema autorità del Principe e
   fino ad un certo limite anche a quella dei Presidi delle Province, e
   1'applicazione di esso e 1'applicazione più o meno lata,' Tertullian,
   as a jurist, uses the word institutum' correctly to signify a legal
   procedure resting upon custom, not necessarily written, Compare Tac.
   Ann. xiii. 32 of the domestic court for the trial of Pomponia Graecina;
   isque (Aulus Plautius) prisco instituto propinquis coram de capita
   famaque coniugis cognovit et insontem pronuntiavit.'

   [286] Suet. Claudius, c. 25.

   [287] Ipsum nomen, si flagitiis careat, an flagitia cohaerentia nomini
   puniantur,' Pliny, Ep. x. 96. Pliny had no definite edict against
   Christianity to guide him: cognitionibus de Christianis interfui
   nunquam; ideo nescio quid et quatenus aut puniri soleat aut quaeri'--so
   in Trajan's rescript Neque enim in universum aliquid quod quasi certam
   formam habeat constitui potest.' In comparing the action of Pliny with
   that of Tigellinus it should be noticed that there are many points of
   close resemblance. Pliny writes: interim in iis, qui ad me tanquam
   Christiani deferebantur, hunc sum secutus modum. Interrogavi ipsos, an
   essent Christiani; confitentes iterum ac tertio interrogavi, supplicium
   minatus; perseverantes duci iussi.' Thus there is the same confession
   before trial, and finally punishment for the name. Though he could find
   no specific law, there was no searching for precedents. Pliny knew that
   for some time past the Christians had been legally regarded as the
   enemies of the state and that confession of the name meant outlawry. It
   should be observed that he was not hasty in condemnation, but that he
   mentions having granted three cognitiones before ordering them to be
   executed. Finally, an anonymous paper was placed in the governor's hand
   implicating a large number of persons which led to his writing to the
   Emperor for direction and advice: Propositus est libellus sine auctore,
   multorum nomina continens. Qui negabant esse Christianos. . . . Alii ab
   indice nominati, esse se Christianos dixerunt.' Compare with Tacitus,
   Ann. xv. 44: Igitur primo correpti qui fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum
   multitudo ingens. . . .' The Rescript of Trajan merely confirmed in
   writing the practice, which had subsisted since the time of Nero, of
   treating the very name of Christian as a crime against the State.

   [288] 1 Pet. ii, 12, 14; iii. 15-17; iv. 15.

   [289] 1 Pet. i. 7: dia puros dokimazomenou. 1 Pet. iv. 12: te en humin
   purosei pros peirasmon humin ginomene.

   [290] 1 Pet. ii. 11-17. Are the words (v. 14): hegemosin, hos dhi autou
   [toi basileos pempomenois eis ekdikesin kakopoion, a reference to
   instructions sent out by Nero with regard to the Christians of Asia
   Minor? 1 Pet. iii. 16.

   [291] 1 Pet. iv. 14-16.

   [292] Heb. x. 32, 33. See also iv. 14, 15, vi. 4-6, x. 23-27, xii.
   1-13, xiii. 23. For the date of Hebrews and of the Apocalypse see
   Lecture VI.

   [293] Rev. xvii. 6. See also ii. 3, 9, 10, 13; iii. 8-11; vi. 9-11;
   vii. 13-17; xii. 10, 11; xiii. 7, 8; xvi. 6; xviii. 24; xx. 4.

   [294] 1 Clem. v. All' hina ton archaion hupodeigmaton pausometha
   elthomen epi tous engista genomenous athletas; labomen tes geneas hemon
   ta gennaia hupodeigmata . . vi. toutois tois andrasin hosios
   politeusamenois sunethroisthe polu plethos eklekton, hoitines pollakis
   aikiais kai basanois dia zelos pathontes hupodeigma kalliston egenonto
   en hemin. Dia zelos gunaikes Danaides kai Dirkai aikismata deina kai
   anosia pathousai epi ton tes pisteos dromon katentesan.

   [295] Suet. Nero, 20; Plin. Hist. Nat. xix. 6. 108, and xxxiv. 18. 1666
   Tac. Ann. xv. 22.

   [296] Tac. Ann. xv. 73: etenim crebro vulgi rumore lacerabatur, tamquam
   viros claros et insontes ob invidiam aut metum extinxisset.' Compare
   Josephus, Ant. xx. 8, 3; Suet. Nero, xxvi.

   [297] Tac. Ann. xv. 58; continua hinc et vincta agmina trahi ac foribus
   hortorum adiacere.'

   [298] Henderson, pp. 272-4.

   [299] Orosius, vii. 7 Auxit hanc molem facinorum eius temeritas
   impietatis in Deum, nam primus Romae Christianos suppliciis et mortibus
   affecit ac per omnes provincias pari persecutione excruciari imperavit
   ipsumque nomen exstirpare conatus beatissimos Christi apostolos Petrum
   cruse, Paulum gladio occidit. . . . Mox acervatim miseram civitatem
   obortae undique oppressere clades, nam subsequente autumno tanta Urbi
   pestilentia incubuit, ut triginta milia funera in rationem Libitinae
   venirent.' Suet. Nero, 34. Tac. Ann. xvi. 13: Tot facinoribus foedum
   annum etiam di tempestatibus et morbis insignivere, vastata Campania
   turbine ventorum qui . . . pertulitque violentiam ad vicina urbi; in
   qua omne mortalium genus vis pestilentiae depopulabatur. . . .'
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   LECTURE VI

   Rev. xii. 11: They loved not their life unto death.'

   The deaths by martyrdom of the Apostles Peter and Paul at Rome towards
   the close of Nero's reign are among the facts of first-century
   Christian history which may in these days be regarded as practically
   outside controversy. The evidence of the letter of the Church of Rome
   to the Church of Corinth written by Clement, [300] a first-century
   document of the most authentic character, even if it stood alone, could
   not seriously be challenged. Let us take the noble examples of our own
   days. Through jealousy and envy the greatest and most righteous pillars
   [of the Church] were persecuted and contended unto death. Let us take
   before our eyes the good Apostles. Peter, who through unjust jealousy
   endured not one, or two, but many toils, and having thus borne witness
   went to the place of glory that was his due. Through jealousy and
   strife Paul showed [how to obtain] the prize of endurance. . . . To
   these men of holy life was gathered together a great multitude of the
   elect, who having through jealousy suffered many insults and tortures
   became very splendid examples amongst us.' The instances mentioned
   here, Peter, Paul, and the great multitude, cannot be separated. If
   language means anything, it means here that these several examples of
   brave and patient witness unto death took place amongst us,' i.e.
   recently and at Rome.

   That the Church of Corinth to whom it was addressed thus interpreted
   the passage in the latter half of the second century appears from the
   letter of Dionysius bishop of Corinth to Soter bishop of Rome written
   before 1174 A.D., in which the statement appears Both alike [Peter and
   Paul], having taught together in Italy, suffered martyrdom about the
   same time.' And when we learn from this same Dionysius that it had been
   the custom at Corinth to read Clement's Epistle in the Church on the
   Lord's Day from the earliest times, it may be assumed that the
   tradition of events, which, at the date when Clement's epistle was
   first received at Corinth, must still have been fresh in men's
   memories, had been handed down continuously. [301]

   Both these passages have been preserved by Eusebius and in the same
   chapter of his Ecclesiastical History' in which the first Dionysian
   extract is found, Caius, a Roman presbyter, who lived in the days of
   Pope Zephyrinus (198-217), is quoted as saying I can show you the
   trophies--i.e. the Memoriae or chapel-tombs--of the Apostles. For if
   you will go to the Vatican or to the Ostian Way, you will find there
   the trophies of those who founded the Church'--the apostles throughout
   this chapter being Peter and Paul. Irenaeus, an Oriental by birth, in
   his youth the disciple of Polycarp, in later life bishop of Lyons,
   spent some time in Rome about 170 A.D.; he was thus in a special way a
   representative man both of Eastern and Western Christianity, and he
   speaks of the Church at Rome, founded and established by the two most
   glorious Apostles Peter and Paul, as being the greatest, the most
   ancient and well known to all.' [302] And again to this Church, on
   account of its more especial eminence, all other Churches must gather,'
   and he only spoke the truth, for as a recent writer (Rev. C. H. Turner)
   quoting this passage has stated, in the next generation' i.e. after the
   Apostles--we might say all the Churches of the Empire "made rendezvous"
   at Rome.' [303] And why? Not because it was the political capital, but
   because Peter and Paul there gained the crown of martyrdom, and because
   at Rome their hallowed remains at the Vatican and on the Ostian Way
   were piously preserved and held in reverence. The authority of the
   Church of Rome during the early centuries of Christianity obtained a
   general recognition accorded to no other Church, not because Rome
   contained the palace of the Caesars, who persecuted the faith, but
   because it was acknowledged everywhere and always that the Church of
   Rome had the distinction of having been founded by St. Peter and St.
   Paul and that it guarded the tombs of these two most glorious
   Apostles.' [304]

   Many legends gathered round the deaths of the two Apostles, but the
   Acts' in which they have been preserved are of late date and mainly
   pure fiction, [305] except in their topographical references, which the
   archaeological researches of De Rossi, Lanciani, Marucchi and others in
   recent years have shown to be generally correct. In one important point
   the tradition embodied in these Acts, that the martyrdom of Peter and
   Paul took place on the same day, i.e. June 29, 67 A.D.--a tradition
   which for centuries was universally accepted as historical--is almost
   certainly wrong. Considerable obscurity must always surround the actual
   date and manner of their death, but the only contemporary evidence we
   possess seems to testify clearly to an interval of time separating the
   two martyrdoms.

   The passage of St. Clement (already quoted) mentions the examples of
   St. Peter and St. Paul in two distinct paragraphs, without any hint
   that they suffered together; indeed the words about St. Paul--when he
   had borne his witness before the rulers, so he departed out of this
   world' --by the use of the singular he' imply that the
   witness-bearer--the martyr--stood alone. [306] To this may be added the
   silence of the Second Epistle to Timothy as to the presence of St.
   Peter at Rome during the time of St. Paul's last imprisonment and
   trial. The evidence from silence is always a very treacherous argument
   to rely upon, but in this case it would indeed be strange, if St. Peter
   had been tried and condemned simultaneously with St. Paul, that the
   latter should not have referred in any way to his brother Apostle's
   presence. As to the manner of their death Tertullian (A.D. 200) writes:
   We read in the lives of the Caesars that Nero was the first who stained
   with blood the rising faith. Then is Peter girt by another, when he is
   made fast to the Cross. Then does Paul obtain his birthright of Roman
   citizenship, when in Rome he is born again ennobled by martyrdom.' The
   language of the African Father here shows plainly that he is referring
   to the undoubted first-century testimony to St. Peter's death by
   crucifixion from the last chapter of the Fourth Gospel. [307] Dionysius
   of Corinth, as we have seen, merely states that both Apostles suffered
   about the same time. The very early Judaeo-Christian Apocalypse, The
   Ascension of Isaiah' [308] (79-80 A.D.), seems to have a clear
   reference to St. Peter's death at the hands of Nero, but no allusion to
   that of St. Paul. The Liberian Catalogue, 354 A.D., is the first
   document in which the death of the Apostles on the same day is
   mentioned, and from the Liberian Catalogue the Liber Pontificalis'
   adopted it, and June 29 was henceforth regarded as the common
   anniversary of the martyrdom of the two Apostles. The origin of this
   mistake is however revealed by certain entries in authentic lists of
   the feasts of martyrs annually celebrated in the Church belonging to
   the second half of the fourth century, from which it appears that in
   the year 258 A.D., owing to the outbreak of the Valerian persecution,
   the relics of the two Apostles were taken from their resting-places at
   the Vatican and on the Ostian Way and deposited for safety in a
   cemetery on the Appian Way known as the Catacombs. The translation took
   place on June 29, and when afterwards the relics were again restored to
   their original tombs, a hymn of St. Ambrose tells us that henceforth on
   that clay there were three feasts kept at Rome: one at the Vatican, a
   second on the Ostian Way, a third at the Catacombs. [309] From the
   beginning of the fourth century then the belief that the Apostles
   suffered together in 67 A.D. on the same day became general, though a
   passage in one of the poems of Prudentius written quite early in that
   century is a proof that with the acceptance of June 29 as the
   anniversary of both Apostles, a tradition remained of their martyrdoms
   having taken place in different years. Prudentius says [310] that St.
   Peter died exactly a year before St. Paul. It was the influence of St.
   Jerome more than any other cause that led to the universal adoption in
   the Western Church of the fourteenth year of Nero as the date of St.
   Peter's death, his account of that Apostle in the De Viris Illustribus
   being the basis of the notice of St. Peter which appears in the Liber
   Pontificalis.' [311]

   The internal evidence of St. Peter's first Epistle shows that he
   survived the Vatican fete and that the extension of the persecution to
   the provinces was the chief cause of his writing. It follows therefore
   that he must have been in concealment during the climax of the Neronian
   attack upon the Roman Christians. Now among the legends which have
   grown up around the death of St. Peter there is a very beautiful one,
   which may possibly have an historical foundation, I mean the well-known
   Quo Vadis? story. His friends, so runs the story, had entreated the
   Apostle to save his life by leaving the city. Peter at last consented,
   but on condition that he should go away alone. But when he wished to
   pass the gate of the city, he saw Christ meeting him. Falling down in
   adoration he says to Him "Lord, whither goest Thou?" And Christ replied
   to him "I am coming to Rome to be again crucified." And Peter says to
   Him "Lord, wilt Thou again be crucified?" And the Lord said to him
   "Even so, I will again be crucified." Peter said to Him "Lord, I will
   return and will follow Thee." And with these words the Lord ascended
   into Heaven . . . And Peter, afterwards corning to himself, understood
   that it was of his own passion that it had been spoken, because that in
   it the Lord would suffer.' The Apostle then returned with joy to meet
   the death which the Lord had signified that he should die. Now the mere
   existence of this ancient tradition would indicate that the crucifixion
   of Peter took place while the persecution was still active, i.e. some
   time in the summer of 65 A.D. [312]

   That it contains a story that is authentic in the sense of being based
   on events that really occurred is not improbable. The Peter described
   here is the Peter of the Gospels--brave, loving, but in critical
   moments irresolute. The persuasions of friends may have induced him to
   seek safety in flight, but no sooner is he on his way than his
   conscience reproves him. He who had just written to the persecuted
   disciples in Asia if any man suffer as a Christian let him not be
   ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf,' [313] must have felt
   that he was again denying his Master, and, as in the High Priest's
   palace, once more did the Lord look upon Peter. The vision came to him
   now, as in former days the vision on the roof of the tanner's house at
   Joppa, as perhaps overwrought with fatigue he had flung himself on the
   ground to rest. There is a passage in St. John's Gospel which seems to
   me to support the historicity of the Quo Vadis? tradition. [314] It was
   after the Supper on the last night of the Lord's earthly life, when
   (according to St. John) Simon Peter said unto Him, Lord, whither goest
   Thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go, thou canst not follow Me now,
   but thou shalt follow Me afterwards. Peter saith unto Him, Lord, why
   cannot I follow Thee now? I will lay down my life for Thy sake.' Two
   questions at once come into the mind: (1) Was the echo of those words
   haunting Peter's memory when he saw the vision? (2) Did his knowledge
   of the cause of Peter's voluntary return to death move the Fourth
   Evangelist to insert those verses in his narrative? Possibly both
   should be answered in the affirmative.

   Before leaving the subject of the Quo Vadis? tradition I should like to
   point out that the remarkable language of Hebrews vi. 6, if it were
   possible to regard it as suggested by the words of the Lord to Peter, I
   am coming to Rome to be crucified again, acquires a living force and
   becomes full of meaning as a reference to an event fresh in the minds
   of the readers. The writer of Hebrews was acquainted with 1st Peter,
   and if, as I venture for the moment to assume, this Epistle was
   addressed to the Jewish Christians in Rome about a year or a year and a
   half after St. Peter's death then the solemn words in which those who
   in times of persecution shall fall away were warned that it was
   impossible to renew them again to repentance--seeing that (by such an
   act of apostasy) they crucify the Son of God afresh and put him to an
   open shame'--recalling, as they did, the very words which had caused
   Peter to turn back and welcome martyrdom, would strike home to the
   hearts and consciences of any waverers that heard them. For the Quo
   Vadis? story, if in any sense historical, must have been widely known
   from the first.

   Having made this reference to the Epistle to the Hebrews let us now
   turn to the consideration of the problems that it presents.

   The internal evidence tells us that this epistle was sent to a Church
   containing a considerable body of Jewish Christians, who though they
   spoke Greek and used the LXX. version, were accustomed to style
   themselves Hebrews.' They had been exposed to a severe persecution,
   having endured a great conflict of sufferings, being made a
   gazing-stock both by reproaches and afflictions'--a conflict in which
   certain persons had apostatised. [315] Further it would appear that
   persecution had not ceased, but that some were still in bonds. [316]
   Among those who had suffered were leaders, who had set an example to be
   followed. [317] The place of martyrdom is plainly indicated as lying
   outside the city walls. [318] Those who would be the readers of the
   Epistle had not yet themselves resisted unto blood, but they needed
   encouragement to persevere, and as a deterrent to the weak-kneed and
   faint-hearted the terrible judgments of God against apostasy are
   painted in the sternest colours. [319] Now all this applies to the
   Judaeo-Christian community of Rome in the year 66 A.D.

   That there was such a body of Judaeo-Christians at Rome and that the
   writer of this Epistle should address them as Hebrews, there is a
   sufficiency of evidence, apart from that furnished by the document
   itself. In the Epistle to the Philippians, which was written at Rome
   some four years before the Epistle to the Hebrews, St. Paul makes
   mention of a party among the Christians there, who preach Christ of
   envy and strife, of contention and not sincerely, supposing to add
   affliction to my bonds.' And in this same epistle he warns the
   Philippians Beware of dogs, beware of the concision, for we are the
   circumcision which worship God in the spirit,' and then proceeds if any
   other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I
   more. Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, an Hebrew of
   the Hebrews.' We may gather from this that the party who tried to add
   affliction to the Apostle's bonds of envy, strife, and contention,'
   were the party that held that circumcision was binding on Christians,
   and who styled themselves Hebrews. [320] Of this extreme Jewish party,
   who were Jews first and Christians afterwards, some under the stress of
   persecution seem to have apostatised, probably by reverting to Judaism
   and seeking protection under its privilege. Moreover in an extant
   inscription one of the Jewish congregations at Rome is described as the
   synagogue of the Hebrews. [321] And Professor Lanciani writes the whole
   district outside the Porta Portese has retained its connexion with the
   Ghetto of Ancient Rome up to our own days, being called Ortaccio degli
   Ebrei, just as in bygone times it bore the name of Campus Iudaeorum or
   Contrata Hebreorum. [322]

   The external evidence that the Epistle to the Hebrews was addressed to
   Roman Christians is circumstantially strong and convincing. It was so
   familiar to Clement of Rome that in his own epistle to the Church of
   Corinth he incorporates its phrases and its ideas freely, but without
   mentioning the writer's name. This proves that Hebrews was well known
   in Rome during the last half of the first century and that it had for
   Clement an attraction which may reasonably be attributed to an
   acquaintance with and respect for the author. The extent of Clement's
   indebtedness may be gathered from the fact that at a later time the
   actual authorship of Hebrews, despite the great dissimilarity of style,
   was ascribed at him. [323] Again the frequency with which the anchor
   appears as the emblem of Christian hope, in the most ancient
   inscriptions found in the Catacombs, may be regarded as a testimony to
   a very early and wide-spread knowledge of the Epistle to the Hebrews
   among Roman Christians. [324] Into the whole question of patristic
   evidence of a later date I cannot enter here, space forbids it, but it
   may be stated broadly that in the middle of the second century Hebrews
   was accepted at Alexandria by Pantaenus and his school as an epistle of
   St. Paul's; that the great Alexandrian Fathers, Clement and Origen,
   both quote Hebrews frequently as St. Paul's, though Clement expressed
   doubts whether it was actually written by St. Paul, and Origen goes
   further and declares that the name of the writer was absolutely
   unknown. The same indecision and indefiniteness of opinion appear in
   Eusebius' Ecclesiastical History' in a number of passages, and he may
   be taken as reflecting the general attitude of the Alexandrian and
   Eastern Churches at the beginning of the fourth century. [325] Very
   different was the attitude of the Roman or Western Church during the
   same period. There never seems to have been the smallest doubt in Rome
   and the West at any time that the epistle was not Paul's. Not until the
   middle of the fourth century does any Western writer cite any passage
   from Hebrews as Pauline. Indeed, in the course of the second century a
   distinct line of division between canonical and uncanonical writings
   began to be drawn, and there seems to have been no hesitation in the
   Western Church in placing the Epistle to the Hebrews among the
   uncanonical. Irenaeus in all his works never appears to have cited the
   epistle, though in his Treatise against Heresies' many passages would
   have been effective. He may be regarded as a representative man of the
   last quarter of the second century. Tertullian and Hippolytus, the one
   at the beginning, the other in the second quarter of the third century,
   both deny the Pauline authorship. Later still in that century neither
   Novatian at Rome nor Cyprian at Carthage, in their controversy about
   the Lapsed,' ever brings forward the passage from Hebrews vi. 2-6 which
   bears directly upon it, nor do they make any quotations from this
   epistle in their writings. This affords conclusive evidence that Rome
   and the West, unlike Alexandria and the East, were not in two minds
   about this epistle: it was not Paul's and therefore not authoritative.
   But there is evidence to show that their knowledge was not merely
   negative. They were sure it was not Paul's because they were acquainted
   with the name of the actual writer.

   Tertullian in his treatise De Pudicitia' makes the following statement:
   [326] for there is extant [a testimony] of Barnabas with the title "To
   the Hebrews"--a man moreover sufficiently accredited, as one whom Paul
   had placed next to himself in the observance of abstinence. . . . And
   at any rate the Epistle of Barnabas is more received among the Churches
   than that apocryphal "Shepherd" of adulterers.' Then, after quoting the
   passage at the opening of the sixth Chapter of Hebrews, Tertullian adds
   He who learnt this from Apostles, and taught it with Apostles, never
   knew of any second repentance promised to the adulterer and
   fornicator.' Now here it will be noticed that the great African Father
   is not attempting to reckon the Epistle to the Hebrews as
   authoritative, or to place it among the Apostolical Scriptures; he
   quotes the epistle as the work of a man whose credentials are simply
   that he was a companion and fellow-worker with Apostles. But on the
   question of authorship there is not a sign that he was making an
   assertion about which there was any doubt. He assumes that his readers
   were aware of it and would admit it. In fact as he is inveighing, as a
   Montanist, against what he regarded as the lax discipline of the Church
   of Rome,' he would not be likely to have quoted this passage in support
   of his argument as written by Barnabas, unless he knew that his
   opponents would not impugn his assertion. It is clear then from this
   that the tradition of the Barnabas authorship was held without dispute
   not only in Provincial Africa but in the Church of Rome itself in the
   time of Tertullian. But if so, does not the existence of such an
   accepted tradition in a Church where no counter-tradition existed,
   except that the author of Hebrews was not St. Paul, virtually postulate
   its truth?

   Now it is needless for me to dilate on the fact here that Barnabas was
   peculiarly qualified to be the writer of such a hortatory homily or
   dissertation as the Epistle to the Hebrews. He was at once a Cypriote
   Jew, brought up in close contact with Alexandrian influences and modes
   of thought, and a Levite by descent, who had relatives living at
   Jerusalem. The writer himself styles his epistle a Word of
   Exhortation'--logos parakleseos--a technical expression for those
   expositions or interpretations of Scripture which it was customary to
   deliver in the synagogues, and Barnabas' very name in its Greek form,
   huios parakleseos, signifies a man gifted with powers of such
   exhortation. The addresses of St. Stephen to the Sanhedrin or of St.
   Paul at Antioch are specimens of such hortatory expositions of
   Scripture, and it has been noted how closely the Epistle to the Hebrews
   follows in many places the lines of St. Stephen's speech. The influence
   of St. Stephen is particularly observable in the eleventh chapter. The
   whole character of this Epistle is moreover exactly in accordance with
   what we should expect from the man who in the Acts of the Apostles is
   brought before us as the mediator between the two schools of Judaistic
   and Pauline conceptions of Christianity. His epistle, possibly written
   at Paul's wish and with his full approval, was sent to Rome as an
   eirenicon, with the aim of drawing nearer together the Hebrews and the
   Gentiles--the party of the circumcision and those converts who were
   followers of St. Paul's doctrines. His object is to show that
   Christianity is the historical outcome of Judaism, and that, so far
   from being in any way opposed, the Law, the Temple, and all the
   characteristic Jewish rites and ceremonies were but types and shadows
   of the more perfect dispensation that was to come; and that they all
   found their spiritual fulfilment in Christ.

   It only remains to point out that the personal references in the
   epistle support the hypothesis of a Barnabas author-ship. The tone of
   authority is marked, [327] and has led some commentators on this ground
   to hold that, even if St. Paul was not the actual writer, the epistle
   was sent to its destination in his name. But there was one man who
   could write with an authority second only to that of the chief
   Apostles, Barnabas, and, if the destination of the epistle were Rome,
   from what has already been said of the connexion of Barnabas with the
   Roman Church [328] it is certain that after St. Peter's death the words
   of no other leader would carry so much weight with the
   Judaeo-Christians there as his. From one passage we gather that the
   writer had not been a personal hearer of the Lord, and from the Acts it
   would appear that Barnabas did not become a Christian until some short
   time after the Great Day of Pentecost. [329] Lastly, the writer, who
   had himself been in bonds, sends the news that Timothy had been
   released, [330] and that he was hoping that he would shortly be able to
   pay a visit to his readers with Timothy as his companion. But according
   to the First Epistle to Timothy, that disciple had at Ephesus confessed
   a good confession before many witnesses' [331] ; this city, then, it
   may be safely inferred, had been the scene of Timothy's imprisonment
   and release. But it will be remembered that in the last lecture some
   reasons were given for believing that Barnabas and Timothy were the
   joint bearers from Rome of the Epistle to the Philippians, and that
   from Philippi they went on to Asia Minor. [332] If then Barnabas were
   the author of Hebrews, nothing would be more natural than that they
   should be in 66 A.D. the one in Ephesus, the other in some neighbouring
   town, and that Barnabas should be planning in company with Timothy to
   journey once again to Rome. The words they of Italy salute you' are a
   fitting greeting, if sent to Rome by a man well known to the Christian
   congregations in Italy, and to whom Italian Christians sojourning in
   the province of Asia would resort as a proved friend and teacher:
   conditions which, unless tradition be altogether untrustworthy, apply
   pre-eminently to Barnabas and to no one else,

   At the close of the year 66 A.D. or the beginning of 67 A.D. we find
   St. Paul again at Rome. In the interval that had elapsed since his
   release in the year 62 A.D., he seems first to have carried out his
   intention of making a missionary journey to Spain and then to have
   revisited the scenes of his former labours in Asia Minor and Greece.
   Clement in his Epistle to the Corinthians speaks of his having reached
   the farthest bounds of the West,' [333] and the Muratorian fragment on
   the Canon speaks of the departure of Paul from the city on his journey
   to Spain.' [334] The authorities for his later travels are the Pastoral
   Epistles. With those travels, or with the authenticity of the Pastoral
   Epistles as a whole, these lectures have no necessary concern. It is
   enough that the autobiographical sections of the Second Epistle to
   Timothy should be recognised as derived from a genuine Pauline source,
   and this recognition is generally conceded even by some who most
   strenuously deny that the entire epistle as we possess it was written
   by Paul, [335] for it is these sections only which deal with the second
   imprisonment of the Apostle in Rome. At the same time I should like at
   this point to record my complete agreement with the conclusion of Sir
   William Ramsay that it is far more difficult to frame any rational
   theory how these letters came into existence, if they are not the work
   of Paul, than it is to understand them as composed by him, and as
   completing our conception of his character'; and again, regarded in the
   proper perspective, they [the Pastorals] are historically perhaps the
   most illuminative of all the Pauline epistles; and this is the best and
   the one sufficient proof that they are authentic compositions.' [336]

   In the Second Epistle to Timothy we find Paul at Rome in prison
   awaiting inevitable death in the calm consciousness of having fought
   the good fight and finished his course. [337] Of what befell him on his
   arrival at Rome we know nothing. But his previous captivity of two
   years and trial would make him well known as a Christian leader, and
   the swarms of informers [338] would lose no time in denouncing him to
   the authorities as suspect. Possibly he may have been arrested under
   the edict of 66 A.D. forbidding philosophers to reside in Rome, which
   had sent Apollonius into banishment. Clement tells us he was brought
   before the governors,' [339] which, in the absence of Nero in Greece
   accompanied by Tigellinus, may be taken to mean the freedman Helius, to
   whom the government had been entrusted, and Nymphidius Sabinus, the
   Pretorian Prefect. [340] In any case, whatever the original cause of
   his arrest, it was as a malefactor (kakourgos) that he was--at the time
   he was writing--suffering hardship even unto bonds; in other words, he
   was being charged with the crimes imputed to those who bore the name of
   Christian. [341] Already he had been once before the tribunal, and
   bitterly does he complain that he could find no one to stand by his
   side and aid him in his defence, but by God's help he had been able
   fully to proclaim his message so that all the Gentiles might hear, and
   he had for the time been delivered from the mouth of the lion' [342]
   and escaped immediate condemnation. But he was still in prison, his
   enemies were busy, and he does not anticipate any issue but death. In
   his captivity, however, he is feeling lonely and deserted. Of his
   personal friends and disciples some like Demas had openly forsaken him,
   others were engaged on various missions, Prisca and Aquila probably in
   consequence of the persecution had left Rome and were once more at
   Ephesus. Only the faithful Luke was with him. [343] For some reason or
   other the Apostle appears in these last months of his life to have been
   under a cloud. Sadly he recalls to Timothy--this thou knowest, that all
   that are in Asia turned away from me,' [344] and the whole tone of the
   Epistle shows that the Roman Christians as a body were, if not
   unfriendly, at least unsympathetic. There were of course exceptions,
   such as Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, and Claudia, who send their salutations
   by him to Timothy, and well-authenticated tradition points to two of
   these, Pudens and Linus, as being among the foremost leaders of the
   Roman Church at the close of the seventh decade of our era. [345] The
   whole soul of Paul however is filled with a longing desire to see once
   more his own beloved son Timothy before the end, and twice does he
   earnestly in the course of the concluding verses of this most touching
   and noble letter beseech him--do thy diligence to come shortly unto
   me'--do thy diligence to come to me before winter.' [346] And then the
   veil falls. Whether Timothy arrived in time to comfort the Apostle in
   the final hours of his life we shall never know. We trust it was so.
   All tradition says that St. Paul, as became his status as a Roman
   citizen, suffered martyrdom by decapitation, being led out of the city
   to the third milestone upon the Ostian Road, at the spot known as Aquae
   Salviae. The site of his tomb is now covered by the basilica which
   bears his name. [347]

   A document now claims our attention which has a closer relation to Rome
   and throws more light upon the feelings with which first-century
   Christianity regarded the World- Empire of the Caesars than any other
   book of the New Testament. I mean the apocalypse of St. John. The
   Apocalypse is full of references to historical events of which the
   author had quite recently been himself an eyewitness at Rome, or which
   were fresh in the memories of the Roman Christians with whom he had
   been associating, and it can be dated with great exactitude from
   internal evidence as having been written at the beginning of the year
   70 A.D. The witness of the contents of the book itself, as will be
   shown, amply justifies such an assertion. There is how-ever a certain
   amount of external evidence, which has had much more weight than it
   deserves, apparently supporting a later date. I think it best to deal
   with this first, with the object of tracing to its source the error on
   which I believe it rests. The witness of Irenaeus, 180 A.D., is no
   doubt important, especially on the question of the authorship of the
   Apocalypse, for he had himself in Asia been instructed by Polycarp, who
   was a personal disciple of St. John. Now Irenaeus several times states
   that John the disciple of the Lord, whom he identifies with the author
   of the fourth Gospel, was the writer. [348] The vexed question of this
   identity only concerns us now in as far as it throws light on the
   passage of Irenaeus bearing upon the date, which I proceed to quote. It
   is commonly rendered as follows: We are not bold enough to speak
   confidently of the name of Antichrist. For if it were necessary that
   his name should be declared clearly at the present time, it would have
   been announced by him who saw the revelation. For it was seen no such
   long time ago, but almost in our generation toward the end of the reign
   of Domitian.' But surely this rendering is wrong. It should be for he
   [St. John the writer] was seen . . . almost in our generation toward
   the end of the reign of Domitian.' [349] It is of the Seer and his
   ability to declare the name of Antichrist that Irenaeus is speaking.
   The misunderstanding about the meaning of the passage is largely due to
   Eusebius, who after a reference to Domitian's persecution proceeds in
   this [persecution] report affirms that the Apostle and Evangelist John,
   who was still living, in consequence of his testimony to the divine
   word was condemned to dwell on the island of Patmos,' and then he
   quotes Irenaeus in support of his statement. Now Eusebius was very
   familiar with the works of Origen, and more particularly his
   commentaries, and it seems to me that in making this statement he had
   in his mind the following comment by Origen upon St. Matthew xx. 22:
   And the sons of Zebedee were baptised with the baptism, since Herod
   killed James the [brother] of John with the sword, while the king of
   the Romans, as tradition teaches, condemned John bearing testimony
   through the word of truth unto the island Patmos. And John speaks of
   the things concerning his testimony, not saying who condemned him . . .
   and he seems to have beheld the Apocalypse in the island.' [350] Origen
   does not give the name of the Roman king, since, as he says, John does
   not tell us who condemned him. He certainly does not say that the Roman
   king was Domitian, indeed he is but repeating what Irenaeus had said
   before, who after discussing the meaning of the number of the Beast'
   declares himself in doubt, for if it were necessary that his name
   should be declared clearly at the present time, it would have been
   announced by him who saw the vision.' But the enigma, which Irenaeus
   and Origen both left unsolved, is no longer sealed to us. In his Life
   and Principate of the Emperor Nero' Mr. Henderson writes The number of
   the Beast is now fairly generally admitted to be' Nero Caesar. [351]
   Eusebius, again, after speaking of Trajan succeeding Nerva in the
   Empire writes: About this time also, John, the beloved disciple of
   Jesus, at once Apostle and Evangelist, still surviving in Asia,
   supervised the Churches there, having returned from his banishment to
   the island after the death of Domitian.' He then refers to Clement of
   Alexandria and Irenaeus as his authorities. With Irenaeus we have
   already dealt. The words of Clement are: For when the tyrant was dead
   he (John) departed from the island of Patmos to Ephesus; he also, when
   called upon, went to the neighbouring districts of the Gentiles, in
   some appointing bishops, in some organising entire Churches.' [352] But
   Clement does not say the tyrant' was Domitian, the name might with even
   greater propriety be applied to Nero.

   The evidence of Victorinus and of Jerome next calls for notice.
   Victorinus, who suffered martyrdom in 303 A.D., is a pre-Eusebian
   witness to the tradition. In his commentary on the Apocalypse, which is
   the earliest extant, he writes When John saw these things, he was in
   the island Patmos, condemned to the mines by Domitian Caesar. There it
   was therefore that he saw the Apocalypse; and when already the Elder
   had thought that he through his passion would receive acceptance,
   Domitian having been slain all his sentences were quashed and John,
   freed from the mines, then afterwards published this same Apocalypse,
   which he had received from God.' [353] Jerome is still more explicit:
   In his fourteenth year when Domitian was stirring up the second
   persecution after Nero, John having been banished into the island
   Patmos wrote the Apocalypse . . . but when Domitian had been slain and
   his acts on account of their excessive cruelty repealed by the Senate
   in the reign of Nerva he returned to Ephesus.' [354]

   Now the first comment I make on all these passages is, that one and all
   of these early Christian writers that I have quoted had no doubt that
   the author of the Apocalypse was John the Apostle, the son of Zebedee;
   rightly or wrongly that was their belief, yet he is at the close of
   Domitian's reign condemned to exile in a lonely island as a criminal
   (to work in the mines according to Victorinus), and after his release
   by Nerva he returns to Ephesus, and as Clement of Alexandria (quoted by
   Eusebius) tells us--he also when called upon went to the neighbouring
   districts of the Gentiles, in some appointing bishops, in others
   organising Churches &c. . . .' But John, son of Zebedee, must in the
   year 96 A.D. have been well-nigh a centenarian; is it seriously
   contended that he at such an age could have survived the hardships of
   such an exile, even without the mines, or that he would have been able
   physically, had he survived, to have taken in hand in the reign of
   Nerva the organisation over a large area of the Churches in Asia and
   the neighbouring districts? It is on the face of it absurd. The
   evidence for this late date is moreover, when critically examined,
   decidedly weak. It is extremely doubtful whether any of the three
   earliest authorities which refer to the exile at Patmos support it.
   Eusebius, as we have seen, read his own interpretation of the words of
   Irenaeus into the passages from Origen and Clement, neither of whom
   here names Domitian. Of the other two witnesses, however, Victorinus
   certainly did not write under the influence of Eusebius, and the
   similarity of his version of the tradition to that of Jerome seems to
   point to their common derivation from some documentary source, which
   connected the condemnation to Patmos and the subsequent release with
   the names of Domitian and Nerva. But, as I shall now proceed to show, a
   condemnation by Domitian and a release by Nerva is not merely not
   inconsistent with but is strongly confirmatory of the fact, attested so
   strongly by the internal evidence of the book, that the Apocalypse was
   written in the early part of the year 70 A.D.

   Let us examine that portion of the internal evidence which chiefly
   concerns us in this lecture, the portion which reflects the events of
   contemporary history in the city of Rome.

   In the seventeenth chapter of the Revelation the great city which
   reigneth over the kings of the earth' is brought before us under the
   likeness of a woman seated un a scarlet-coloured beast with seven
   heads, which are explained to be seven hills, and on her forehead is
   written her name of Mystery--Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots
   and the Abominations of the Earth. On this woman drunken with the blood
   of the saints and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus [355] judgment
   is pronounced. Again in the following chapter the Seer repeats this
   last indictment: And in her was found the blood of prophets and of
   saints and of all that were slain upon the earth.' [356] There are
   other passages of similar import, but these two are sufficient to make
   it clear that the writer is referring to the Neronian persecution with
   its multitude of victims, and not to that of Domitian, which was not a
   general persecution at all, but a series of isolated acts directed
   chiefly against a few influential persons, including members of his own
   family.

   Again both in chapter xiv. 8, and chapter xviii. 2, an angel is
   represented as crying with a mighty voice Fallen, fallen is Babylon the
   Great,' and the lurid picture which is given of that fall is no mere
   effort of ecstatic imagination, it is the picture of a real event,
   fresh in the memory. As we read of the kings of the earth and the
   merchants of the earth standing afar off and weeping and lamenting for
   her, as they see the smoke of her burning, and crying out Alas, alas
   that great city Babylon, that mighty city; for in one hour is thy
   judgment come,' and as we read again--of the winepress of the wrath of
   God being trodden without the city and blood came out of the winepress
   even to the horses' bridles'--there is but one occasion in the whole of
   the first century to which such a description could be applied: the
   writer had seen it with his own eyes--the storming and burning of the
   Capitol by the foreign mercenaries of Vitellius, and the subsequent
   capture and sacking of the city by the infuriated Flavian army under
   Mucianus and Antonius Primus on December 19 to 21, 69 A.D. At no other
   time, certainly not in the end of Domitian's reign, was it possible to
   speak of Rome as fallen, or for the Seer to have raised his triumphant
   cry Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets;
   for God hath avenged you on her' (Rev. xviii. 20).

   The following passages from the Histories' of Tacitus, if read side by
   side with the passages telling of the fall of Babylon the Great in the
   Apocalypse, will carry conviction that both writers are describing one
   and the same unique event. Of the burning of the Capitol Tacitus writes
   The fire extended itself to the porticoes adjoining the temples; soon
   the eagles that supported the cupola caught fire, and as the timber was
   old they fed the flame. Thus the Capitol . . . was burned to the
   ground. . . . From the foundation of the city to that hour the Roman
   republic had felt no calamity so deplorable, so shocking as that.' And
   again of the capture of the city by the Flavian troops: The city
   exhibited one entire scene of ferocity and abomination. . . . Rivers of
   blood and heaps of bodies at the same time; and by the side of them
   harlots, and women that differed not from harlots--all that unbridled
   passion can suggest in the wantonness of peace--all the enormities that
   are committed when a city is sacked by its relentless foes--so that you
   could positively suppose that Rome was at one and the same time frantic
   with rage and dissolved in sensuality. . . . lamentation was heard from
   every quarter, and Rome was filled with cries of despair and the
   horrors of a city taken by storm.' [357] Well might they who stood afar
   off as they saw the smoke of her burning and the terror of her torment
   exclaim Alas, alas that great city Babylon, that mighty city; for in
   one hour is thy judgment come.' [358] Even the description--mother of
   harlots and of the abominations of the earth'--what a realistic
   intensity and force it gains, as the utterance of one who had seen with
   his own eyes the scenes in the streets of Rome on those terrible
   December days.

   In the course of eighteen months four emperors had perished and Italy
   had been the scene of continuous and savage civil war. In consequence
   of the events just described Vespasian became emperor, but at the
   opening of the year 70 A.D. both he and his elder son Titus were
   abroad. Vespasian in Egypt, Titus in Judaea. Domitian was the sole
   representative of his family in Rome, and he was at once presented to
   the people by the victorious Flavian general, Mucianus, was saluted as
   Caesar, and made praetor. His father and brother were appointed
   consuls, but as they were absent, Domitian was invested with full
   consular authority--imperio consulari. For six months he in conjunction
   with Mucianus acted as regent, administered public affairs, restored
   order and distributed offices. His name, says Tacitus, [359] was placed
   at the head of all despatches and edicts. Though but a boy of eighteen
   his head became filled with ambitious ideas, and he began, says
   Suetonius, [360] to use his power in so arbitrary a manner as to give
   proof of what he was to become later. To such an extent was this the
   case that Dion Cassius [361] tells us that Vespasian wrote to him from
   Alexandria I am much obliged to you, my son, for letting me still be
   emperor, and for not having as yet deposed me.'

   Such incendiary language as we find in the Apocalypse, if used
   publicly, would at such a time soon bring down upon the offenders the
   repressive arm of those charged with the maintenance of order in the
   capital after the terrible experiences of the year 69 A.D. Tradition
   says that John narrowly escaped martyrdom [362] ; however this may be,
   there is a high probability that his deportation to Patmos took place
   very early in the year 70 A.D. (in January or February) through a
   sentence passed in Domitian's name. In the month of June of that year
   Domitian and Mucianus left Rome to take part in a campaign in Gaul, and
   a little later Vespasian arrived in Rome and at once assumed the
   direction of affairs. [363] Suetonius informs us that from the
   beginning he was anxious to conduct himself with great moderation and
   clemency. [364] One of his first cares was to take in hand the
   administration of justice, which had been sadly interrupted by the
   civil wars, and to examine into the accumulation of law-suits which had
   arisen, and to provide for the restitution of what had been seized by
   violence in the disorders of the time. Now Vespasian associated Titus
   with himself in the government in the course of the year 71 A.D. and
   was very jealous during the whole of his reign of allowing authority to
   be vested in any but members of his own family. But Vespasian took as
   his colleague in the consulship in 71 A.D. M. Cocceius Nerva. Now
   Nerva--the future emperor--was the representative of a family
   distinguished for three generations as jurists, and no doubt his
   appointment at this particular time was due to Vespasian's desire to
   have a skilled lawyer at his side for dealing with the mass of
   sentences of exile and of confiscation which were the legacy of the
   successive revolutions. Nerva held office during the first nundinum of
   71 A.D., and it is permissible to believe that in accordance with
   tradition one of the sentences quashed by him was that which sent John
   to Patmos. If by an order of Nerva he were now released, his exile
   would have lasted almost exactly one year. [365]

   The external evidence, which was supposed to be adverse to the
   acceptance of the early date for the writing of the Apocalypse, having
   thus been transformed into an argument in its favour, we will now
   proceed by a further examination of certain crucial passages of the
   book to make assurance on this matter doubly sure.

   The opening verses of chapter xi. imply that the Temple of Jerusalem
   was still standing, and that there was no expectation of the
   destruction of the Shrine itself. But the outer court was to be given
   to the nations, who for a period represented by 42 months would trample
   it under foot. [366] This statement must have been made at the time
   when the legions of Titus were already closing round Jerusalem and its
   doom was sealed, but before it was known that the desperate character
   of the defence would carry with it the entire destruction of the city
   and its world-famous sanctuary. That Jerusalem was not destroyed when
   the words (xi. 8) were written--their dead bodies lie in the street of
   the Great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also
   their Lord was crucified'--is evident. In 95 A.D. the city was in
   ruins.

   The central theme of the Apocalypse is the struggle between Christ and
   Antichrist, between Christianity and the Imperial World-Power of Rome.
   To St. John the Roman World-Power is Antichrist and both of them are
   personified by Nero. The baleful figure of Nero dominates the entire
   picture of the struggle between the forces of good and evil. The wild
   beast, [367] coming up out of the sea with its seven heads and ten
   horns, and the imagery connected with it, was suggested to the Seer by
   the apocalyptic visions of Daniel vii., the fourth kingdom of Daniel
   being identified by him with the Roman Empire. The name of the beast
   [368] is expressed by a number--the number of a man'--and the number is
   Six Hundred and Sixty-Six. Irenaeus discusses the meaning of this
   number which concealed the name of Antichrist, and already when he
   wrote his treatise Against Heresies' in 180 A.D. the key had been lost.
   And he is puzzled by the fact that he found in some MSS. the number 616
   instead of 666--one such MS. exists still--and he supposes it due to
   the error of copyists. But there is a solution now generally accepted,
   and whose correctness this very variant reading actually confirms. For
   if the Greek spelling of Nero Caesar be transliterated into Hebrew and
   the numerical values of the Hebrew letters added together they make
   666. If however the Latin spelling be treated in the same way, the
   total comes to 616. Nero then was Antichrist, and the interpretation of
   the seven heads, the ten horns and the other symbolic imagery of this
   portion of the Apocalypse must be approached from the point of view
   that they all belong to the Neronian period. St. John was not an
   historian, his mind was stored with the language and ideas of Daniel
   and Ezekiel and other Apocalyptic writers, who had preceded him; and
   his own Apocalypse was but one out of a number of Jewish or
   Judaeo-Christian Apocalypses of the first century, with some of which
   he shows himself to be acquainted. Nevertheless in all that he writes
   there is a distinctive historical background, and it is limited to what
   he himself knew of the actual contact of Christianity with the Imperial
   power at Rome: a contact which began in the days of Claudius and which
   had issued in the reign of Nero in a conflict for life and death, which
   was still undecided. Indeed I may go further and say that it is only
   when the Apocalypse is treated historically as a Neronian document that
   any satisfactory interpretation can be found for the imagery of certain
   difficult passages. For example, nothing is more remarkable in the
   years which followed Nero's death than the belief that gained firm
   possession of the popular imagination, that the Emperor was not really
   dead, but that he had fled to the East and would speedily reappear and
   once more possess himself of power. In 69 A.D. a false Nero was put to
   death in the island of Cythnus, and twenty years later another Nero
   pretender raised a revolt in Asia. [369] The Christian Sibylline
   Oracles are evidence as to the character and prevalence of this Nero
   legend in the reign of Vespasian, [370] and the references to it in the
   Apocalypse are a proof of the strong impression which it had made upon
   the writer. In the thirteenth chapter, after describing the beast with
   its seven heads and ten horns, St. John proceeds: and I saw one of his
   heads as though it had been smitten unto death; and his death-stroke
   was healed'; and in chapter xvii. verses 7, 8, he writes I will tell
   thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her,
   which hath the seven heads and the ten horns. The beast that thou
   sawest was, and is not; and is about to come up out of the abyss, and
   goeth into perdition.' Then a few verses further on comes the passage
   which has caused so much trouble to commentators, in no small measure
   because they allow themselves to wander out of a strictly limited field
   of investigation--i.e. the Neronian cycle. St. John says (verses 9-12)
   'The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth: and
   they are seven kings; the five are fallen, the one is, the other is not
   yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a little while. And the
   beast that was, and is not, is himself also an eighth, and is of the
   seven; and he goeth into perdition.' Now the key to this passage is
   found as soon as it is recognised that it deals with no other period of
   Roman history than that which I have called the Neronian cycle'--the
   period during which the Church and the Empire, Christ and Antichrist,
   were first brought face to face as forces irreconcilably opposed. For
   note that throughout Nero is not merely one of the seven heads, he is
   identified with the Beast itself. [371] In one passage (xiii. 3) he is
   the head that was smitten unto death and his wound was healed,' in
   another (xiii. 14) the beast that had the wound of a sword and did
   live,' and again (xvii. 8) the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.'
   Now the words five are fallen' (epesan) imply that in each of these
   five cases there was a violent death Augustus and Tiberius could not be
   described as fallen,' even had their reigns come within the Seer's
   purview. The five are Claudius, who adopted Nero as his son and heir,
   Nero himself, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius. The one who is' signifies the
   man for the moment invested with imperial power, Domitian, the acting
   Emperor, who banished the writer. The one not yet come' is the real
   Emperor Vespasian, who had not yet arrived at Rome to take into his
   hands the reins of government, and he will continue only a short
   while,' for Nero--the beast that was, and is not, who is also an
   eighth, and is of the seven'--will quickly return from the East whither
   he had fled, and once more seat himself on the throne. And his end is
   perdition,' for after his return will immediately follow the great
   struggle between Christ and Antichrist, when the latter will be
   overthrown and cast alive into the lake of fire. [372] Again the ten
   horns with ten diadems,' of chapter xiii. verse 1, are generally
   considered to be the governors of the chief provinces of the Empire,
   and this is borne out by the reference to them in chapter xvii. verses
   12-13: And the ten horns that thou sawest are ten kings, which have
   received no kingdom as yet, but they receive authority as kings, with
   the beast, for one hour'; and then a few verses lower and the ten horns
   that thou sawest, and the beast, these shall hate the harlot, and shall
   make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
   utterly with fire.' Is there not a direct reference here to the events
   of the two preceding years? The revolt of Vindex was the signal for the
   overthrow of Nero. The armies of Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian
   in succession occupied Rome, and the imperial city was held in
   subjection by foreign troops, sacked, and its most sacred edifices
   burnt. All these five men were governors of provinces.

   Lastly it seems to me impossible to dissociate the gathering together
   of the nations to battle at Armageddon, the nations which are in the
   four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to
   the war, the number of whom is as the sand of the sea,' [373] from the
   actual gathering of the nations in those battles near Bedriacum which
   had taken place in the year 69. Gog and Magog had come to signify in
   the Apocalyptic literature the uncivilised tribes of the earth, and
   surely if ever Armageddon was realised in the history of the world it
   was in that second battle of Bedriacum ending in the sack of Cremona in
   which the armies of Vitellius and Vespasian contended for the mastery.
   On the one side were troops from Italy, Spain and Portugal, Gaul, the
   German Rhine frontier, even from far distant Batavia and Britain; on
   the other, legions from the Danube frontier, and behind these the
   armies of Syria, Judaea and Egypt, with auxiliaries from the
   furthermost East, from the borderlands of the Euphrates and Tigris.
   [374] The Seer is not describing these battles, but he saw the medley
   of troops from every nation under heaven actually fighting in the
   streets of Rome, and the scenes he witnessed still so freshly imprinted
   in his mind are vividly reflected in the imagery of his vision.

   Renan [375] has pointed out in his well-known work L'Antéchrist' that
   the portents, scourges, and convulsions of nature which in the
   Apocalypse follow upon the opening of the seals, the blowing of the
   trumpets, and the emptying of the vials were far from being merely
   imaginative. The years that preceded 70 A.D. were years marked by every
   kind of disaster and catastrophe. Earthquakes were frequent and
   violent, especially in that part of Asia to which John addressed his
   seven letters. [376] The great pestilence at Rome in 65 A.D. was
   followed by a wild hurricane, which laid waste the Campagna. [377] All
   sorts of portents were said to have foreshadowed the death of Nero in
   68 A.D. and the succession of political convulsions that followed.
   [378] This same year 68 was marked by a famine at Rome, [379] the year
   69 by a very disastrous inundation of the Tiber. [380] It was no wonder
   that a visionary mystic like St. John should have perceived the signs
   of the consummation of all things in such a series of catastrophes,
   political and physical. Surely there could not be a more convincing
   piece of circumstantial evidence for fixing the date of the book.

   Moveover as the Seer in the island of Patmos sat brooding over and
   recording his visions, before his very eyes there was a spectacle which
   has left its traces upon his language. The volcano in the neighbouring
   island of Thera was in violent activity during the greater part of the
   first century, after which it had a long period of quiescence until 726
   A.D. No one can read a number of passages in the Apocalypse [381]
   without feeling that the writer must have been the witness of a
   volcanic eruption on a grand scale, and there are other passages which
   point to familiarity with such scenes. Now the very remarkable fact
   stands recorded, that on two separate occasions, in 196 B.C. and in 46
   A.D., so extraordinary was the violence of the eruptive forces in the
   very neighbourhood of this island that new islands came into existence,
   whose modern names still recall the character of their origin. A vivid
   description is given by Strabo of the eruption of 196 B.C.: Midway
   between Thera and Therasia flames rushed forth from the sea, causing
   the whole of it to boil and be on fire, and afterwards an island,
   twelve stadia in circumference, composed of the burning mass was thrown
   up as if raised by machinery.' [382] Compare with this the language of
   Rev. viii. 8, 9: and the second angel sounded, and as it were a great
   mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of
   the sea became blood; and the third part of the creatures that were in
   the sea and had life died, and the third part of the ships were
   destroyed.' All these graphic touches are such as we should expect from
   a writer who had actually resided in a group of islands where such
   catastrophic convulsions had recently taken place. There was an
   eruption in Thera in 6o A.D., and the following decade was marked by
   continued seismic and volcanic disturbances.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [300] Clement, 1 Cor. v. 6; supra, p. 47.

   [301] Eus. Hist. Eccl. ii. 25; iv. 23: homoios de kai ten Italian
   homose eidaxantes, emarturesan kata ton auton kairon.

   [302] Irenaeus, adv. Haer. iii. 3. 2: Sed quoniam valde longum est in
   hoc tali volumine omnium Ecclesiarum numerare successiones, maximae et
   antiquissimae et omnibus cognitae, a gloriosissimis duobus apostolis
   Petro et Paulo Romae fundatae et constitutae Ecclesiae, eam quam habet
   ab apostolis traditionem et annuntiatam hominibus fidem, per
   successiones episcoporum pervenientem usque ad nos indicantes,
   confundimus omnes eos, qui quoquo mode, vel per sibi placenta, vel per
   vanam gloriam, vel per caecitatem et malam sententiam praeter quam
   oportet, colligunt.'

   [303] C. H. Turner, Studies in Early Church History, p. 222.

   [304] Iren. adv. Haer. Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam propter potiorem
   principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui
   sunt undique fideles, in qua semper ab his, qui sunt undique,
   conservata est ea, quae est ab apostolis traditio.' On the universal
   acceptance by all Churches of the martyrdom of the Apostles Peter and
   Paul at Rome, see P. Martin, Revue des Questions historiques, xiii. pp.
   31 ff.

   [305] Richard A. Lipsius, Die Apokryphen Apostelgeschichten and
   Apostellegenden, 2er Band, 1e Hälfte.

   [306] A. Harnack, Altchristl. Lit. 2er Theil, 1er Band, pp. 549-60. See
   Chase's admirable article on St. Peter in Hastings's Dict. of the
   Bible; 1 Clem. v: kai marturesasm epi ton hegoumenon houtos apellage
   tou kosmou.

   [307] Tert. Scorp. 15. See also Praescript. 36: Ista quam felix
   ecclesia . . . ubi Petrus passioni dominicae adaequatur'; Adv. Marc.
   iv. 5; John xxi. 18, 19: Verily, verily I say unto thee, when thou wast
   young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest; but
   when thou shalt be old thou shalt stretch forth thy hands and another
   shall gird thee and carry thee whither thou wouldest not. Now this he
   spake signifying by what manner of death he should glorify God.' Comp.
   xiii. 36. Seneca (Cons. ad Marciam, 20) writes of those crucified
   brachia patibulo explicuerunt.' The tradition that St. Peter at his own
   request was crucified head-downwards was first mentioned by Origen,
   aneskolopisthe kata kephales (Op. ii. 24 de la Rue), in his Commentary
   on Genesis to which Eusebius refers (Hist. Eccl. iii. 1). This shows
   that the tradition was known early in the third century, and the letter
   of Seneca quoted above is evidence that such a method of execution was
   not unknown in Rome, for he writes: Video istic cruces non unius quidem
   generis, sed aliter ab aliis fabricatas; capite quidem conversos in
   terrain suspendere.' It is impossible to say whether this tradition of
   the mode of St. Peter's death be true, on the whole it is improbable.

   [308] Ascension of Isaiah, Charles, pp. 25 and 95, iv. 2, 3: A lawless
   king, the slayer of his mother: who himself, even this king, will
   persecute the plant which the Twelve Apostles of the Beloved have
   planted. Of the Twelve one will be delivered into his hands.' Comp. ten
   phuteian en phuteusousin hoi dodeka apostoloi and the words of the
   letter of Dionysius of Corinth, ten apo Petrou kai Paulou phuteian
   genetheisan Rhomaion te kai Korinthion. Eus. Hist. Eccl. ii. 25. In the
   Ascension of Isaiah St. Paul is not reckoned among the Twelve.

   [309] On the Liberian Catalogue, its sources and its relation to the
   Liber Pontificalis, see Duchesne's great edition of the Liber
   Pontificalis; Light-foot's excursus on the early Roman succession in
   his Apostolic Fathers (St. Clement of Rome), part I. vol. i. 201-345;
   Harnack, Chron. der Altchristl. Literatur, vol. i: Die ältesten
   Bischofslisten,' 79-230; also the chapter The Western Church' in
   Turner's Studies in Early Church History, 1912. The burial and tombs of
   the Apostles Peter and Paul and the translation of their bodies for a
   time to the Catacombs are the subject of a special Note, Note E,
   Appendix. The fact of the date of the translation and of the triple
   feast being on June 29 will be found in Duchesne, pp. civ-cvii; also in
   Barnes, St. Peter in Rome, pp. 107 ff. In the Hieronymian Martyrology
   (in a Codex discovered by De Rossi at Berne) the following entry
   occurs: III Kal. iul. Romae, natale sanctorum Petri et Pauli: Petri in
   Vaticano, via Aurelia; Pauli vero in via Ostensi; utriusque in
   Catacumbas; passi sub Nerone, Basso et Tusco Consulibus.' The words
   passi sub Nerone must be regarded as in a parenthesis, the date of the
   consulship of Bassus and Tuscus is 258 A.D. A somewhat earlier and more
   abbreviated entry is found in the so-called Feriale Philocalianum
   (335-354 A.D., Duchesne). The title of the document is Depositio
   Martyrum, and we find III. Kal. iul. Petri in Catacumbas et Pauli
   Ostense Basso et Tusco Consulibus.' A hymn attributed to St. Ambrose
   (Daniel, Thesaurus hymnologicus, Halle, 1841, No. 71) has this verse:

   Tantae per urbis ambitum

   Stipata tendunt agmina,

   Trinis celebrator viis

   Festum sacrorum Martyrum.
   This hymn was written for the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul on June
   29. The trinis viis' signifies the Aurelian, the Ostian, and the Appian
   Ways.

   [310] Prudentius, Peristephanon, hymn xii.

   Prima Petrum rapuit sententia legibus Neronis,

   Pendere iussum praeminente ligno.
   * ? * ? * ? * ? * ? * ? * ? *

   Ut teres orbis iter flexi rota percucurrit anni

   Diemque eundem sol reduxit ortus,

   Evomit in iugulum Pauli Nero fervidum furorem,

   Iubet feriri gentium magistrum.'
   St. Augustine (Sermons, 296-7) held a similar opinion.

   [311] Duchesne, Lib. Pont. vol. i. p. 119: Ce d'but, de même que
   plusieurs autres parties de la notice, étant emprunté au De Viris de
   Saint-Jérôme.' C. H. Turner in his chapter on St. Cyprian's
   correspondence in Studies in Early Church History, p. 101, writes; The
   older critics, following St. Jerome's statement (De Viris, lxvii.) that
   Cyprian suffered eodem die quo Romae Cornelius sed non eodem anno,"
   naturally placed Cornelius with Cyprian on September 14. But we know
   from the Liberian Catalogue that Cornelius died at Centumcellae, and
   September 14 was perhaps the day of the translation of his remains to
   Rome.' Hence it appears how easily these confusions of dates may have
   arisen through the commemoration of a depositio. The passages of St.
   Jerome bearing upon the date are: (1) Simon Petrus . . . Romam pergit,
   ibique viginti quinque annis cathedram sacerdotalem tenuit usque ad
   ultimum Neronis annum, id est, quartum decimum' (c. i.). (2) Paulus
   Apostolus . . . quarto decimo anno Neronis eodem die quo Petrus, Romae
   pro Christo capite truncatur . . . anno post passionem Domini XXXVII'
   (c. v.). (3) Hic [Lucius Annaeus Seneca] ante biennium quam Petrus et
   Paulus martyrio coronarentur, a Nerone interfectus est' (c. xii.).
   Seneca was put to death end of April, 65. A.D.

   [312] Lipsius, Die Apokryphen Apostelgeschichten.and Apostellegenden,
   2er Band, 1e Hälfte, p. 318. The following extract is from the Passio
   Petri by pseudo-Linus: Ut autem portam civitatis voluit egredi, vidit
   sibi Christum occurrere. Et adorans eum ait: "Domine, quo vadis?"
   Respondit ei Christus: "Romam venio iterum crucifigi." Et ait ad eum
   Petrus: "Domine, iterum crucifigeris?" Et dixit ad eum dominus: "Etiam,
   iterum crucifigar." Petrus autem dixit: "Domine, revertar et sequar
   te." Et his dictis dominus ascendit in coelum . . . Et [Petrus] post
   haec rediens in se ipsum, intellexit de sua dictum passione.' Compare
   St. John, xiii. 36, 37: Dicit ei Simon Petrus: Domine, quo vadis?
   Respondit Iesus: Quo ego vado, non potes me mode sequi: sequeris autem
   postea. Dicit ei Petrus: Quare non possum te sequi modo? animam meam
   pro te ponam.' Wordsworth's edition of the Vulgate.

   [313] 1 Pet. iv. 16; also see ii. 19-21, iii. 14-18.

   [314] If, on the other hand, the Quo Vadis? story were a pure invention
   of a later age, then the original romancer must have based it on the
   two passages St. John, xiii. 36, 37, and Hebrews, vi. 6, taken with St.
   John, xxi. 15-23.

   [315] Heb. x. 32, 33, comp. vi. 6, x. 39, 15-25.

   [316] Heb. xiii. 3.

   [317] Heb. xiii. 7.

   [318] Heb. xiii. 12, 13.

   [319] Heb. xii., the whole chapter.

   [320] Phil. i. 13, 14, iii. 2-5. The very words St. Paul uses of these
   opponents at Rome, dia phthonon kai erin, are the words used by Clement
   of the causes which led to St. Peter's death, dia zelos kai phthonon,
   and to St. Paul's dia zelos kai erin.

   [321] Corp. Inscr. Graec. 9909, see Garrucci's Cimitero degli antichi
   Ebrei, p. 39. This synagogue doubtless belonged to a small isolated
   settlement of Jews, which had only one place of worship; it therefore
   had no distinctive name, but was known simply as the synagogue of the
   Hebrews.

   [322] Lanciani, New Tales of Old Rome, p. 248. The love of the
   Hellenist Jews of the Dispersion, living as strangers and sojourners in
   a foreign land, for the name of Hebrews was probably due to the desire
   to emphasise the fact that they were the heirs of the promises made to
   Abraham who by faith sojourned in the land of promise as a stranger'
   (Heb. xi. 9). Corp. Inscr. Graec. 9922 is a striking proof that the
   Roman Jews called themselves Hebrews': Alupis Tiberieus kai hoi autou,
   Ioustos kai Alupis, Ebr?oi, meta tou patros auton hode kinte.

   [323] Origen, Hom. in Hebr. quoted by Eus. Hist. Eccl. vi. 25;
   Philastrius, de Haeres. 89; Jerome, de Viris Illustribus, 15. Others
   suggest that Clement was the translator into Greek of an Epistle of
   Paul written in Hebrew. Eus. Hist. Eccl. iii. 37. Euthalius, Migne,
   P.G. lxxv. 776.

   [324] Marucchi, Arch. Chrét. ii. 173.

   [325] Eus. Hist. Eccl. vi. 14, 25, 41. Origen believed the thoughts to
   be those of St. Paul, the actual language and argument those of a
   disciple. As to the authorship however he declares--tis de hograpsas
   ten epistolen to men alethes theos oiden. Later the opinion at
   Alexandria that Paul himself was the author became dominant and at last
   accepted by all.

   [326] Tertullian, De Pudicitia, 20: Volo tamen ex redundantia alicuius
   etiam comitis apostolorum testimonium superinducere, idoneum
   confirmandi de proximo iure disciplinam magistrorum. Extat enim et
   Barnabae titulus ad Hebraeos, adeo satis auctoritatis viri, utquem
   Paulus iuxta se constituerit in abstinentiae tenore (1 Cor. ix. 6). Et
   utique receptior apud ecclesias epistola Barmabae illo apocrypho
   pastore moechorum.' Another and a much later witness, that in the
   Western Church the authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews was
   assigned to Barnabas, is to be found in the Index Claromontanus, D. 2,
   a MS. of the sixth century. In the stichometrical catalogue of the
   books of the Old and New Testaments at the end of this codex there is
   no mention of the Epistle to the Hebrews. After Jude, however, and
   before the Apocalypse comes the epistle of Barnabas,' the length of
   which is set down as 850 stichoi or lines, the Apocalypse as 1200. This
   corresponds to the length of the Epistle to the Hebrews and not to that
   of the epistle of the pseudo-Barnabas, which the stichometry of
   Nicephorus, 850 A.D., shows to be practically the same as the
   Apocalypse, i.e. pseudo-Barnabas, 1360 stichoi; Apocalypse, 1400. The
   position of the epistle in the Codex Claromontanus and the length
   assigned are well-nigh positive proof that the Epistle of Barnabas here
   signifies the Epistle to the Hebrews.

   [327] Renan, L'Antéchrist, xvi-xvii: I1 (l'auteur) n'en tenait pas
   moins un rang élevé dans l'Eglise; il parle avec autorité; il est
   très-respecté des frètres auxquels il écit; Timothée paraît lui être
   subordonné. Le seul fait d'adresser une épitre à une grande Eglise
   indique un homme important, un des personnages qui figurent dans
   1'histoire apostolique et dont le nom est célèbre . . . L'attribution à
   Barnabé est la plus vraisemblable.'

   [328] Supra, pp. 80-2.

   [329] 2 Acts, iv. 36-7.

   [330] Heb. x. 32, xiii. 23.

   [331] 1 Tim. vi. 12 and i. 3.

   [332] Supra, p. 121.

   [333] Clement, 1 Cor. v.: epi to terma tes duseos elthon. In the year
   66 A.D., according to Philostratus, Apollonius of Tyana being banished
   from Rome turned westwards to the land which they say is bounded by the
   Pillars. He intended to see Gades and the tides of the ocean, for he
   heard some report of the philosophy of the men in those parts and their
   proficiency in religion.' In 68 or 69 A.D. he was once more in Greece.
   See Phillimore's Philostratus, ii. 48, 63 ff.

   [334] Profectione Pauli ab urbe ad Spania proficiscentis.' The
   Muratorian fragment is generally supposed to be of the age of
   Hippolytus, if not his work. Lightfoot (Apostolic Fathers, part i. vol.
   ii. 405 ff) places its date towards the close of the second century.
   Also Zahn and Harnack.

   [335] Salmon (Int. to N.T. p. 511) writes: As for the general Pauline
   character of these letters there cannot be a better witness than Renan,
   who, while continuing to assert them not to be genuine, every now and
   then seems staggered by the proofs of authenticity that strike him. He
   says in one place "Some passages of these letters are so beautiful that
   we cannot help asking if the forger had not in his hands some authentic
   notes of Paul which he has incorporated in his apocryphal composition'
   (L'Eglise Chrétienne, p. 95).' Of those who reject the Epistle (2 Tim.)
   Hausrath, Pfleiderer and Ewald recognise the sections i. 15-18, iv.
   9-22 as fragments of a genuine Pauline letter. Salmon, p. 303.

   [336] Ramsay, Hist. Commentary on 1st Epist. to Timothy,' Expositor,
   Ser. vii. 7, June 1909, p. 488, and Ser. vii. 8, p. 1. Prof. Vernon
   Bartlett (Expositor, Ser. viii. 25, Jan. 1913, p. 29) writes: When one
   approaches these Epistles fresh front the few pages on them in Hort's
   Lectures on Judaistic Christianity, and in The Christian Ecclesia, and
   from Sir W. M. Ramsay's recent "Historical Commentary on the Epistles
   to Timothy" in the Expositor, one feels the subject has been lifted to
   a new level of reality and that much criticism between Baur and
   Jülicher is simply out of date and irrelevant.'

   [337] 2 Tim. iv. 6-8.

   [338] Henderson's Principate of Nero, p. 392.

   [339] Clement, 1 Cor. v.: marturesas epi ton hegoumenon.

   [340] Dion Cassius, lxiii. 12: houto men de tote he ton Rhomaion arche
   duo autokratorsin hama edouleuse, Neroni kai Helio; oude echo eipein
   hopoteros auton cheiron en.

   [341] Comp. 1 Pet. ii. 12, iii. 16, iv. 13, 16, 19.

   [342] 2 Tim. iv. 17: Helius--probably.

   [343] 2 Tim. iv. 10-13, 19, 20.

   [344] 2 Tim. i. 15.

   [345] 2 Tim. iv. 21. Linus is no doubt the man who appears in the
   episcopal lists as the first bishop of Rome after Peter. Pudens was a
   man of senatorial rank, who according to tradition played a
   considerable part in the early history of the Church in Rome. See
   Appendix, Note C.

   [346] 2 Tim. iv. 9, 21.

   [347] See Appendix, Note E, The Tombs of St. Peter and St. Paul.

   [348] For the question of the identity of John the Apostle the son of
   Zebedee, John the disciple of the Lord, who reclined on His Breast at
   Supper, John the author of the Epistles and the Fourth Gospel, and John
   the Presbyter--see the convincing arguments of Dom John Chapman,
   O.S.B., in his John the Presbyter and the Fourth Gospel: Clarendon
   Press, 1911.

   [349] Irenaeus, Adv. Haer. v. 30. 1-3; Eus. Hist. Eccl. iii. 18 and v.
   8: tounoma autou di ekeinou an errethe, tou kai ten apokalupsin
   heorakotos; oude gar pro pollou chronou heorathe, alla schedon epi tes
   hemeteras geneas, pros to teleites Dometianou arches. That John is the
   subject before heorathe seems to follow necessarily from the words
   which precede in the same passage--marturounton auton ekeinon ton kat'
   upsin Ioannen heorakoton. . . .

   [350] ho de Rhomaion basileis, hos he paradosis didaskei, katedikase
   ton Ioannen marturounta dia ton tes aletheias logon eis Patmon ten
   neson; didaskei de ta peri tou marturiou autou Ioannes, me legon tis
   auton katedikase.

   [351] Henderson, Life of Nero, p. 440. See infra, p. 173.

   [352] Eus. Hist. Eccl. 23.

   [353] Migne, P.L. v. 1665.

   [354] De Viris Illust. 9.

   [355] Rev. xvii. 3-7, 9.

   [356] Rev. xviii. 24. Compare vi. 9-11, 14, xiii. 15, xvi. 5-7.

   [357] Tac. Hist. iii. 72, 83, iv. 1. Rev. xiv. 8, 17-20, xvii. 16,
   xviii. passim.

   [358] Rev. xviii. 10.

   [359] Tac. Hist. iv. 3, 44-47, 51, 68; Josephus, Bell. Iud. iv. 11. 4.

   [360] Suetonius, Domitian, 1.

   [361] Dion Cassius, lxv. 22, lxvi. 1-3.

   [362] Tertullian (Praescrip. 36), after speaking of the martyrdoms of
   Peter and Paul, relates that John was cast into burning oil but escaped
   unhurt. Jerome in his commentary on Matt. xx. 23 refers to the same
   tradition. Whatever the grounds of the tradition, there can be no
   question that the writer of the Apocalypse speaks of himself as a
   partaker in the tribulation.'

   [363] Gsell, Règne de 1'Enapéreur Domilien, pp. 13-14.

   [364] Suetonius, Vespasian, 8, 10.

   [365] Gsell, 17-18. C.I.L. vi. 1984. In the ten years from 70 to 79,
   Vespasian filled the office of [ordinary] consul nine times, Titus
   seven times, Domitian once. Domitian was consul suffectus five times
   during the same period. In 80 Titus and Domitian were consuls. For
   complete list see Bouche-Leclerc, Institutions Rornaines, p. 603. For
   Nerva and his father and grandfather, see Profumo, Le fonte ed i tempi
   dello Incendio Neroniano, p. 511 ff. Pauly, Real-Encyclopädie, under
   Cocceius.

   [366] Rev. xi. 1, 2. See Daniel, vii. 25, three and a half years or 42
   months. It is the time of the duration of the Fourth Kingdom or Roman
   Empire.

   [367] Rev. xiii. 1. At a short distance from Patmos the island of Thera
   or the Wild Beast rises out of the sea.

   [368] Rev. xiii. 18. Irenaeus, cont. Haer. v. 30. C. 11 gives the
   reading 616. In Philostratus, Apollonius of Tyana, Apollonius is
   represented as saying on his arrival at Rome--In my travels, which have
   been wider than ever man yet accomplished, I have seen many, many wild
   beasts of Arabia and India; but this beast, which is commonly called a
   Tyrant, I know not how many heads it has, nor if it be crooked of claw,
   and armed with horrible fangs. However they say it is a civil beast and
   inhabits the midst of cities; but to this extent it is more savage than
   the beasts of mountain and of forest, that whereas lions and panthers
   can sometimes by flattery be tarried and change their disposition,
   stroking and petting this beast does but instigate it to surpass itself
   in ferocity and devour at large. And of wild beasts you cannot say that
   they were ever known to eat their own mothers, but Nero has gorged
   himself on this diet.'--Phillimore's tr. vol. ii. p. 38.

   [369] Henderson's Life and Principate of Nero, p. 440. Tac. Hist. ii.
   8: vario super exitu eius rumore eoque pluribus vivere eum fingentibus
   credentibusque.' Sueton. Nero, 57: edicta quasi viventis et brevi magno
   inimicorum malo reversuri.' The pretender of 69 A.D., driven by stress
   of weather to the island of Cythnus, was taken by Calpurnius Asprenas,
   Governor of Galatia, and put to death. Tac. Hist. ii. 8, 9. Dion
   Cassius, lxiv. 9; also Tac. Hist. i. 2: mota prope etiam Parthorum arma
   falsi Neronis ludibrio.'

   [370] Sibylline Oracles, v. 143-147, 361-373. This portion of the
   Sibylline Oracles was written 71-74 A.D.: so Bousset, Zahn and Charles.

   Pheuxetai ek Babulonos [Rome] anax phoberos kai anaides

   hon pantes stugeousi brotoi kai photes aristoi;

   olese gar pollous kai gasteri cheiras epheken. 143-5.
   * ? * ? * ? * ? * ? * ? * ? *

   hexei d' ek peraton gaies metroktonos aner

   hos pasan gaian kathelei kai panta kratesei. 363-4.
   See also iv. 119-122, 137-139; this part of the Sibylline Oracles is
   dated about 80 A.D. See also Ascension of Isaiah, iv. 2-4. It is of
   importance to notice, says Dr. Charles in his note on this passage,
   that the persecution under Nero is the only one known to the writer (p.
   25).

   [371] Rev. xi. 7: And when they shall have finished their testimony the
   beast that cometh up out of the abyss shall make war with them, and
   overcome them, and kill them.' Dr. Charles in the Introduction to the
   Ascension of Isaiah (p. lxiv) makes the following comment on this
   passage: The antichrist in this instance makes his advent in Jerusalem
   (see v. 8), therefore before 70 A.D.'

   [372] Rev. xix. 20.

   [373] Rev. xvi. 14-16, xx. 8.

   [374] Henderson, Civil War in the Roman Empire, pp. 21-35, 128-144.

   [375] Renan, L'Antéchrist, pp. 327-329.

   [376] Tac. Ann. xiv. 13, 27; Suet. Nero, 20; Philostratus, Apollonius,
   vi. 38, 41; Seneca, Quaest. Nat. vi. 1: Mundus ipse concutitur . . .
   consternatio omnium'; Sibyll. orac. iii. 471 ff.

   [377] Tac. Ann. xvi. 13; Suet. Nero, 39.

   [378] Tac. Ann. xv. 47; Hist. i. 18, 86; Dion Cassius, lxiii. 26.

   [379] Suet. Nero, 45; Sibyll. Orac. iii. 475 ff.

   [380] Tac. Hist. i. 86; Plutarch, Otho, 4.

   [381] Rev. vi. 12-17, viii. 5-9, xvi. 3, 18, 20, 21.

   [382] See Pauly, Real-Encyclopädie under Thera.' The name of the island
   described by Strabo as thrown up was Hiera, now Nea Kaumeni; that
   thrown up in 46 A.D. Theia, now Mikra Kaumeni. Seneca, Nat. Quaest. vi.
   21; Dion Cassius, lx. 29; Orosius, vii. 6. The modern name of Thera is
   Santorin (a corruption of St. Irene), see Encyclopaedia Britannica (ed.
   1911) under Santorini'
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  LECTURE VII

   1 Cor. i. l0: Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord
   Jesus Christ that ye all speak the same thing, that there be no
   divisions among you.'

   Before proceeding to the consideration of that earliest official
   document of the Roman Church commonly known as the First Epistle of
   Clement to the Corinthians,' some reference should be made to the order
   of the episcopal succession in that Church. It is only necessary to
   touch upon it briefly here, for it has been treated so fully and
   thoroughly by many writers that it appears sufficient to state the
   conclusion arrived at and generally accepted, viz. that the order of
   names is that given by Irenaeus, Linus, Anencletus or Cletus, Clemens,
   and that the traditional terms assigned to their episcopates, Linus
   twelve years, Anencletus twelve years, and Clemens nine years, are
   approximately correct. If Linus became bishop in 68 A.D. this would
   make the close of the episcopate of Clemens to coincide with the first
   year of the second century. [383]

   As to the exact character of the office that they held, and of the
   organisation of the Church during these decades, there has been much
   difference of opinion, and from lack of the necessary material to clear
   up doubtful points such difference of opinion will probably always
   continue to exist. The constitution of the Mother Church of Jerusalem
   after 42 A.D. seems to have followed strictly the Jewish model, James
   and the elders or presbyters corresponding to the High Priest and the
   Sanhedrin. [384] The position of James was undoubtedly monarchical, but
   there is no strict analogy between his position and that of the
   Christian bishop of the time of Ignatius. James's position was
   exceptional. His authority, derived at once from near relationship to
   the Lord and from his own lofty personal character, placed him on a
   level with the acknowledged leaders of the Twelve. He ranked with Peter
   and John, as one of the pillars of the Church. [385] But just as the
   earliest local organisation of the Church at Jerusalem followed the
   Jewish model that was at its side, so did that of the Christian
   communities which sprang into being among the Diaspora. There is no
   hint given that the presbyters that were ordained in every city were
   officials of a type unknown to the Synagogue. [386] Each Christian
   ecclesia like each Jewish synagogue had its presbyters, and in large
   cities, like Rome, as there were a number of distinct synagogues, so
   there were several distinct Christian congregations or Churches, such
   as the Church in the house of Aquila and Prisca. In so far as there was
   a new departure, it lay in the fact that the Christian presbyter was a
   spiritual as well as an administrative official. Little as we are told
   in the New Testament on the subject, the picture drawn in the
   Apocalypse of the four and twenty presbyters seated round the throne of
   God and taking the leading part in the worship of Heaven seems to place
   this beyond reasonable question.

   But though the original model of Christian organisation was the
   Synagogue, more and more as the Gentile element increased and became
   predominant would the separate congregations or ecclesiae gradually
   acquire Gentile characteristics, derived from the constitution of the
   various associations for religious cults and other purposes, known as
   collegia, sodalitates, th i a s o i or e r a n o i , which, with the
   licence or at least the connivance of the state, were to be found in
   every part of the empire. [387] The choice, for instance, by the early
   Christians of the word ecclesia in preference to synagoge was probably
   deliberate. Both words are used in the LXX, ecclesia as the translation
   of the Hebrew Qatal signifying a religious assembly, synagoge as that
   of the Hebrew word edhah, a general assembly of the whole people. The
   adoption of the term ecclesia, says Harnack, was the happiest stroke
   which the primitive (Christian) community accomplished in the way of
   descriptive titles.' [388] Its choice was at once distinctive and would
   have familiar associations to Gentile ears.

   So, too, with the term episcopus. This word in the sense of overseer'
   occurs many times in the LXX, and its ecclesiastical use was probably
   suggested by familiarity with certain passages in this Greek version of
   the Old Testament, which was the only Scriptures with which the vast
   majority of the early Christians were acquainted. [389] But again it
   must not be forgotten that the name would be the more readily adopted
   by Greek-speaking Christians of Gentile origin, since it was already
   well known as the title of officials engaged in secular duties, as
   Overseers or Superintendents. When it first passed into Christian use
   is unknown, but its earliest appearance is in the remarkable words
   addressed by St. Paul to the presbyters of the Ephesian Church, whom he
   had summoned to meet him at Miletus as he was journeying to Jerusalem
   in 57 A.D. Take heed to yourselves and to all the flock in which the
   Holy Spirit set you as overseers (episkopous) to shepherd (poimainein)
   the Church of God, which He purchased with His Blood.' [390] Here we
   find certain presbyters described as overseers' and their special
   function as that of shepherding or tending the flock, implying that in
   the local organisation of the Church their duty was not only that of
   government, guidance, and discipline, but of the provision of spiritual
   food. Again in the Epistle to the Philippians St. Paul salutes the
   saints in Christ Jesus with the overseers and deacons.' Turning to the
   Pastoral Epistles we have the qualifications set forth carefully, which
   should guide Timothy and Titus in their choice of persons fit for the
   Church's official ministry. [391] From these instructions two facts
   seem to come out clearly: that while all episcopi were presbyters, only
   a limited number of the presbyters were episcopi. In other words these
   titles cannot be used convertibly. An episcopus, or presbyter-bishop if
   one may so style him, differed from the ordinary presbyter in that he
   had certain superadded duties of oversight and superintendence such as
   were connoted by his name. There is a spiritual side to his office: he
   must be apt to teach,' able to exhort in the sound doctrine and to
   convict the gainsayers'; and a business or administrative side: he must
   be blameless, as God's steward.' [392] The language of St. Peter, Ye
   were as sheep going astray but are now returned to the Shepherd and
   Bishop of your souls,' [393] while it seems to point to an equivalence
   of the two terms Shepherd and Bishop--pastor and episcopus--no less
   significantly marks out the sphere of duty--as the pastorate of souls.
   That it was possible to be a presbyter without having a specific local
   charge, just in the same way as in modern days there are priests
   without cure of souls, seems to be conveyed in another passage of this
   epistle, where St. Peter addresses the presbyters, as their fellow
   presbyter, exactly as St. John at a later date styled himself simply
   the presbyter ' in the opening salutation of his second and third
   Epistles, and indeed it was as John the Presbyter that he was best
   known in his old age. [394] Certainly neither Peter nor John was a
   local official. The whole passage runs as follows: the presbyters
   therefore among you I exhort who am your fellow-presbyter . . . tend
   (shepherd) the flock of God which is among you, exercising the
   oversight (acting as episcopi) not of constraint but willingly like
   God; nor yet for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as lording
   it over your allotted charges, [395] but making yourselves ensamples to
   the flock.' The presbyters therefore who were addressed were
   presbyter-bishops, and it may be gathered they had each of them a
   separate cure, over which they had independent spiritual rule, and
   moreover that they received stipends, otherwise it would not have been
   necessary to warn them against the danger of seeking after filthy
   lucre. It will be at once seen how appropriate is the name of rulers'
   which is applied to these officers of the Church in the Epistle to the
   Hebrews. The exhortation obey your rulers and submit to them; for they
   watch in behalf of your souls, as they that shall give account' [396]
   at once emphasises the authority which, as we have seen, these
   presbyter-bishops exercised, and likewise defines the double sphere of
   their jurisdiction and the two aspects of their office, as at once
   shepherds of souls' and God's stewards.'

   Thus after the martyrdom of the Apostles Peter and Paul such evidence
   as we possess points to the government of the Church in Rome passing
   into the hands of that inner committee of the presbyterate consisting
   of those who had spiritual charge of the several congregations or
   domestic Churches in the capital. At their head we find a president,
   either elected or chosen by seniority of office, bearing the title of
   The Bishop, but at first differing in no way from the other
   presbyter-bishops except in precedence, as primus inter pares.

   The analogy between the earliest Christian organisation and that of the
   Synagogue has already been pointed out. The presbyters ordained by the
   Apostles from city to city were to a certain extent the Christian
   counterparts of the Jewish presbyters, but, as the Christian Church had
   no Temple and no priestly caste entrusted with the conduct of
   sacrificial worship, the Christian presbyter differed from the Jewish
   in that his functions were not merely administrative but spiritual and
   liturgical. In the same way the government of the Church by a committee
   of presbyter-bishops representing the several congregations with a
   Bishop-president at their head was analogous to that of cities like
   Alexandria, in which the Jewish population was large, where the
   government was entrusted to a gerousia or committee of archons
   representing the several synagogues, whose president bore the name of
   Gerousiarch. [397] The contention of Dr. Hatch in his Bampton Lectures
   that the Christian presbyters were purely administrative and judicial
   officers is not, as we have shown, borne out by a careful examination
   of the scriptural references to their functions, nor is the supposed
   evidence of the Didache' to the existence in the latter part of the
   first century of a hierarchy of Apostles, Prophets and Teachers, whose
   authority was supreme in spiritual matters and to whom the presbyters
   and deacons were subordinate, really tenable. Notably to the Prophet a
   lofty position is assigned in the Didache,' especially in the conduct
   of worship and in the celebration of the Eucharist. [398] The discovery
   of this work and its first publication in 1883 has had an immense
   influence in moulding the opinions of recent writers on the early
   organisation of the Church, particularly those of Harnack, [399] but it
   may be asked what proof is there that its picture of first-century
   Church life and order is trustworthy? We have indeed the witness of
   many passages in the Acts and Epistles to the fact that the prophet
   with his peculiar charismatic gift of ecstatic (chiefly eschatological)
   utterance occupied a prominent place in the early Christian
   communities, but these passages also testify not merely that the
   prophet, as such, had no definite place in Church organisation, but
   that his influence was intermittent and even spasmodic, and that, at
   Corinth for instance, he might be a disturbing factor in the
   assemblies, an element, to use St. Paul's words, of confusion rather
   than of peace.' [400] The truth is that there are very cogent reasons
   for holding the Didache' to be a fourth-century document, whose author
   in his presentation of first-century Christianity drew largely upon his
   imagination. [401] It is not wise therefore to base any arguments or
   theories about the true character of the earliest organisation of the
   Church upon a writing whose date is very disputable and whose origin
   and sources are unknown.

   Leaving therefore the Didaches' on one side let us now try to
   supplement the evidence as to the state of the Church in Rome and
   elsewhere about 68 A.D. that has been gathered from the canonical books
   of the New Testament, evidence that on the face of it is very
   incomplete and obscure, by an examination of two works both of them
   Roman and at one time regarded as almost canonical, I mean the
   (so-called) First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians' and The
   Shepherd of Hermas.' These writings with the Epistles of Ignatius are
   first-class authorities, but clearly much depends upon a knowledge of
   the date of their first appearance. That of Ignatius' epistles has been
   determined within very narrow limits, 107 to 109 A.D. The notice about
   Hermas in the Muratorian fragment and the Liberian catalogue is, as I
   shall attempt to show later, most probably a blunder. The date of
   Clement's Epistle was at one time regarded as uncertain, but since the
   publication of Light-foot's great work on the Apostolic Fathers, the
   opinion of scholars has become practically unanimous that it was
   written at the close of the reign of Domitian, about 96 A.D.; indeed
   this date may be regarded as one of the accepted results' of
   present-day criticism. I feel therefore how very bold it is on my part
   to venture even to hint at a difference of view. I have never however
   been able to convince myself that this accepted result' is correct, and
   I welcome the opportunity afforded me by these lectures for stating my
   reasons for doubting the soundness of the arguments on which it is
   based.

   Of the authenticity of the anonymous epistle which opens with the words
   [402] the Church of God sojourning in Rome to the Church of God
   sojourning in Corinth' or of the accuracy of the early, continuous, and
   widespread tradition, which assigned the actual authorship to that
   Clement who in the earliest lists of the bishops of Rome stands the
   third in order from the Apostles, there is absolutely no question.
   [403] The patristic evidence is conclusive, and is admitted as such.
   But the corollary to this postulate, that because Clement was the
   author therefore the epistle was written during the time of his
   episcopate, 92 to 101 A.D., does not follow. Nevertheless the
   assumption has been made with surprising unanimity, and it has led to
   the date at which this letter was sent to Corinth being assigned to the
   time when the Church found deliverance from the persecution of Domitian
   by that tyrant's assassination. Nay, to such an extent has this
   pre-supposition gained possession of the mind even of a writer like
   Bishop Lightfoot, so eminently careful and cautious in the handling of
   historical evidence, that in his criticism of the chronology of the
   early Roman succession, he writes The date of Clement's epistle is
   fixed with a fair degree of certainty at 95 or 96 A.D., as it was
   written during or immediately after the persecution under Domitian.
   This year therefore must fall within the episcopate of Clement.' [404]
   But surely this is something like arguing in a circle, for I venture to
   say that there does not exist any definite evidence, internal or
   external, that the epistle was written during or immediately after the
   persecution of Domitian. It will be my object to show that such
   evidence as we possess points to a very different conclusion, viz. that
   when Clement gave literary expression to the message from the Church in
   Rome to the Church in Corinth he was not yet the official head of the
   Roman Church, and further that the probable date of the epistle is the
   early months of 70 A.D.

   It will be necessary to deal with the arguments for and against
   seriatim.

   The cause of the writing of the epistle was the outbreak of schism and
   dissension in the Corinthian Church described by the writer as that
   abominable and unholy sedition, foreign and strange to the elect of
   God, which a few head-strong and self-willed persons have kindled to
   such a pitch of madness, so that your name, once respected and widely
   spoken of and worthily beloved of all men, hath been greatly defamed.'
   [405] The cause of this sad change is ascribed to jealousy and envy,
   and the examples of Cain and Abel, of Jacob and Esau, of Joseph, of
   Moses, and of David and Saul are brought forward as warnings of the
   evil consequences which indulgence in jealousy and envy produces. The
   writer then proceeds: But let us cease to speak of examples of ancient
   days, and let us come to those who very recently were athletes [of the
   faith]; let us take the illustrious examples of our own time. Through
   envy and jealousy the greatest and most righteous pillars were
   persecuted and contended even unto death. Let us take before our eyes
   the good apostles.' [406] Then follow references to the martyrdoms of
   St. Peter and of St. Paul. This epithet good' has exercised the minds
   of critics, but there seems to be no doubt that it is the true reading.
   Lightfoot remarks Such an epithet may be most naturally explained on
   the supposition that Clement is speaking in affectionate remembrance of
   those whom he had known personally, otherwise the epithet would be out
   of place.' Does not the same comment apply, it may be asked, to the
   readers of the Epistle? Peter and Paul were regarded as the founders of
   the Corinthian as well as of the Roman Church, and the epithet points
   to their memory being still quite fresh. Then in the following chapter
   Clement gives a description of the climax of the Neronian persecution;
   briefly but with graphic strokes he tells us how to these men of holy
   living was gathered together a great multitude of the elect, who having
   suffered through jealousy many indignities and tortures became very
   splendid examples amongst ourselves. Persecuted through jealousy, women
   after having suffered in the guise of Danaids and Dirces terrible and
   monstrous outrages attained the goal which made sure to them the race
   of faith and those who were weak in body received a noble reward.' If
   any one were to read those paragraphs for the first time without any
   presuppositions or arrière-pensées, would they doubt that they told of
   scenes of horror which not only the author but all those in whose name
   he wrote had literally before their eyes, and which still haunted the
   minds of the witnesses?

   Further, if Clement had just passed through the persecution of Domitian
   in which so many Christians of illustrious rank suffered, with whom as
   bishop he must have had intimate relations, is it conceivable that none
   of their examples should have been brought forward, but only those of
   an already distant persecution, whose memory more recent events must
   have tended to throw into the background? But it is said that Clement
   is speaking of what happened under Domitian in the sentence which
   follows the opening salutation--by reason of the sudden and successive
   troubles and calamities which have befallen us, we consider that we
   have been somewhat slow in giving attention to the questions in dispute
   among you.' [407] But it may be asked, is it possible to read into
   these words so large a reference? The Domitianic persecution, when it
   came, must have touched Clement himself and his fellow-Christians at
   Rome far too severely and closely for the subject to have been
   dismissed thus casually and once for all in the ten opening words of a
   sentence containing fifty-nine words? When one considers that according
   to the opinion of the critics this Epistle was written almost
   immediately after the death of Domitian the Persecutor, it seems mere
   trifling to suppose that the deep sorrow and keen sense of bereavement
   that must have been filling the Roman Church at the sad fate of so many
   of its foremost members could not have found here or elsewhere in this
   lengthy letter more fitting expression. But if the date of the document
   be, as I hold that it is, the early months of 70 A.D., then the
   reference to the sudden and successive troubles and calamities, which
   have befallen us' receives a natural explanation, one written large in
   the historical records of the time, [408] and a mere allusion to which
   would be sufficient to account to the Corinthians for the delay of the
   Roman Church in dealing with the questions on which its advice had been
   sought. [409] In the whole course of its long and chequered history the
   city of Rome has never experienced so many sudden and successive
   troubles and calamities' as befell it in the course of the year 69
   A.D., and the brief reference to them by the writer of this Epistle is
   seen to be as aptly as it is tersely phrased.

   The internal evidence of the Epistle is in many important respects
   strongly in favour of the early date. In the organisation of the Church
   only bishops and deacons' are mentioned, exactly as they are in St.
   Paul's Epistle to the Philippians, while the title bishop' is to the
   same extent inter-changeable with that of presbyter' as it is in the
   Acts and the Pauline epistles, and the word rulers' has the same sense
   as in the Epistle to the Hebrews. [410] The Apostles derive their
   authority directly from Jesus Christ, the presbyter-bishops and deacons
   from the Apostles, who are described as having gone through town and
   country preaching the good tidings that the kingdom of God was about to
   come. [411] All this is thoroughly primitive. It is too the mark of a
   very early date that while Clement three times speaks of the Lord Jesus
   as child or servant of God'--pais Theou--only once is the word
   son--huios--used, and that in a quotation from the second Psalm taken
   direct from the Epistle to the Hebrews. [412] Again as to Clement's
   references to the canonical writings of the New Testament, Dr.
   Lightfoot, though on other grounds he supports the late date for this
   Epistle, writes thus--one important test of date in early Christian
   writings lies in the Biblical quotations--both the form and the
   substance. Now the quotations from the Gospels in this letter exhibit a
   very early type. They are not verbal; they are fused; and they are not
   prefaced by "It is written" (gegraptai) or "The Scripture saith" (he
   graphe legei) or the like, but a more archaic form of citation is used,
   "The Lord spake" (ho Kurios eipen) or some similar expression.' [413] A
   very considerable admission. On the other hand the abundant use that is
   made of the Pauline epistles, especially Romans and 1 Corinthians, of 1
   Peter, and more than any other of the Epistle to the Hebrews, is very
   natural in one who was the disciple and companion of St. Peter and St.
   Paul, and whose conversion tradition assigns to St. Barnabas. [414]

   It is difficult to see how the evidential value of c. xli. can be
   explained away. It is so important as a witness for the early date that
   it must be given in full. Let each of you, brethren, in his own order
   give thanks [415] [at the Eucharist], keeping a good conscience without
   passing beyond the appointed rule of his service [416] with reverence.
   Not in every place, brethren, are the perpetual daily [417] sacrifices
   offered, or the free-will offerings or the sin offerings and the
   trespass offerings, but in Jerusalem alone, and there not in every
   place is it offered, but before the sanctuary in the altar-court; after
   the victim which is being offered has been inspected for blemishes by
   the high priest and the aforesaid ministry. They then who do anything
   contrary to the seemly order of His [God's] will have death as their
   punishment. Ye see, brethren, how in proportion as we have been deemed
   worthy of fuller knowledge, so much the greater is the danger to which
   we are exposed.' Those who cling to the Domitianic date for this
   Epistle are driven to strange shifts to find any plausible argument for
   denying to this passage its obvious sense, that at the time when it was
   written the Temple at Jerusalem was still standing, and the daily
   sacrifice had not ceased. Lightfoot and others bring forward Josephus'
   account of the Mosaic sacrifices (Ant.' iii. cc. 9, 10) written in 93
   A.D., in which the historic present is freely used. But as Hefele [418]
   pointed out some years ago, there is a wide distinction between the two
   cases. Josephus, in describing a ritual system that had passed away,
   employs a well-known artifice of the historian in order to lend
   vividness to his narrative. Clement on the other hand brings before the
   eyes of his readers the fixed order of the Jewish worship with the
   purpose of showing to them that the maintenance of such order was a
   Divine institution. But if the Temple had been destroyed and that order
   of worship had been violently brought to an end, would not his whole
   argument fall to the ground and his opponents be able to retort that
   the complete disappearance of the Jewish sanctuary, its official
   hierarchy and ordered ritual was a proof that such a system no longer
   could claim the divine sanction?

   Once more as to the dissensions at Corinth, little is told as to their
   cause and character, except that the action of certain headstrong and
   reckless persons' had led to some of the duly constituted presbyters
   being expelled from their office, and that the ringleaders were few in
   number. [419] Perhaps the example held up before the authors of the
   discussion of the hierarchical order of the Mosaic cult at Jerusalem
   may point to these headstrong persons' being Judaeo-Christians, who had
   strong opinions about the absolute equality of all members of the
   Christian community, or possibly without going so far as to object to
   the existence of the office of presbyter they may have protested
   against the appointment of uncircumcised Gentiles to this office.
   Moreover, while we have no information to throw light upon the state of
   Corinth at the end of Domitian's reign, that town had been the scene of
   stirring events and activities some thirty years earlier. In the autumn
   of 66 A.D. Nero went to Greece. In November 67 A.D. he witnessed at
   Corinth the Isthmian games, and in that city conferred freedom upon
   Achaia, a privilege which was not revoked until six years later by
   Vespasian, because of the disorders that broke out. What is even more
   important, Nero at this time seriously set about the formidable
   engineering task of cutting a navigable canal through the Isthmus.
   [420] For this purpose no fewer than 6000 Jewish prisoners, captured by
   Vespasian in a battle at Tiberias on the Sea of Galilee, were sent by
   that general to Corinth to carry out the excavations, [421] and at the
   time of Nero's death a considerable part of the work had been
   completed. It was, however, then abandoned, with the result that a very
   large body of fanatical Jewish Zealots must have remained at Corinth as
   slaves or freedmen, their fierce patriotism still glowing unquenched by
   defeat and bondage. Here then in 69 A.D. were present all the elements
   for fomenting such an out-break of strife and discord as actually took
   place.

   Or take the well-known reference to the story of the Phoenix, [422] and
   the analogy that it offers to the Resurrection. In recounting this
   legend Clement was no more credulous than his contemporaries, one of
   whom, Pliny the Elder, tells us in his Natural History' that a phoenix
   was brought to Rome in the censorship of the Emperor Claudius (47 A.D.)
   and that it was exposed to public view in the Comitia,' adding this
   fact is attested by the public annals.' [423] Now Clement, as a boy,
   may have actually seen this publicly exhibited wonder, and the vivid
   impression made on the youthful imagination here finds expression some
   twenty-two years later. It is just one of those little touches that
   give added life to the narrative and connect the personality of the
   writer with the events of his time. It is to be noted that Clement does
   not hint at there being anything of a miraculous character in the
   resurrection of the Phoenix, he speaks of it as a fact of natural
   history.

   Let us now turn our attention to the passages on which the advocates of
   a late date have chiefly relied. The beginning of chapter xliv. runs
   thus: Our Apostles also knew through our Lord Jesus Christ, that there
   would be strife about the dignity of the bishop's office. [424] For
   this reason then having received perfect foreknowledge they appointed
   the aforesaid [bishops and deacons] and then they further laid down
   regulations [425] that if they [any of these bishops and deacons]
   should fall asleep, other tried men should succeed to their ministry.
   Those then who were appointed by them or afterwards by other men of
   repute with the approval of the whole Church, and have ministered
   unblameably to the flock of Christ in all humility, peaceably and
   without arrogance [426] and who have for many years received high
   testimony from all [427] --we do not consider it just that these men
   should be ejected from their ministration.' Here the words our
   Apostles' clearly signify St. Peter and St. Paul, held to be the joint
   founders of both the Churches of Rome and Corinth. The careful advice
   and warnings addressed by both these Apostles to the presbyter-bishops
   in their extant writings are a proof of the truth of Clement's
   assertion as to their having pre-vision about the difficulties which
   might arise in the future concerning the authority and position of
   these rulers' of the Church. But it does not follow, because the
   Apostles laid down regulations for the filling up of these offices,
   whenever they became vacant by death, or because, at the time when
   Clement was writing, some of the holders of these offices had been
   appointed by the Apostles, others by the choice of the presbytery with
   the consent of the Church, or because among these were men who for many
   years had been honoured and respected by all, that there-fore the
   Epistle was written some decades after the Apostle's martyrdom. Those
   who use this argument overlook the possibility that the first
   presbyters of the Roman Church were appointed by St. Peter about 44 or
   45 A.D., and those of Corinth by St. Paul about 51 or 52 A.D. Most of
   these would be literally elders'--men well advanced in years when first
   they took office--and in the interval between these dates and 70 A.D.
   there must have been many vacancies by death and fresh appointments,
   some directly by the Apostles, others in their absence by the Churches
   in the manner ordained by Apostolical authority.

   Again in chapter xlvii., after condemning in the strongest terms the
   strifes, parties, and divisions which were tearing to pieces the
   Corinthian Church, Clement continues: Take up the epistle of the
   blessed Paul the Apostle. What was it that he first wrote to you in the
   beginning (en arche) of the Gospel? In truth under the inspiration of
   the Spirit he sent you a letter concerning himself and Cephas and
   Apollos, because that even then you had given way to party spirit.'
   Clement then proceeds to compare the apostles of renown, the great
   leaders of those days (just mentioned), with the present instigators of
   schism and dissension, and he denounces their conduct in the words It
   is shameful, beloved, very shameful and unworthy of Christian conduct
   that it should be reported that the very steadfast and primitive
   (archaian) Church of Corinth should by one or two persons have been
   induced to rebel against its presbyters.' Now far too much stress has
   been laid by the up-holders of the Domitianic hypothesis upon this word
   apxaiav as signifying ancient,' and it is said that such a description
   could not have been given of a Church only twenty years old. But is it
   not evident that the word apxaia was suggested by the previous word
   apxrj, and that it means no more than that the foundation of the Church
   at Corinth took place in the earliest days of the preaching of the
   Gospel in Europe? [428]

   The following particulars concerning the envoys who were the bearers of
   this epistle to Corinth have been held to necessitate a late date. We
   have sent faithful and discreet men who have passed their lives
   blamelessly in our midst from youth to old age.' And again send back to
   us quickly in peace and with joy our envoys Claudius Ephebus and
   Valerius Bito together with Fortunatus also.' [429] Now the conjecture
   of Lightfoot that the names of Claudius Ephebus and Valerius Bito point
   to their being freedmen of the Imperial household at the time when
   Messalina was Empress is probably correct. [430] But if they received
   their manumission about 45 A.D., they may well have been from
   thirty-five to forty years of age at that date, and so more than sixty
   in 70 A.D. As there is reason to believe that Christianity was first
   brought to Rome shortly after the death of St. Stephen, and as St.
   Peter's first visit took place at the very time when Messalina was at
   the height of her power, there is no difficulty in giving these two men
   a place among the very first converts to the faith. Fortunatus is
   separately mentioned, and we may infer that he was not a Roman envoy
   but a Corinthian, and if a Corinthian, then although the name is not
   uncommon, his identification with the Fortunatus mentioned by St. Paul
   in his First Epistle to the Corinthians is more than a possibility.
   [431] It is, however, extremely unlikely that the Fortunatus whose
   coming to Ephesus refreshed St. Paul in 54 A.D., was still active and
   travelling to and fro as an emissary between his native town and Rome
   in 96 A.D., more than forty years later.

   The assumption so commonly made that the Epistle, the actual authorship
   of which by universal consent is attributed to Clement, the third in
   order of succession of the Roman bishops, must have been written during
   the period of his episcopate, 92 to 101 A.D., has in fact really no
   justification. There are very strong arguments (besides those already
   brought forward) to be urged against it, both negative and positive.
   The Epistle is written in the name of the Church of Rome, and is
   throughout anonymous. From the first line to the last there is not a
   single phrase which hints at the individuality of the writer or gives
   any indication that he was a man of mark and authority, the personal
   pronouns used are always we' and us.' Now such self-effacement would be
   perhaps natural in the young Clement of 70 A.D. It is quite in
   accordance with what Epiphanius tells us (quoting apparently the lost
   memoirs of Hegesippus) about his voluntary refusal to accept the post
   of presiding-bishop after the death of the Apostles, [432] lest he
   should cause strife and division,' and of his withdrawal in favour of
   his seniors, first of Linus, then of Anencletus. But tradition asserts
   with no uncertain voice that Clement held a place apart in the Roman
   Church as the first century began to draw to its close. It was not his
   Epistle to the Corinthians' which gave him fame, and which caused a
   plentiful crop of legends to grow up around his name, but his
   distinction first as being a personal disciple of St. Peter, by whom he
   was ordained to the presbyterate, and also a fellow-worker with St.
   Paul, and secondly from the high social position and family connexion
   which tradition assigns to him, a tradition which I believe to be in
   substance correct. [433] The Clement, then, who became bishop in 92
   A.D. was an Apostolical man of exceptional authority, whose personality
   would not lend itself to concealment. If he wrote the Epistle in 96
   A.D., his name would give added weight to the advice of the Church over
   which he presided. Moreover are there not strong grounds for holding
   that during the quarter of a century of Flavian rule, at Rome and
   elsewhere, the office of bishop had been growing in importance and
   respect and dignity, and was gradually becoming monarchical in
   character? Can any unprejudiced person read the language of Ignatius
   without perceiving that the primitive organisation of the Roman and
   Corinthian Churches, as depicted in Clement's Epistle, could not have
   still subsisted unchanged until 96 A.D.? Ignatius, remember, was a
   contemporary of Clement, his letters were written not more than seven
   or eight years after Clement's death, and in these letters the
   authoritative and autocratic position of the bishop is set forth again
   and again in terms that admit of no qualification. Let no man do aught
   pertaining to the Church apart from the bishop'--it is not lawful apart
   from the bishop either to baptise or hold an Agape'--whenever you are
   subject to the bishop, you appear to me not to be living the ordinary
   life of men, but after the manner of the life of Jesus Christ.' It is
   quite clear that in such statements as these Ignatius is not speaking
   of any new thing. With him the office of bishop is of the very esse and
   not merely of the bene esse of the Church. Without the three orders of
   bishop, presbyters, and deacons there is' he declares no Church
   deserving of the name.' In another passage he speaks of the bishops
   established in the furthest quarters as being in the mind of Jesus
   Christ as Jesus Christ is the Mind of the Father' and of the presbytery
   that is worthy of God being fitted to the bishop as the strings to a
   harp.' [434] These words preclude any mere local reference, and when
   one considers how close was the intercourse between Antioch and Rome,
   it will be seen how extremely difficult it would be to conceive of the
   Great Roman Community, for which Ignatius himself expresses the utmost
   veneration, [435] as not possessing that qualification without which it
   would not be deserving the name of a Church.' In other words in the
   year 96 A.D. the organisation of the Roman Church was not that which we
   find in Clement's Epistle, nor was the position which Clement with his
   antecedents must at that date have held consistent with the entire
   absence of the personal note in the letter which he wrote to Corinth.

   The case in fact against this Epistle having been written by Clement
   during his episcopate is very strong. It only remains to draw attention
   to two pieces of documentary evidence, both of which indirectly confirm
   the conclusion at which we have arrived. In a passage from the letter
   of Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, to Soter, bishop of Rome, which has
   been preserved to us by Eusebius, the words occur to-day we have spent
   the Lord's Holy Day, in which we have read your epistle; reading which
   we shall at all times receive admonishment, as also [is the case] with
   the former epistle written to us by Clement.' [436] Dr. Bigg in the
   introduction to his Commentary on the First Epistle of St. Peter
   compares the Greek words here used hemin dia Klementos grapheisan with
   those of St. Peter: I have written to you by Silvanus'--dia Silouanou
   humin egrapsa, and he holds that the two passages must be understood in
   the same way, and he says that Dionysius's words mean clearly that
   Clement was the mouthpiece or interpreter of the Church of Rome.' [437]
   This implies that Clement, though no doubt a leading official, was in
   putting into literary form and with a free hand the general
   instructions he had received, only the servant, not the head of the
   Church acting on his own initiative.

   The evidence of Hermas has a double interest from the light that it
   throws both on the date of The Shepherd' and upon the position of
   Clement. With the date of The Shepherd' I shall deal in the next
   lecture. I will merely state here that my contention will be that that
   part of Hermas' work known as The Visions' and possibly the whole of it
   was written in the course of the first decade of Domitian's reign. The
   reference to Clement occurs at the close of the Second Vision. In the
   Vision an old woman, representing the Church, had given to Hermas a
   small book containing a revelation, which at her command he had copied
   out letter by letter. This done the aged woman again came to him and
   asked him if he had already given the book to the presbyters. On his
   replying that he had not, the aged woman said--I quote the exact
   words--Thou hast done well, for I have words to add. When then I shall
   have finished all the words, by thee it shall be made known to all the
   elect. Thou shalt therefore write two little books and shalt send them
   to Clement and to Grapte. Clement will then send to the cities that are
   without, for to him this [charge] has been entrusted; and Grapte will
   admonish the widows and the orphans. But thou shalt read [the words]
   unto this city before the presbyters, who preside over the Church.'
   [438]

   This passage has been variously interpreted, but it is allowed by the
   great majority of critics that it contains a definite historical
   allusion to Clement, the author of the Epistle from the Roman Church to
   the Corinthians, and the comment of Lightfoot is perfectly just--the
   allusion in Hermas seems to be an obvious recognition of the existence
   of this letter. . . . Clement is represented as the writer's
   contemporary, who held a high office, which constituted him, as we
   might say, foreign secretary of the Roman Church.' [439] Precisely. But
   such a description surely implies that at the time Clement was
   occupying what can only be described as a subordinate position, since
   he was charged with secretarial duties entrusted to him by others. The
   particular charge was one that might very well be assigned to a younger
   member of the presbyterate distinguished among his colleagues for wider
   culture and greater familiarity with literary Greek. The mere fact that
   his name is here coupled with that of Grapte, apparently a deaconess,
   is of itself a proof that the Clement of Hermas' second Vision had not
   yet become at the close of a long and honoured career the venerated
   bishop of 96 A.D.

   Nothing is known of Grapte outside of this reference, and some critics
   have supposed that the name was not that of a real woman, but is used
   here allegorically. But if so, then is it not reasonable to suppose
   that the whole passage is allegorical, not historical? If Grapte be a
   mere creature of Hermas' imagination, why not Clement? But those who
   seek in this way to evade the difficulties attending this passage,
   which is so important for fixing the dates both of Clement's Epistle
   and of The Shepherd,' have really no justification for taking refuge in
   allegory. The names Graptus and Grapte though rare are both of them to
   be found in contemporary inscriptions. One of these inscriptions is
   particularly interesting, [440] as it brings into collocation the names
   of Clemens and Graptus. It tells how a certain Julius Graptus adorned a
   mausoleum with plantations in the year when M. Arrecinus Clemens was
   consul for the second time, in other words in the year 93 A.D. Another
   inscription, [441] a fragment, contains the words Grapte uxor. This
   Julius Graptus and Grapte the deaconess may well have been the children
   of Nero's freedman Graptus, described by Tacitus as active in his
   master's service in the year 59. Arrecinus Clemens was a near relation
   of the imperial Flavians; if he were at the same time an elder brother
   of Clement the bishop, then at once the mystery of the high family
   connexion which the Clementine romances have woven around the name of
   the bishop disappears and becomes explicable. That such a relationship
   existed is no mere random suggestion. It is one which, as I shall
   endeavour to show elsewhere, is well deserving of careful examination.
   [442]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [383] Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. pp. 63- 7, 79- 81. The
   whole subject is exhaustively discussed and examined in his Excursus
   No. 5, pp. 201- 345, on the Early Roman Succession,'see supra, pp. 70,
   71; and p. 84, note 3.

   [384] Harnack, Constitution and Law of the Church, p. 34.

   [385] Gal. ii. 9; also i. 19, and ii. 12.

   [386] Hort, Christiana Ecclesia, pp. 62-3; Lightfoot, Philippians, pp.
   191-2.

   [387] Hardy, Studies in Roman History, Christianity and the Collegia,'
   pp. 129-43.

   [388] Schürer, Hist. of the Jewish People, 2 Div., vol. ii. pp. 59 ff.;
   Harnack, Const. and Law, pp. 15-6; Hort, Christ. Eccl. pp. 3-18.

   [389] Such passages as Ps. cviii. (cix.), quoted by St. Peter, Acts, i.
   20, and Ezekiel, xxxiv. 11, or again Is. lx. 17, as quoted by Clement
   of Rome, xlii. 5: katasteso tous episkopous auton en dikaiosune kai
   tous diakonous auton en pistei.

   [390] Acts, xx. 28. See Hort, Christ. Eccl. pp. 97-104; Harnack, Const.
   and Law, p. 53. Among the numerous works on the subject of the early
   organisation of the Christian Church are the following: Hatch's
   well-known and most important Bampton Lectures of 1881; also his
   Hibbert Lectures of 1888, The Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon
   the Christian Church' [edited by Dr. Fairhairn and published 1907];
   Sohm, Kirchenrecht, 1892; Michiel, Les Origines de l'épiscopat, 1900;
   Knopf, Das Nachapostolische Zeitalter, 1906; Batiffol, L'Eglise
   naissante et le Catholicisme, 1909; Gwatkin (articles in Hastings's
   Dictionary) Bishops,' Church Government,' &c.

   [391] Comp. 1 Tim. iii. 2 with v. 17 and Titus, i. 7.

   [392] 1 Tim. iii. 2; Titus, i. 7, 9: dei gar ton episkoton anenkleton
   einai, hos Theou oikonomon.

   [393] The words of St. Peter deserve careful consideration. In 1 Peter
   ii. 25 the Apostle writes: Ete gar hos probata planomenoi; all'
   epestraphete nun epi ton poimena kai episkopon ton psuchon humon. The
   Shepherd here, whose office is described by the additional term
   episkopos (note there is only one article), being the Good Shepherd
   Himself, the Lord Jesus Christ, of Whom all earthly poimenes kai
   episkopoi were the delegates and representatives. Can it be doubted
   that the Apostle had here in his mind his Master's commission so
   emphatically and lovingly repeated Poimaine ta probata mou--boske ta
   probatia mou? A very interesting passage is that at the opening of the
   fifth chapter of this same First Epistle of St. Peter, vv. 1, 2:
   Presbuterous oun en humin parakalo ho sumpresbuteros . . . poimanate to
   en humin poimnion tou Theou [Comp. Acts, xx. 28] ep9iskopountes. This
   last word is not found in Aleph and B, possibly omitted for
   ecclesiastical reasons. Consult the excellent notes of Bigg's
   commentary on ii. 23 and v. 1, 2 (Int. Crit. Commentary Series), pp.
   119-50, 182-8.

   [394] 2 John, v. 1; 3 John, v. 1. For the identity of John the son of
   Zebedee, the Apostle, with John the Presbyter--see Chapman's John the
   Presbyter. This writer's arguments go to the very root of the question.

   [395] med' hos katakurieuontes ton kleron. The word kleron is
   ambiguous, but its most natural interpretation is that of separate
   allotted charges or cures, otherwise the expression katakurieuontes
   would be unmeaning. Dr. Bigg (Commentary on 1 Peter, p. 189) remarks
   that St. Paul warns the presbyter-bishop that he is to be no striker'
   (1 Tim. iii. 3; Tit. i. 7) and that this implies that discipline in a
   congregation, many of whom were converted slaves, might be roughly
   administered.

   [396] Heb. xiii. 17; also xiii. 7 and 24. Twice in Clement (1 Cor. i. 3
   and xxi. 6) are the hegoumenoi and the presbuteroi distinguished from
   one another, i.e. there was an inner committee of presbyter-bishops.

   [397] The analogy is made the more complete by the fact that the Greek
   title archon was the equivalent of a Hebrew word signifying shepherd.'
   see Schürer, Hist. of the Jewish People, 2 Div., vol. ii. pp. 59ff,
   247ff. In the inscriptions in the Jewish cemeteries at Rome the titles
   archon' and gerousiarch' are frequent. Presbyter' has according to
   Schürer never been found.

   [398] Didache, x. 7, xiii. 3, xv. 1, 2.

   [399] Harnack, Expansion of Christianity, vol. i. pp. 407 ff.;
   Constitution and Law of the Church, p. 78 ff.; Die Lehre der Zwölf
   Apostel [Texte and Untersuchungen, ii. 1, 2, pp. 193-241]; Chronologie,
   pp. 428-38.

   [400] See especially 1 Cor. xiv. passim, also xii. 28, 29; and Eph. ii.
   20, iii. 5, iv. 11. The passages which the author of the Didache had
   chiefly in his mind were no doubt 1 Cor. xii. 28, where St. Paul writes
   God hath set some in the Church, first apostles, secondly prophets,
   thirdly teachers,' and Eph. iv. 11: He gave some apostles, and some
   prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers' Hort
   remarks (Christian Ecclesia, pp. 157-61) much profitless labour has
   been spent on trying to force the various terms used into meaning so
   many different ecclesiastical offices. Not only is the feat impossible,
   but the attempt carries us away from St. Paul's purpose, which is to
   show how many different functions are those which God has assigned to
   the different members of a single body . . . ; these passages give us
   practically no evidence respecting the formal arrangements of the
   ecclesiae of that age; though they tell us much of the forms of
   activity that were at work within them.' Dr. Bigg's account of New
   Testament prophets and prophecy in his Introduction to 1 Peter, pp.
   43-48, is clear and illuminating. He comments on the fact that in 1
   Peter there is no allusion to Christian prophecy. For the prophets' in
   sub-Apostolic times and in the Didache see his introduction to the
   Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles, pp. 28-38.

   [401] In Dr. Bigg's Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles (Early Church
   Classics, S.P.C.K., 1898) just referred to, he gives a series of
   reasons for holding this document to have been written early in the
   fourth century. More recently in the Journal of Theological Studies,
   April 1912, Dean Armitage Robinson announces his adhesion to Dr. Bigg's
   view as to a probable late date for the Didache. The author, he argues,
   was trying to represent the state of the Church in accordance with what
   he thought to be the Apostles' teaching, not as it was in his own days.
   His description is not derived from contemporary knowledge. See also an
   article in the same journal, October 1911, by Rev. A. S. Duncan Jones,
   on The Nature of the Church,' in which the writer cricicises the views
   of Harnack and of Sohm on the constitution of the early Church.

   [402] he ekklesia tou Theou he paroikousa Rhomen te ekklesia tou Theou
   te paroikouse Korinthon.

   [403] Eus. Hist. Eccl. iii. 16, 37. The epistle is called by Eusebius
   megale, thaumasia, anomologemene para pasin.

   [404] Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 342. The italics
   are mine. Among the older writers Hefele in his Prolegomena to the
   Epistle (1855) writes as to the date tota haec quaestio facillime
   posset dissolvi si tempus Clementis episcopatus plane constaret.'
   Workman (Persecution in the Early Church, p. 206) writes: As I incline
   to a later date for the epistle of St. Clement, I see no reason to
   reject the succession of bishops as Linus, Cletus, Clement. . . . The
   question of succession is bound up with the date of the Epistle.'

   [405] Clement, 1 Cor. i. 1.

   [406] Ibid. v. 1: all' hina ton archaion hupodeigmaton pausometha,
   elthomen epi tous engista genomenous athletas; labomen tes geneas hemon
   ta aennaia hupodeigmata. Lightfoot translates tous engista genomenous
   athletas those champions who lived very near to our tune'; Gregg (Early
   Church Classics): those great ones, who are nearest to our time';
   Hippolyte Hemmer, Clément de Rome (1909): venons en aux athlètes tout
   récents.' tes geneas hemon can only mean our own time,' i.e. the time
   in which all of us are living, not a period thirty years ago. When John
   the Baptist cried generation of vipers,' or our Lord Whereto shall I
   liken this generation?' or An adulterous generation seeketh after a
   sign,' or St. Peter save yourselves from this untoward generation,'
   they were speaking to and of the living men and women they saw around
   them, and so does Clement in this passage.

   [407] dia tas aiphnidious kai epallelous genomenas hemin sumphoras kai
   teriptoseis, adelphoi, bradion nomizomen epistophen pepoiesthai peri
   ton epizetoumenon par humin pragmaton.

   [408] See Lecture VI, pp. 168-170. Also Tac. Hist. i. 2. Philostratus,
   Apollonius of Tyana (ed. Phillimore, ii. p. 58): Galba was killed at
   Rome itself after grasping at the Empire; Vitellius was killed after
   dreaming of empire; Otho, killed in lower Gaul, was not even buried
   with honour, but lies like a common man. And destiny flew through all
   this history in one year.'

   [409] Unless the advice of the Church at Rome had been sought, there
   could have been no reason to excuse delay in attending to the matter.
   Zahn, Intr. to N.T. vol. i. p. 269, holds that Fortunatus, who is
   mentioned in Clement's Epistle lxv. brought the news of the Corinthian
   dissensions to Rome. See also Stahl, Patristische Untersuchungen, 1901.

   [410] Clement, 1 Cor. xlii, 4, 5; x1iv. 1. 4, 5; liv. 2; lvii. 1, for
   rulers. hegoumenoi i. 3, proegoumenoi xxi. 6.

   [411] Ibid. xlii. 2, 3: ho Christos oun apo tou Theou kai hoi apostoloi
   apo tou Christou . . . . exelthon (hoi apostoloi) euangelizomenoi ten
   basileian tou Theou mellein erchesthai.

   [412] Ibid. lx. 2. 3, 4, xxxvi. 4; Heb. i. 5.

   [413] Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 353.

   [414] Of the four epistles named, 1 Corinthians dealt with a situation
   in some respects similar to that described by Clement and in the same
   town. Romans and Hebrews were addressed to Rome, and 1 Peter written in
   Rome. The use made by Clement of Hebrews strengthens the argument for
   its Barnabas authorship.

   [415] eucharisteito, perform his act of Eucharistia.

   [416] leitourgia , a word transferred to Christian ministerial
   services, especially that of the Eucharist, from the LXX. where it
   signifies the services' of the priests in their Temple duties.

   [417] endelechismon . This word is used in the LXX. to distinguish the
   sacrifices that were obligatory every day from those of free will. See
   Ex. xxix. 42, xxx. 8; Numbers, xxviii. 6.

   [418] Hefele, Patrum Apost. opera (1855), xxxiv.: Sed res utraque,
   Iosephi et Clementis, longe dissimilis est. Iosephus, sacros populi sui
   ritus describens, per figuram, historicis non inusitatam, praesenti,
   quod dicimus, historico utitur. Clemens, autem, ut Corinthos ad ordinem
   servandum adducat, lectoribus ordinem Iudaici cultus ante oculos ponit.
   Quodsi autem templum iam fuisset destructum, tota S. Patris
   argumentatio fuisset infirma, ipsaque adversarios invitasset, ut
   dicerent: En, eversione templi Hierosolymitani Deus ipse testatus est,
   talem ordinem sibi non esse exoptatum.'

   [419] Clement, 1 Cor. i. 47.

   [420] Henderson, Life and Principate of Nero, pp. 392 ff., 495 ff.;
   Philostratus, Apollonius of Tyana (Bewick), p. 216.

   [421] Josephus, Bell. Iud. iv. 10: Out of the young men he chose 6000
   of the strongest and sent them to Nero to dig through the isthmus of
   Corinth.'

   [422] Clement, 1 Cor. xxv.

   [423] Pliny, Nat. Hist. x. 3 (Bostock's tr., p. 481); compare Tac. Ann.
   vi. 28. Pliny was himself a sceptic--there is no one but doubts it was
   a fictitious phoenix only.'

   [424] 1 Pet. v. 1-6; 1 Tim. iii. 5-13; Tit. i. 5-11; compare 1 Cor. xi.
   18, 19; Rom. xii. 6-8; Eph. iv. 11-12; Heb. xiii. 17.

   [425] The reading here epinomen is probably corrupt. The translation of
   I. . . . legem dederunt has been adopted.

   [426] abanausos , the opposite disposition to those having banausos ,
   arrogance, pride; compare 1 Pet. v. 3.

   [427] memarturemenous pollois chronois hupo panton

   [428] St. Paul (Phil. iv. 15) in his Epistle to the Philippians writes:
   and ye yourselves also know, ye Philippians, that in the beginning of
   the Gospel (en arche tou euangeliou ), when I departed from Macedonia,
   no church had fellowship with me in the matter of giving and receiving,
   but ye only.' And in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians (xi. 9):
   when I was present with you and in want, I was not a burden on any man;
   for the brethren when they came from Macedonia supplied the measure of
   my want.' We thus see that St. Paul himself applies the expression en
   arche tou euangeliou to his first visit to Corinth. Compare St. Luke,
   i. 2 hoi ap' arches autoptai.

   [429] Clement, 1 Cor. lxiii. and lxv.

   [430] Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 27 ff.

   [431] tous de apestalmenous aph' hemon Klaudion Ephebon kai Oualerion
   Bitona sun kai Phortounato. The words sun kai place Fortunatus in a
   different category from Ephebus and Bito. Th. Zahn (Intr. to N.T. vol.
   i. p. 269) holds that Fortunatus was a delegate from Corinth and that
   it had been he who had brought the news of the dissensions to Rome.
   Lightfoot also (part i. vol. i. p. 29 and vol. ii. p. 187) is of
   opinion that Fortunatus was a Corinthian and that there is no
   improbability in identifying him with the Fortunatus of 1 Cor. xvi. 17.

   [432] See the most interesting chapter on the Hypomnemata of Hegesippus
   in Eusebiana, by H. J. Lawlor (Clarendon Press. 1912). Mr. Lawlor
   produces very strong arguments and evidence (pp. 73-94) to show that
   Epiphanius in writing his Panarion had before him a copy of Hegesippus'
   Memoirs, and further that those Memoirs contained a great deal of
   information about the early history of the Churches of Jerusalem,
   Corinth, and Rome: We find that, just as in the case of Jerusalem and
   Corinth, so in that of Rome, what he [Hegesippus] wrote was mainly a
   résumé of the history of the Christian community, special attention
   being paid to the circumstances under which each bishop succeeded to
   his charges' (p. 85). Among other passages of Epiphanius that which
   explains how it was that Clement though appointed bishop by the
   Apostles Peter and Paul was not first but third in succession, i.e. the
   story of his resignation in favour of Linus and Anencletus, was
   probably taken from Hegesippus (p. 9).

   [433] See Clementine' Homilies and Recognitions, the Epistles to
   Virgins, the Apostolical Constitutions.

   [434] Smyrn. 8; Trall. 2. 3, 4; Eph. 3, 4; Magn. 3, 6, 7; Philad. 4,
   etc.

   [435] Romans (salutation): hetis kai prokathetai en topo choriou
   Rhomaion, axiotheos , axioprepes, axiomakaristos, axiepainos,
   axiepiteuktos , axiagnos kai prokatathemene tes agapes , Christonomos,
   Patronomos.

   [436] Eus. Hist. Eccl. iv. 23.

   [437] Bigg, 1 Peter, Intr. p. 5.

   [438] Hermas, Vision iii. 4: grapseis oun duo biblaridia kai pempseis
   hen Klementi kai hen Grapte. pempsei oun Klemes eis tas exo poleis,
   ekeino gar epitetraptai; Grapte de nouthetese i tas cheras kai tous
   horphanous; su de anagnose eis tauten ten polen meta ton presbuteron
   ton proisamenon tos ekklesias.

   [439] Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 348.

   [440] C.I.L. xii. 3637:

   m. ARRECINO CLEMENTE II

   L. BAEBIO HONORATO

   cos

   IVLIVS.GRAPTUS.MAG.

   MAESOLEVM.EXCOLVIT.ET.VT.ESSET.FRVns

   ornaviT.POSITIS.ARBORIBVS.VITIBVS.ROSAriis idem

   OBLATA.SIBI.A.COLLIBERTIS.IMMVNITATE ET TITVLO.

   qVO.BENIVOLENTIA.EIVS.CONTINERETVR

   ne.QVA.PARTE.VTILITATIBVS.EORVM.

   qvAVIS.VIDERETVR.IMMVNITATEM

   reMISIT.ET.TITVLO.QVEM.DE.SVO.

   posVIT.   ?   ? CONTENTVS.FVIT.
   Emended by Mommsen.

   [441] 1. C.I.L. xii. 4822: GRAPTE VXOR

   [442] See Lecture VIII. pp. 227- 35, and Note D of the Appendix.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  LECTURE VIII

   Daniel, xi. 3, 6: And the king shall do according to his will; and he
   shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god till the
   indignation be accomplished.'

   During the period which followed the accession of the Flavian dynasty
   to the Imperial throne the Church in Rome seems to have lived in
   comparative repose. For more than a quarter of a century after the
   martyrdom of St. Paul there is no record of any violent persecution of
   the Christians. But there is no reason to believe that the ban under
   which those professing the Christian faith lay since the Neronian
   persecution of 65 A.D. was in any way lightened or removed. The
   Christians were then condemned for crimes which were summed up by
   Tacitus as constituting hatred of the human race,' in other words they
   were condemned as enemies of the Roman state and people. The mere
   confession of the Christian name henceforth in itself entailed
   punishment. The principle of action, which Tertullian calls the
   Neronian Institution, continued to be the settled policy of the Roman
   government. This did not mean that the Christian so long as he lived
   quietly and did nothing to bring himself under the notice of the police
   was sought out and dragged before the magistrate. But it did mean that
   he was an outlaw, liable as such at any moment to be dealt with
   summarily by the authorities, as a mere matter of police
   administration. No regular judicial trial was needed, the inquiry
   (cognitio) was confined to the establishment of the charge of being a
   Christian, and once established by the confession of the accused the
   death penalty followed.

   The policy of the Flavian emperors, Vespasian, Titus, and--during the
   first part of his reign--Domitian, was on the whole both towards Jews
   and Christians one of singular moderation. After the merciless
   suppression of the terrible revolt in Judaea and the destruction of
   Jerusalem and its Temple, the position of the Jews in the empire was
   however no longer the same. As a political entity, a nation in any
   sense of the word, they had ceased to exist, they were but a number of
   separate communities scattered throughout the Roman world. But
   Vespasian granted to them a continuation of the religious privileges
   they had hitherto enjoyed on condition that all Jews were registered
   and paid to Roman officials as a tax for the maintenance of the temple
   of Jupiter Capitolinus the didrachma that they had previously
   contributed for the support of the Temple at Jerusalem. [443] But the
   very fact of this registration for fiscal purposes served to accentuate
   the distinction between Jew and Christian the more clearly. The
   Christian Church could no longer find shelter under the shadow of the
   privileges of the synagogues.

   That Titus was himself well aware of the difference, and that he was
   personally hostile to Christianity, is shown by an interesting passage
   in the fourth-century historian, Sulpicius Severus, which in the
   opinion of scholars is generally regarded as an extract from one of the
   lost books of Tacitus. It tells of a council held by Titus at the time
   of the final storming of Jerusalem to decide whether the Temple should
   be destroyed or not. Titus himself, it is reported, with some of his
   officers held that it was necessary, so as to abolish more completely
   the religion both of Jews and Christians, since these religions,
   although opposed to each other, both sprang from the same origin; the
   Christians had issued from the Jews; if the root were taken away, the
   stem would quickly perish.' [444] With the destruction of the Temple
   and the crushing out of the revolt, however, the situation was changed,
   moderate and statesmanlike views prevailed, the Jews secured religious
   toleration and lenient treatment, and no systematic persecution was
   directed against the Christians so long as Titus lived or for some
   years after his untimely death.

   There is no contemporary Christian writing which throws any light upon
   the state of the Church during this time, unless it be The Shepherd' of
   Hermas. This remarkable work bears every mark from internal evidence of
   being a product of the Flavian age. We have already seen in the last
   lecture that the author speaks of a certain Clement, who, if not the
   well-known writer of the Epistle to the Corinthians,' which is the
   general opinion, must be a fictitious personage. Were it not for
   certain statements in the documents known as the Muratorian Fragment on
   the Canon' and the Liberian Catalogue' probably few would have given to
   The Shepherd' a later date than the beginning of the second century.
   The reference to Hermas and his book by the Muratorian writer runs
   thus: [445] . . . very lately in our times Hermas wrote "The Shepherd"
   in the city of Rome while his brother Pius, the bishop, was sitting in
   the chair of the Church of the city of Rome, and therefore it ought to
   be read; but it cannot, to the end of time, be placed either among the
   prophets who are complete in number, nor among the Apostles for public
   lection to the people in church.' Zahn in his Geschichte des
   Neutestamentlichen Kanons' makes this comment: Careful and impartial
   reading of "The Shepherd" would have shown the Fragmentist that the
   same must have been written a considerable time before the episcopate
   of Pius. He who holds the book, despite the name of Clement (Vis. ii.
   4) and many other signs, as a work dating from about 145, must hold it
   to be a pseud-epigraphic fiction, which the Fragmentist throughout does
   not.' [446] The statement in the Muratorian extract quoted above is in
   fact, from whatever point of view it be regarded, a blunder of the
   writer who is called by Zahn the Fragmentist.' The dilemma is one from
   which there seems to be no possibility of escape.

   Dr. Lightfoot has very convincingly shown that this Muratorian document
   contains a literal translation into Latin (somewhat corrupted in
   transmission) of a Greek metrical original, and also that there are
   strong reasons for assigning the authorship to Hippolytus. The literary
   activity of this famous Roman writer during the closing years of the
   second and the first quarter of the third century was very great. The
   Muratorian Canon' may probably be dated from 185 to 200 A.D. [447] The
   Liberian Catalogue,' it is generally agreed, was largely dependent on a
   later work of Hippolytus, the Chronology.' Now in the Liberian
   Catalogue' to the notice of Pope Pius I the following statement is
   appended: under his pontificate his brother Hermes wrote a book in
   which is contained the Mandate which an angel gave to him, when he came
   to him in the garb of a shepherd.' [448] The two passages, Muratorian
   and Liberian, are derived in fact from a common source, most probably
   Hippolytean. But an examination of the character of this source may
   well make one distrustful of its strict accuracy as regards names and
   dates. The Liberian Catalogue' contains a number of strange errors. The
   deaths of St. Peter and St. Paul are stated to have taken place in 55
   A.D. Clement succeeds Linus in 67 A.D., and Anencletus, the real
   successor of Linus, is duplicated and follows Clement, first at Cletus,
   then as Anacletus. Clement's death is recorded as having occurred
   sixteen years before he became bishop according to the generally
   received date. [449] Nor were the errors confined to the first-century
   episcopates. The Hippolytean source is not even accurate about Pope
   Pius himself, who in the words of the Muratorian Fragment' lived very
   recently in our own times.' Hegesippus and Irenaeus, both of whom
   stayed some time in Rome soon after the death of Pius, both give the
   order of succession as Pius, Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherus. [450] The
   Liberian Catalogue' makes Pius the successor of Anicetus instead of the
   predecessor. The conclusion then that we are compelled to draw is that
   this particular piece of external evidence for the date of The
   Shepherd' cannot be accepted as authoritative in face of the internal
   evidence of the book itself. Probability points to its having arisen
   through a confusion between the name of the author and the title of his
   work. Bishop Pius according to a very ancient tradition had a brother
   named Pastor, who was a presbyter. [451] Now in the Latin version known
   as Vulgate,' which probably dates from the end of the second century,
   the title of Hermas' book is Liber Pastoris.' [452] This version was
   thus contemporary with the Muratorian Fragment.' It required but a
   single step therefore to identify the presbyter Pastor with the author
   of the allegory. The Liber Pontificalis,' while embodying the
   biographical notice of Pius I which is found in the Liberian
   Catalogue,' prefaces it by another paragraph in which this Pope is
   spoken of as The brother of Pastor.' There is no attempt to fuse this
   statement with that concerning Hermas--they are separated from one
   another by intervening matter. Indeed in the two earliest forms of the
   Liber Pontificalis' that we possess, the so-called Felician' and
   Cononian' abridgements, the compiler of the Cononian,' evidently
   perceiving the incongruity of the double reference to a brother,
   deliberately refuses to apply the term to Hermas, the words frater
   ipsius' being omitted. [453]

   The earliest patristic references to The Shepherd' point to its having
   been written considerably before the pontificate of Pius I (140-155
   A.D.). Irenaeus, whose sojourn in Rome took place less than twenty
   years after the death of Pius, quotes the opening sentence of the First
   Mandate' as Scripture--Well then spake the Scripture, which saith.'
   [454] Before a document could be thus--plainly, simply, and without
   periphrasis--accepted as Scripture, it must needs have been of some
   considerable antiquity, and indeed it may be regarded as evidence that
   Irenaeus looked upon Hermas as an Apostolical man,' the Hermas in fact
   mentioned by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans.

   Clement of Alexandria in Egypt and Tertullian in Western Africa, in
   writings which date about twenty years later than that of Irenaeus just
   quoted, and almost contemporary with the first publication of the
   Muratorian Canon,' both speak of The Shepherd' as Scripture.' Of
   Clement Dr. Salmon says [455] : The mutilated commencement of the
   "Stromateis' opens in the middle of a quotation from "The Shepherd" and
   about ten times elsewhere he cites the book, always with a complete
   acceptance of the reality and divine character of the revelations made
   to Hermas.' Tertullian [456] before he became a Montanist in his
   treatise De Oratione' rebukes the custom of sitting down for prayer,
   the origin of which he attributes to the opening words of the fifth
   Vision of The Shepherd.' This assigns to The Shepherd' an authority
   which could only belong to a book long received as the work of an
   inspired man. Origen [457] somewhat later in the third century gives as
   his opinion (based no doubt on tradition) that the Hermas mentioned in
   the Epistle to the Romans was the writer of The Shepherd' and adds this
   scripture seems to me very useful and as I think divinely inspired.'
   Such testimonies--and there are none of like date (save the Muratorian
   Fragment') of an adverse character--if not conclusive, point
   unmistakeably to the work of Hermas having already about it the
   hallowing consecration of age and the reverence due to a sub-apostolic
   writing.

   The contents of this strange book are divided into two parts. The first
   part contains a series of five Visions. In the last of these Visions a
   noble-looking man in the garb of a Shepherd, and who is named the Angel
   of Repentance, appears to Hermas, and bids him write down a series of
   Precepts or Mandates, and of Parables or Similitudes, which he had come
   to deliver to him. The second part of the work contains the twelve
   Mandates and the ten Similitudes, which he received from the mouth of
   the Shepherd. It is not my intention to discuss the question whether
   the autobiographical details in this book belong to the real life-story
   of a genuine Hermas, nor again the question whether the two parts of
   the work are from the hand of the same author. There are few in the
   present day who have doubts on either of these questions, and I shall
   assume the unity of authorship of a man, who while conveying
   instruction and warning, moral and doctrinal, under allegorical forms
   is dealing all the time seriously with the religious experiences and
   spiritual failings and trials of his own personal life and of the
   contemporary life of the Christian Church in Rome. [458] But these
   assumptions being granted, it will at once be seen that the use that
   can be made of The Shepherd' as an illuminating historical document
   depends almost entirely upon its date.

   It has already been suggested that the Muratorian Fragmentist blundered
   in his assertion that the work of Hermas was written during the
   episcopate of his brother Pope Pius I, because he confused the author
   of The Pastor' with a well-known brother of the bishop, who actually
   bore that name. Now the very first line of Hermas' book compresses into
   the briefest compass the life-story of the writer's youth. He who
   brought-me-up sold me into Rome to a certain Rhoda.' [459] This implies
   that Hermas had either been born a slave in the house of the vendor,
   who did not live at Rome, or what is from the form of the
   expression--ho threpsas--quite probable, that he had been a castaway
   child whom the above-mentioned master had taken care of and brought up
   as a slave. In the last case his parentage would be unknown and he
   would have no brother. If, however, he were born a slave, three things
   must be postulated before the Muratorian statement can be accepted: (1)
   that in this slave household relationships were recognised; (2) that
   both Hermas and his brother must have been sold in Rome and afterwards
   became freedmen; (3) that the brother laid aside his original Greek
   slave name for that of Pius. Negative evidence is never conclusive, but
   it is certainly very strange that, if Hermas wrote his book during his
   brother's episcopate, there should not be a single reference to that
   brother's existence in a work in which the author several times speaks
   of his family and, as has been said, repeatedly deals with the
   condition, organisation, and affairs of the Church.

   The allusion to Clement as a living man, entrusted with the task of
   communicating with foreign cities, seems to fix the date at which the
   Visions were written, as being previous to the accession of the said
   Clement to the episcopate, i.e. before 92 A.D. How hopeless is the
   attempt to combine a belief in the historicity of this personal
   reference to Clement, as a contemporary occupying an important position
   in the Roman Church, with an acceptance even in a modified form of the
   statement of the Muratorian Fragmentist is exemplified by Harnack in
   his Chronologie der Altchristlichen Literatur.' [460] Harnack will not
   admit for a moment that the paragraph about Clement and Grapte is
   fiction,' [461] so he meets the difficulty first by extending the life
   of Clement to 110 A.D., then by imagining the Shepherd' to have been
   written in instalments during a period of some thirty-five years, the
   original little book' consisting of a portion of Vision II only. But
   while admitting that the work of Hermas shows evident traces of gradual
   growth to completion, it seems to me quite clear that no great interval
   of time can have separated the first portion written from the last.
   From beginning to end the same conditions obtain throughout both as
   regards Hermas personally and as regards the internal condition and the
   trials of the Church. In that very Vision II which Harnack regards as
   the oldest part of the book, a great tribulation' is announced as
   coming, and in Vision IV the announcement is repeated; but although
   past persecutions are described in the earliest Visions' and latest
   Similitudes,' [462] they differ in no way in character, and there is
   nowhere any allusion to the great tribulation' as having come. Again in
   the Visions' [463] Hermas is represented as having lost his wealth and
   been ruined because of the wrong-doings of his family. This punishment
   has fallen upon him for his neglect in not admonishing his children,
   who are invited to penitence and are promised forgiveness, if from
   their heart they repent. In Similitude VII' we learn that the children
   have repented from their heart, and Hermas complains to the Shepherd
   Angel that nevertheless his afflictions have not ceased. The reply is
   Dost thou think that the sins of those who repent are straightway
   remitted? The very essence of this rejoinder lies in the fact that the
   time of Hermas' affliction--i.e. the period covered by the book--had
   been short.

   The past persecutions described by Hermas agree with all we know of the
   Neronian persecution and its consequences. In Vision III mention is
   made of those who have suffered scourges, imprisonments, great
   afflictions, crosses, wild beasts for the Name's sake.' [464] In Sim.
   IV. we read of sufferers for the sake of the name of the Son of God,
   who suffered willingly with their whole heart and gave up their lives.
   These when brought before the authority and questioned did not deny,
   but suffered readily'; of others as fearful and hesitating, who
   reasoned in their hearts whether they should deny or confess before
   they suffered'; of others again--the double-minded'--who at the first
   rumours of persecution through cowardice sacrifice to idols and are
   ashamed of the name of their Lord.' We find in these references a
   remarkable agreement with the references to the Neronian persecution in
   1 Peter, Hebrews, the Apocalypse, 1 Clement and the Annals' of Tacitus,
   both as to the punishments inflicted, and the various categories into
   which the accused were divided, the willing and courageous martyrs, the
   more timid and doubtful sufferers, and the renegades and apostates, who
   denied their faith. [465] It may be gathered also from various passages
   of The Shepherd' that persecution was not confined to the one violent
   outburst, but that at the time when Hermas was writing those who
   professed the Christian faith were living if not in peril yet in
   continual insecurity, liable at any moment to be called upon to confess
   or deny their faith. Such was the state of things which there is good
   reason to believe subsisted throughout the first two decades of Flavian
   rule.

   The constitution of the Church is a subject that has no direct interest
   for Hermas. The almost chance references to it in the pages of The
   Shepherd' are however of considerable significance and value. The
   condition of things, we find, has altered little since Pauline days.
   The charismatic ministry of apostles, prophets, and teachers are
   working side by side with the hierarchical officials--bishops,
   presbyters, and deacons. In Vision III. 5, the white stones used for
   the building of the tower, which is the Church, are described as being
   The apostles, bishops, teachers, and deacons, who have walked in godly
   gravity, and who have discharged their duties as bishops, teachers, and
   deacons for the good of God's elect. Some of these have fallen asleep,
   some still are with us.' [466] Now this passage, which recalls the
   language of 1 Cor. xii. 28 and Eph. iv. 11, clearly implies that of the
   original apostles, bishops, teachers, and deacons there were some still
   living when Hermas wrote. It will be noticed that Hermas omits from
   this list The prophets,' and elsewhere throughout this work, but in
   Similitude XI he treats at length of the difference between true and
   false prophets. He was himself a prophet and he is at pains to claim
   for himself inspiration and a position of authority. He does not
   classify The prophets' with the apostles and teachers, because he
   regards the prophets apparently as possessing gifts which place them in
   a category apart. From a number of passages it may be seen that Hermas,
   as a prophet, both claimed and exercised the right of delivering
   charges and admonitions to the rulers of the Church, and of speaking
   publicly in the assemblies. [467]

   Apostles and teachers are mentioned several times in Similitude IX. In
   one curious passage Hermas tells how those of these apostles and
   teachers who had fallen asleep in the power and faith of the Son of God
   preached to those who had fallen asleep before them and themselves gave
   them the seal of their preaching,' i.e. baptised them. [468] From this
   it has been inferred that all the Twelve Apostles were dead when these
   words were written. But surely this is not so. The apostles' of Hermas
   were the whole body of those chosen and sent out as missionaries by the
   Churches. Only those who had fallen asleep' could follow in their
   Master's steps and preach to the dead. The position of the charismatic
   ministry in the days of Hermas seems in fact to have changed little
   since St. Paul wrote his First Epistle to the Corinthians.

   Very important historically, however, are certain hints which may be
   found in The Shepherd' about changes at work in the constitution of the
   official hierarchy. Twice Hermas refers to the hierarchy under the
   general title of chiefs of the Church,' [469] using the same Greek term
   as is employed in the Epistle to the Hebrews and in 1 Clement. Only
   once does the word presbyters occur as the designation of this official
   class, when the aged woman, the Church, bids Hermas read the book she
   has given him--to this city with the presbyters that preside over the
   Church.' And here the word for those who preside' [470] is a technical
   word found several times in the same sense in St. Paul's epistles. The
   references of Hermas therefore to the constitution of the Church are
   thus thoroughly primitive, and the picture drawn by him of the local
   organisation essentially the same as that which we find in the Pauline
   epistles. It is clear for instance that the title episcopus was not yet
   confined to a single individual, but was still the common designation
   of all presbyters who were charged with the cure of souls. Nevertheless
   there are signs that an evolutionary movement was already in progress,
   which was preparing the way for that transformation in the
   signification of the word ' bishop,' which we find already accomplished
   at the time when Ignatius wrote his epistles towards the end of the
   first decade of the second century. This seems to be the fair and
   legitimate interpretation of certain passages of The Shepherd,' to
   which we will now turn our attention.

   Sternly does the Prophet in Vision III rebuke the dissensions among
   those who sit in the foremost seats. [471] Again in Similitude VIII the
   Shepherd-Angel speaks of certain men who, though always faithful and
   good, were jealous one of another about the first places and a certain
   dignity' [472] (doxes tinos). But these,' he continues, are all foolish
   to contend thus for the first places. Nevertheless, when they heard my
   commands, being good men they cleansed themselves and repented
   quickly.' Now knowing, as we do, on grounds approaching to historical
   certainty that from the time of the deaths of the apostles Peter and
   Paul a succession of presbyters occupied a post of pre-eminence and
   dignity among their fellows--that of presiding bishop and official head
   of the local Church--is it not permissible to read between the lines
   that, around this office, heart burnings and jealousies not
   unaccompanied by cabals and intrigues had arisen? During the two long
   episcopates of Linus and Anencletus, each of twelve years according to
   tradition, the office that they held had, we can scarcely doubt, been
   gradually drawing to itself more and more of initiative and authority,
   and becoming more monarchical in character. If then Hermas wrote, as I
   am now contending he did, during the closing years of Anencletus, the
   long immunity from violent persecution which the Church in Rome had
   then enjoyed was precisely a period when in such a large and mixed
   community, containing unstable and doubtful elements, strifes and
   dissensions about precedence might arise, and ambitious presbyters be
   found ready to assert with acrimony and self-assertion their equality
   of privilege with one who was nominally only one of themselves, primus
   inter pares it might be, but still a presbyter like the rest.

   The immunity from persecution, to which I have referred, was, however,
   not long to endure, and the severe trial through which the Church had
   to pass before the end of Domitian's reign would doubtless be more
   effective in purifying and cleansing it from those jealous,
   self-seeking, and factious elements of which Hermas speaks, than his
   rebukes and upbraidings. The coming tribulation, which he predicted as
   being at hand, was no doubt that tribulation [473] which first-century
   Christianity expected would precede, in accordance with the Lord's
   words, the Second Advent and the final consummation of all things. The
   prophecy proved true, however, though in a different sense from that
   which the prophet intended.

   Christian writers have been accustomed to couple together the names of
   Nero and Domitian, as the first two persecutors of the Church. It has
   already been shown that although the attack of Nero on the Christians
   was but the violent outburst of a tyrant, anxious to divert public
   odium from himself against a body of sectaries who were generally hated
   and despised, it had permanent results and marked the real beginning of
   what was to be the continuous policy of the Roman State. The
   persecution of the adherents of the Christian faith by Domitian was far
   less direct, and did not, as may be gathered from the letter of Pliny
   to Trajan about sixteen years later, establish any fresh precedents;
   for had such fresh precedents been established they would not have
   escaped the notice of this writer, who was a contemporary and, as his
   correspondence proves, a close observer of current events.

   The origin of the persecution of Domitian was not so much religious as
   fiscal. The Imperial treasury had been emptied by a series of
   extravagances. In his search for fresh sources of income, Domitian
   bethought him of the tax which Vespasian had in 70 A.D. imposed upon
   the Jews, commanding them, as a condition for their religious
   privileges being respected, to pay henceforth, as already stated, the
   didrachma they had become accustomed to contribute for the support of
   the Temple and its worship at Jerusalem to the Roman authority for the
   maintenance of the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus. Hitherto the
   collection of this tax had been leniently carried out and had been only
   demanded from those circumcised Jews who were professed members of the
   synagogues. Domitian determined that all who lived more Iudaico,
   including the large class of Godfearers' and indeed all who to a
   greater or less extent followed Jewish customs, should be liable, and a
   strict inquisition was in consequence made. [474] The exact date is not
   accurately known, but what followed was the bringing to the notice of
   the Government the existence of a body of people living after the
   Jewish fashion but repudiating any connexion with the synagogues and
   therefore having no right to shelter themselves behind the Jewish
   privileges. Against them the charge of atheism and Jewish manners' was
   accordingly preferred, and out of the fiscal demand there came a series
   of arrests and trials in which many Christians suffered.

   It must, however, be borne in mind that there does not seem to have
   been any organised attack upon the Christian faith as such, but rather
   that a number of individuals, both of high rank and of low, became for
   various causes, during the reign of terror which marked the closing
   years of Domitian's rule, suspect to the government, and paid by their
   lives or their exile, and in both cases by the confiscation of their
   property, the penalty for exciting the fears, the jealousy, or the
   rapacity of the tyrant. [475] Moreover to a man whose proclamations
   began with the words our God and Lord Domitian,' and who ostentatiously
   made the restoration of the national religion one of the aims of his
   policy, it was easy under the charges of atheism and Jewish manners' or
   of being movers of innovations' [476] to strike at those who held aloof
   from taking part in Caesar-worship or in the religious festivals and
   spectacles.

   Very little, practically nothing, is known of the extent to which the
   general body of Christians suffered under Domitian. In as far as
   persecution fell upon the humbler classes, it arose, as I have pointed
   out, not as part of a systematic attack on the Christian religion as
   such, but as a result of the stricter exaction of the didrachma tax.
   And it was by no means confined to Rome. Wherever colonies of Jews were
   settled the fiscal inquisition would be made, and thus the presence of
   Christian communities brought to the official notice of the
   magistrates. In their case the procedure would be summary. The mere
   confession of the Name was sufficient to place the Christian outside
   the law. He would be asked either to deny the faith or to suffer
   martyrdom, and among the large number of those who were but half and
   half Christians, doubtless very many conformed to the request and saved
   their lives. Eusebius in his Chronicle' quotes the historian Bruttius
   as stating that many Christians suffered under Domitian, but the
   expression is a very vague one, [477] and obviously the chief interest
   of the passage to Eusebius, as it is to us, is its reference to the
   important fact that among the many high and influential persons whom
   the tyrant visited with death or banishment were certain of his own
   near relatives who were Christians. It is around the names of a very
   small group of individuals that the chief interest of the Domitianic
   persecution centres, an interest which has been greatly increased by
   recent archaeological discoveries.

   The passage from the Chronicle' of Eusebius merely tells us the name of
   one of these relatives of Domitian who, according to his authority
   Bruttius, suffered banishment because she was a Christian. Her name was
   Flavia Domitilla, and she is described in Jerome's Latin version as
   being a niece of Flavius Clemens the consul by his sister.' Her place
   of banishment was the island of Pontia. The Armenian version of the
   Chronicle' suggests that there may be in this passage some corruption
   of the text, [478] nevertheless its general correctness is confirmed
   strongly by the parallel passage from the History' of Eusebius, where
   that writer basing his statement on the evidence of heathen historians,
   prominent amongst whom would be the Bruttius named in the Chronicle,'
   states that in the fifteenth year of Domitian amongst many others who
   suffered persecution was Flavia Domitilla, a daughter of the sister of
   Flavius Clemens, one of the consuls at Rome at that time, who for her
   witness to Christ was banished as a punishment to the island of
   Pontia.' [479]

   Now this evidence of Eusebius, when compared with certain passages in
   the pages of Dion Cassius and Suetonius, requires very careful
   attention. Dion writes (I quote the abridgement of Xiphilinus)--in this
   year (95 A.D.) Domitian put to death Flavius Clemens, being then
   consul, his cousin, and Flavia Domitilla, his relation and the wife of
   the same [Clemens]. Both were condemned for the crime of "atheism." On
   this charge were condemned many others who had adopted Jewish customs;
   some were put to death, others punished by confiscation. Domitilla was
   only transported to the island of Pandateria.' [480] Now the
   relationship of this Domitilla to Domitian is revealed to us plainly by
   Quintilian, [481] who was tutor to the sons of Flavius Clemens and who
   states that they were the grandchildren of the Emperor's sister, who
   also bore the name of Flavia Domitilla. This daughter of Vespasian died
   before her father, but the name of the grand-daughter appears on
   several extant inscriptions, from which we learn that the Christian
   catacomb in which many members of the Flavian family were buried, and
   which dates from the first century, was excavated on her property.
   [482] There can be no doubt that she was a Christian and that the faith
   of Christ had been adopted by others closely related to Domitian.
   Whether Flavius Clemens himself was actually a baptised Christian and
   suffered martyrdom, it is very difficult to say. The complete silence
   of Eusebius and of Christian legend and tradition would rather lead to
   the conclusion that, though the consul may have been well-disposed
   towards Christianity and even lived after the Christian manner, and so
   have incurred the charge of atheism,' yet this was not the real cause
   which led to his being executed. Like his brother Flavius Sabinus
   before him he stood too near the throne for the suspicious and
   childless tyrant to endure the presence in Rome of those whose
   blood-relationship made them possible rivals and successors. This is
   borne out by the statement of Suetonius, who after describing the
   morbid state of fear and suspicion, amounting almost to semi-madness,
   in which Domitian spent his last years, living in constant dread of
   conspiracy and assassination, proceeds--finally he suddenly put to
   death on the faintest suspicion, when he had only just ceased to be
   consul, Flavius Clemens, his cousin-german, a man of the most
   contemptible inactivity, whose sons, then of very tender age, he had
   openly destined for his successors, and, discarding their former names,
   had ordered one to be called Vespasian, the other Domitian. By this
   violent act he very much hastened his own destruction.' [483] It was in
   fact by the hand of Stephanus, a freedman and steward of Domitilla,
   Flavius Clemens' wife, that the tyrant was stabbed a few months later.

   Now Suetonius had previously given an account of the murder of Flavius
   Sabinus, the elder brother of Flavius Clemens, by his cousin Domitian
   for no other reason than a mistake of a herald, who on Sabinus being
   chosen at the consular election, inadvertently proclaimed him to the
   people not as consul but as imperator, [484] and in the passage quoted
   above the historian clearly implies that it was on some similar very
   slender ground of political suspicion that Flavius Clemens fell a
   victim to Domitian's jealousy. Possibly his Christian principles,
   however laxly held, may have compelled him during his tenure of office
   to hold aloof from certain religious ceremonies and spectacles, thus
   bringing down upon him the imperial anger. The words of Suetonius that
   he was a man of most contemptible inertia' [485] represent a charge
   which was frequently brought against the Christians, because their
   religious scruples prevented them from taking an active part in the
   political life and still more in the cruel and vicious amusements of
   their time. The same charge is brought by Tacitus against Flavius
   Sabinus, the City Prefect during the latter years of Nero. He was the
   elder brother of Vespasian and the father of the Sabinus and Clemens
   put to death by Domitian. He perished in defending the Capitol against
   the German mercenaries of Vitellius in 69 A.D. Tacitus describes him as
   at the close of his life mild in character, averse to bloodshed, and
   sluggish.' He must in his official capacity have taken part in the
   persecution of 65 A.D., and the effect of what he witnessed may well
   have been the conversion wholly or in part of the unwilling persecutor.

   The theory of the identity of Flavius Clemens the consul put to death
   in 95 A.D. with Clement who was bishop of Rome at that period was at
   one time seriously put forward by a number of eminent German scholars
   [486] but it has now been generally abandoned. It was pointed out with
   a certain amount of plausibility that the later Clementine legend
   ascribing to the bishop a close connexion with the imperial family was
   due to the fact that he was a mere duplication of the consul, and that
   it was unlikely that there should be at once in Rome two persons
   bearing the same name, one of whom occupied one of the highest official
   positions in the state, and the other was the official head of the
   Christian community. Dr. Lightfoot was able to show conclusively that
   this theory of duplication had no foundation and was untenable, but his
   own solution of the mystery surrounding Clement the bishop's
   personality, that he was a man of Jewish descent, a freedman or the son
   of a freedman belonging to the household of Flavius Clemens,' [487] is
   equally if not more impossible. Dr. Lightfoot seems to have forgotten
   that Flavius Clemens was quite a young man, probably not more than
   thirty, when he died. [488] Clement the bishop, unless all that
   tradition relates of him be false, must have been at least fifty in 95
   A.D. He could not in any case have been the son of a freedman of the
   younger man. Again if a freedman he would not have adopted his master's
   cognomen, but would have retained his own slave name as cognomen,
   preceded by the nomen Flavius.

   It is somewhat strange, however, that while so many attempts have been
   made either to identify the two Clements mentioned above or at least to
   connect them in some way with each other, the presence of a third
   contemporary Clement, who undoubtedly played a much larger part in
   Roman public life than either of the other two, has been overlooked.
   Yet I am now going to ask you to fix your attention upon this man and
   his family relationships, for I believe that by doing so we shall find
   the clue to the solution of many difficulties and shall be able to
   clear up a number of doubtful points in the history of Roman
   Christianity at the end of the first century. Here in the lecture
   itself I can only indicate briefly and in outline the hypothesis which
   I am putting forward, and am perforce reserving for a special note in
   the Appendix the fuller discussion of details and of the authorities on
   which the various statements and suggestions are based. [489]

   M. Arrecinus Clemens was the son of M. Arrecinus Tertullus Clemens,
   Praetorian Prefect under Caligula. From Josephus we learn that this
   Tertullus Clemens was privy to the conspiracy which resulted in the
   murder of that Emperor, and connived at it. From the same authority
   comes the information that after the assassination Herod Agrippa was
   allowed to act as an intermediary between the Praetorian troops and the
   soldiery who obeyed the Senate. The result was that Claudius who had
   been acclaimed Emperor in the camp became quietly possessed of the
   reins of power without bloodshed. He owed thus his peaceful accession
   to the throne in no small measure to the authority exercised by the
   Praetorian Prefect. How great that authority and influence was may be
   gathered from the fact that his son thirty years later was welcomed by
   the guards as their Prefect because the memory of his father was still
   fresh among them.

   It should be noted that it is from the Jewish historian, Josephus, only
   that the information comes as to the parts played by Arrecinus
   Tertullus Clemens and Herod Agrippa before and after Caligula's death,
   and it seems to me a perfectly legitimate inference that the Prefect
   was a friend of Agrippa and may indeed like many other well-to-do
   Romans have felt the attraction of the synagogue and to a greater or
   less extent been a God-fearer.' Be this as it may, it is certain that
   Titus Flavius Vespasianus was a relative of Tertullus Clemens.
   Vespasian, Suetonius tells us, was brought up from early childhood by
   his grandmother Tertulla, a name which suggests not merely the bond of
   kinship between the Prefect and the future Emperor but the likelihood
   that in their youth they were closely associated. Evidence of the
   friendliness of the relations which continued to subsist between the
   two men in later life is not wanting. Titus, the son of Vespasian, was
   born in 39 A.D. in very poor circumstances, but shortly after the
   accession of Claudius both Vespasian himself and his elder brother T.
   Flavius Sabinus obtained commands in the expedition to Britain under
   Aulus Plautius. In his father's absence we find Titus at Court, as the
   companion of Britannicus, the son of Claudius. Can we not see here
   signs that Clemens to whom Claudius owed so much had used his influence
   with the Emperor on behalf of his kinsmen? As a further mark of the
   closeness of the relations between them we find that Titus, while still
   little more than a boy, was married to Arrecina Tertulla, daughter of
   Clemens. Domitian, the younger son of Vespasian, was not born until 51
   A.D., after his father's return from Britain, and he seems to have
   found a home with his uncle, T. Flavius Sabinus, during the years 57-69
   A.D., when Vespasian was abroad and Sabinus filled the post of Prefect
   of the City. This elder brother of Vespasian did not marry till late in
   life, probably not until after he settled in Rome in 57 A.D. at the
   close of his governorship of Moesia, for, as we have already seen, his
   children were still young when he was murdered in December 69 A.D.
   Domitian, then aged eighteen, was with his uncle in the Capitol, when
   it was stormed by the Vitellian troops, and narrowly escaped with his
   life, to be immediately afterwards saluted as Caesar and invested with
   consular authority. One of his first acts was the appointment of his
   relative, M. Arrecinus Clemens, who is described by Tacitus as being in
   very great favour with Domitian, to the post of Praetorian Prefect,
   formerly held by his father. This younger Arrecinus Clemens was
   afterwards twice consul (suffect) in 73 A.D. and 94 A.D., and from 8z
   A.D. onwards a member of the Imperial Council. Shortly after his second
   consulship he was suddenly condemned and put to death by Domitian, who,
   as Suetonius tells us, treated him with every mark of regard up to the
   last. The death of this active and prominent man can therefore have
   occurred only about a year before that of Flavius Clemens.

   It is not surprising that there should be confusion and mistake on the
   part of later Christian writers, who knew nothing of Clemens the consul
   of 94 A.D., the man of twenty-five years official experience, but
   attributed all references in heathen writers to a consul of that name
   to Flavius Clemens, thereby creating entanglements and difficulties.
   For instance it has been seen that Eusebius, referring to Bruttius
   [490] as his authority, both in his History' and in his Chronicle,'
   states that Flavia Domitilla, the niece [the sister's child] of Flavius
   Clemens, one of the consuls at that time, had been exiled because of
   her profession of the Christian faith to the island of Pontia. There is
   no mention in either passage of the death of Flavius Clemens. Further,
   Jerome, in one of his epistles giving a description of the visit of a
   certain Paula in 385 A.D. to the island of Pontia, declares that she
   saw there the cells in which Flavia Domitilla had spent a long exile.

   On the other hand Suetonius and Philostratus record the death of
   Flavius Clemens without any hint of any punishment falling upon any
   Flavia Domitilla. Dion Cassius, however, declares that both Flavius
   Clemens and his wife Flavia Domitilla were accused of the crime of
   atheism' and that he was executed, while his wife was banished to the
   island not of Pontia but of Pandateria.

   This is all very puzzling, but there is yet another source of
   information available to us--the legendary Acts of Nereus and
   Achilles.' These Acts,' though late in date and as regards many details
   pure fiction, rest nevertheless on a solid basis of real fact, for a
   memorial of Nereus and Achilles (according to the story the martyred
   chamberlains of a Flavia Domitilla, whose mother Plautilla was the
   sister of Clemens the Consul) has been found in the cemetery of
   Domitilla, where the Acts' tell us the bodies were laid. Flavia
   Domitilla herself, so runs this narrative, had been banished to the
   island of Pontia because as a Christian she wished to live in
   virginity, and had refused to marry in accordance with the Emperor's
   commands. To say that such an incident is one common to early Christian
   hagiography is no argument against its authenticity in this or any
   particular instance. It is a simple matter of fact that the precepts of
   St. Paul on the subject of virginity had a far-reaching influence, and
   that during the age of persecution many Christian women did regard the
   state of life commended by the Apostle as the highest ideal of
   discipleship. Plautilla's name, I can see no reason to doubt, was found
   in the original source which furnished the materials for the
   sixth-century Acts of Nereus and Achilles.' I am inclined, however, to
   connect the disobedience and banishment of Domitilla the virgin with
   the sudden disgrace and execution of Arrecinus Clemens, she being his
   niece and Plautilla his sister. Eusebius states that the Domitilla
   banished to the island of Pontia was the niece of Flavius Clemens, and
   he quotes the contemporary historian Bruttius as his authority. Apart
   from other reasons for believing that Eusebius must have made a
   mistake, to which I shall refer directly, I think it more than likely
   that he never saw the original narrative of Bruttius at all, but only
   some Greek extract from it at second hand, in which the mother of
   Domitilla was described, just as she is in The Acts of Nereus and
   Achilles,' simply as the sister of Clemens the consul. He naturally
   would interpret this as a reference to Flavius Clemens. The same error
   was committed by the author of the Chronicon Paschale,' who records
   that Flavius Clemens was consul both in 93 A.D. and 95 A.D., whereas it
   is certain that he was consul for the first time in 95 A.D., the consul
   in 94 A.D. being Arrecinus Clemens.

   There is every mark (except the duplication of names) that the account
   given by Dion Cassius of the execution of Flavius Clemens and the
   condemnation of his wife, Domitian's niece, to exile in the island of
   Pandateria is quite distinct from that recorded by Eusebius on the
   authority of Bruttius, and with fuller detail in The Acts of Nereus and
   Achilles.' Eusebius in mentioning the name of Flavius Clemens could
   surely not have refrained from speaking of his fate had the passage
   from Bruttius that was before his eyes made any allusion to this last
   and crowning act of Domitian's cruelty. No, the incidents connected
   with the sentences on the two Flavia Domitillas seem to have been
   separated by an interval of some twelve months or more from each other.

   Circumstantial evidence is in favour of the conclusion I have adopted.
   In 95 A.D. Flavius Clemens was, as I have said, still quite a young
   man. It is therefore extremely improbable that he should have had a
   niece of sufficient age and standing to have aroused the resentment of
   Domitian, or that she should have been accompanied into exile by two
   soldier-chamberlains, the historical reality of whose martyrdom and
   subsequent burial in the cemetery of Domitilla extant memorials
   testify. Dr. Lightfoot [491] sees a discrepancy in the representation
   of these two men both as soldiers of the guard and as chamberlains of
   Domitilla. It is rather an undesigned piece of confirmatory evidence,
   if, as I am assuming, this Domitilla were the niece and the
   granddaughter of two Pretorian Prefects, one of whom had just served
   the office of consul.

   But further light may, I think, be thrown upon her personality, which
   will reveal still more clearly the causes for the confusion of names to
   which I have referred. It never seems to have struck any of the
   numerous critics and commentators who have dealt with these questions,
   that Clemens' was not a cognomen in use among the Flavian family. If
   the second son of T. Flavius Sabinus received the cognomen Clemens, the
   inference is that he derived it from his mother.

   The name of the wife of Flavius Sabinus, the brother of Vespasian, is
   not recorded, but he married late in life, and if that wife were
   Plautilla, daughter of the Praetorian Prefect, Tertullus Clemens, and
   sister of Arrecinus Clemens the consul of 93 A.D., it seems to me that
   not merely the difficulties attaching to the scanty historical
   references to the Domitianic persecutions, but also those connected
   with the more or less legendary traditions relating to the same period,
   will be largely removed. Let us examine some of the consequences of the
   hypothesis that I have put forward as to Plautilla having been the wife
   of Titus Flavius Sabinus, the Prefect of the City from 57 to 69 A.D.
   According to The Acts of Nereus and Achilles' she was a Christian
   convert and died the same year that St. Peter was martyred. Sabinus was
   murdered in 69 A.D. and as I have already pointed out there are hints
   in the narrative of Tacitus that he, too, may in his last years have
   imbibed Christian principles. The natural guardian of his orphan
   children would be their uncle M. Arrecinus CIemens, the Praetorian
   Prefect of 70 A.D. The two sons as they grew up would no doubt pass
   under the direct care of Vespasian himself, but the daughter, Flavia
   Domitilla, would remain with her uncle, and would thus be rightly
   described not as the sister of Flavius Clemens but as the niece of
   Arrecinus.

   Again, the name Plautilla suggested to De Rossi that her mother's name
   was likely to be Plautia.' This suggestion I shall adopt by the further
   assumption that the wife of Tertullus Clemens was a sister of Aulus
   Plautius the conqueror of Britain, and therefore a relative of Plautia
   Urgulanilla the second wife of Claudius and sister-in-law to Pomponia
   Graecina, whose conversion through Judaism to Christianity may be dated
   as having taken place early in Claudius' reign. That Tertullus Clemens
   either personally or through his wife had some special Jewish connexion
   has already been suggested as an explanation of the particular
   knowledge shown by Josephus about the part played by this Praetorian
   Prefect at the time of the assassination of Caligula; and if his wife
   were the sister of Aulus Plautius not only is there a possibility that
   she may have shared the religious views of Pomponia Graecina, but a
   further reason is adduced for the appointment of both Vespasian and his
   brother Sabinus to posts in the army of Britain under that general.

   Thus a scheme of relationship between the Flavian and Arrecinian
   families has been drawn up, which has at least the not inconsiderable
   merit of co-ordinating a number of isolated facts and bringing them
   into harmony with one another. It will be found that it is able to
   answer to a further and still more trying test of its general accuracy.
   I have suggested at the close of the last lecture that Clement the
   Bishop was a younger brother of M. Arrecinus Clemens the consul. It
   will be found, as I then said, that such a suggestion was in no way a
   random conjecture. The high position which the famous bishop held,
   according to all the traditions that have come down to us, in the
   estimation of later generations was due not to his being the author of
   the Epistle sent by the Roman Church to the Church at Corinth, but to
   his being a personal disciple of St. Peter and at the same time a man
   of distinguished birth and family connexion. In the Acts of Nereus and
   Achilles' The bishop is described as being the son of a brother of
   Clemens the consul.' The relations between him and St. Peter, the
   evidence for which is strong and convincing, render it more probable
   that he was the younger brother of Arrecinus. This would be in
   accordance with what we find in the Clementine Homilies' and
   Recognitions.' In their accounts of the early life of the bishop, which
   are derived from a common earlier source, Clement is represented as the
   youngest of his family. In these romances, the biographical chronology
   is hopeless. The names of the parents and brothers of the bishop belong
   to the period of Hadrian and the Antonines, while his conversion takes
   place in the reign of Tiberius. The statement, however, that the father
   of Clement was a near relative and foster-brother of an emperor and
   that his mother was likewise a kinswoman of Caesar can scarcely be the
   pure invention of a writer of fiction. There could be no object in a
   romancer going out of his way to make such an assertion unless it had
   behind it a genuine historical tradition. If Clement, however, were the
   son of Arrecinus Tertullus Clemens and of Plautia the sister of Aulus
   Plautius, his father was a relative and possibly the foster-brother of
   Vespasian, his mother a kinswoman of Claudius. It is an interesting
   thought that with such parentage he may have gained his early knowledge
   of the Jewish scriptures and of the principles of Christianity at the
   feet of Pomponia Graecina.

   Among the victims of Domitian in 95 A.D. was a member of one of the
   most illustrious families in Rome--M' Acilius Glabrio. [492] While he
   was consul in 91 A.D. as the colleague of M. Ulpius Trajanus, the
   future emperor, he appears to have excited the suspicion and dislike of
   Domitian, who in order to humiliate and degrade him compelled Glabrio
   to fight with wild beasts in the amphitheatre adjoining the imperial
   villa at Albanum. He was victorious but was afterwards exiled. This
   punishment did not, however, satisfy the vindictive spirit of the
   Emperor. Dion Cassius, after telling of the execution of Flavius
   Clemens and the banishment of his wife upon the charge of atheism and
   Jewish manners,' says that he also caused Acilius Glabrio to be put to
   death for the same crimes. Suetonius likewise states that Acilius
   Glabrio in his place of exile and several others of senatorial and
   consular rank were executed as instigators of novelties'--molitores
   rerum novarum. [493] The character of these charges had for some time
   given rise to something more than a suspicion that this M' Acilius
   Glabrio may have been a Christian. This suspicion has been converted
   almost into certainty by the discovery in 1888 by De Rossi in the
   first-century cemetery of Priscilla of a gamma-shaped crypt formerly
   richly adorned with frescoes, now in a state of ruin, but containing
   many fragments of inscriptions showing that this was a burial place of
   the Acilii Glabriones and other members of the Acilian Gens. [494] It
   has been a great misfortune that in this catacomb, as in that of
   Domitilla, so much wanton destruction should have been wrought by the
   searchers for relics (especially at the beginning of the seventeenth
   century) in ignorant disregard of the inestimable historical value of
   these precious archaeological records of primitive Roman Christianity.
   The name Priscilla was not uncommon in the Acilian family, and it is
   thought that the particular Priscilla from whom the catacomb derives
   its name may have been the mother of M' Acilius Glabrio, the consul of
   91 A.D. These two cemeteries of Priscilla and Domitilla even in their
   present devastated condition bear witness, which cannot be gainsaid, to
   the hold which Christianity had obtained among the upper classes in the
   reign of Domitian.

   This account of the Church in Rome in the first century has had to be
   compressed into eight lectures. Now compression implies that certain
   matters have been passed over lightly, others selected for special and
   detailed treatment. This is a true description of the method that I
   have followed, and it has consisted in choosing for more exhaustive and
   careful examination precisely those questions and subjects round which
   controversies have arisen and on which there have been and are strong
   differences of opinion. It is, for instance, of vital importance to a
   right understanding of the growth of Christianity in the centre of the
   empire, that the contemporary documents which throw light upon it
   should be correctly dated, and to this question of dates much
   attention, perhaps some may think a disproportionate amount of
   attention, has been given. That, however, depends entirely upon the
   results achieved by arguments whose force and validity rest upon the
   patient unravelling and disentanglement of a quantity of involved,
   obscure, and sometimes apparently contradictory evidence. This I will
   venture to say, that while only too deeply conscious of the limitations
   of my knowledge, it has been my endeavour in these lectures freely, and
   without prejudice, to give expression to the conclusions which close
   personal study of the documentary and epigraphic evidence has led me to
   form, in the hope if not of convincing or converting those who have
   adopted different views, at least of stimulating inquiry and arousing
   fresh interest in some questions that have been regarded as choses
   jugees, and to remind those who may do me the honour of reading these
   pages, that experience has taught that there are very few indeed even
   of the so-called accepted results of criticism' which can be received
   without the mental reservation of a note of interrogation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [443] Josephus, Bell. Iud. vii. 6. 6; Dion Cassius, lxvi. 7. This
   conciliatory attitude of Vespasian and Titus to the Jewish Diaspora was
   due in part to the fact that the non-Palestinian Jews had taken no
   share in the revolt and that they were financially useful, in part to
   the influence of Agrippa II and his sister, who lived at Rome on terms
   of close intimacy with the Imperial family. Vespasian had also special
   cause to be grateful to the Jew, Tiberius Alexander, who was the first
   to proclaim him emperor at Alexandria and who secured the allegiance to
   him of the legions in Egypt, 1 July 69. See Tac. Hist. ii. 79.

   [444] Sulp. Severus, Chron. ii. 30. 6: Fertur Titus adhibito consilio
   prius deliberasse . . . at contra alii et Titus ipse evertendum templum
   in primis censebant quo plenius Iudaeorum et Christianorum religio
   tolleretur; quippe has religiones, licet contrarias sibi, iisdem
   auctoribus profectas: Christianos ex Iudaeis extitisse: radice sublata,
   stirpem facile perituram.'

   [445]

   . . . ' pastorem uero

   nuperrim e temporibus nostris in urbe

   roma herma conscripsit sedente cathe

   tra urbis romae aeclesiae pio eps fratre

   eius et ideo legi eum quide oportet se pu

   plicare vero in eclesia populo neque jnter

   apostolos in fine temporum potest.'
   Zahn, Gesch. N.T. Kanons, p. 8; both Zahn and Lightfoot render
   nuperrime by neosti.

   [446] Denn aufmerksame and unparteiische Lesung des Hirten würde dem
   Frg. gezeigt haben dass derselbe geraume Zeit vor dem Episkopat des
   Pius geschrieben sein will. Wer das Buch trotz des Namens Clemens (Vis.
   ii. 4) and vieler anderer Anzeichen für ein Werk aus der Zeit vom 145
   hielt, musste es für eine pseudepigraphische Fiction halten, was der
   Frg. durchaus nicht thut.'--Zahn, Gesch. N.T. Kanons, ii. 113.

   [447] Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. ii. pp. 405-13.

   [448] Sub huius episcopatu frater eius Ermes librum scripsit, in quo
   mandatum continetur, quod ei praecepit angelus, cum venit ad illum in
   habitu pastoris.' Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 254.
   Lelong, Le Pasteur d'Hermas, p. xxvi. Duchesne, Lib. Pont. vol. i. p.
   4. Harnack, Chronologie, pp. 175 and 258-9.

   [449] In 76 A.D. instead of 92 A.D.

   [450] Hegesippus visited Rome when Anicetus was bishop and was
   acquainted with Soter and Eleutherus. Eus. Hist. Eccl. iv. 22. Irenaeus
   also spent some time in Rome, probably in the episcopate of Soter
   169-175. In his work on Heresies he gives the order of succession of
   the Roman bishops: . . . then Pius, then Anicetus, then Soter; lastly
   the twelfth in order from the Apostles, Eleutherus, who now holds the
   office of bishop.' Eus. Hist. Eccl. v. 6; Iren. Haer. iii. 3.

   [451] The Acts of Pastor and Timothy, though apocryphal, are of great
   antiquity. The ecclesia Pudentiana, the foundation of which in the
   Baths of Novatus by Pope Pius I is recorded in these Acts, still exists
   as the Church of St. Pudentiana--see note in Lib. Pontificalis under
   biographical notice of Pius. Hic ex rogatu beatae Praxedis dedicavit
   ecclesiam thermas Novati, in vico Patricii, in honore sororis suae
   sanctae Potentianae, ubi et multa dona obtulit; ubi saepius sacrificium
   domino offerens ministrabat. Immo et fontem baptismi construi fecit.'
   According to tradition Pius erected this Church into a titulus, and
   appointed as its presbyter his brother Pastor. The provision of a
   baptismal font probably means that this church became at this time the
   Metropolitan Church of Rome. Inscriptions have been found in which this
   church is styled titulus Pudentis.' In the excavations now being
   carried out for the building of the new Ministry of the Interior it is
   hoped that discoveries may be made throwing further light on these
   traditions. Galland, Bibl. Patrum, i. 672; De Rossi, Bullettino, 1867,
   pp. 49-58; Marucchi, Elém. d'Arch. Chrét. ii. pp. 381-3, iii. pp.
   364-373; Hefele (Patrum Apost. Op. xcv) quotes from Galland Presbyter
   Pastor titulum condidit et digne in Domino obiit.' See Appendix, Note
   C, The Legend of Pudens.

   [452] Lelong, Le Pasteur d'Hermas (1912), Intr. cv: La Version Vulgate
   (L') remontant peut-être a la fin du II^e siècle, en tout cas très
   ancienne . . . nous est parvenue dans de nombreux manuscrits.'

   [453] Duchesne, Lib. Pont. p. 58. The passage stands thus in the
   Felician Abridgement: Pius, natione Italus ex patre Rufino, frater
   Pastoris, de civitate Aquileia, sedit ann. xviii, mens. iiii, dies iii.
   Fuit temporibus Antonii Pii a consulatu Clari et Severi. Sub huius
   episcopatu frater ipsius Hermis librum scripsit in quo mandatum
   continetur quod praecepit angelus Domini cum venit ad eum in habitu
   pastoris et praecepit ei ut sanctum Paschae die dominica celebraretur.'
   The Cononian Abridgement omits frater ipsius. Pius is the first of the
   Roman bishops after Clement to bear a Latin name. If he were, as stated
   above, an Italian by birth, it is in the last degree unlikely that he
   was the brother of a slave who had the Greek name Hermas, and who seems
   to hint that he was of foreign origin. There is no reference to the
   Easter controversy in The Shepherd.

   [454] Irenaeus, Haer. iv. 20. 2: kalos oun eipen he graphe he legousa;
   Proton panton p isteuson . . . from Hermas, Mand. i. 1.

   [455] Article on Hermas' in Smith and Wace's Dictionary of Christian
   Biography. Hilgenfeld in the prolegomena to his edition of Hermae
   Pastor 1881, p. v), after giving a list of the passages in which
   Clement of A. quotes The Shepherd, concludes: . . . Clemens Alex.
   igitur integro Pastore usus de divinis eius revelationibus ne dubitavit
   quidem neque Hermam apostolorum temporibus posteriorem existimasse
   potest.'

   [456] Tertullian, De Oratione, xii.: Quod assignata oratione assidendi
   mos est quibusdam, non perspicio rationem, nisi quod pueri volunt. Quid
   enim, si Hermas ille cuius scriptura fere Pastor inscribitur, transacta
   oratione non super lectum assedisset, verum aliud quid fecisset, id
   quoque ad observationem vindicaremus?' The actual words of the Latin
   version of the Pastor referred to occur at the beginning of the Fifth
   Vision: quum orassem domi, et consedissem supra lectum, intravit et
   quidam reverenda facie etc.' See Hefele, Patr. Apost. Op. p. 345.
   Hilgenfeld's comment is non vero "scripturae" auctoritatem ipsam sed
   solum argumentum inde haustum [Tertullianus] impugnavit.' Proleg. iii.
   That Tertullian used the Latin version of Hermas--i.e. the Vulgate
   version, and that this Liber Pastoris was read publicly in the Churches
   of Provincial Africa at the opening of the third century, is the
   opinion of Harnack. Introd. to edition of Hermas' Pastor by Gebhardt
   and Harnack, p. xlviii.

   [457] Origen, Comm. on Rom. xvi. 14: quae scriptura valde mihi utilis
   videtur et ut puto divinitus inspirata.' Hefele, Proleg. xciii. Again
   in his Comm. on Hosea Origen refers to the building of the tower in
   Hermas, Vis. iii. ii. 16, 17 in a passage beginning with kai en to
   Poimeni and ending with semainei he graphe. See Hilgenfeld, p. 15. This
   expresses his attitude to The Shepherd throughout his works.

   [458] The question of the unity of the work has been set at rest by
   Link, Die Einheit des Pastor Hermas, 1888, and Baumgaertner, Die
   Einheit des Hermas Buchs, 1889.

   [459] ho threpsas me pepraken me Rhode tini eis Rhomen. Vis. i. 1.
   threttos = Lat. verna, a slave born and brought up in a house.
   Hilgenfeld quotes Pliny, ep. ad Traian. 66: quos vocavit threptous qui
   liberi nati expositi, deinde sublati a quibusdam et in servitute
   educati sunt.' The preposition is here seems to be used as meaning that
   Hermas was brought to Rome from elsewhere to be sold.

   [460] Harnack, Chronologie, pp. 262-7.

   [461] Harnack, Chronologie, p. 265: Dass diese Worte [the passage about
   Clement and Grapte] eine "Fiction" seien, ist eine Annahme, die sich
   nicht begründen and die sich nicht halten lässt, wenn man sie
   durchdenkt.'

   [462] Compare Vis. ii. 2. 7 and iii. 2. 1, with Sim. viii. 3. 6, 7, and
   ix. 28.

   [463] Vis. i. 3, ii. 2. 2-5, 3.1; iii. 6. 7, with Sim. vii. ton oun
   metanoounton euthus [eutheos] dokeis tas hamartias aphiesthai; Numquid
   ergo,' ait, protinus putas aboleri delicta eorum, qui agunt
   poenitentiam?'

   [464] Vis. iii. 2. 1: mastigas, phulakas, thlipseis megalas, staurous,
   theria.. See also Vis. ii. 2.

   [465] Sim. ix. 28, passim: hosoi ep' exousian achthentes exetasthesan
   kai ouk hernesanto all' epathon prothumos . . . hosoi de deiloi kai en
   distagmo egenonto kai elogisanto en tais kardiais auton, poteron
   arnesontai e homologesouri kai epathon . . . humeis de hoi paschontes
   heneken tou onomatos doxazein opheilete ton theon . . . dokeite ergon
   mega pepoiekenai ean tis humon dia ton theon pathe. Sim. ix. 19. 1: ek
   tou protou orous tou melanos hoi pisteusantes toioutoi eisin; apostatai
   kai blasphemoi eis ton Kurion, kai prodotai ton doulon tou theou.
   toutois de metanoia ouk esti, thanatos de esti. Sim. viii.: tines de
   auton eis telos apestesan; houtoi oun metanoian ouk echousin; dia gar
   tas pragmateias auton eblasphemesan ton Kurion kai apernesanto. Compare
   1 Pet. iii. 13-17: all' ei paschoite dea dikaiosunen, makarioi. ton de
   phobon auton me phobethete, mede tarachthete; . . . etoimoi de aei pros
   apologian panti to aitounti humas, and iv. 12-19: ei oneidizesthe en
   onomati Christou, makarioi. . . . ei de hos Christianos, me
   aischunestho, doxazeto de ton Theon en to merei touto. Heb. vi. 4-8:
   Adunaton gar tous hapax photisthentas . . . kai parapesontas, palin
   anakainizein eis metanoian . . . to telos eis kausin. x. 32: pollen
   athlesin hupemeinate pathematon . . . oneidismois te kai thlipsesi
   theatrizomenoi; . . . ten harpagen ton huparchonton humon meta charas
   prosedexasthe. Hermas himself appears to have been among those who had
   lost their possessions for their faith. Vis. ii. 2 (1, 2); iii. 6 (6,
   7). Rev. xii. 11: ouk eg?pesan ten psuchen auton achri thanatou. Also
   xiv. 9-13, xx. 4, and 1 Clement v. and vi. Tacitus, Ann. xv. 44: Nero
   subdidit reos et quaesitissimis poenis adfecit, quos per flagitia
   invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat . . . igitur primum correpti qui
   fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum multitudo ingens. . . .

   [466] Vis. iii. 5: houtoi eisin hoi apostoloi kai episkopoi kai
   didaskaloi kai diakonoi hoi poreuthentes kata ten semnoteta tou theou
   kai episkopesantes kai didaxantes kai diakonesantes hagnos kai semnos
   tois eklektois tou theou, hoi men kekoimemenoi, hoi de eti ontes.

   [467] Vis. ii. 2. 6; 4. 2-3; iii. 8. 11; 9. 7-10; Sim. ix. 31. 6.

   [468] Sim. ix. 16. 5: houtoi hoi apostoloi kai hoi didaskaloi hoi
   keruxantes to onoma tou huiou tou theou, koimethentes en dunamei kai
   pistei tou huiou tou theou ekeruxan kai tois prokekoimemenois kai autoi
   edokan autois ten sphragida tou kerugmatos. In this passage the numbers
   of these apostles and teachers' is given as forty, and in the previous
   paragraph (4) the words he sphragis to hudor estin explain the meaning
   of The Seal.' The apostles' throughout The Shepherd is used in the
   wider sense of missionaries' except in Sim. ix. 17. 1.

   [469] hoi proegoumenoi. Vis. ii. 2. 6; iii. 9, 7. Compare 1 Clem. xxi.
   6. hoi hegoumenoi is found 1 Clem. i. 3 and Heb. xiii. 7, 17, 24.

   [470] Vis. ii. 4. 2: hoi proistamenoi; see 1 Thess. v. 12; Rom. xii. 8;
   1 Tim. v. 17.

   [471] Vis. iii. 7, 9: nun oun himin lego tois proegoumenois tes
   ekklesias k9ai tois protokathedritais; me ginesthe homoioi tois
   pharmakois . . . blepete oun, tekna, mepote hautai hai dichostasiai
   humon aposteresousin ten zoen humon . . .

   [472] Sim. viii. 7. 4: echontes zelon tina en allelois peri proteion
   kai peri doxes tinos. Harnack (Gesch. d. Altchrist. Lit. 1,
   Chronologie,' p. 175) after quoting these passages writes: die zuletzt
   angeführten Stellen mögen darauf hinweisen, dass der monarchische
   Episkopat damals in Anzug war; aber von diesem selbst ist in dem Buche
   keine Spur zu finden.' It is curious that a critic of the calibre of
   Harnack should not see that the statement in the last clause does not
   and cannot weaken in the very least the force of the admission
   previously made. Hermas felt it was his duty to rebuke the rivalries
   and dissensions to which the growing power of the bishop gave rise, but
   why should he, writing for Roman Christians of his own day, and not for
   the enlightenment of far distant posterity, inform his contemporaries
   of a fact which was a matter of common knowledge?

   [473] St. Matt. xxiv. 21, 29; St. Mark, xiii. 24; compare 2 Thess.
   4-10.

   [474] Suet. Domitian, 12: Praeter caeteros Iudaicus fiscus acerbissime
   actus est; ad quem deferebantur qui vel improfessi Iudaicam viverent
   vitam, vel, dissimulata origine, imposita genti tributa non
   pependissent.' See Martial, vii. 55. 7.

   [475] Suet. Domitian, 3: Virtutes quoque in vitia deflexit; quantum
   coniectare licet, super ingenii naturam inopia rapax, metu saevus.'
   Orosius, vii. 10: Nobilissimos e senatu, invidiae sirnul et praedae
   causa . . . interfecit.'

   [476] Ibid. 10: molitores novarum rerum.'

   [477] According to the Latin Hieronymian version (ed. Schöne, ii. p.
   163): 'Scribit Bruttius plurimos Christianorum sub Domiciano fecisse
   martyrium, inter quos et Flaviam Domitillam Flavii Clementis consulis
   ex sorore neptem in insulam Pontianam relegatam quia se Christianam
   esse testata sit.' See Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. p.
   108.

   [478] In the Latin translation of the Armenian version of the Chronicle
   (ed. Schöne, ii. p. 160) we find: refert autem Brettius, multos
   Christianorum sub Dometiano subiisse martyrium; Flavia vero Dometila et
   Flavus Clementis consulis sororis filius in insulam Pontiam fugit quia
   se Christianum esse professus est.' Lightfoot, ibid. p. 105. In the
   Syrian Epit. (ed. Schöne, p. 214): Flaviam Domitillam, filiam sororis
   Clementis consulis.'

   [479] Eus. Hist. Eccl. iii. 18.

   [480] Dion Cassius, lxvii. 14: kan to auto etei allous te pollous kai
   ton Phlaouion Klementa hupateuonta, kaiper anepsion onta kai genaika
   kai auten sungene heautou Phlaouian Domitillan echonta, katesphaxen ho
   Dometianos; epenechthe de amphoin enklema atheotetos, huph' hes kai
   alloi es ta ton Ioudaion ethe exokellontes polloi katedikasthesan, kai
   hoi men apethanon, hoi de ton goun ousion esterethesan; he de Domitilla
   huperoristhe monon es Pandaterian.

   [481] Quint. Inst. Orat. iv. prooem.: Cum mihi Domitianus Augustus
   sororis suae nepotum delegavit curam.'

   [482] See Appendix, Note F, The Cemeteries of Priscilla and Domitilla.
   C.I.L. vi. 948, 949, 8942, 16246.

   [483] Suetonius, Domitian, 15-17: repente ex tenuissima suspicione
   tantum non in ipso eius consulatu interemit.'

   [484] Suetonius, Domitian, 10.

   [485] Contemptissimae inertiae.' Compare Tacitus' words in reference to
   his father, Hist. iii. 65: mitem virum abhorrere a sanguine et
   caedibus'; 73: Flavium Sabinum inermem neque fugam coeptantem
   circumsistunt'; 75: after stating that Flavius Sabinus had served the
   state in thirty-five campaigns and with distinction at home and abroad,
   Tacitus proceeds: in fine vitae alii segnem, multi moderatum et civium
   sanguinis parcum credidere.' It was a change of disposition that was
   observed at the close of the life of this tried servant of the State.
   See Allard, Hist. d. Persécutions, i. pp. 81-115 (ed. 1892).

   [486] Lipsius, Volkmar, Hilgenfeld, Erbes, at one time Harnack.

   [487] Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i, pp. 59-61.

   [488] Tac. Hist. iii. 69: eoque, concubia nocte, suos liberos Sabinus,
   et Domitianum, fratris filium in capitolium accivit.' The children of
   Sabinus were quite young in 70 A.D., and Clemens was younger than
   Sabinus. His own sons were children under a tutor in 95 A.D. The fact
   that he did not become consul till that date is of itself a proof of
   his youth. The Flavian emperors as a rule reserved the consulships for
   members of their own family.

   [489] Appendix, Note D, The Family of Clement the Bishop.

   [490] At Torre Marancia, on the Via Ardeatina, on a plot of land
   adjoining the entrance to the cemetery of Domitilla, a burial place of
   the Bruttian gens has been discovered. The historian was probably
   Bruttius Praesens, the friend of Pliny the Younger. De Rossi, Bull.
   Arch. crist. 1865, p. 24; 1875, p. 74. Marucchi, Roma Sotterranea
   Cristiana, N.S. tone. i. 22-23, 29-30. See also App. Note F, Cemeteries
   of Priscilla and Domitilla.

   [491] Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. p. 51.

   [492] Gsell, Le Règne de l'Empereur Domitien, pp. 294-6; Allard, Hist.
   des Persécutions, pp. 111-115.

   [493] Dion Cassius, lxvii. 12, 14; Suet. Domitian, 10, 19; Juvenal, iv.
   93-103; Fronto, Ep. ad M. Caesarem, v. 23.

   [494] De Rossi, Bull. di Arch. Crist. 1888-89, pp. 15-66, 103-133; Roma
   Sotterranea, p. 319; Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome, pp. 4-8; Wahl,
   Römische Quartalschrift, 1890, iv. pp. 305 ff; Marucchi, Arch.
   Chrétienne, ii. pp. 422-7. See App. Note F, Cemeteries of Priscilla and
   Domitilla.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   APPENDICES
     __________________________________________________________________

NOTE A.

  CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE OF EVENTS MENTIONED IN THE LECTURES.

   The Crucifixion Passover, 29 A.D.
   Martyrdom of St. Stephen 33 A.D.
   Accession of Claudius January 24, 41 A.D.
   Imprisonment of St. Peter Passover, 42 A.D.
   St. Peter's 1st visit to Rome Summer, 42 A.D.
   Death of Herod Agrippa Spring, 44 A.D.
   Prophecy of Agabus 44 A.D.
   Famine in Judaea 45-46 A.D.
   Queen Helena in Jerusalem 45 A.D.
   St. Mark's Gospel written at Rome 44-45 A.D.
   St. Peter with St. Mark leaves Rome 45 A.D.
   St. Peter at Jerusalem Spring, 46 A.D.

   Barnabas and Saul bring alms from Antioch to Jerusalem (visit of Gal.
   ii. 1-10)
   Pentecost, 46 A.D.

   Barnabas and Saul with Mark sail from Antioch to Cyprus
   Spring, 47 A.D.

   St. Peter makes Antioch the centre of his missionary work
   47-54 A.D.

   Barnabas and Saul return from their missionary journey
   Autumn, 49 A.D.

   Encounter of St. Peter and St. Paul at Antioch (Gal. ii. 11-14)
   49 A.D.
   Council at Jerusalem late 49 A.D.

   Jews expelled from Rome by Claudius St. Paul starts from Antioch on his
   2nd Missionary Journey with Silas
   after Passover, 50 A.D.
   St. Barnabas and St. Mark go to Cyprus  ? "  ? ? "  ? 50 A.D.
   St. Paul at Corinth

   Summer, 51 A.D.-Spring, 53 A.D.
   Gallio arrives in Achaia April or May, 52 A.D.
   St. Paul at Jerusalem Passover, 53 A.D.
   Accession of Nero October 13, 54 A.D.
   St. Peter and St. Barnabas at Corinth late 54 A.D.
   St. Peter and St. Barnabas in Rome and Italy early 55 A.D.-56 A.D.
   St. Paul at Ephesus Autumn 53 A.D.-Spring A.D.
   1st Epistle to the Corinthians from Ephesus Autumn 55 A.D.
   St. Paul in Greece

   early summer, 56 A.D.-Passover, 57 A.D.
   Epistle to the Romans from Corinth early in 57 A.D.
   St. Paul at Jerusalem Pentecost, 57 A.D.
   St. Paul's imprisonment at Caesarea 57 A.D.-59 A.D.
   St. Luke's Gospel 58 A.D.-59 A.D.
   St. Paul arrives in Rome February, 60 A.D.
   St. Paul's captivity in Rome 60 A.D.-62 A.D.
   The Acts of the Apostles before 62 A.D.
   Death of Festus Summer of 62 A.D.
   St. Peter in Rome (3rd visit) 63 A.D.-65 A.D.
   The Great Fire of Rome July, 64 A.D.
   Persecution of the Christians by Nero Spring, 65 A.D.
   The Vatican fête May, 65 A.D.
   1st Epistle of St. Peter June, 65 A.D.
   Martyrdom of St. Peter Summer, 65 A.D.
   Apollonius of Tyana in Rome 66 A.D.
   Epistle to the Hebrews late in 66 A.D.
   Martyrdom of St. Paul 67 A.D.
   Death of Nero June 9, 68 A.D.
   Burning of the Capitol and storming of Rome Dec. 19-21, 69 A.D.
   Domitian in power at Rome January-June, 70 A.D.
   Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians February, 70 A.D.
   St. John exiled by Domitian to Patmos, where he writes the Apocalypse
   Spring, 70 A.D.
   Destruction of the Temple by Titus September 7, 70 A.D.
   Nerva consul January to April, 71 A.D.
   St. John released from Patmos Spring, 71 A.D.
   Anencletus succeeds Linus as 2nd bishop of Rome 80 A.D.
   Domitian becomes emperor                        September 13, 81 A.D..
   "The Shepherd" of Hermas                        about 90 A.D.
   Clement becomes 3rd bishop of Rome              92 A.D.-101 A.D.
   M' Acilius Glabrio consul                       91 A.D.
   M. Arrecinus Clemens consul suffect             94 A.D.
   T. Flavius Clemens consul                       95 A.D.
   Domitianic persecution                          94 A.D.-96 A.D.
   Assassination of Domitian                       September 18, 96 A.D.
     __________________________________________________________________

NOTE B

  AQUILA AND PRISCA OR PRISCILLA

   In 1888 G. B. de Rossi discovered in the Coemeterium Priscillae a crypt
   belonging to the Acilian gens dating from the first century, but in a
   very ruinous condition. Among the broken inscriptions of many members
   of this noble family one finds the names of Acilius Glabrio and of
   Priscilla. Both Priscus and Priscilla or Prisca are cognomina used by
   this family, as may be seen by a reference to Pauly's
   Real-Encyclopädie' under Acilius. The existence of this elaborately
   decorated burial-place containing a large number of sarcophagi seems to
   point to M' Acilius Glabrio, the Consul of 91 A.D. who was accused of
   atheism and Jewish manners' and put to death by Domitian, having been a
   Christian. It has been conjectured therefore that the Priscilla after
   whom the cemetery is named, and who must have been the owner of the
   property beneath which the excavations were made (property which was
   part of the extensive possessions of the Acilii Glabriones) was a near
   relative--aunt or sister--of the victim of Domitian. In this cemetery,
   according to the witness of the Liberian Calendar,' of the Itineraries'
   and of the Liber Pontificalis,' reposed the bodies of Aquila and Prisca
   (Marucchi, Eléments d'Archéol. Chrét.' ii. p. 385) with many other
   saints and martyrs. The biographical notice of Leo IV (847-55 A.D.) in
   the Liber Pontificalis' states that that Pope removed many bodies
   within the walls to save them from possible desecration by the Saracens
   (Duchesne, ii. p. 115), among these the bodies of Aquila and Prisca.

   The supposition that these two companions of St. Paul were freedmen of
   the family of the Acilii Glabriones or connected with them by ties of
   clientship is highly probable. Prisca or Priscilla appears to have been
   a Roman and by the precedence of her name over that of her husband, as
   already stated, it has been assumed that she was of higher position and
   that the house at Rome was her property. This suggests that she may
   have been a daughter of a freedman of the Acilian Priscilla who was the
   founder of the cemetery. The Priscilla of the Acts was so named after
   her. Aquila was a Jew and a native of Pontus. Of his Jewish name we are
   ignorant. He may have been taken to Rome as a slave and been a freedman
   of one of the Acilii. Quite possibly, however, he may have settled in
   Rome, like so many others, as a craftsman and trader, and his connexion
   with the powerful family, perhaps through the influence of Priscilla,
   have been one of clientship. As to the name Aquila, the following
   quotation from a poem of Ausonius with the title Acilio Glabrioni,
   grammatico Jun. Burdigalensi' [214. 3. 4] may explain its origin:


   Stemmate nobilium deductum nomen avorum

   Glabrio Aquilini Dardana progenies.

   The contention of De Rossi, Marucchi and others that the ancient church
   of St. Prisca on the Aventine covers the site of the church in the
   house of Prisca and Aquila will not bear serious investigation. Of the
   St. Prisca, virgin and martyr, who gave her name to the church nothing
   is really known, but she was a different person from the Prisca of the
   Acts and the Pauline epistles. From the fourth to the eighth century
   the church is always described as titulus Priscae (Duchesne, Lib.
   Pont.' i. 501, 517). It was not until the Pontificate of Leo III
   (795-816 A.D.) that the name titulus Aquilae et Priscae first appears
   (Duchesne, ii. p. 20): fecit in titulo beatis Aquile et Priscae coronam
   ex argento pens. lib. VI.,' but in this same notice of Leo III occur
   the words basilica beate Priscae' and Duchesne remarks that Prisca was
   still ordinary at this time (p. 42).

   In a MS. preserved in the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris (Cod. lat.
   9697 p. 78) an account is given of the discovery in 1776 of the ruins
   of a Roman house and Christian oratory close to St. Prisca with
   frescoes of the fourth century, but this ruin was unfortunately
   destroyed and no trace of it remains. In Bianchini's edition of the
   Liber Pontificalis' (P.L. cxxvii. col. 1315) mention is made in the
   notice of Pope Zephyrinus (198-217) of a Christian glass' [495] found
   intra antiquae ecclesiae rudera prope S. Priscam' (de Rossi in Bull. di
   Arch. Crist.' 1867, p. 48). These things prove the existence on this
   spot of a very ancient Christian place of worship, but nothing more.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [495] The words of the Lib. Pont. itself Et fecit constitutum in
   ecclesia et patenas vitreas ante sacerdotes in ecclesia, et ministros
   supportantes, donec episcopus missas celebraret, ante se sacerdotes
   adstantes, sic missae celebrarentur,' are an interesting reference to
   the rites attending the celebration of the Mass at Rome in early times:
   Duchesne, L.P. i. p. 140, makes the comment la mention de patènes de
   verre est à remarquer; elles n'étaient certainemeut plus en usage à la
   fin du V^e siècle,'
     __________________________________________________________________

NOTE C

  THE PUDENS LEGEND

   The name of a certain Pudens occurs in St. Paul's Second Epistle to
   Timothy (iv. 21): Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens and Linus and
   Claudia.' He is not mentioned elsewhere in the New Testament, but a
   large number of traditions have grown up about him, which connect him
   with St. Peter rather than with St. Paul; and in these traditions there
   is in all probability a basis of historical fact. In modern times the
   theory met with strong support, especially among English writers, that
   Pudens was the husband of Claudia. They were identified with the Pudens
   and Claudia of Martial's Epigrams' (iv. 13, xi. 53), and Claudia was
   held to be a British maiden and a daughter of a British chief named
   Cogidubnus (Martial, xi. 53, CIL.' vii. 11). But it is needless to
   discuss this hypothesis, for it has been conclusively shown that the
   Epigrams' were not written until many years after the death of St.
   Paul. The name Claudia moreover was then not uncommon, and the fact
   that the names Pudens and Claudia in the salutation are not coupled
   together, but separated by the name Linus, is a strong objection prima
   facie to their being husband and wife. [496]

   The ground document for the Pudens Legend is the very ancient Acts of
   SS. Pudentiana and Praxedis,' or as it is sometimes called the Acts of
   Pastor and Timothy.' [497] These Acts' consist of a letter from a
   presbyter named Pastor (this Pastor appears in the Liber Pontificalis'
   as brother of Pope Pius I) to another presbyter named Timothy and the
   reply of the latter. The letters are followed by a short appended
   narrative. The date of these Acts' is uncertain, and the letters in
   their present form are undoubtedly fictitious, but they embody, as can
   be proved by existing memorials, a genuine tradition treated as to its
   details with the usual inventive freedom and chronological
   inexactitude.

   The story as told in these Acts' is as follows: a certain Pudens, whose
   mother was named Priscilla, a Christian of property, who had shown
   great zeal in entertaining Apostles and strangers, after the death of
   his wife consecrated his house as a church of Christ. This church in
   the house of Pudens in the Vicus Patricius was erected into a Roman
   parish under the name of titulus Pastoris (the Pastor who wrote the
   letter being the presbyter placed in charge of this parish). Here with
   his two daughters Praxedis and Pudentiana, who as chaste virgins spent
   their lives in prayer, fasting, and charitable deeds, Pudens passed his
   remaining days. The daughters after his death not only obtained the
   consent of Pope Pius to the building of a baptistery adjoining the
   church, but the bishop drew the plan with his own hand, and frequently
   visited the church and offered there the sacrifices to God. On the
   decease of Potentiana the letter of Pastor informs us that he and the
   surviving sister Praxedis placed the body by the side of that of her
   father in the Cemetery of Priscilla [498] on the Via Salaria.

   Here begins what in some MSS. is called the Acts of Praxedis.' Many
   noble Christians including Pope Pius came to console Praxedis on her
   loss, among them a certain Novatus, described as the brother of
   Timothy, but nowhere in these Acts' as the brother of Praxedis and
   Pudentiana. This is an important point to remember, for most modern
   writers following later Martyrologies describe Novatus and Timothy as
   sons of Pudens. [499] Novatus having fallen ill, Praxedis and Pastor
   visited him in his sickness, and the issue was that he left to them the
   whole of his property. The letter containing all this information was
   sent to Timothy to know what he would wish that they should do in the
   matter of his brother's estate. Timothy replies that he is rejoiced at
   what his brother has done, and leaves the entire disposition in the
   hands of Praxedis and Pastor. The contents of these letters in fact
   make it absolutely clear that there was no relationship between the
   sisters Praxedis and Potentiana and the brothers Novatus and Timothy.

   After the letters comes a narrative by the hand of Pastor of what
   followed, Praxedis asked Bishop Pius that the Baths of Novatus, which
   at that time were not in use, should be consecrated as a church. Pius
   consented and dedicated in the name of Praxedis the Baths, as a church,
   within the city in the Vicus Lateranus and he erected it into a Roman
   parish, titulus, and consecrated a baptistery to it. That this is the
   true meaning of the original and that the words in brackets are a later
   gloss interpolated by the writer to explain the existence in his days
   of a church of St. Pudentiana in the Vicus Patricius as well as a
   church of St. Praxedis in the Vicus Lateranus is almost self-evident.
   It runs thus: Quod et placuit Sancto Pio Episcopo; thermasque Novati
   dedicavit ecclesiam sub nomine beatae Virginis [Potentianae in vico
   Patricio. Dedicavit autem et aliam sub nomine sanctae Virginis]
   Praxedis infra urbem Romam, in vico qui appellatur Lateranus.' The
   Acts' had already given an account of the dedication of the church in
   the Vicus Patricius at a much earlier period before the death of
   Novatus. The Acts' conclude with an account of the burial of Praxedis
   by Pastor in the cemetery of Priscilla by the side of her father and
   sister.

   The mistake, which led to the interpolation above mentioned caused the
   following note to he appended to the biography of Pope Pius in two MSS.
   (and their derivatives) of the Liber Pontificalis': Hic [Pius] ex
   rogatu beate Praxedis dedicavit aecclesiam thermas Novati in vico
   Patricii, in honore Sororis suae sanctae Potentianae, ubi et multa dona
   obtulit; ubi saepius sacrificium Domino offerens ministrabat'; Duchesne
   commenting on this writes: L'auteur de la note paraît avoir mal compris
   le texte des Acta, car il ne parle que de l'une des deux églises,
   rapportant à celle du Vicus Patricius ce qui est dit de l'intervention
   de Praxède et des thermes de Novatus' (Duchesne, Lib. Pont.' i. 133).
   This note has also misled most modern writers on the subject. [500] The
   two Churches of St. Pudentiana and St. Praxedis are at this day two of
   the most interesting churches in Rome, and undoubtedly stand on the
   sites of those mentioned in the Acts,' and there is a record of St.
   Pudentiana having been restored by Pope Siricius (384-398 A.D.). It is
   quite certain, however, that this church was not named after a daughter
   of Pudens but after Pudens himself. An inscription Hic requiescit in
   pace Hilarus Lector tituli Pudentis' bears the date 528 A.D. and shows
   that this was the correct style. Another inscription of 384 A.D. is
   Leopardus Lector de Pudentiana and in the mosaic of the apse (the
   oldest mosaic in a Roman church) the Saviour holds an open volume with
   the words Dominus conservator ecclesiae Pudentianae.' As Lanciani
   remarks (Pagan and Christian Rome,' p, 112): In course of time the
   ignorant people changed the word Pudentiana, a possessive adjective,
   into the name of a Saint; and the name Sancta Pudentiana usurped the
   place of the genuine one. It appears for the first time in a document
   of the year 745.' An inscription of 491 A.D. speaks of certain
   presbyters Tituli Praxedis.'

   The existence, however, of both sisters receives substantiation from
   the fact that their tombs and that of Pudens are mentioned in the
   Liberian Calendar' and in the Pilgrim Itineraries' as existing in the
   fourth and fifth centuries in the Cemetery of Priscilla, where
   according to the Acta' they were buried. Paschal I in his great
   translation of the remains of saints from the catacombs into the city
   in 817 A.D. brought the sarcophagi of SS. Pudentiana and Praxedis from
   the catacomb to the Church of St. Praxedis, and the names of both are
   recorded on a catalogue inscribed on a marble slab to the right of the
   altar and their portraits appear in the mosaics of this date, which
   adorn the Church (Marucchi, Elém. d'Arch. Chrét.' iii. 325-332).

   It is thought that Justin Martyr, when on his trial in 160 A.D. he
   declared, being interrogated by the Judge as to his dwelling place,
   that he lived close to the baths called the Timotine,' may have been
   referring to the baths of Novatus as the place where he was accustomed
   to worship. As Timothy was the brother of Novatus it is a possible
   supposition.

   The question now arises, was this Pudens of the Acta' identical with
   the Pudens of the 2nd Epistle to Timothy. The Bollandists say No. De
   Rossi, Marucchi, and many others say Yes, and they get over the
   chronological difficulty by urging that Pudentiana and Praxedis may
   have lived to a very advanced age. But the probabilities against such a
   view are almost insuperable. It is much more likely that the Pudens of
   the Epistle and the Pudens of the Acta' were father and son. At one
   time it was the opinion of De Rossi and his school that the
   first-century cemetery of Priscilla was the property of the family of
   Pudens. He and his daughters were buried in the cemetery and his
   mother's name is given in the Acta' as Priscilla. But the discovery of
   the crypt of the Acilian gens in this catacomb seemed to render it
   almost certain that the cemetery must have belonged to the family of
   Acilius Glabrio, the Consul of 91 A.D., in which the names of Priscus,
   Priscilla and Prisca are found. De Rossi therefore suggested that
   Pudens may have himself been an Acilius. I have however already made
   another suggestion, i.e. that Priscilla the mother of Pudens according
   to the Acta' was an Acilia, and perhaps the aunt or sister of M'
   Acilius Glabrio.

   The traditions which connect the name of Pudens with the early history
   of the Church in Rome are persistent and numerous quite apart from what
   is recorded in the Acta' that we have been considering. It is said that
   the house of Pudens (the elder Pudens mentioned by St. Paul) was during
   his stay in Rome the home of St. Peter. The sella gestatoria, or St.
   Peter's chair, the oak framework of which is of great antiquity, is
   said to have been originally the senatorial chair of Pudens. The wooden
   altar at the St. John Lateran again has been in continuous use there
   since the fourth century, when it was removed from St. Pudentiana, and
   that despite the fact that Pope Sylvester in 312 A.D. ordered that all
   altars should henceforth be of stone. Many indeed had been so before,
   for the word titulus which signifies a consecrated parish church
   implies its possession of a stone altar. In the Church of St.
   Pudentiana at the present time there is preserved within the altar a
   single wood plank reputed to have been left at that church as a
   memorial when the altar itself was removed. When Cardinal Wiseman was
   titular cardinal of St. Pudentiana he had the plank examined and found
   that the wood was identical with that of the altar at the Lateran
   Church. The reason of its preservation was the tradition that this
   altar had been used by St. Peter when he celebrated the Eucharist in
   the oratory in Pudens' house. When St. John Lateran replaced St.
   Pudentiana as the Cathedral Church of Rome the bishop and the altar
   moved there together. [501] These traditions have historically small
   value in themselves, but it may safely be said that they could never
   have arisen and obtained the vogue which we find them to have had in
   comparatively early times, had not the Pudens of Apostolic times and
   his family after him been active and leading members of the primitive
   Christian community in Rome. [502]

    THE FAMILY CONNEXION OF CLEMENT THE BISHOP.

   A Tabular Statment of the Scheme of Relationship (set forth in Lecture
   VIII) between the
   Arrecinian and Imperial Flavian Families.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [496] See Lightfoot, Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. i. pp. 76-79.

   [497] Bollandist Acta SS. Maii, iv. 297-301.

   [498] It is evidently intended that the Priscilla who gave her name to
   the cemetery was the mother of Pudens.

   [499] A note in the Bollandist Acta SS. Maii, iv, p. 301, states for
   instance: Colitur S. Novatus 20 Iunii etiam Martyrologio Romano
   adscriptus et dicitur filius S. Pudentis Senatoris et frater Sancti
   Timothei Presbyteri et Sanctarum Virginum Praxedis et Potentianae, qui
   ab Apostolis eruditi sunt in fide,' quorum nihil probamus.

   [500] See De Rossi, Bullettino di Arch. Crist. 1867, pp. 49-65;
   Marucchi, Eléments d'Arch. Chrét. ii. 364 ff.; Mem. degli Apost. Pietro
   e Paolo, pp. 110-116; Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome, pp. 110-115;
   Barnes, St. Peter in Rome, pp. 72-78; Spence-Jones, Early Christians in
   Rome, pp. 263-7, &c.

   [501] Concerning the term titulus, Barnes (St. Peter in Rome, p. 75)
   writes: A great deal has been written on the origin and use of this
   word, but it is probable that it is really derived from its occurrence
   in the Old Latin version, in the account of the setting up by Jacob of
   the altar at Bethel after his wonderful dream: an account which to this
   day is read in the service for the consecration of an altar in a
   church. "And Jacob said: How terrible is this place; this is no other
   but the house of God and the gate of heaven. And Jacob arising in the
   morning took the stone which he had laid under his head and set it up
   for a title (erexit in titulum), pouring oil upon the top of it." A
   "title' therefore, in early Christian usage, came to be nothing else
   but a stone altar duly consecrated, and, in a wider sense, the church
   that contained that altar and drew its own sanctity from it.' In the
   Liber Pontificalis (Duchesne, torn. i. p. 126) of Evaristus, the
   successor of Clement as bishop in 101 A.D., it is recorded hic titulos
   in urbe Romae dividit presbyteris.'

   [502] Bianchini in his Anastasius Bibliothecarius (edn. of Liber
   Pontificalis in 1718) made the suggestion that Pudens was a member of
   the Gens Cornelia. In 1778 in the primitive Christian oratory
   discovered in immediate proximity to the Church of St. Prisca (supra,
   p. 243) a bronze tablet was found to one Caius Marius Pudens
   Cornelianus offered to this man by a town in Spain expressing gratitude
   for services rendered during the time when he filled the office of
   legate, and stating that he (Pudens) had been chosen as patron' by the
   citizens. The date of this tabula patronatus is 222 A.D:, and its
   presence gives strong grounds for assuming that the house containing
   the Christian place of worship was his property. The following
   inscription is of great interest as it belongs to the reign of
   Vespasian and contains the names of an Amaranthus, a T. Flavius, a Q.
   Cornelius Pudens, and a Chrestus. Marucchi (Rom. Sott. N.S. i. p. 30)
   states that immediately adjoining the Cemetery of Domitilla excavated
   beneath Flavian property lies a property known as Tor Marancia from a
   certain Amaranthus; on this are a number of pagan sepulchres belonging
   to the Bruttian family; while Eusebius tells us that he derived his
   information about the Flavian Christians from an historian named
   Bruttius [see Note D, p. 256, and Note F, p. 279).

   HILARITATI PVPLIC ·  ? ·  ? ·

   IMP · CAES · VESPASIANI ·  ? ·  ? ·

   SACRVM

   TRIBVL · SVCC · CORP · IVN *

   ·  ? ·  ? ·  ? ·  ? ·  ?

   T : COMINIVS AMARANTH : : : ·

   T : FLAVIVS · T : F : LVSCV : : : ·

   Q : CORNELIVS · Q : F : PVDENT : : ·

   CVRATORES : LIBEROR : TRIB : SVC : COR : IVNIOR : : · ·
   On the other face occur the words:

   PONEN · CVR ·

   C · NYMPHIDIVS · CHRESTVS ·

   · ? ·  ? ·  ? ·  ? ·  ? ·

   DEDIC · XVII K · DEC ·

   L · ANNIO · BASSO ·

   C CAECINA · PAETO · ?   ? ^COS · (i.e. 70 A.D.)
   * Tribules succussani. Corpus juniorum.--Muratori, tom. i. p. cccviii.
     __________________________________________________________________

   (1) M. Arrecinus Tertullus Clemens, Prefect of the Praetorian Guard in
   41 A.D. (Josephus, Ant.' xix. 1. 6, 7, and Tac. Hist.' iv. 68.) It is
   from Josephus that we learn that Clemens was privy to the conspiracy of
   Chaerea and others against Caligula and connived at his assassination.
   It appears from Josephus that Herod Agrippa came to the Praetorian
   camp, where troops had acknowledged Claudius as emperor, and
   successfully acted as mediator between them and that portion of the
   army that obeyed the Senate (Josephus, Ant.' xix. 3. 1, 3; 4. 1, 2,
   ff.). This information exclusively reported by Josephus may be taken to
   imply that Clemens had some connexion, possibly as a God-fearer,' with
   the Jewish community at Rome, and that he was a friend of Herod
   Agrippa.

   From Tac. Hist.' iv. 68 it appears that this Prefect was so much
   beloved by his troops that his son's appointment as Prefect in 70 A.D.
   was hailed with joy in the camp, because the father's memory after so
   long an interval of time was still held in regard. Suetonius (Titus' 4)
   tells us that his name was Tertullus, that he belonged to the
   Equestrian order, and that his daughter Arrecina Tertulla was the first
   wife of the Emperor Titus. An inscription CIL.' vi. 12355 gives his
   praenomen as Marcus.

   (2) Plautia. The name of the wife of (1) is actually unknown. The
   reasons for assigning to him, as his wife, a sister of Aulus Plautius,
   the conqueror of Britain, are stated in Lecture VIII. Plautia would be
   the sister-in-law of Julia Pomponia Graecina, and a relative of Plautia
   Urgulanilla, the second wife of Claudius.

   (3) M. Arrecinus Clemens, son of (1), described by Tacitus Hist.' iv.
   68 as domui Vespasiani per adfinitatem innexum et gratissimum
   Domitiano, Praetorianis [Domitianus] praeposuit, patrem eius, sub Caio
   Caesare, egregie functum ea cura, dictitans, laetum militibus idem
   nomen.' The relationship with the Imperial Flavian House may be traced
   back to (8) Tertulla, the grandmother of Vespasian, by whom from
   childhood he was brought up. Tertullus Clemens (1) the Prefect was
   probably Vespasian's cousin and the companion of his boyhood. Arrecina
   Tertulla (5), daughter of (1) and sister of (3), married Titus (19).
   She died while Titus was quite young.

   M. Arrecinus Clemens (3) was Consul Suffectus in 73 A.D. (CIL.' vi.
   2016 and xiv. 2242) and a second time with L. Baebius Honoratus (CIL.'
   xii. 3637). This second consulship appears to have been most probably
   in 94 A.D. The Fasti Consulares are admittedly imperfect with regard to
   the names of the consuls suffect. But the names of both the ordinary
   Consuls Collega and Priscus and of the three suffects for 93 A.D. have
   been preserved. In 94 A.D. Asprenas and Lateranus were ordinary
   consuls. [503] In some lists Arrecinus Clemens appears, however, as the
   colleague of Asprenas (see Dion Cassius, ed. Lipsiae, 1829, iv. p. 84).
   The Chronicon Paschale' (extract given in Lightfoot, Clement of Rome,'
   i. p. 110) has the following entries: 93 A.D. Domitian Augustus XIII
   and Flavius Clemens, 94 A.D. Asprenatus [Asprenas] and Lateranus, 95
   A.D. Domitian Augustus XIV and Flavius Clemens II. This is an instance
   of that confusion of Arrecinus Clemens with Flavius Clemens which has
   been the fruitful source of difficulties. Flavius Clemens was consul
   only once and in 95 A.D., Arrecinus Clemens for the second time in 94
   A.D. He was a member of the Imperial Council from 82 A.D. and also
   Curator Aquarum. His name appears CIL.' vi. 199 xi. 428 and xv. 7278.
   He was put to death by Domitian 94 A.D. or 95 A.D. (Suet. Domitian,'
   11.)

   (4) Plautilla. The Acts of Nereus and Achilles' represent these martyrs
   as at first servants of Plautilla, the sister of Clement the Consul,
   and afterwards of her daughter Domitilla the virgin. The Acts of
   Petronilla,' which are incorporated with those of Nereus and Achilles,
   state that these three saints were all buried in the crypt of
   Domitilla. That they were real historical persons has been proved in
   recent years by the discovery by De Rossi [504] of their memorials in
   the cemetery of Domitilla. It is at least possible, therefore, that
   Plautilla is likewise an historical person, and the presumption is
   increased by the fact that she is definitely in these Acts represented
   as the sister of Clement the Consul. De Rossi himself believed in her
   real existence, and many others have followed him in the assumption,
   which I have adopted, as also his suggestion that her mother's name was
   Plautia. I differ, however, in my interpretation of the words sister of
   Clement the Consul' in making her the sister not of Flavius but of
   Arrecinus Clemens. If the historicity of the statement of the Acts of
   Nereus and Achilles about Plautilla be accepted, it should be accepted
   as a whole. Now stress is laid on the fact that the Plautilla of these
   Acts died in the same year as St. Peter suffered martyrdom. The words
   are explicit: eodem anno dominus Petrus apostolus ad coronam martyrii
   properavit ad Christum et Plautilla corpus terrenum deseruit.'
   Plautilla therefore could not well be the sister of Flavius Clemens,
   the younger of the two sons of Flavius Sabinus, as these sons are
   described as children at the time of their father's murder in December
   69 A.D. The hypothesis that she was the daughter of M. Arrecinus
   Tertullus Clemens the Praetorian Prefect of 41 A.D., and therefore
   sister of M. Arrecinus Clemens the Consul of 73 A.D. and 94 A.D., and
   that she was the wife and not the daughter of her cousin Flavius
   Sabinus, the brother of Vespasian, and that, through her, T. Flavius
   Clemens, her son, Consul in 95 A.D., obtained his cognomen, has about
   it impress of verisimilitude.

   (5) Arrecina Tertulla.--The first wife of the Emperor Titus. She died
   quite young. See CIL.' vi. 12355, 12357.

   (6) Clement the Bishop.--In the Clementine Homilies' and Clementine
   Recognitions,' which are in reality Petrine romances derived from a
   common original and dating from the beginning of the third century,
   Clement is represented as a Roman by birth and of the kindred of
   Caesar. His father is a relative and foster-brother of an emperor, and
   his mother likewise connected with Caesar's family. The name of the
   father is Faustus (Homilies'), Faustinianus (Recognitions'), Faustinus
   (Liber Pontificalis'), of two elder brothers Faustinus and Faustinianus
   (Homilies'), Faustinus and Faustus (Recognitions'), of the mother
   Mattidia. Now these names belong to the period of Hadrian and the
   Antonines. Faustina (died 141 A.D.) was the wife of the Emperor
   Antoninus Pius, and her daughter of the same name (died 175 A.D.) was
   the wife of his adopted son and successor, Marcus Aurelius. Mattidia
   was the niece of Trajan, and her daughter Sabina the wife of the
   Emperor Hadrian. As the romances throughout make Clement to have been
   the disciple and companion of St. Peter and he is spoken of as being
   already grown up at the time of the Crucifixion, it will be at once
   perceived that the compilers of this Clementine literature were, in the
   use that they made of tradition, absolutely indifferent to
   chronological considerations. That they gave voice to a genuine
   tradition both as regards Clement's discipleship to St. Peter and his
   relationship to the family of the reigning Caesars is rendered in the
   highest degree probable from the fact that the Clementine story is
   merely a framework for the Ebionite or Helchasaite version of Peter's
   travels, preaching and controversies with Simon Magus, which forms the
   real subject-matter of this literature. [Hort, Clementine
   Recognitions.'] M. Arrecinus Tertullus Clemens was the kinsman of
   Vespasian, and as that emperor was brought up not in his paternal home
   but by his grandmother Tertulla, it is quite possible that they were
   actually foster-brothers. Tertullus was one of the Flavian cognomina.
   Q. Flavius Tertullus was consul suffect. in 133 A.D. (CIL.' vi. 858).
   Plautia was a relative of Plautia Urgulanilla, the second wife of
   Claudius, her daughter Arrecina Tertulla the wife of Titus.

   In the Acts of Nereus and Achilles' Clement the Bishop is addressed as
   the nephew of Clement the Consul: patris tui fuisse germanum.' In the
   Clementines he is represented as considerably the youngest of his
   family. It is for various reasons more probable that he was the younger
   brother than the nephew of M. Arrecinus Clemens, and such I have
   assumed him to be.

   (7) T. Flavius Petro.--The name of the famous saint, Petronilla, who
   was buried in the Flavian cemetery of Domitilla, was probably derived
   from this Flavian cognomen. A crop of legends grew up around her name,
   as being a daughter of St. Peter. It is possible that she may have been
   a spiritual daughter of the Apostle, as having been converted and
   baptized by him.

   (8), (9), (10). Titus Flavius Sabinus and his wife, according to
   Suetonius, left Italy to live among the Helvetii; their son Vespasian
   was educated by his grandmother Tertulla upon a family estate at Cosa
   in the Volscian territory. (Suet. Vespasian,' 2, 3.)

   (11) T. Flavius Sabinus, the elder son of (9) and (10). After serving
   the State in thirty-five campaigns with distinction (Tac. Hist.' iii.
   75) and having been Governor of Moesia for seven years, Sabinus was
   appointed in 57 A.D. Prefect of the City. He held this important office
   for twelve years continuously save for a brief interval in the short
   reign of Galba. As Prefect of the City he must have taken part (perhaps
   passively) in the persecution of the Christians in 65 A.D. and been the
   witness of the courage with which so many martyrs faced torture and a
   horrible death. Some have supposed that in his latter years he may to a
   greater or less extent have fallen under the influence of the Christian
   Faith. His whole career proclaims him to have been during the greater
   part of his life a man of action. Tacitus speaks of his being invalidus
   senecta' and describes him at this stage as mitem virum abhorrere a
   sanguine et caedibus' (Hist.' iii. 65). When the Vitellians stormed the
   Capitol, Flavium Sabinum inermem neque fugam coeptantem circumsistunt'
   (Hist.' iii. 73). And again after his murder, in fine vitae alii
   segnem, multi moderatum et civium sanguinis parcum credidere' (Hist.'
   iii. 75). All these traits do not prove much in themselves, but the
   fact that several of his descendants and relatives were undoubtedly
   Christians lends a certain probability to the supposition that this
   mildness, sluggishness, and unwillingness to resist arms in hand may
   have been due to the acceptance of Christian principles. Sabinus
   apparently did not marry till late in life, possibly not till after he
   settled at Rome in 57 A.D., as his children were quite young at the
   time of his murder in December 69 A.D. If Plautilla were his wife, she
   died four years before her husband, leaving two sons and a daughter,
   the younger son receiving his grandfather's cognomen Clemens.

   (12) The Emperor Vespasian appears to have been in considerable poverty
   at two periods of his life. His eldest son, Titus (19), was born
   December 30, 39 A.D.: prope Septizonium sordidis aedibus cubiculo vero
   perparvo et obscuro.' (Suet. Tit.' 1.) Yet a few years later we find
   him being educated in the palace with Britannicus. It is suggested that
   this change may have been partly brought about by the influence on
   behalf of his kinsman of the Praetorian Prefect Arrecinus Tertullus
   Clemens. At a later period, before he went as Proconsul to Africa in 61
   or 62 A.D., he was in such bad circumstances that he had to mortgage
   his entire property to his brother in order to raise money. (Tac.
   Hist.' iii. 73.) His wife (13) and his daughter (22), both named Flavia
   Domitilla, predeceased him. His younger son Domitian (25) seems when
   Vespasian was abroad in Africa and Judaea to have lived with his uncle
   Sabinus and to have been under his care. Titus (19) was, while still a
   youth, married to his relative Arrecina Tertulla (5). Domitian (25),
   born October 25, 51 A.D., was twelve years younger than his brother.
   From the end of December 69 A.D. to the following June as Praetor with
   full consular power he with Mucianus exercised in the absence of
   Vespasian in Egypt and Titus in Judaea the imperial authority at Rome.

   (15) Flavia Domitilla, spoken of by Eusebius, Chronicon' (Jerome's Lat.
   vers. ed. Schöne ii. p. 163), thus:--Scribit Bruttius . . . Flaviam
   Domitillam Flavii Clementis consulis ex sorore neptem in insulam
   Pontianam relegatam, quia se Christianam esse testata est.' A similar
   reference derived no doubt from the same source is found in Hist.
   Eccl.' iii. 18, where the meaning of the word neptem is made clear:
   Phlauian Dometillan . . . ex adelphes gegonuian Phlauiou Klementos,
   henos ton tenikade epi Rhomes hupaton. Eusebius states that this took
   place in the fifteenth year of Domitian, but, as I have pointed out in
   Lecture VIII, it is almost certain that Eusebius has here misread his
   authority and that the Consul to whom Flavia Domitilla was niece was
   Arrecinus Clemens the Consul of 94 A.D., and not Flavius Clemens the
   Consul of 95 A.D. The family of Flavius Sabinus (11) were children in
   70 A.D.; it is scarcely possible therefore that this Flavia Domitilla
   should have been old enough to occupy such a position of importance as
   is here assigned to her, and still more so in the Acts of Nereus and
   Achilles.' In those Acts' she appears as the daughter of Plautilla,
   sister of Clement the Consul, and is clearly a woman of property with
   chamberlains of her own. In the Chronicon Paschale' the same passage of
   Bruttius, about the persecution of the Christians by Domitian, as
   Eusebius quotes is referred to, but the notice of it appears under the
   fourteenth year of Domitian, which began in September 94 A.D. The
   banishment of this Domitilla to the island of Pontia I believe to have
   taken place at the end of 94 A.D., after Arrecinus Clemens was Consul
   and before Flavius Clemens entered on his consulship. The fact that
   Eusebius neither in the Chronicle' nor Ecclesiastical History' makes
   any mention of the execution of Flavius Clemens or the banishment of
   his wife seems to me inferential evidence that his authority Bruttius
   did not here record an event which Eusebius could scarcely have
   overlooked in one or other of his two historical works. In my Table of
   the Flavian Family I have made Flavia Domitilla [the virgin] the
   daughter of FIavius Sabinus (15) and of Plautilla (4), the sister of
   Arrecinus Clemens (3). I have further suggested in Lecture VIII that
   after the murder of Sabinus, Plautilla being already dead, the maternal
   uncle (3) undertook the charge of the orphan children. The two sons as
   they grew up would in due course be cared for by the Emperor Vespasian,
   as being the nearest male representatives of his family, his own two
   sons having no male heirs, the daughter remaining still in the wardship
   of the maternal uncle who had brought her up. It would be only natural
   therefore in such circumstances for Bruttius to speak of her as the
   niece of Arrecinus, rather than as the sister of Flavius.

   The sudden condemnation to death of Arrecinus Clemens by Domitian, as
   recorded by Suetonius (Domit.' 11), may well have been connected with
   the same causes which led to his niece Domitilla's banishment, i.e. her
   profession of the Christian faith and her contumacy in refusing to
   marry at the Emperor's bidding.

   (22), (23), (24) Dion Cassius (lxvii. 14) relates that Domitian put to
   death his cousin Flavius Clemens while consul [Suet., Domit.' 15, says
   almost before his consulship had ended] and that he sent his wife
   Flavia Domitilla, also a relative, into exile on the island of
   Pandateria. Suetonius does not mention the wife's banishment, but
   remarks that this violent act--i.e. the execution--very much hastened
   his own destruction' and then tells us of the tyrant's assassination by
   Stephanus the steward of Domitilla. Philostratus (Apollonius,' viii.
   25) in his account says that Stephanus was the freedman of Flavius
   Clemens' wife. Quintilian, who was the tutor of Flavius Clemens' young
   sons (of very tender age, Suet. Domit.' 15), makes it clear that their
   mother was the daughter of Domitian's sister: cum vero mihi Domitianus
   Augustus sororis suae nepotum delegaverit curam' (Inst. Orat.' Prooem.
   2). This sister of Domitian died before her father Vespasian became
   Emperor in 70 A. D. For epigraphic evidence of the existence of this
   Flavia Domitilla, wife of Flavius Clemens, see CIL.' vi. 948, 8942 and
   16246. The first of these as restored by Mommsen stands:

     Flavia Domitilla FILIA.FLAVIAE.DOM.ITILLAE.

     Imp. Caes. VespasiANI.NEPTIS.FECIT.GLYCERAE.L.ET.

     ·  ?  ? ·  ?  ? ·  ?  ? ·  ?  ? ·  ?  ? ·  ?  ? ·

   The name of the NEPTIS is given in CIL.' vi. 8942:

   FLAVIAE.DOMITIL
   VESPASIANI.NEPTIS

   There were thus four Flavia Domitillas: the wife of Vespasian (13), her
   daughter (22), her granddaughter (24), and her niece (15).
     __________________________________________________________________

   [503] The most complete Fasti Consulares for the Flavian Period are
   found in a contribution by Asbach in Jahrbücher des Vereins von
   Altertumsfreunden im Rheinlande [Bonn] vol. 79, p. 6o ff. Asbach has
   only discovered the name of one Suffectus in 94 A.D., but he quotes
   Prosper as making Clement the colleague of Asprenas. It is almost
   certain that in a year when the Emperor did not assume the consulship
   there would be several Suffecti. In Muratori, Nov. Thes. Vet. Inscr.
   tom. i. p. cccxlv, the full list for 93 A.D. is preserved. Consules 93.
   Pompeius Collega, Cornelius Priscus, quibus suffecti fuerunt. M.
   Lollius Paullinus, Valerius Asiaticus Saturninus. Horum uni suffectus
   erat, C. Antistius Iulius Quadratus. So in 94 A.D. M. Arrecinus Clemens
   and L. Baebius Honoratus were suffecti to Asprenas and Lateranus. The
   suffect mentioned by Asbach--Silius Italicus--may have taken the place
   of Clemens in the last months of 94 A.D.

   [504] De Rossi, Bull. di Arch. Crist. 1874, pp. 5 ff., 68 ff., 122 ff.
   &c. Roma Sotterranea, tom. i. pp. 130 ff. See also Lipsius, Apokryphen
   Apost. Geschicht. II. i. p. 205.
     __________________________________________________________________

NOTE E

  THE TOMBS OF THE APOSTLES ST. PETER AND ST. PAUL

   If thou wilt go to the Vatican or to the Ostian road thou wilt find the
   trophies of the Apostles who founded this Church.' These words of the
   Roman presbyter Gaius (identified by Dr. Lightfoot [505] with the
   well-known Hippolytus bishop of Portus) in his treatise against the
   heretic Proclus are a positive testimony to the existence at the end of
   the Second Century of trophies or memoriae--i.e. small oratories--over
   the graves of the Apostles Peter and Paul. It further indicates in what
   localities these visible monuments were to be found. Eusebius, to whom
   we are indebted for the preservation of this piece of valuable
   evidence, makes the further statement that the names of the Apostles
   were to be seen in the cemeteries of Rome in his day. [506]

   The Liber Pontificalis' contains what appears to be an authentic record
   of the construction of one of these memoriae. Of bishop Anacletus
   (Anencletus) it is said Hic memoriam Beati Petri construxit et
   composuit.' The erection of these monuments may therefore be placed in
   the early years of Domitian's reign.

   The evidence from traditional sources as to the exact position of the
   spots where the two Apostles were martyred and afterwards buried is
   very detailed and complete, and, as is usual in topographical
   references, is accurate, even though the narratives, in which these
   references occur, are in the main apocryphal fictions of a late date.

   The principal authorities in the case of St. Peter are as follows:

   Liber Pontificalis': [Petrus] sepultus est via Aurelia in templum
   Apollinis, iuxta locum ubi crucifixus est, iuxta palatium Neronianum,
   in Vaticanum, iuxta territorium Triumphale.'

   Jerome, De Viris Illustribus': Sepultus est in Vaticano iuxta viam
   triumphalem totius orbis veneratione celebratur.'

   Martyrium Beati Petri Apostoli': Ad locum qui vocatur Naumachiae iuxta
   obeliscum Neronis in montem.'

   Acta Petri': Apud palatium neronianum iuxta obeliscum inter duas
   metas.'

   Liber Pontificalis': [Cornelius] posuit iuxta locum ubi crucifixus est,
   inter corpora sanctorum episcoporum, in templum Apollinis, in monte
   aureo, in vaticanum palatii neroniani.'

   De locis S.S. Martyrum': Petrus in parte occidentali civitatis iuxta
   viam Corneliam ad milliarium primum in corpore quiescit.'

   From these notices it will be seen that three roads are mentioned--the
   Via Aurelia (Nova), the Via Triumphalis, and the Via Cornelia. These
   three roads met at a point close to the Pons Neronianus or Triumphalis.
   Between the Via Aurelia Nova and the Via Cornelia stood the Circus of
   Nero, between the Via Cornelia and the Via Triumphalis the Vatican
   hill. The Circus of Nero was the scene of the Games at which a
   multitude of Christians perished by horrible tortures in the spring of
   65 A.D., and here according to the Acta Petri' suffered St. Peter iuxta
   obeliscum inter duas metas'--that is on the spina at a point
   equidistant from the two goals, where the obelisk stood, the same
   obelisk removed in 1586 to the front of the Basilica. The palatium
   Neronianum and the Naumachia were appellations given in later days to
   the remains of the Circus, which was destroyed when Constantine built
   the first Basilica above St. Peter's tomb. The Mons Aureus (a
   corruption of Aurelius) was so called from its proximity to the Via
   Aurelia Nova, later the name was extended to the Janiculum also, the
   southern part of which is still called Montorio. [507]

   Templum Apollinis. Duchesne writes (Lib. Pont.' i. 120): Quant au
   temple d'Apollon, il y a, clans cette désignation, un souvenir du
   célèbre sanctuaire de Cybèle, qui s'élévait tout près du cirque et de
   la basilique, et qui fut, jusqu'aux dernières années du iv^e siècle, le
   théâtre des cérémonies sanglantes du taurobolium et du criobolium . . .
   Le Collège des xv. viri sacris faciundis, qui était chargé du culte de
   cette déesse, étaient aussi directeurs du culte d'Apollon.' In any case
   there was a building on this spot popularly known as the templum
   Apollinis, witness the notice in the Liber Pontificalis' of Pope
   Silvester (314-335 A.D.): eodem tempore Augustus Constantinus fecit
   basilicam beato Petro apostolo in templum Apollinis.' (Duchesne, Lib.
   Pont.' i. 176.)

   The body of St. Peter then was buried in a small cemetery on the
   Vatican hill close to the place where he was crucified. Over this tomb
   Anencletus erected his memoria, and in the immediate vicinity the first
   twelve bishops of Rome, with the exception of Clement and Alexander,
   were according to the Liber Pontificalis' laid to rest--in each case
   the phrase recurs sepultus est iuxta corpus beati Petri in Vaticanum.'
   In time the entire space available was filled up. Zephyrinus was the
   first to be buried in 217 A.D. on the Appian Way, and his successor
   Calixtus created the crypt in the great subterranean cemetery called
   after his name, where he himself and a number of his successors were
   interred. The crypt of the Popes was discovered in 1854 by De Rossi,
   and the inscriptions on the broken coverings of the Sarcophagi of
   several of the bishops may still be seen. Excavations made near the
   Great Altar of St. Peter's in the early seventeenth century by Paul V
   and Urban VIII revealed many interesting facts. A large coffin was
   found made of great slabs of marble containing a mass of half-charred
   bones and ashes, pointing to the probability that Peter was interred
   close by the remains of the martyrs who had perished as living torches
   at the Neronian Vatican fête. All round the Confessio' in which the
   Apostle's relics were supposed to rest were placed coffins side by side
   against the ancient walls, containing bodies swathed in Jewish fashion.
   On the slabs that covered them were no inscriptions, save in one case
   where the name Linus could be deciphered. [508] Whether these were the
   bodies of the earliest bishops of Rome it is impossible to say, but the
   discovery, taken in conjunction with the statements of the Liber
   Pontificalis' which topographically are so often correct, makes the
   supposition credible. The evidence is far from complete, but it is
   weighty. The historical character of the notices relating to the
   Vatican interments in the Liber Pontificalis' is borne out by the
   remarkable omission of Clement and also of Alexander. The legend of
   Clement's martyrdom in the Chersonese is fictitious. It may be taken as
   certain that he did not die in Rome. In the Liber Pontificalis' we read
   concerning Alexander--sepultus est via Numentana, ubi decollatus est,
   ab urbe Roma non longe, miliario VII.' In the Itinerary or Pilgrim
   Guide of William of Malmesbury: In septimo miliario eiusdem viae
   [Nomentanae] s. papa Alexander cum Eventio et Theodulo pausant' (De
   Rossi, Rom. Sott.' i. 179). [509] Again the later notices as to the
   burials of Zephyrinus, of Callistus and their successors not on the
   Vatican but upon the Appian Way have been verified by De Rossi and
   other modern archaeologists. The statements as to the discoveries made
   in the excavations of 1615 and 1626 rest on contemporary authorities.
   Francesco Maria Torrigio, who was with Cardinal Evangelista Pallotta an
   eye-witness of the exhumations of 1615, has given an account of them in
   his work Le sacre Grotte vaticane,' 1639, and Giovanni Severano also
   relates what he had heard in his Memorie sacre delle sette chiese di
   Roma,' 1629. The master mason Benedetto Drei, who was likewise an
   eye-witness of the discoveries made in 1615, has left an engraved plan
   originally intended for Torrigio's book; one copy of this, in the
   British Museum, is of exceptional interest, for it is covered with
   autograph MS. notes in the handwriting of Drei himself. [510] In this
   one can see how the tombs are so arranged round the central shrine that
   the bodies seem to surround that of St. Peter like bishops assisting at
   a council.' An account quite as circumstantial and authentic is given
   by a certain R. Ubaldi, canon of the basilica, of the excavations made
   in 1626. The MS. containing this narrative lay forgotten in the Vatican
   Archives until it was discovered by Professor Gregorio Palmieri in
   recent years and was transcribed and published by Cavalicre Mariano
   Armellini in his work Le Chiese di Roma,' 1891. An English version may
   be found in A. S. Barnes, St. Peter in Rome,' pp. 315-338, a work full
   of interesting material and valuable research.

   Let us now turn to the tomb of St. Paul on the Ostian Way. The
   Apocryphal Acts all declare that St. Paul as became his status as a
   Roman citizen suffered martyrdom by decapitation--honestiores capite
   puniantur, and that he was led out to a place known as Aquae Salviae,
   near the third mile-stone on the Ostian Way. This tradition has not
   been seriously disputed. In the Greek Acts the addition is made that
   the Apostle suffered under a pine-tree--eis massan kaloumenen Akkouai
   Salbias plesi tou dendrou tou strobilou. An extant inscription of
   Gregory the Great, 604 A.D., records the gift by him of a piece of land
   at the Aquae Salviae to the basilica of St. Paul--Valde incongruum ac
   esse durissimum videretur ut illa ei specialiter possessio non serviret
   in qua palmam sumens martyrii capite est truncatus ut viveret, utile
   iudicavimus eandem massam quae Aquas Salvias nuncupatur . . . cum
   Christi Gratia luminaribus deputare.' [511] A memorial chapel was built
   here in the fifth century, whose remains were discovered in 1867 under
   the present Church of S. Paolo alle Tre Fontane, and in 1875 in the
   course of some excavations for a water tank behind this church a number
   of coins of Nero were found together with several pine-cones fossilised
   by age.

   The body of St. Paul according to tradition was buried by a Christian
   matron of the name of Lucina in a plot of ground, which was her
   property, about a mile nearer to Rome. It was not a subterranean
   cemetery but one on the surface, and the piece of land was confined,
   being hemmed in between the Ostian Road and another road, which has
   since disappeared, known as the Via Valentiniana. [512] This spot in
   the time of the presbyter Gaius, about 200 A.D., was marked like that
   of St. Peter on the Vatican by a memorial oratory (trophy) probably
   erected by Anencletus at the same time as the Petrine memoria already
   referred to.

   That the bodies of the Apostles did not continuously remain undisturbed
   in their first resting places is one of those traditions which can be
   supported by a body of evidence, leaving indeed some points doubtful
   and obscure, but as regards the main fact almost conclusive. In that
   Kalendar of the Church known as the Feriale Philocalianum' (about 354
   A.D.) under the heading Depositio Martyrum' occurs the following entry:

   III. Kal. Iul. Petri in Catacumbas et Pauli Ostense--Tusco et Basso
   cons.'

   The names of the Consuls fix the date as 258 A.D. and show that this
   entry is taken from some official source. It is clearly unintelligible
   as it stands. De Rossi however discovered at Berne a Codex of the
   Martirologium Hieronymianum' which exhibits the same entry in a fuller
   form:

   III. Kal. Iul. Romae natale apostolorum sanctorum Petri et Pauli--Petri
   in Vaticano via Aurelia Pauli vero in Via Ostensi, utrumque in
   Catacumbis, passi sub Nerone, Basso et Tusco consulibus.' [513]

   This can only mean that on June 29 the Feast of the Apostles was kept
   in three places or stations--at the Vatican, on the Ostian Road, and in
   a place known as the Catacombs in memory of some event which took place
   in the consulate of Tuscus and Bassus, 258 A.D. The words bassi sub
   Nerone must be regarded as a parenthesis. The existence of these three
   stations is proved by a hymn of pseudo-Ambrose for June 29, as these
   lines show:


   Tantae per urbis ambitum

   Stipata tendunt agmina;

   Trinis celebrator viis

   Festum sacrorum Martyrum.

   Now it can be proved that these consular dates in the Kalendar signify
   in other cases a translation of remains, and the conclusion is that a
   translation of the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul to the Catacombs
   took place in 258 A.D.

   There are many testimonies to the fact that the bodies of the two
   Apostles did actually rest in the cemetery ad Catacumbas, but the
   authorities differ as to the period at which the translation took place
   and also as to the duration of time during which the relics remained in
   their temporary tomb. The story contained in the Apocryphal Acta Petri
   et Pauli' speaks of certain unknown people from the East who after the
   Apostles' martyrdom attempted to carry off the bodies to their own
   country, but being overtaken by an earthquake the people of Rome took
   the bodies from them at the third milestone on the Appian Way at the
   place called ad Catacumbas. Here the remains were deposited for one
   year and seven months until tombs were built for them on the Vatican
   and the Ostian Way. Now this story, of which there are several slightly
   differing versions, is almost certainly based upon a real historical
   event, the translation which took place in 258. The late writers of the
   Acta' were utterly indifferent to chronology, and the deposition in the
   cemetery on the Appian Way when Tuscus and Bassus were consuls was
   associated with the martyrdoms and relegated with the accompaniment of
   many confused and legendary details to the time of Nero. All
   probability is against the story of the Acta.' Even if the Apostles
   were put to death at the same time, and I have shown that there is a
   very strong presumption that St. Peter's death preceded that of St.
   Paul by two years, nothing could be more unlikely than the bringing
   back of their bodies to be interred in the vicinity of their places of
   execution when once they had been laid safely to rest in the cemetery
   on the Appian Way. There were as yet no sacred associations connected
   with the Vatican Hill and the Ostian Way to move the Roman Christians
   to act in the manner described in these apocryphal narratives. [514]

   The cause of the translation of 258 A.D. is not difficult to divine,
   for this was the year of the outbreak of the persecution of Valerian.
   An Edict had been issued against the Christians, forbidding their
   meetings in the cemeteries. It might well be that fears were aroused
   lest the sacred tombs of the Apostles should be desecrated, and so the
   bodies were removed to a place of greater safety. The researches of
   archaeologists have shown that the cemetery ad Catacumbas must in those
   days have been admirably adapted for the purpose. It was ancient
   already, it lay apart from other cemeteries, and it resembled rather a
   pagan than a Christian place of burial (Duchesne, Lib. Pont.' cvii). It
   has been in recent years most carefully examined and studied and in the
   chamber known as the Platonia or Platoma a double tomb may still be
   seen, said to be that in which the bodies were placed. [515] Here
   Damasus (366-387 A.D.) built a basilica, which until the eighth century
   was known as the Basilica of the Apostles, and on the walls of the
   Chamber he placed an inscription in verse. In the Liber Pontificalis'
   we read--Hic fecit basilicas duas: una beato Laurentio iuxta theatrum
   . . . et in Catacumbas ubi iacuerunt corpora sanctorum apostolorum
   Petri et Pauli, in quo loco platomam ipsam, ubi iacuerunt corpora
   sancta, versibus exornavit.' This poem of Damasus has fortunately been
   preserved. The text runs thus:


   Hic habitare prius sanctos cognoscere debes

   Nomina quisque Petri pariter Paulique requiris

   Discipulos oriens misit quod sponte fatemur

   Sanguinis ob meritum Christum qui per astra secuti

   Aetherios petiere sinus regnaque piorum

   Roma suos potius meruit defendere cives

   Haec Damasus vestras referat nova sidera laudes. [516]

   Those words discipulos oriens misit may possibly have given rise to the
   later apocryphal fictions about the unknown men from the East, who
   tried to carry off the bodies of the Apostles. Damasus however here
   clearly means by these words the Apostles themselves, the word
   discipulos being used instead of Apostolos through the exigencies of
   the metre. He says in effect that though the East had sent the
   Apostles, Rome, which had been the scene of their labours and their
   deaths, had the best claim to retain them.

   But even if it be granted that the notices in the Feriale
   Philocalianum' and the Hieronymian Martyrology' contain an official
   authentic statement that a translation of the relics to the cemetery ad
   Catacumbas took place in 258 A.D., as such authorities as the Abbé
   Duchesne, Monsignor de Waal, Professor Marucchi, and Father A. S.
   Barnes admit, there are other difficulties to be overcome, and they
   differ from one another in their interpretation of documentary
   evidence, and in their views as to whether there were two translations
   or one only, and as to the duration of the sojourn of the relics in the
   Platonia. The Apocryphal Acta' say that the bodies were taken to the
   Catacombs immediately after the martyrdom of the Apostles and were
   removed to the tombs that had been prepared on the Vatican and on the
   Ostian Way one year and seven months afterwards. The Itineraries or
   Pilgrim Guides of the fifth and sixth centuries make the sojourn to be
   forty years: Et iuxta eandem viam (Appiam) ecclesia est S. Sebastiani
   martyris, ubi ipse dormit, et ibi aunt sepulchra Apostolorum Petri et
   Pauli; in quibus xl annos requiescebant (De locis S.S. Martyrum');
   Postea pervenies via Appia ad S. Sebastianum martyrem, cuius corpus
   iacet in inferiori loco, et ibi sunt sepulchra Apostolorum Petri et
   Pauli in quibus xl annos requiescebant' (Salzburg Notitia'). As
   Duchesne and Barnes say, the term forty years is here undoubtedly
   intended as a round number, though the former is inclined, it seems to
   me, to extend it too widely. [517] The exact number of forty years
   would bring us to an impossible date, the height of the fiercest
   persecution which the Christian Church had to endure--that of
   Diocletian. The period of one year and seven months mentioned in the
   Apocryphal Acta' has, I have little doubt, some historical basis, which
   now it is impossible to discover, [518] but that the relics of the
   Apostles remained in the Platonia at least until the year 284 the Acta'
   of St. Sebastian testify. According to these Acta ' the Saint was
   buried in the Catacomb which still bears his name close to the Platonia
   because he had in a vision expressed the wish that his body might lie
   near the vestigia of the holy Apostles. [519] There is another
   difficulty to be surmounted. In the biography of Pope Cornelius,
   251-253 A.D., in the Liber Pontificalis' the statement is made that at
   the request of a certain matron Lucina by name the bodies of the
   blessed Apostles Peter and Paul were taken up by night; and that Lucina
   first buried the blessed Paul in her own ground (in praedio suo) on the
   Ostian Road and then that Cornelius placed the body of Peter close to
   the spot where he was crucified among the bodies of the holy
   bishops--in templum Apollinis, in Monte Aureo in Vaticanum palatii
   Neroniani iii Kai. Iul.' Now it is clear that if the bodies of the
   Apostles were only brought to the cemetery ad Calacumbas in 258 A.D.,
   they cannot have been restored to their former tombs some years
   earlier. Duchesne, Marucchi, and Barnes are all of opinion that this
   paragraph in the notice of Cornelius has been somehow misplaced. [520]
   Further it is stated that after the martyrdom of this Pope this same
   Lucina gathered together his remains (cuius corpus noctu collegit) and
   buried it in her own ground (praedio suo) in a crypt close to the
   Cemetery of Callistus. Apparently therefore Lucina had property, which
   she converted into a cemetery, both on the Ostian and the Appian Way.

   Now Barnes has proposed a solution of this difficulty which is both
   ingenious and well worthy of consideration. [521] He suggests that in
   some worn MS. the name Marcellus has been read as Cornelius and that
   the passage relating to the restoration of the bodies of the Apostles
   to their original tombs belongs to the biography of Marcellus. The
   Pontificate of Marcellus is separated from that of his predecessor
   Marcellinus by an interregnum due to the persecution of Diocletian, and
   its date was probably 306-309 A.D. In the biography of this Pope there
   is again mention of a certain matron, Lucina, the widow of a man named
   Marcus. On the martyrdom of Marcellus she gathered together his remains
   (cuius corpus collegit) and buried it in the Cemetery of Priscilla.
   Lucina, it is said, gave all her property to the Church, and a
   comparison of the various documents seems to point to that portion of
   the cemetery of Priscilla on the Via Salaria Nova, where Marcellus and
   his successors were buried, having been the property of this Lucina. By
   the time of the accession of Marcellus the bodies of the Apostles had
   been in the Platonia nearly 50 years. The abdication of Diocletian in
   305 A.D. led to peace [522] being restored to the Christian Church in
   Rome by the advent of Maxentius to power. This then would be a very
   fitting time for a new pope to prepare the removal of the Apostolic
   relics from the catacomb to their original tombs. There is extant an
   inscription of Damasus [523] which tells us that the severity of
   Marcellus to those who had lapsed in the persecution stirred up violent
   strife and discord leading to sedition and the shedding of blood.

     Veridicus rector, lapsos quia crimina fiere

     Praedixit, miseris fuit omnibus hostis amarus;

     Hinc furor, hinc odium sequitur, discordia, lites,

     Seditio, caedes; solvuntur foedera pacis.

     Crimea ob alterius, Christum qui in pace negavit,

     Finibus expulsus patriae est feritate tyranni.

     Haec breviter Damasus voluit comperta referre

     Marcelli ut populus meritum cognoscere posset.

   This inscription contains no reference to Marcellus having brought back
   the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul to the Vatican and the Ostian Way,
   but the brevity of the poetical encomium of Damasus, as he himself
   states, made him confine himself to praising those actions of the
   bishop which were the cause of the suffering and exile that befell him.
   [524] I would suggest, however, that in these discords and tumults, to
   which the inscription refers, may be found perhaps an explanation of
   the delay of one year and seven months in the entombment of the
   Apostles of which the Apocryphal Acta' (Passio Petri el Pauli) speak.
   The strange passage, which tells of how while the bodies of the
   Apostles were being carried off by the Greeks to be taken to the East,
   there was a great earthquake and the Roman people ran out and seized
   them in the place which is called Catacumba at the third milestone on
   the Via Appia, and the bodies were kept there for one year and seven
   months, until the places were built in which their bodies were placed,
   and then they were brought back with glory of hymns and were deposited
   that of St. Peter in the Vatican and that of St. Paul on the Ostian Way
   at the second milestone,' may well be a distorted and misdated version
   of events that really took place in the days of Marcellus. Let us
   suppose that on the first anniversary day of the Apostles, June 29,
   after the accession of Maxentius an attempt was made to remove the
   relics from the Catacombs, but that it was frustrated by the sudden
   attack of a hostile crowd, from whose hands the bodies were with
   difficulty rescued and taken back to the Platonia. Then about a year
   and a half later after all preparations had been carefully made the
   translation was successfully carried out. Now in the Liberian
   Catalogue' under the heading depositio martyrum the entry occurs viii.
   kl. Martias fatale Petri de Cathedra,' and this commemoration Professor
   Marucchi states was according to ancient documents observed from the
   Fourth century with such feasting that it gained the popular name of
   dies sancti Petri epularum.' [525] Further in the Laterculum of
   Silvias, 448 A.D., it is said that in earlier times this commemoration,
   held on February 22, was a joint festival of SS. Peter and Paul. [526]
   Was it not then on this date that after a year and seven months the
   actual translation took place?

   What may be called the Marcellus hypothesis remains however little more
   than a plausible conjecture, for no positive evidence can be brought
   forward to establish its truth.

   Nevertheless an examination of the Apocryphal Acta' reveals the fact
   that a certain Marcellus was supposed to be the writer of the Passio
   Petri et Pauli' from which the extract quoted above about the attempt
   to carry off the Apostles' bodies, and about their lying for a year and
   seven months in the Catacombs, is taken. Marcellus it is who after the
   martyrdom takes the lead in burying St. Peter near the Naumachia in the
   place called the Vatican.' Lipsius in his work on the Apostolic legends
   devotes a whole section to what he styles der sogenannte
   Marcellustext.' [527] Nor is this all. On late authority St. Paul was
   said to have been buried by a certain matron Lucina in her own property
   (in praedio suo) on the Ostian Way, [528] In the Liber Pontificalis'
   the Lucina of the Cornelius biography buries St. Paul on the return
   from the Catacombs on the Ostian Way in praedio suo.' The Lucina of the
   Marcellus biography is the widow of Marcus, in the Passio Petri et
   Pauli' Marcus is the father of Marcellus. In all probability the three
   Lucinas are one and the same person, whose activity was connected with
   the life of Pope Marcellus. If this should be so, it will at once
   appear that a strong case is made for placing the return of the relics
   from the Platonia in the pontificate of Marcellus, about 307 A.D.

   That the bodies of the Apostles were believed to lie in the tombs on
   the Vatican and on the Ostian Way when Constantine determined to erect
   basilicas over their remains is certain. The exact year in which these
   were built is unknown, except that it was in the Pontificate of Pope
   Silvester, 314-335. The words of the Liber Pontificalis' (Duchesne, 176
   and 178) tell us that the object of the Emperor was to do honour to the
   sacred tombs of the Apostles. The sarcophagus which contained the body
   of St. Peter he enclosed in bronze from Cyprus and fixed it at the
   central point of a cubical chamber of masonry--cuius loculum undique
   aere Cypro conclusit, quod est immobile; ad caput, pedes V; ad pedes,
   pedes V; ad latus dextrum, pedes V; ad latus sinistrum, pedes V;
   subter, pedes V; supra, pedes V; sic inclusit corpus beati Petri et
   recondit.' He then placed on the coffin a cross of gold (with an
   inscription)--super corpus Petri, supra aera quod conclusit, fecit
   crucem ex auro purissimo, pens. lib. cl. in mensuram loci, ubi scriptum
   est hoc CONSTANTINVS AVGVSTVS ET HELENA AVGVSTA HANC DOMVM REGALEM
   SIMILI FVLGORE CORVSCANS AVLA CIRCVMDAT, scriptum ex litteris nigellis
   in cruce ipsa.'

   Constantine likewise built a basilica on the Ostian Way to the memory
   of St. Paul, whose sarcophagus was, like St. Peter's, enclosed in
   bronze and a cross of gold placed over it cuius corpus ita recondit in
   aere et conclusit sicut beati Petri . . . et crucem auream super locum
   beati Pauli apostoli posuit pens. lib. cl.' The scrupulous care that
   was taken not to disturb the tombs in any way was conspicuously shown
   in the instance of the Constantinian basilica of St. Paul. It was the
   custom in the early basilicas that the altar upon the tomb of the saint
   or martyr to whom the church was dedicated should be placed at the west
   end at the central point of the chord of an apse round which the clergy
   sat on either side of the bishop or other dignitary. The Celebrant
   stood with his back to this apse facing eastward with the congregation
   before him in the nave. Now the tomb of St. Paul lay so near to the
   Ostian Way, one of the main roads from Rome, that this first basilica
   was of diminutive proportions. Before however many years were past it
   was felt that so small a church was unworthy of St. Paul, and another
   basilica on the same scale as that of St. Peter was erected in 386 A.D.
   To effect this without touching the tomb and altar led to a completely
   new departure in the internal arrangements of the basilica, a new
   departure that was to have permanent results by being generally
   adopted. [529] The church was reversed, the apse was now placed at the
   east end, but the celebrant still stood on the west side of the altar
   facing eastwards, with result that he looked towards the clergy in the
   apse and had his back to the congregation in the nave: a custom which
   has since become universal. Another innovation arose from the desire to
   cover all the consecrated ground, where the first basilica had stood,
   and a transverse nave at right angles to the main nave was built, and
   thus came into existence in 386 A.D. the earliest known example of a
   cruciform church. No stronger evidence could be brought forward to show
   the scrupulous and reverential care with which the early Christians
   cherished and guarded the burial places of their dead. In this they
   were aided by the laws of the State, which declared every tomb to be
   locus sacer, locus religiosus,' and there is seen to be no
   impossibility in the assumption that the sarcophagi which Constantine
   enclosed in bronze really contained the bodies of the Apostles.
   Whatever care was bestowed on other tombs, those of St. Peter and of
   St. Paul would from the first be regarded with exceptional veneration,
   and be watched over and tended with peculiar devotion, so that it would
   be most unlikely that those who translated the relics to the catacombs
   in 258 A.D. should have made any mistake.

   The question whether these sarcophagi encased in bronze by Constantine
   are still in existence, or whether they were destroyed by the Saracens
   in 846 A.D. or by the soldiery of Bourbon in 1527, can only be answered
   positively by excavations which it may safely be said will never be
   undertaken. Probability on the whole seems to be that, though the
   shrines were plundered and destroyed, the tombs themselves were
   untouched. If the story told by Bonanni, [530] who professes to be
   giving from the MS. of a contemporary of the event (Torrigio) the
   evidence of eyewitnesses, be true, then in some alterations that were
   being made in 1594 by the orders of Pope Clement VIII to the altar of
   the Confession an aperture was opened through which the sarcophagus of
   St. Peter with the gold cross gleaming upon it was seen by the Pope
   himself, and Cardinals Bellarmine, Antoniano and Sfondrato. By
   Clement's command the aperture was filled up with cement and has not
   been opened since. Further in the excavations by Paul V in 1615 and by
   Urban VIIl in 1626, in the immediate vicinity of the shrine, conclusive
   evidence was obtained that the early Christian sepulchres which
   clustered round the sacred resting place of the Apostle had never been
   disturbed.

   In the case of St. Paul's shrine a very interesting discovery made in
   1835, when the basilica was being rebuilt after the great fire of 1823,
   points to the conclusion that the tomb had not been interfered with
   since the fourth century. A slab of marble measuring seven feet by four
   feet was uncovered with the simple inscription

   PAVLO

   APOSTOLO MART.

   The opinion of archaeologists who have examined the slab is unanimous
   that the character of the inscription and the form of the letters fix
   the date as belonging to the age of Constantine. Under the name [531]
   is a round aperture, the ancient billicum confessionis, sometimes
   called the fenestrella or little window, through which handkerchiefs or
   other objects were lowered so as to be hallowed by contact with the
   sarcophagus.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [505] Apost. Fathers, part i. vol. ii. pp. 318, 377-83.

   [506] Hist. Eccl. ii. 25.

   [507] For the tradition connected with S. Pietro in Montorio and its
   origin see Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome, p. 128; Barnes, S. Peter
   in Rome, p. 98.

   [508] The evidence of Torrigio (but see below Drei's plan) is not
   clear, whether the name Linus was a separate word, or the termination
   of such a name as Marcellinus. The tomb of Linus appears however to
   have been known in the ninth century according to the poet Rhabanus
   Maurus. Acta Sanct. 6 Sept. p. 543.

   [509] There is some doubt about Alexander. Marucchi, Elém. d'Arch.
   Chrét. i. p. 28.

   [510] An excellent reproduction of this will be found in Barnes's St.
   Peter in Rome, facing p. 304. Drei's MS. notes confirm the reading
   Linus.

   [511] Marucchi, Elém. d'Arch. Chrét. ii. p. 74; De Rossi, Roma
   Sotterranea, i. p. 182; Bullet. di Arch. Crist. 1869, pp. 81 ff.;
   Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome, pp. 156-7.

   [512] Stevenson, L'area di Lucina sulla Via Ostiense' in Nuovo Bullet:.
   di Arch. Crist. 1898, pp. 68 ff.

   [513] Duchesne, Lib. Pont. i. p. cv.

   [514] A letter of Gregory the Great to the Empress Constantina about
   600 A.D. shows that the legend of the early translation was current in
   his time and accepted by him. Opp. St. Greg. ii. ep. 30.

   [515] Dr. A. De Waal, Die Apostelgruft ad Catacumbas an der Via Appia;
   Marucchi, Le Merorie degli Apostoli Pietro e Paolo in Roma, 1903, pp.
   75-92.

   [516] De Rossi, Inscr. Crist. ii. p. 52.

   [517] Duchesne (Lib. Pont. cv and cvii) suggests a date after 313 A.D.,
   Barnes (St. Peter in Rome) 308 or 309 A.D.

   [518] See suggestion infra, p. 269.

   [519] Acta Sanctorum, Jan. 2, p. 622.

   [520] Duchesne, Liber Pont. i. p. 151; Marucchi, Le Memorie degli
   Apostoli Pietro e Paolo, p. 56; Barnes, St. Peter in Rome, pp. 116 ff.

   [521] St. Peter in Rome, pp. 119-127.

   [522] Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol. ii. p. 161: The revolt of
   Maxentius immediately restored peace to the Churches of Italy and
   Africa, and the same tyrant who oppressed every other class of his
   subjects showed himself just, humane, and even partial towards the
   afflicted Christians.'

   [523] De Rossi, Inscr. Crist. ii. pp. 62, 103, 138.

   [524] That there is confusion in the traditions relating to Cornelius
   and Marcellus is evident from the fact that in the Liber Pontificalis
   Cornelius is beheaded in Rome, in the Liberian Catalogue in exile at
   Centumcellis, cum gloria dormitionem accepit. Damasus makes Marcellus
   apparently die in exile. In the Liber Pontificalis he is condemned to
   tend horses in stables at Rome and dies of ill-usage. The inscription
   of Damasus is however authentic, as is the extant slab containing the
   words Cornelius Martyr, in the crypt where this Pope was buried.

   [525] Marucchi, Elém. d'Arch. Chrét. ii. pp. 453-6; De Rossi, Bullett.
   d. Arch. Crist. 1890, p. 72 ff.

   [526] Blunt, Annot. Book of Common Prayer (The Conversion of St. Paul')

   [527] Lipsius, Die Apokryphen Apostelgeschichten und Apostellegenden,
   2er Band 1e Hälfte, pp. 284-386. One MS. Cod. Urbin. is headed--III.
   Kl. Iulii Passio beatorum Petri et Pauli a Marcello discipulo Petri
   edita quique idem interfuit passioni.'

   [528] De Rossi, Roma Sotterranea, ii. p. 262; Stevenson, L'area di
   Lucina sulla Via Ostiense,' Nuovo Bullett. 1898, p. 60 ff.

   [529] Barnes, St. Peter in Rome, p. 215 ff.; Belloni, Della grandezza
   et la disposizione della primitiva Basilica Ostiense.

   [530] Bonanni, Temp. Vatic. Historia, published in 1696, p. 149.

   [531] There are also two square apertures of later date, purpose
   unknown.
     __________________________________________________________________

NOTE F.

  The Roman Catacombs.
  The Cemeteries of Priscilla and Domitilla.

   During the first century of our era the Romans almost universally
   practised cremation for the disposal of their dead. The law of the XII
   Tables supposes inhumation as well as cremation to be in use; but
   cremation gradually became the vogue and it was not until the age of
   the Antonines that, largely through the influence of Christianity and
   other Oriental cults, a reversion to the practice of inhumation began
   to take place. The early Christians from the first adopted the Jewish
   custom of burial, and their tombs were, whenever circumstances
   permitted, fashioned after the likeness of those in Palestine,
   sepulchres like that of the Lord Jesus Christ. No burials were
   permitted within the city of Rome; but the beds of soft volcanic tufa
   which lay beneath the soil of the suburban area afforded easy
   facilities for the excavation of subterranean galleries, vaults, and
   crypts in which to lay the dead. Hence gradually in the course of the
   first four centuries came into existence that vast underground city of
   the dead, often incorrectly spoken of as the Roman Catacombs. The word
   Catacombs strictly applies to one small cemetery only, the locus ad
   catacumbas [532] where the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul in 258 A.D.
   found a temporary resting-place. The first Christian cemeteries
   differed in no way from those of the Jewish community, three of which
   have been discovered and explored. [533] There has been much written on
   the subject of the Roman Catacombs which does not need consideration
   here. The cemeteries of the first century, whatever may have been the
   case later, were the property of private persons of rank and wealth,
   and were intended in the first place for the use of the family to which
   the owners belonged, also for that of their clients, freedmen and
   slaves, and by permission for other poor persons belonging to the
   Christian brotherhood. As yet there was no question of the formation of
   Collegia funeratica or Burial Guilds, though it is regarded as highly
   probable that such organisations with their collective ownership and
   special privileges did exist in the third century; indeed it is known
   that the several cemeteries were each attached to a titulus--or parish
   church. But this was not the case in the period with which we are
   dealing, when the places of assembly for congregational worship were
   still private houses--ecclesiae domesticae. The most ancient parts of
   the cemeteries of Priscilla and DomitilIa and the crypt of Lucina,
   which date from Apostolic times, were family vaults constructed beneath
   the property of the person after whose name they are called, and
   granted by that person, as a locus sacer' placed under the protection
   of the Roman Law (lex monumenti). Henceforward the tomb was held
   inviolable, whatever might be the religion of those interred in it. The
   plot of ground (area) was often enclosed by walls, or its dimensions
   were engraved on boundary stones. Sometimes the inscription is found
   Sibi suisque, libertis libertabusque posterisque eorum,' sometimes the
   letters H.M.H.N.S.--hoc monumentum haeredem non sequitur.' The
   administration of the leges monumentorum lay within the jurisdiction of
   the pontifices, who were thus the legal guardians of the inviolability
   of the burial-places thus granted, and their leave was required for the
   deposition of the bodies in the tombs or their translation, or indeed
   for the holding of anniversary festivals or rites or for any changes in
   the construction or character of the monuments. These powers do not
   seem to have been arbitrarily or vexatiously used, but it must always
   be remembered that they did exist and that the catacombs were in no
   sense secret and unknown hiding-places of the early Christians, but,
   with the exception perhaps of a few small subterranean crypts carefully
   concealed, like the Platonic chamber in which the bodies of the
   Apostles for awhile were laid, were registered and thus known to the
   magistrates.

   The Roman Catacombs are one of the wonders of the world. It has been
   calculated that the length of the galleries in the cemeteries excavated
   within three miles of the Gates of Servius amounts to 540 miles, the
   quantity of material removed by excavation 96,000,000 cubic feet, and
   the number of bodies interred at the very least 1,700,000. [534] Of
   this vast network of subterranean galleries only a comparatively small
   portion has been explored, though progress is being made year by year,
   and unfortunately all the cemeteries as they have been opened out have
   been found to be in a miserable state of ruin and devastation.
   Nevertheless, the Catacombs even in their present condition contain in
   the inscriptions and frescoes that still cover the walls, and in the
   remains of the shrines of saints and martyrs, a most precious record
   not merely of the names of the Christians who in the ages of
   persecution found their last resting-place in the loculi arranged along
   the walls of these crypts and galleries, but of their beliefs, prayers,
   rites, worship, and modes of thought. Historically we are here in the
   presence of a crowd of witnesses who though dead yet speak to us, of a
   mass of evidence that is incontrovertibly authentic.

   By far the larger part of the tombs in the Catacombs belong to the
   century and a half which preceded the peace of the Church under
   Constantine, 313 A.D. But after the middle of the fourth century,
   although by the care of Pope Damasus (366-384 A.D.) and others
   basilicas were erected over the most venerated remains of famous
   martyrs, and the chapel-crypts in which the bodies actually lay were
   adorned with rich shrines and mural decorations, subterranean interment
   gradually ceased [535] and in the fifth century the Catacombs had
   become simply sanctuaries, whither pilgrims resorted to pray before the
   tombs of the martyrs. For three centuries a continual stream of
   pilgrims made their way, to Rome for this purpose, and some of the
   Itineraries or guide-books that they used still exist. Meanwhile the
   cemeteries were already in the seventh century beginning to be robbed
   of their precious contents, as in 645 A.D. and in 652 A.D. a number of
   the bodies of martyrs were removed from the Catacombs into Rome in
   order to save them from pillage and desecration at the hands of
   barbarian invaders. Finally in the time of Paschal I (817-824 A.D.)
   this translation to churches within the city walls was carried out on
   an extraordinary scale. It is said that the remains of no fewer than
   2300 martyrs were deposited in one single church, that of St. Praxedis.
   Henceforward the pilgrimages came to an end, the Catacombs were
   deserted, and in time their very existence was forgotten. The
   accidental re-opening of a Christian cemetery by some workmen in the
   Vigna Sanchez on the Via Salaria in 1578 led to a revival of interest.
   It was part of what is now known as the Catacomb of the Jordani, but a
   landslip, owing to the rough carelessness of those who first examined
   these crypts, completely destroyed them and no trace of them now
   remains. It was fortunate that at the beginning of the seventeenth
   century a really intelligent and scientific exploration of the
   Catacombs was undertaken by Antonio Bosio, died 1629 A.D., who devoted
   thirty years to the study of the subject and was the real founder of
   Christian archaeology. He had great difficulties in his way owing to
   lack of resources for the purposes of excavation, but his Roma
   Sotterranea,' published after his death in 1632, is of very great value
   owing to the wanton destruction during the next two centuries of
   monuments and works of art, which had survived as memorials of early
   Christianity in Rome. The one object of the exploration of the
   Catacombs, even on the part of those who did seriously study Christian
   archaeology and whose writings are a proof of the interest they felt in
   their subject--Aringhi, Boldetti, Bottari [536] and others--was the
   discovery of the relics of saints. To effect this purpose the
   cemeteries were pillaged and ravaged, the loculi broken open, their
   contents carried away, the inscriptions broken to pieces or removed
   wholesale, the precious works of art found in the tombs--gold and
   silver vessels, lamps, medallions, engraved seals, precious stones, and
   personal ornaments--stolen and scattered far and wide. Some of these
   are to be seen to-day in museums and private collections, but the
   greater part have disappeared. Not until the middle of the nineteenth
   century was a successor found who approached the study of the Catacombs
   in. the scientific spirit of Bosio, and with far greater genius.
   Giovanni Battista de Rossi (1822-94), whose early interest in the
   subject of Christian archaeology had been aroused by the labours of P.
   Marchi, [537] whose pupil indeed he was, gave his whole life with a
   thoroughness and industry which could not be surpassed to the
   investigation of all known sources which threw light upon the
   topography and history of subterranean Rome. He possessed in a peculiar
   manner a special combination of gifts--patience, imagination and
   insight, and the results of his labours have been not merely fruitful
   in discovery and in additions to our knowledge of early Christianity,
   but they have proved that the so-called legends of the Acta Sanctorum,'
   though late in date, are never to be regarded as simply fictitious
   romances, the efforts of imaginative invention. On the contrary,
   however great the accretion of legendary details, largely thaumaturgic,
   these stories deal with real historical persons and have been built up
   on a basis of genuine fact. Of De Rossi's method of working and the
   materials that he used in his researches--i.e. the Pilgrim Itineraries
   of the seventh century, five of which are still preserved in monastic
   libraries, the ancient topographies, the Sillogae Epigraphicae' drawn
   up in the eighth and ninth centuries, the famous Monza papyrus
   containing a list of the sacred oils from the various shrines sent by
   Gregory the Great to the Lombard Queen Theodelinda, the notices in the
   Liber Pontificalis,' the Hieronymian Martyrology, the lists in the
   Liberian Catalogue entitled Depositio Episcoporum' and Depositio
   Martirum,' and the Acta Sanctorum' themselves--a full account is given
   by himself in his published works, [538] which should be consulted.
   References have already been made to the most important of the
   discoveries which have in recent years rewarded the explorers of the
   first century cemeteries of Priscilla and Domitilla under De Rossi's
   inspiring guidance, and it is unnecessary to restate at length what has
   been written. The bearing however of these and other discoveries in the
   same localities on the history of the Christian Church in Rome during
   the second half of the twelfth century is of such an interesting
   character that a brief recapitulation of results may be of service.

   The vast cemetery of Priscilla lies on the Via Salaria Nova on the
   north side of the city. It consists of two stories, in each of which is
   found a network of galleries and crypts. The present entrance is modern
   (1865), the ancient door stands on the opposite side of the road, above
   which can be still read the inscription in the red letters which denote
   great antiquity, COEM. PRISCILLAE. It was in 1888 that De Rossi in the
   course of excavations discovered the crypt and chapel of the Acilian
   gens. The explorers first came across a broken marble slab containing
   the words ACILIO GLABRIONI FILIO, and afterwards the ruined crypt was
   unearthed and other fragments of inscriptions to members of various
   branches of the Acilian family. Formerly the walls had been encrusted
   with marble or coated with fine plaster and covered with frescos and
   mosaics, but everything had been smashed to pieces by the hands of
   relic and treasure hunters in the middle of the seventeenth century.
   Nevertheless the historical value of this signal find is great. It may
   be held to establish the fact that M' Acilius Glabrio, the consul of 91
   A.D., who was put to death by Domitian accused of following Jewish
   manners and strange superstitions' and of being an inciter of
   innovations,' was a Christian, and not merely so but that in the second
   century many members of this distinguished family belonging to the high
   aristocracy of Rome had embraced the Christian faith. It seems to
   follow that this cemetery was excavated under property belonging to the
   Acilian House. The names of Priscilla and Prisca are found on
   inscriptions as in use among members of this family, and the Priscilla
   who was the donor of the ground and founder of the cemetery was
   doubtless a near relative of the Consul. In the preceding Note on the
   Legend of Pudens' it has been pointed out that there is no necessary
   inconsistency in the two statements that Priscilla was mother of Pudens
   and sister or aunt of M' Acilius Glabrio. Indeed there are signs that
   the Acilian crypt and the primitive cemetery of Priscilla, though
   closely adjoining, were originally separated, the crypt being
   approached by a distinct staircase. If so, it is quite possible, as the
   Acta' seem to indicate, that the cemetery may have been through his
   mother the property of Pudens, the crypt at its side constructed
   beneath land belonging to Glabrio. Above the cemetery of Priscilla,
   after the peace of the Church, was built a basilica, afterwards known
   as St. Sylvester, [539] into which the bodies of many martyrs and
   saints were translated from the crypts below in the fourth century. The
   bodies however of Pudens and his daughters and of Aquila and Prisca
   were left undisturbed until the time of Leo IV in the middle of the
   ninth century. Leo IV appears to have made a careful exploration of the
   cemetery, but after his days it fell into disuse and complete
   abandonment. Beneath the story where these bodies lay is a second
   story, consisting of a long gallery out of which open some twenty
   transversal galleries as yet very imperfectly explored. Of this second
   story deep down below the surface and approached by two or more
   staircases from the upper galleries Marucchi writes: On peut dire sans
   exaggération que c'est la region cimetériale la plus vaste et la plus
   régulière de toute la Rome souterraine. Ses inscriptions gravées sur
   marbre, ou peintes en rouges sur des tuiles comme au premier étage,
   attestent qu'au moins en partie elle remonte à la plus haute antiquité.
   A mon avis, il y eut là un noyau cimetérial dès le Il^e siècle.' [540]
   One of the most remarkable features of the cemetery of Priscilla is the
   existence of two large tanks, one on each floor, besides several
   smaller ones. These two large tanks were almost certainly ancient
   baptisteries. Marucchi has written learnedly, and with a considerable
   measure of success, to identify the cemetery of Priscilla with the
   Cymiterium Ostrianum, ubi Petrits apostolus baptizavit' of the
   apocryphal Acta Liberii.' This cemetery also was called ad Nymphas or
   ad Fontes S. Petri, names which might well be derived from the tanks
   just mentioned. One of the principal pieces of evidence adduced by
   Marucchi is found in the Catalogue of Monza containing a list of the
   phials of sacred oil taken from the different shrines and sent to Queen
   Theodelinda by the direction of Gregory the Great. Under the heading
   Salaria Nova' follows: Sedes ubi sedit Scs Petrus ex oleo Sci Vitalis
   Scs Alexander Scs Martialis Scs Marcellus Sci Silvestri Sc Felicis Sci
   Filippi et aliorum multorum Scorum. . . .' All these saints mentioned
   were buried either in the Cemetery of Priscilla or its immediate
   vicinity. [541] In any case we are in the presence here of the most
   ancient of Roman baptisteries.

   The Cemetery of Domitilla lies to the west of the Via Ardeatina (a road
   which ran parallel to the Via Appia) close to the point where it is
   crossed by the modern Via delle Sette Chiese. The cemetery extends
   under a property known as the Tor Marancia, a name doubtless derived
   from a certain Amaranthus. [542] In excavations made on this property a
   number of pagan tombs were found, which gave the clue to De Rossi that
   he was seeking in order to locate the cemetery of Domitilla mentioned
   in the Acts of Nereus and Achilles.' One of these discovered in 1772
   contains the words

   FLAVIAE · DOMITILLAE

   VESPASIANI · NEPTIS

   EIVS · BENEFICIO · HOC · SEPVLCRVm

   MEIS · LIBERTIS · LIBERTABVS · POsuit.

   Another found in 1817 records how a certain Calvisius Philotas made
   this tomb for his brother Sergius Cornelius Julianus, for his wife
   Calvisia, and for himself

   EX INDVLGENTIA FLAVIAE DOMITILL.

   In close vicinity to these were discovered four inscriptions to members
   of the Bruttian gens. One of these makes mention of a Bruttius
   Praesens.

   D M.
   BRVTIO · VENVSINO
   C · BRVTTIVS · PRAESENS
   PATRONVS · LIBERTO
   BENE · MERENTI · FECIT.

   Now Eusebius in his Chronicle' tells us that he derived his information
   about the Domitianic persecution and the banishment of Flavia Domitilla
   to the island of Pontia from an historian named Bruttius, who may
   possibly be identified with C. Bruttius Praesens, who was consul for
   the second time in 139 A.D. This group of indications led Dc Rossi to
   suspect that the cemetery which lay beneath the Tor Marancia was none
   other than the Cemetery of Domitilla, in which, according to the Acts
   of Nereus and Achilles,' those martyrs were buried.

   Acting on this hypothesis the Commission of Sacred Archaeology under
   the direction of De Rossi began a systematic exploration of the
   cemetery in 1852. At first progress was but slow, owing to the
   difficulties placed in the way of research by the then proprietor of
   the property. Tor Marancia was however in 1873 purchased by Monsgr.
   Francesco de Merode, with the aim of forwarding the work by every means
   in his power. Already in 1865 De Rossi had re-discovered the original
   entrance to the Catacomb hewn out of the side of a low cliff. It must
   always have been a conspicuous object to the passer-by, and is a proof
   of the great security which was felt in the protection and immunity
   from disturbance afforded by the law to all places of burial. This
   entrance opened into a vestibule adorned with biblical frescoes, which
   were plainly visible from outside through the door. To this vestibule
   De Rossi gave the name of Il vestibule dei Flavi; its construction is
   assigned to the first century. The inscription above the entrance was
   missing, but in 1874 in the ruins of the basilica of St. Petronilla
   only a very short distance from the entrance was a fragment of marble
   containing a portion of a title, which De Rossi has restored thus:

   SepulcRVM
   FlaviORVM

   Below this is the Christian symbol, an anchor. In 1873 De Rossi was
   rewarded by the discovery of the basilica of Nereus and Achilles, which
   had been one of the special objects of his search. There could be no
   doubt on the matter, for a portion of an inscription of Pope Damasus
   was found, the contents of which are known, for a copy exists in the
   Pilgrim Itinerary of Einsiedeln, and a small column was unearthed on
   which is represented a scene of martyrdom and above it the word
   ACILLEVS. According to the Itineraries' the tomb of the famous martyr
   Petronilla lay behind the altar which covered the remains of Nereus and
   Achilles. The explorers were able to verify this indication. In a
   cubiculum behind the apse of the basilica, and approached by a short
   passage, a fresco was discovered on the wall filling the front of the
   arcisolium where the sarcophagus had lain; the painting showed two
   female figures standing, art elder and a younger woman with their names
   inscribed

   VENERANDA · DEP · VII · IDVS · IANVARIAS ·
   PETRONELLA MARTYR.

   In or close by this cubiculum was therefore, it may be safely inferred,
   the burial place of PETRONILLA. Her sarcophagus was actually removed to
   the Vatican at the request of the King of France at a time when many
   such translations were made by Pope Paul I (755-756).

   The inscription on the sarcophagus.

   AVRELIAE · PETRONILLAE · FIL · DVLCISSIMAE ·

   may be taken as indicating that she belonged to the Aurelian gens,
   several of whose members are buried in this cemetery, and that she was
   related to the Flavian imperial family, one of whose cognomina was
   Petro.

   The legend that she was the daughter of St. Peter has no foundation
   other than the name.

   One of the most ancient portions of the cemetery situated in the
   immediate vicinity, and to the south of the remains of the basilica of
   Nereus and Achilles (or as it is sometimes called of Petronilla), is
   that styled the Region of the Flavii Aurelii. It contains the
   inscription PhL. SABEINOS · KAI TITIANE ADELPhE not improbably the
   grandchildren of Flavius Clemens and of Flavia Domitilla the founder of
   the crypt.

   Another of the earliest and most interesting crypts in this Catacomb
   was discovered in 1881. The decorations of this sepulchral chamber are
   elaborate and rich, resembling those of a room in a Pompeian house, and
   belonging to the same period. Above the arcisolium inscribed on marble
   is the single word AMPLIATI. Les lettres de cette courte épitaphe,'
   remarks Marucchi, sont très soignées et d'une forme paléographique
   certainement antérieure à la seconde moitié du II^e siècle; on peut la
   juger sans témérité de la fin du premier.' [543] It is remarkable too
   that such prominence should be given to a single name bespeaking
   probably a man of servile origin. A further mark of the regard in which
   this tomb was held is the existence of a staircase of later date, cut
   through the rock to provide a direct way of approach from the Via
   Ardeatina to the pilgrims. That the man thus honoured was the Ampliatus
   mentioned by St. Paul in the salutation in chapter xvi. of the Epistle
   to the Romans is therefore not an unreasonable supposition. A later
   inscription in the same crypt records that a certain Aurelius Ampliatus
   with Gordianus his son have erected a memorial to Aurelia Bonifatia,
   his incomparable wife. This Aurelius Ampliatus may have been a
   descendant of the Ampliatus who was a contemporary of the Apostles, and
   very probably a freedman of the Aurelian family, many members of which
   family, as this Catacomb bears witness, had been among the early
   converts to Christianity.

   The precious medallion in bronze, containing the earliest
   representation in existence of the heads of the two Apostles Peter and
   Paul, now in the Sacred Museum of the Vatican Library, was found by
   Boldetti in the Cemetery of Domitilla. [544]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [532] The meaning of the term is uncertain. De Rossi gives it a hybrid
   derivation from kata and cubitorium, but this is very doubtful.

   [533] Raffaele Garrucci, Cimeteri degli antichi Ebrei; Orazio Marucchi,
   Elém. d'Arch. Chrét. ii. 208-226, 259-276.

   [534] Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome, pp. 320-1. The estimate is
   that of Michele Stefano de Rossi made in 1860.

   [535] No inscription has been found of a later date than 410 A.D.

   [536] Aringhi, Roma Sotterranea, 1651; Boldetti, Osservazioni sopra i
   cimeteri di santi martiri ed antichi cristiani di Roma, 1720; Bottari,
   Sculture e pitture sacre extratte dai cimeteri di Roma, 1757.

   [537] I monumenti delle anti cristiane primitive ne11a metropoli di
   Cristianesimo, 1844.

   [538] Roma Solterranea Cristiana, 1864-77. Inscriptiones Christianae
   urbis Romae VIIº saeculo antiquiores, 1861-88. Il museo epigrafico
   cristiano pro-laterense, 1878. Musaici delle chiese di Roma anteriori
   at seculo XV, 1872. Especially Bullettino di Archeologia cristiana,
   1863-94. The Bullettino has been continued with the title Nuovo
   Bullettino under the editorship of Professor O. Marucchi, the pupil and
   fellow-worker cf De Rossi.

   [539] The basilica of St. Sylvester suffered complete destruction
   during the period of the Barbarian invasions. Its very existence had
   for long centuries been forgotten, until De Rossi unearthed its ruins
   in 1889.

   [540] Marucchi, Elém. d'Arch. Chrét. ii. 459.

   [541] Marucchi, Di un antico battistero recentemente scoperto nel
   cimetero apostolico di Priscilla a delta sue importanza storica, 1901.
   Le Memorie degli Apostoli Pietro e Paolo in Roma, 1903, pp. 93-108. In
   Roma Sotterranea Cristiana, nuova serie, tom. i. p. 10, Marucchi writes
   Spero di pubblicare un nuovo lavoro su questo stesso argumento.'

   [542] Supra, p. 249.

   [543] Elém. d'Arch. Chrét. ii. 118.

   [544] Osservationi sui cimeteri, 1720, p. 192.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Exodus

   [1]29:42   [2]30:8

   Numbers

   [3]28:6

   Psalms

   [4]54:16   [5]108:8

   Isaiah

   [6]6:9-10   [7]60:17

   Ezekiel

   [8]34:11

   Daniel

   [9]7   [10]7:25   [11]11:3   [12]11:6

   Matthew

   [13]13:14   [14]16:18   [15]20:22   [16]20:23   [17]24:21   [18]24:29

   Mark

   [19]4:12   [20]13:24

   Luke

   [21]1:2   [22]8:10   [23]11:19-20   [24]11:26-27   [25]12
   [26]12:1-18   [27]12:25   [28]24:44-49   [29]24:50-53   [30]24:50-53
   [31]24:52-53

   John

   [32]12:40   [33]13:23-27   [34]13:36   [35]13:36-37   [36]13:36-37
   [37]13:36-37   [38]14:16   [39]14:26   [40]14:26   [41]16:13
   [42]20:3-10   [43]21:15-23   [44]21:18-19   [45]21:18-19
   [46]21:20-24   [47]28:15

   Acts

   [48]1   [49]1:10   [50]2   [51]2:32-36   [52]2:46   [53]3:1   [54]3:1
   [55]3:14-15   [56]3:20   [57]3:21   [58]3:26   [59]4:10   [60]4:13
   [61]4:33   [62]4:36-37   [63]4:37   [64]5:12   [65]5:25   [66]5:30-32
   [67]5:42   [68]5:42   [69]6:8   [70]6:9   [71]6:9   [72]7:54-60
   [73]8:1-3   [74]8:14   [75]9:25-27   [76]9:26-31   [77]9:31
   [78]9:32   [79]11   [80]11   [81]11:1-18   [82]11:19-27   [83]11:26
   [84]12   [85]12:12   [86]13:1   [87]13:8   [88]13:15   [89]15
   [90]15:41   [91]16:6-7   [92]18:1   [93]18:11   [94]18:18   [95]18:19
   [96]18:23   [97]18:24-27   [98]18:24-27   [99]19:10   [100]19:22-24
   [101]19:31   [102]19:33-34   [103]20:19-25   [104]20:28   [105]20:28
   [106]21:4   [107]21:11-14   [108]21:16   [109]21:37-40
   [110]22:22-30   [111]23:5   [112]23:11   [113]23:12-22   [114]24:22
   [115]24:26   [116]25:12   [117]25:19   [118]27:27   [119]28:15
   [120]28:15   [121]28:17-21   [122]28:23   [123]28:29-31   [124]28:30
   [125]28:30-1   [126]28:30-31

   Romans

   [127]1   [128]1:1   [129]1:5   [130]1:8   [131]1:10-12   [132]1:12
   [133]1:13   [134]1:13   [135]1:15-16   [136]2:17   [137]2:17-29
   [138]3:1-2   [139]3:8   [140]4:1   [141]9:1-3   [142]9:3   [143]10:1
   [144]10:14   [145]11:8   [146]11:13-14   [147]11:17-24   [148]12:6-8
   [149]12:8   [150]13:11-13   [151]14:1-23   [152]15   [153]15:14
   [154]15:14-29   [155]15:14-29   [156]15:20   [157]15:20   [158]15:22
   [159]15:23-24   [160]15:24   [161]15:24   [162]15:30-31   [163]16
   [164]16:1-23   [165]16:1-23   [166]16:7   [167]16:14-15   [168]16:16
   [169]16:19   [170]16:22   [171]16:34

   1 Corinthians

   [172]1:12   [173]3:22   [174]5:6   [175]9:5   [176]9:6   [177]9:6
   [178]10:4   [179]11:18-19   [180]12:28   [181]12:28   [182]12:28
   [183]12:29   [184]14   [185]15:51-2   [186]16:17   [187]16:19
   [188]16:19

   2 Corinthians

   [189]1:8   [190]2:4-5   [191]2:13   [192]4:8-11   [193]8:23
   [194]10:12-18   [195]11:9   [196]11:23   [197]11:27-28   [198]12:10
   [199]12:11   [200]12:11-13   [201]12:20-21   [202]12:24   [203]13:1

   Galatians

   [204]1:18   [205]1:18   [206]1:18-21   [207]1:19   [208]2   [209]2
   [210]2:1-10   [211]2:1-10   [212]2:9   [213]2:9   [214]2:11-14
   [215]2:12

   Ephesians

   [216]2:20   [217]3:5   [218]4:11   [219]4:11   [220]4:11
   [221]4:11-12   [222]6:19-20   [223]6:21-22

   Philippians

   [224]1:12-15   [225]1:13-14   [226]1:14-18   [227]1:15-16
   [228]1:19-25   [229]2:11   [230]2:17   [231]2:19-30   [232]2:20
   [233]2:24   [234]3:1-6   [235]3:2-3   [236]3:2-5   [237]4:3
   [238]4:3   [239]4:10-20   [240]4:15

   Colossians

   [241]1:1   [242]1:7   [243]2:1   [244]4:3   [245]4:7-8   [246]4:9
   [247]4:10   [248]4:10   [249]4:10   [250]4:12   [251]4:14   [252]4:18

   1 Thessalonians

   [253]4:16-18   [254]5:12

   2 Thessalonians

   [255]1:7-10   [256]4

   1 Timothy

   [257]1   [258]1:3   [259]3:2   [260]3:2   [261]3:3   [262]3:5-13
   [263]5:17   [264]5:17   [265]6:12   [266]6:12-13

   2 Timothy

   [267]1:15   [268]1:15-18   [269]2:11   [270]4:6-8   [271]4:9
   [272]4:9-11   [273]4:9-22   [274]4:10-13   [275]4:11   [276]4:17
   [277]4:19   [278]4:20   [279]4:21   [280]4:21   [281]4:21

   Titus

   [282]1:5-11   [283]1:7   [284]1:7   [285]1:7   [286]1:9
   [287]2:12-13

   Philemon

   [288]1:8-13   [289]1:10   [290]1:19   [291]1:22   [292]1:22
   [293]1:23   [294]1:23   [295]1:23   [296]1:23

   Hebrews

   [297]1:5   [298]4:14-15   [299]6:2-6   [300]6:4-6   [301]6:4-6
   [302]6:4-8   [303]6:5-6   [304]6:6   [305]6:6   [306]6:6   [307]9:37
   [308]10:15-25   [309]10:23-27   [310]10:26-29   [311]10:32
   [312]10:32   [313]10:32-33   [314]10:32-33   [315]10:39   [316]10:39
   [317]11:9   [318]12   [319]12:1-13   [320]13:3   [321]13:7
   [322]13:7   [323]13:7   [324]13:12-13   [325]13:17   [326]13:17
   [327]13:17   [328]13:23   [329]13:23   [330]13:23   [331]13:24
   [332]13:24

   1 Peter

   [333]1:7   [334]2:11-17   [335]2:12   [336]2:14   [337]2:19-21
   [338]2:25   [339]3:13-17   [340]3:14-18   [341]3:16   [342]3:16
   [343]4:7   [344]4:12   [345]4:12-19   [346]4:13   [347]4:14-16
   [348]4:16   [349]4:16   [350]4:16   [351]4:19   [352]5:1-2
   [353]5:1-6   [354]5:3   [355]5:12   [356]5:13   [357]5:13   [358]5:13

   2 Peter

   [359]1:14   [360]3:10-12

   2 John

   [361]5:1

   3 John

   [362]5:1

   Revelation

   [363]2:3   [364]2:9   [365]2:10   [366]2:13   [367]3:8-11
   [368]6:9-11   [369]6:9-11   [370]6:12-17   [371]6:14   [372]7:13-17
   [373]8:5-9   [374]8:8-9   [375]11:1-2   [376]11:7   [377]11:8
   [378]11:8   [379]12:10-11   [380]12:11   [381]12:11   [382]13:1
   [383]13:1   [384]13:3   [385]13:7-8   [386]13:14   [387]13:15
   [388]13:18   [389]14:8   [390]14:8   [391]14:9-13   [392]14:17-20
   [393]16:3   [394]16:5-7   [395]16:6   [396]16:14-16   [397]16:18
   [398]16:20   [399]16:21   [400]17:3-7   [401]17:6   [402]17:7-8
   [403]17:8   [404]17:9   [405]17:9-12   [406]17:12-13   [407]17:16
   [408]17:18   [409]17:18   [410]18:1-21   [411]18:2   [412]18:10
   [413]18:20   [414]18:24   [415]18:24   [416]19:20   [417]20:4
   [418]20:4   [419]20:8   [420]22:10-12   [421]22:20
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * Elaias: [422]1
     * AThANATO: [423]1
     * Atomon: [424]1
     * Atomos: [425]1
     * Augousteseon: [426]1
     * Etoikos: [427]1
     * Etoimos: [428]1
     * KAI TITIANE: [429]1
     * Kampesion: [430]1
     * Peristephanon: [431]1
     * Periodoi: [432]1
     * Periodoi Barnaba: [433]1
     * Periodoi Petror: [434]1
     * Periodoi Petrou: [435]1
     * Porkiou de Phestou diadochou Pheliki pemphthentos hupo Neronos, hoi
       proteuontes ton kata ten Kaisareian katoikounton Ioudaion eis ten
       Rhomen anabainousi Phelikos kategorou_tes; kai pantos an ededokei
       timorian ton eis Ioudaious adikematon, ei me polla auton ho Neron
       to adelpho Pallanti parakalesanti sunechorese, malista de tote dia
       times echon ekeinoi: [436]1
     * Poimaine ta probata mou--boske ta probatia mou: [437]1
     * Presbuterous oun en humin parakalo ho sumpresbuteros . . .
       poimanate to en humin poimnion tou Theou : [438]1
     * Pepeismai de, adelphoi mou, kai autos ego peri humon, hoti kai
       autoi mestoi este agathosunes, pepleromenoi pases gnoseos,
       dunamenoi kai allelous nouthetein.: [439]1
     * Sibouresion: [440]1
     * Simona: [441]1
     * Su ei Petros kai epi taute te petra oikodomeso mou ten ekklesian:
       [442]1
     * TERTIADELPhE EUPsUChIOUDI: [443]1
     * Tigellinos gar, huph' ho to xiphos en tou Neronos, apelaunen auton
       tes Rhomes . . . apangelthentos de to Tigellino ton logon touton
       pempei tous axontas auton es to dikasterion hos apologesaito me
       apebein es Nerona: [444]1
     * Timotheo gnesio tekno en pistei.: [445]1
     * PhE: [446]1
     * PhL.: [447]1
     * Pheuxetai ek Babulonos: [448]1
     * Pheuxetai ek Babulonos anax phoberos kai anaides.: [449]1
     * Phlauian Dometillan . . . ex adelphes gegonuian Phlauiou Klementos,
       henos ton tenikade epi Rhomes hupaton: [450]1
     * banausos : [451]1
     * gnesie sunzuge: [452]1
     * grapseis oun duo biblaridia kai pempseis hen Klementi kai hen
       Grapte. pempsei oun Klemes eis tas exo poleis, ekeino gar
       epitetraptai; Grapte de nouthetese i tas cheras kai tous
       horphanous; su de anagnose eis tauten ten polen meta ton
       presbuteron ton proisamenon tos ekklesias: [453]1
     * gegraptai: [454]1
     * dei gar ton episkoton anenkleton einai, hos Theou oikonomon.:
       [455]1
     * dia Silouanou humin tou pistou adelphou, hos logizomai, di oligon
       egrapsa.: [456]1
     * dia Silouanou humin egrapsa: [457]1
     * dia zelon kai phthonon: [458]1
     * dia zelos kai phthonon: [459]1
     * dia zelos kai erin: [460]1
     * dia puros dokimazomenou: [461]1
     * dia tas aiphnidious kai epallelous genomenas hemin sumphoras kai
       teriptoseis, adelphoi, bradion nomizomen epistophen pepoiesthai
       peri ton epizetoumenon par humin pragmaton.: [462]1
     * dia phthonon kai erin: [463]1
     * diegesis: [464]1
     * dio kai enekoptomen ta polla tou elthein pros humas. ta polla:
       [465]1
     * doxes tinos: [466]1
     * epinomen: [467]1
     * etoimos: [468]1
     * ei oneidizesthe en onomati Christou, makarioi. . . . ei de hos
       Christianos, me aischunestho, doxazeto de ton Theon en to merei
       touto.: [469]1
     * eis massan kaloumenen Akkouai Salbias plesi tou dendrou tou
       strobilou.: [470]1
     * eucharisteito: [471]1
     * heuromen ploion Aiguption kai anelthontes eis auto katechthemen en
       Alexandreia kakei emeina ego didaskon tous echomenous adelphous
       . . . . .: [472]1
     * zetemata tina peri tes idias deisidaimonias.: [473]1
     * euchomen gar anathema einai autos ego apo tou christou huper ton
       adelphon mou, ton sungenon mou kata sarka, hoitines eisin
       Israelitai: [474]1
     * th i a s o i : [475]1
     * threptous: [476]1
     * threttos: [477]1
     * kath' holes tes Ioudaias kai Galileias kai Samareias: [478]1
     * kakourgos: [479]1
     * kalos oun eipen he graphe he legousa; Proton panton p isteuson:
       [480]1
     * katakurieuontes: [481]1
     * katasteso tous episkopous auton en dikaiosune kai tous diakonous
       auton en pistei.: [482]1
     * katepseusanto hemon Thuesteia deipna kai Oidipedeious mixeis:
       [483]1
     * kata sarka: [484]1 [485]2
     * kata: [486]1
     * kai (t)on dodeka (heis) tais chersin autou p(arad)othesetai: [487]1
     * kai autos ego: [488]1
     * kai marturesasm epi ton hegoumenon houtos apellage tou kosmou:
       [489]1
     * kai anephereto eis ton ouranon: [490]1
     * kai en to Poimeni: [491]1
     * kletos apostolos, aphorismenos eis euangelion theou: [492]1
     * kleron: [493]1
     * kan to auto etei allous te pollous kai ton Phlaouion Klementa
       hupateuonta, kaiper anepsion onta kai genaika kai auten sungene
       heautou Phlaouian Domitillan echonta, katesphaxen ho Dometianos;
       epenechthe de amphoin enklema atheotetos, huph' hes kai alloi es ta
       ton Ioudaion ethe exokellontes polloi katedikasthesan, kai hoi men
       apethanon, hoi de ton goun ousion esterethesan; he de Domitilla
       huperoristhe monon es Pandaterian.: [494]1
     * kerugma: [495]1
     * leitourgia : [496]1
     * logos parakleseos: [497]1 [498]2
     * marturounton auton ekeinon ton kat' upsin Ioannen heorakoton.
       . . .: [499]1
     * marturesas: [500]1
     * marturesas epi ton hegoumenon: [501]1
     * megale, thaumasia, anomologemene para pasin: [502]1
     * memarturemenous pollois chronois hupo panton: [503]1
     * med' hos katakurieuontes ton kleron: [504]1
     * mastigas, phulakas, thlipseis megalas, staurous, theria.: [505]1
     * men oun: [506]1
     * neosti: [507]1
     * nun oun himin lego tois proegoumenois tes ekklesias k9ai tois
       protokathedritais; me ginesthe homoioi tois pharmakois . . .
       blepete oun, tekna, mepote hautai hai dichostasiai humon
       aposteresousin ten zoen humon . . . : [508]1
     * xenia: [509]1
     * hoi proegoumenoi: [510]1
     * hoi proistamenoi: [511]1
     * hoi ap' arches autoptai: [512]1
     * hoi hegoumenoi: [513]1
     * ou thelo de humus agnoein, adelphoi, hoti pollakis proethemen
       elthein pros humas kai ekoluthen achri tou deuro.: [514]1
     * ou men eis makron auto tauta prouchorei. Para podas goun epi tes
       autes Klaudiou basileias, he panagathos kai philanthropotate ton
       holon pronoia ton karteron kai megan ton apostolon, ton aretes
       heneka ton loipon hapanton proegoron, Petron, epi ten Rhomen hos
       epi telikouton lumeona biou cheiragogei, hos hoia tis gennaios
       Theou strategos tois theiois hoplois phraxamenos, ten polutimeton
       emporian tou noetou photos ex anatolon tois kata dusin ekomizen,
       phos auto kai logon psuchon soterion, to kerugma tes ton ouranon
       basileias euangelizomenos: [515]1
     * oudena gar echo isopsuchon, hostis gnesios ta peri humon
       merimnesei: [516]1
     * ouk eg?pesan ten psuchen auton achri thanatou.: [517]1
     * ouch hos Petros kai Paulos diatassomai humin; ekeinoi apostoloi,
       ego katakritos.: [518]1
     * ohus idon ho Paulos eucharistesas to theo elaben tharsos; : [519]1
     * houto men de tote he ton Rhomaion arche duo autokratorsin hama
       edouleuse, Neroni kai Helio; oude echo eipein hopoteros auton
       cheiron en: [520]1
     * houtoi hoi apostoloi kai hoi didaskaloi hoi keruxantes to onoma tou
       huiou tou theou, koimethentes en dunamei kai pistei tou huiou tou
       theou ekeruxan kai tois prokekoimemenois kai autoi edokan autois
       ten sphragida tou kerugmatos.: [521]1
     * houtoi eisin hoi apostoloi kai episkopoi kai didaskaloi kai
       diakonoi hoi poreuthentes kata ten semnoteta tou theou kai
       episkopesantes kai didaxantes kai diakonesantes hagnos kai semnos
       tois eklektois tou theou, hoi men kekoimemenoi, hoi de eti ontes.:
       [522]1
     * paraklesesi de pantoiais Markou, hou to Euangelion pheretai,
       akolouthon onta Petrou liparesai, hos an kai dia graphes hupomnema
       tes dia logou paradotheises autois kataleipsoi didaskalias, me
       proteron te aneinai, e katergasasthai ton andra, kai taute aitious
       genesthai tes tou legomenou kata Markon euangeliou graphes. Gnonta
       de to prachthen phasi ton apostolon, apokalupsantos auto tou
       pneumatos, hesthenai te ton andron prothumia, kurosai te ten
       graphen eis enteuxin tais ekklesiais.: [523]1
     * parakalei pantas.: [524]1
     * parakletos: [525]1
     * pais Theou: [526]1
     * par hois kai xenizomai: [527]1
     * par hois kai psenizomaa: [528]1
     * poimainein: [529]1
     * pollakis: [530]1
     * pollen athlesin hupemeinate pathematon . . . oneidismois te kai
       thlipsesi theatrizomenoi; . . . ten harpagen ton huparchonton humon
       meta charas prosedexasthe.: [531]1
     * poimenes kai episkopoi: [532]1
     * presbuteroi: [533]1
     * proeballonto allous Simona men kai Menandron apo Samareias ohi kai
       magikas dunameis poiesantes pollous exepatesan kai eti apatomenous
       echousi. kai gar par humin, hos proephemen, en te basilidi Rhome
       epi Klaudiou Kaisaros genomenos ho Simon kai ten hieran sunkleton
       kai ton demon Rhomaion eis posouto kateplexato hos theos
       nomisthenai, kai andrianti, hos tous allous par humin timomenous
       theous, timethenai.: [534]1
     * proegoumenoi: [535]1
     * proteron: [536]1
     * proton: [537]1
     * pantes de diesparesan kata tas choras tes Ioudaias kai Samareias
       plen ton apostolon: [538]1
     * paredroi: [539]1
     * sebomeeoi: [540]1
     * sebomenoi: [541]1
     * sebomenoi ton Theon: [542]1
     * semainei he graphe: [543]1
     * speira Sebaste: [544]1
     * sungeneis: [545]1
     * sullalesas meta tou sumbouliou: [546]1
     * sunachthenai en te ekklesia.: [547]1
     * sun kai: [548]1
     * sunergos: [549]1
     * tauta kai humeis dia tes tosautes nouthesias ten apo Petrou kai
       Paulou phuteian genetheisan Rhomaion te kai Korinthion
       sunekerasate.: [550]1
     * tauta kai humeis dia tes tosautes nouthesias ten apo Petrou kai
       Paulou phuteian genetheisan Rhomaion tekai Korinthion sunekerasate.
       Kai gar ampho kai eis ten hemeteran Korinthon phuteusantes hemas,
       homoios edidaxan; homoios de kai eis ten Italian homose didaxantes,
       emarturesan kata ton auton kairon: [551]1
     * tines de auton eis telos apestesan; houtoi oun metanoian ouk
       echousin; dia gar tas pragmateias auton eblasphemesan ton Kurion
       kai apernesanto.: [552]1
     * tounoma autou di ekeinou an errethe, tou kai ten apokalupsin
       heorakotos; oude gar pro pollou chronou heorathe, alla schedon epi
       tes hemeteras geneas, pros to teleites Dometianou arches: [553]1
     * tous de apestalmenous aph' hemon Klaudion Ephebon kai Oualerion
       Bitona sun kai Phortounato: [554]1
     * tous engista genomenous athletas: [555]1
     * tous te Ioudaious, pleonasantas authis chalepos an aneu taraches
       hupo tou ochlou sphon tes poleos eirchthenai, ouk exelase men, to
       de de patrio nomo bio chromenous, ekeleuse me sunathroizesthai. tas
       te hetaireias epanachtheisas hupo tou Gaiou dieluse.: [556]1
     * toutois tois andrasin hosios politeusamenois sunethroisthe polu
       plethos eklekton, hoitines pollakis aikiais kai basanois dia zelos
       pathontes hupodeigma kalliston egenonto en hemin. Dia zelos
       gunaikes Danaides kai Dirkai aikismata deina kai anosia pathousai
       epi ton tes pisteos dromon katentesan: [557]1
     * touto de estin sunparaklethenai en humin dia tes en allelois
       pisteos humon te kai emou.: [558]1
     * ten phuteian en phuteusousin hoi dodeka apostoloi: [559]1
     * ten phuteian hen phuteusousin hoi apostoloi tou agapetou dioxei kai
       ton dodeka heis tais chersin autou paradothesetai: [560]1
     * ten apo Petrou kai Paulou phuteian genetheisan Rhomaion te kai
       Korinthion: [561]1
     * teresis meta aneseos.: [562]1
     * tis de hograpsas ten epistolen to men alethes theos oiden: [563]1
     * to misthoma: [564]1
     * ton Theon: [565]1
     * ton de Paulon eiasen en teresei dia Drusillan: [566]1
     * tes geneas hemon: [567]1
     * te gunaiki Poppaia, theosebes gar en, huper ton Ioudaion deetheise
       charizomenos, he tois men deka prosetaxen apienai.: [568]1
     * te en humin purosei pros peirasmon humin ginomene.: [569]1
     * ton oun metanoounton euthus [eutheos] dokeis tas hamartias
       aphiesthai: [570]1
     * huios parakleseos: [571]1 [572]2
     * huios: [573]1
     * phasi ton apostolon: [574]1
     * pheuxetai ek Babulonos anax phoberos kai anaides.: [575]1
     * philotimoumenon: [576]1
     * phoboumenoi: [577]1
     * abanausos : [578]1
     * akribesteron eidos ta peri tes hodou.: [579]1
     * all' ei paschoite dea dikaiosunen, makarioi. ton de phobon auton me
       phobethete, mede tarachthete; . . . etoimoi de aei pros apologian
       panti to aitounti humas: [580]1
     * all' hina ton archaion hupodeigmaton pausometha, elthomen epi tous
       engista genomenous athletas; labomen tes geneas hemon ta aennaia
       hupodeigmata.: [581]1
     * aneskolopisthe kata kephales: [582]1
     * apostoloi ekklesion: [583]1
     * archaian: [584]1 [585]2
     * aspasasthe Andronikon kai Iounian tous sungeneis mou kai
       sunaichmalotous mou, hoitines eisin episemoi en tois apostolois,
       ohi kai pro emou gegonan en Christo: [586]1
     * anax phoberos kai anaides: [587]1
     * ara ge kai: [588]1
     * archon: [589]1
     * Agrippesion: [590]1
     * Adunaton gar tous hapax photisthentas . . . kai parapesontas, palin
       anakainizein eis metanoian . . . to telos eis kausin. : [591]1
     * Aibreon: [592]1
     * All' hina ton archaion hupodeigmaton pausometha elthomen epi tous
       engista genomenous athletas; labomen tes geneas hemon ta gennaia
       hupodeigmata . . : [593]1
     * Alupis Tiberieus kai hoi autou, Ioustos kai Alupis, Ebr?oi, meta
       tou patros auton hode kinte: [594]1
     * Aspasasthe Priskan kai Akulan tous sunergous mou en Christo Iesou,
       hoitines huper tes psuches mou ton heauton trachelon hupethekan:
       [595]1
     * egeneto de Petron dierchomenon dia panton: [596]1
     * ek tou protou orous tou melanos hoi pisteusantes toioutoi eisin;
       apostatai kai blasphemoi eis ton Kurion, kai prodotai ton doulon
       tou theou. toutois de metanoia ouk esti, thanatos de esti. : [597]1
     * elthontes de epi ton aigialon : [598]1
     * elpizon hoti chremata dothesetai hupo tou Paulou; dio kai
       puknoteron auton metapempomenos homilei auto.: [599]1
     * en phulakais perissoteros.: [600]1
     * en arche: [601]1
     * en arche tou euangeliou: [602]1
     * en arche tou euangeliou : [603]1
     * endelechismon : [604]1
     * ep9iskopountes: [605]1
     * epipothian.: [606]1
     * episkopous: [607]1
     * epi to terma tes duseos elthon: [608]1
     * epi to terma tes duseos.: [609]1
     * episkopos: [610]1
     * heorathe: [611]1
     * e r a n o i : [612]1
     * epesan: [613]1
     * epinon gar ek pneumatikes akolouthouses petras; he de petra en ho
       Christos: [614]1
     * echontes zelon tina en allelois peri proteion kai peri doxes tinos:
       [615]1
     * Elumas: [616]1
     * Etoimas: [617]1
     * he graphe legei: [618]1
     * he gar humon hupakoe eis pantas aphiketo: [619]1
     * he xenia: [620]1
     * he pistis humon: [621]1
     * he sphragis to hudor estin: [622]1
     * he ekklesia tou Theou he paroikousa Rhomen te ekklesia tou Theou te
       paroikouse Korinthon: [623]1
     * hegemosin, hos dhi autou [toi basileos pempomenois eis ekdikesin
       kakopoion: [624]1
     * hegoumenoi: [625]1 [626]2
     * hemin dia Klementos grapheisan: [627]1
     * hemin dia Klementos grapheisan.: [628]1
     * hexei d' ek peraton gaies metroktonos aner: [629]1
     * hetis kai prokathetai en topo choriou Rhomaion, axiotheos ,
       axioprepes, axiomakaristos, axiepainos, axiepiteuktos , axiagnos
       kai prokatathemene tes agapes , Christonomos, Patronomos: [630]1
     * Ete gar hos probata planomenoi; all' epestraphete nun epi ton
       poimena kai episkopon ton psuchon humon: [631]1
     * Iounian: [632]1
     * Ionion pelagos, ho nun Adrias.: [633]1
     * ho Kurios eipen: [634]1
     * ho Christos oun apo tou Theou kai hoi apostoloi apo tou Christou
       . . . . exelthon (hoi apostoloi) euangelizomenoi ten basileian tou
       Theou mellein erchesthai: [635]1
     * ho basileus houtos: [636]1
     * ho de Rhomaion basileis, hos he paradosis didaskei, katedikase ton
       Ioannen marturounta dia ton tes aletheias logon eis Patmon ten
       neson; didaskei de ta peri tou marturiou autou Ioannes, me legon
       tis auton katedikase.: [637]1
     * ho threpsas: [638]1
     * ho threpsas me pepraken me Rhode tini eis Rhomen: [639]1
     * ho hekatontarchos paredoke tous desmious to stratopedarche, :
       [640]1
     * homoios de kai ten Italian homose eidaxantes, emarturesan kata ton
       auton kairon.: [641]1
     * hon pantes stugeousi brotoi kai photes aristoi;: [642]1
     * hos pasan gaian kathelei kai panta kratesei: [643]1
     * hosoi ep' exousian achthentes exetasthesan kai ouk hernesanto all'
       epathon prothumos . . . hosoi de deiloi kai en distagmo egenonto
       kai elogisanto en tais kardiais auton, poteron arnesontai e
       homologesouri kai epathon . . . humeis de hoi paschontes heneken
       tou onomatos doxazein opheilete ton theon . . . dokeite ergon mega
       pepoiekenai ean tis humon dia ton theon pathe. : [644]1
     * husteresa ton huperlian apostolon: [645]1
     * huper epignonta ton Petron protreptikos mete kolusai mete
       protrepsasthai: [646]1
     * olese gar pollous kai gasteri cheiras epheken: [647]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * . . . ' pastorem uero: [648]1
     * Hic habitare prius sanctos cognoscere debes : [649]1
     * Pone Tigellinum: taeda lucebis in illa,: [650]1
     * Stemmate nobilium deductum nomen avorum: [651]1
     * Tantae per urbis ambitum : [652]1
     * Ut teres orbis iter flexi rota percucurrit anni : [653]1
     * Veridicus rector, lapsos quia crimina fiere: [654]1
     * Prima Petrum rapuit sententia legibus Neronis, : [655]1
     * Tantae per urbis ambitum : [656]1
     * . . . Linus fuit temporibus Neronis, a consulatu Saturnini et
       Scipionis: [657]1
     * AMPLIATI: [658]1
     * Ab Appii Foro hora quarta: dederam aliam paullo ante Tribus
       Tabernis.: [659]1
     * Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam propter potiorem principalitatem necesse est
       omnem convenire ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt undique fideles,
       in qua semper ab his, qui sunt undique, conservata est ea, quae est
       ab apostolis traditio.: [660]1
     * Ad locum qui vocatur Naumachiae iuxta obeliscum Neronis in montem.:
       [661]1
     * Afflicti suppliciis Christiani, genus hominum superstitionis novae
       et maleficae: [662]1
     * Afflicti suppliciis christiani, genus hominum superstitionis novae
       et maleficae.: [663]1
     * Antonius Felix per omnem saevitiam et libidinem ius regium servili
       ingenio exercuit: [664]1
     * Apostolos: [665]1
     * Apud palatium neronianum iuxta obeliscum inter duas metas.: [666]1
     * Atque ubi dicendam ad causam introissent . . . pro crimine accipi
       cum super Neronis ac Tigellini saevas percontationes, Faenius
       quoque Rufus violenter urgeret.: [667]1
     * Auxit hanc molem facinorum eius temeritas impietatis in Deum, nam
       primus Romae Christianos suppliciis et mortibus affecit ac per
       omnes provincias pari persecutione excruciari imperavit ipsumque
       nomen exstirpare conatus beatissimos Christi apostolos Petrum
       cruse, Paulum gladio occidit. . . . Mox acervatim miseram civitatem
       obortae undique oppressere clades, nam subsequente autumno tanta
       Urbi pestilentia incubuit, ut triginta milia funera in rationem
       Libitinae venirent.: [668]1
     * Castra Peregrinorum: [669]1
     * Clemens Alex. igitur integro Pastore usus de divinis eius
       revelationibus ne dubitavit quidem neque Hermam apostolorum
       temporibus posteriorem existimasse potest.: [670]1
     * Coemeterium ad Nymphas Beati Petri ubi baptizaverat: [671]1
     * Cohors militum Italicorum voluntaria, quae est in Syria.: [672]1
     * Colitur S. Novatus: [673]1
     * Collegia funeratica: [674]1
     * Coniuncti: [675]1
     * Consul suffectus: [676]1
     * Contemptissimae inertiae.: [677]1
     * Cum mihi Domitianus Augustus sororis suae nepotum delegavit curam.:
       [678]1
     * Cuncta malefacta sibi impune ratus tanta potentia subnixo.: [679]1
     * Cymiterium Ostrianum, ubi Petrits apostolus baptizavit: [680]1
     * Dicit ei Simon Petrus: Domine, quo vadis? Respondit Iesus: Quo ego
       vado, non potes me mode sequi: sequeris autem postea. Dicit ei
       Petrus: Quare non possum te sequi modo? animam meam pro te ponam.:
       [681]1
     * Dominus conservator ecclesiae Pudentianae.: [682]1
     * Domus Aurea: [683]1
     * Dum essem puer et liberalibus studiis erudirer, solebam cum
       caeteris eiusdem aetatis et propositi, diebus dominicis sepulchra
       Apostolorum et martyrum circuire, crebroque cryptas ingredi, quae
       in terrarum profunda defossae, ex utraque parte ingredientium per
       parietes habent corpora sepultorum, et ita obscura sunt omnia, ut
       propemodum illud propheticum compleatur: Descendant ad infernum
       viventes: [684]1
     * Duraveruntque, quoniam et de longissimo aevo arborum diximus, ad
       Neronis principis incendia quibus cremavit Urbem, annis CLXXX . . .
       postea cultu virides iuvenesque ni Princeps ille accelerasset etiam
       arborum mortem: [685]1
     * Ergo abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos et quaesitissimis poenis
       adfecit, quos per flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat:
       [686]1
     * Et fecit constitutum in ecclesia et patenas vitreas ante sacerdotes
       in ecclesia, et ministros supportantes, donec episcopus missas
       celebraret, ante se sacerdotes adstantes, sic missae celebrarentur:
       [687]1
     * Et iuxta eandem viam (Appiam) ecclesia est S. Sebastiani martyris,
       ubi ipse dormit, et ibi aunt sepulchra Apostolorum Petri et Pauli;
       in quibus xl annos requiescebant (De locis S.S. Martyrum'); Postea
       pervenies via Appia ad S. Sebastianum martyrem, cuius corpus iacet
       in inferiori loco, et ibi sunt sepulchra Apostolorum Petri et Pauli
       in quibus xl annos requiescebant: [688]1
     * Fasti Consulares: [689]1 [690]2
     * Fatebantur: [691]1
     * Fertur Titus adhibito consilio prius deliberasse . . . at contra
       alii et Titus ipse evertendum templum in primis censebant quo
       plenius Iudaeorum et Christianorum religio tolleretur; quippe has
       religiones, licet contrarias sibi, iisdem auctoribus profectas:
       Christianos ex Iudaeis extitisse: radice sublata, stirpem facile
       perituram.: [692]1
     * Flagitia cohaerentia nomini: [693]1
     * Flaviam Domitillam, filiam sororis Clementis consulis.: [694]1
     * Flavium Sabinum inermem neque fugam coeptantem circumsistunt:
       [695]1 [696]2
     * Hic [Lucius Annaeus Seneca] ante biennium quam Petrus et Paulus
       martyrio coronarentur, a Nerone interfectus est: [697]1
     * Hic [Petrus] ordinavit duos episcopos, Linum et Cletum, qui
       praesentaliter omne ministerium sacerdotale in urbe Roma populo vel
       supervenientium exhiberent; beatus autem Petrus ad orationem et
       praedicationem, populum erudiens, vacabat. . . . Hic beatum
       Clementem episcopum conservavit, eique cathedram vel ecclesiam
       omnem disponendam commisit.: [698]1
     * Hic [Pius] ex rogatu beate Praxedis dedicavit aecclesiam thermas
       Novati in vico Patricii, in honore Sororis suae sanctae
       Potentianae, ubi et multa dona obtulit; ubi saepius sacrificium
       Domino offerens ministrabat: [699]1
     * Hic ex rogatu beatae Praxedis dedicavit ecclesiam thermas Novati,
       in vico Patricii, in honore sororis suae sanctae Potentianae, ubi
       et multa dona obtulit; ubi saepius sacrificium domino offerens
       ministrabat. Immo et fontem baptismi construi fecit.: [700]1
     * Hic fecit basilicas duas: una beato Laurentio iuxta theatrum . . .
       et in Catacumbas ubi iacuerunt corpora sanctorum apostolorum Petri
       et Pauli, in quo loco platomam ipsam, ubi iacuerunt corpora sancta,
       versibus exornavit.: [701]1
     * Hic memoriam Beati Petri construxit et composuit.: [702]1
     * Hic requiescit in pace Hilarus Lector tituli Pudentis: [703]1
     * III Kal. iul. Romae, natale sanctorum Petri et Pauli: Petri in
       Vaticano, via Aurelia; Pauli vero in via Ostensi; utriusque in
       Catacumbas; passi sub Nerone, Basso et Tusco Consulibus.: [704]1
     * III. Kal. Iul. Petri in Catacumbas et Pauli Ostense--Tusco et Basso
       cons.: [705]1
     * III. Kal. Iul. Romae natale apostolorum sanctorum Petri et
       Pauli--Petri in Vaticano via Aurelia Pauli vero in Via Ostensi, :
       [706]1
     * III. Kal. iul. Petri in Catacumbas et Pauli Ostense Basso et Tusco
       Consulibus.: [707]1
     * III. Kl. Iulii Passio beatorum Petri et Pauli a Marcello discipulo
       Petri edita quique idem interfuit passioni.: [708]1
     * Igitur primo correpti qui fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum
       multitudo ingens. . . .: [709]1
     * Igitur primum correpti qui fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum
       multitudo ingens haud proinde in crimine incendii quam odio humani
       generis coniuncti sunt. Et pereuntibus addita ludibria, ut ferarum
       tergis contecti laniatu canum interirent, aut crucibus adfixi aut
       flammandi, atque, ubi defecisset dies, in usum nocturni luminis
       urerentur. Hortos suos ei spectaculo Nero obtulerat et circense
       ludicrum edebat, habitu aurigae permixtus plebi vel curriculo
       insistens. Unde quamquam adversus sontes et novissima exampla
       meritos miseratio oriebatur, tamquam non utilitate publica sed in
       saevitiam unius absumerentur: [710]1
     * In munere Neronis arserunt vivi de quibus ille iusserat cereos
       fieri, qui lucerent spectatoribus. . . . Maleficos homines taeda,
       papyro, cera super vestiebat, sicque ad ignem admoveri iubebat ut
       arderent.: [711]1
     * In septimo miliario eiusdem viae [Nomentanae] s. papa Alexander cum
       Eventio et Theodulo pausant: [712]1
     * Indicio eorum: [713]1
     * Ineunt deinde consulatum Silius Nerva et Atticus Vestinus, coepta
       simul et aucta coniuratione, in quam certatim nomina dederant
       senatores eques miles, feminae etiam, cum odio Neronis tum favore
       in C. Pisonem: [714]1
     * Ipsa rettuli verba: [715]1
     * Ipsum nomen, si flagitiis careat, an flagitia cohaerentia nomini
       puniantur: [716]1
     * Ista quam felix ecclesia . . . ubi Petrus passioni dominicae
       adaequatur: [717]1
     * Iudaeorum iuventutes per speciem sacramenti in provincias gravioris
       caeli distribuit, reliquos gentis eiusdem vel similia sectantes
       urbe summovit, sub poena perpetuae servitutis nisi obtemperassent.:
       [718]1
     * Iudaeos impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit.:
       [719]1
     * Jam pridem Syrus in Tiberim defluxit Orontes.: [720]1
     * Laterculum: [721]1
     * Laureolum Schol. In ipso mimo Laureolo figitur crux unde vera cruce
       dignus est Lentulus, qui tanto detestabilior est quanto melius
       gestum imitatus est scenicum. . . . Hic Lentulus nobilis fuit et
       suscepit servi personam in agendo mimo.: [722]1
     * Linus: [723]1
     * Magi estis quia novum nescio quod genus religionis inducitis.:
       [724]1
     * Marcus, Petri sectator, praedicante Petro evangelium palam Romae
       coram quibusdam Caesareanis equitibus et multa Christi testimonia
       proferente, petitus ab eis, ut possent quae dicebantur memoriae
       commendare, scripsit ex his, quae a Petro dicta sunt, evangelium
       quod secundum Marcum vocitatur.: [725]1
     * Mundus ipse concutitur . . . consternatio omnium: [726]1
     * Naumachia: [727]1
     * Neque enim in universum aliquid quod quasi certam formam: [728]1
     * Nero subdidit reos et quaesitissimis poenis adfecit, quos per
       flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat . . . igitur primum
       correpti qui fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum multitudo ingens.
       . . .: [729]1
     * Nobilissimos e senatu, invidiae sirnul et praedae causa . . .
       interfecit.: [730]1
     * Non possum ferre, Quirites, Graecam urbem: [731]1
     * Non regibus haec adulatio, non Caesaribus honor.: [732]1
     * Numquid ergo,' ait, protinus putas aboleri delicta eorum, qui agunt
       poenitentiam?: [733]1
     * P. Ælius Chrestus et Cornelia Paula hoc scalare adplicitum huic
       sepulchro quod emerunt a fisco agente Agathonico proc [-uratore]
       Augustorum nostrorum quod habet scriptura infra scripta. Gentiano
       et Basso cons. vii Kal. April.: [734]1
     * Paulus Apostolus . . . quarto decimo anno Neronis eodem die quo
       Petrus, Romae pro Christo capite truncatur . . . anno post
       passionem Domini XXXVII: [735]1
     * Petrus: [736]1
     * Petrus Apostolus . . . cum primum Antiochenam Ecclesiam fundasset,
       Romam proficiscitur, ubi Evangelium praedicans xxv annis eiusdem
       urbis Episcopus perseverat. Post Petrum primus Romanam ecclesiam
       tenuit Linus annis xi.: [737]1
     * Petrus in parte occidentali civitatis iuxta viam Corneliam ad
       milliarium primum in corpore quiescit.: [738]1
     * Pius, natione Italus ex patre Rufino, frater Pastoris, de civitate
       Aquileia, sedit ann. xviii, mens. iiii, dies iii. Fuit temporibus
       Antonii Pii a consulatu Clari et Severi. Sub huius episcopatu
       frater ipsius Hermis librum scripsit in quo mandatum continetur
       quod praecepit angelus Domini cum venit ad eum in habitu pastoris
       et praecepit ei ut sanctum Paschae die dominica celebraretur.:
       [739]1
     * Pomponia Graecina, insignis femina, Plautio qui ovans se de
       Britanniis rettulit nupta ac superstitionis externae rea,
       mariti·iudicio permissa; isque prisco instituto, propinquis coram,
       de capite famaque coniugis cognovit et insontem nuntiavit. Longa
       huic Pomponiae aetas et continua tristis fuit; nam post Iuliam
       Drusi filiam dolo Messalinae interfectam per quadraginta annos non
       cultu nisi lugubri, non animo nisi maesto egit; idque illi
       imperitante Claudio impune, mox ad gloriam vertit.: [740]1
     * Post ascensum eius beatissimus Petrus episcopatum suscepit: [741]1
     * Praeter caeteros Iudaicus fiscus acerbissime actus est; ad quem
       deferebantur qui vel improfessi Iudaicam viverent vitam, vel,
       dissimulata origine, imposita genti tributa non pependissent.:
       [742]1
     * Presbyter Pastor titulum: [743]1
     * Princeps Peregrinorum: [744]1
     * Principe Augusta nomen hoc ortum est, Tiberio disciplina eius
       inluxit, sub Nerone damnatio invaluit. . . . Et tamen permansit
       erasis omnibus hoc solum "institutum Neronianum" iustum denique ut
       dissimile sui auctoris.: [745]1
     * Profectione Pauli ab urbe ad Spania proficiscentis.: [746]1
     * Propositus est libellus sine auctore, multorum nomina continens.
       Qui negabant esse Christianos. . . . Alii ab indice nominati, esse
       se Christianos dixerunt.: [747]1
     * Qui sacra impia nocturnave ut quem obtruncarent, defigerent,
       obligarent, fecerint faciendave curaverint, aut crucibus
       suffiguntur aut bestiis obiiciuntur. . . . Magicae artis conscios
       summo supplicio adfici placuit, id est bestiis obiici aut crucibus
       suffigi; ipsi autem magi vivi exuruntur.: [748]1
     * Quod assignata oratione assidendi mos est quibusdam, non perspicio
       rationem, nisi quod pueri volunt. Quid enim, si Hermas: [749]1
     * Quod et placuit Sancto Pio Episcopo; thermasque Novati dedicavit
       ecclesiam sub nomine beatae Virginis [Potentianae in vico Patricio.
       Dedicavit autem et aliam sub nomine sanctae Virginis] Praxedis
       infra urbem Romam, in vico qui appellatur Lateranus.: [750]1
     * Relegatio: [751]1
     * Romanus secretis criminationibus incusaverat Senecam ut C. Pisonis
       socium. . . . Unde Pisoni timor, et orta insidiarum in Neronem
       magna moles sed inprospera.: [752]1
     * Salaria Nova: [753]1
     * Scribit Bruttius . . . Flaviam Domitillam Flavii Clementis consulis
       ex sorore neptem in insulam Pontianam relegatam, quia se
       Christianam esse testata est.: [754]1
     * Scribit Bruttius plurimos Christianorum sub Domiciano fecisse
       martyrium, inter quos et Flaviam Domitillam Flavii Clementis
       consulis ex sorore neptem in insulam Pontianam relegatam quia se
       Christianam esse testata sit.: [755]1
     * Sed exponenda huius nominis [Christi] ratio est propter ignorantium
       errorem, qui eum immutata litera Chrestum solent dicere.: [756]1
     * Sed profectione Pauli ab urbe ad Spaniam proficiscentis.: [757]1
     * Sed quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali volumine omnium
       Ecclesiarum numerare successiones, maximae et antiquissimae et
       omnibus cognitae, a gloriosissimis duobus apostolis Petro et Paulo
       Romae fundatae et constitutae Ecclesiae: [758]1
     * Sed res utraque, Iosephi et Clementis, longe dissimilis est.
       Iosephus, sacros populi sui ritus describens, per figuram,
       historicis non inusitatam, praesenti, quod dicimus, historico
       utitur. Clemens, autem, ut Corinthos ad ordinem servandum adducat,
       lectoribus ordinem Iudaici cultus ante oculos ponit. Quodsi autem
       templum iam fuisset destructum, tota S. Patris argumentatio fuisset
       infirma, ipsaque adversarios invitasset, ut dicerent: En, eversione
       templi Hierosolymitani Deus ipse testatus est, talem ordinem sibi
       non esse exoptatum.: [759]1
     * Sed ut cum perperam Chrestianos pronuntiatur a vobis, nam nec
       nominis certa est notitia penes vos: [760]1
     * Sedes ubi sedit Sc: [761]1
     * Sepultus est in Vaticano iuxta viam triumphalem totius orbis
       veneratione celebratur.: [762]1
     * Sibi suisque, libertis libertabusque posterisque eorum: [763]1
     * Simon Petrus . . . Romam pergit, ibique viginti quinque annis
       cathedram sacerdotalem tenuit usque ad ultimum Neronis annum, id
       est, quartum decimum: [764]1
     * Simon Petrus . . . princeps Apostolorum, post episcopatum
       Antiochensis ecclesiae et praedicationem dispersionis eorum qui de
       circumcisione crediderant, in Ponto, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia et
       Bithynia, secundo Claudii anno ad expugnandum Simonem Magum Romam
       pergit, ibique viginti quinque annis cathedram sacerdotalem tenuit,
       usque ad ultimum annum Neronis, id est decimum quartum.: [765]1
     * Sub huius episcopatu frater eius Ermes librum scripsit, in quo
       mandatum continetur, quod ei praecepit angelus, cum venit ad illum
       in habitu pastoris.: [766]1
     * Subdidit reos: [767]1
     * Suffecti: [768]1
     * Suffectus: [769]1
     * Tot facinoribus foedum annum etiam di tempestatibus et morbis
       insignivere, vastata Campania turbine ventorum qui . . .
       pertulitque violentiam ad vicina urbi; in qua omne mortalium genus
       vis pestilentiae depopulabatur. . . .: [770]1
     * Ubi haec a tribuno relata Bunt Poppaea et Tigellino coram, quod
       erat saevienti principi intimum consiliorum. . . .: [771]1
     * Ut autem portam civitatis voluit egredi, vidit sibi Christum
       occurrere. Et adorans eum ait: "Domine, quo vadis?" Respondit ei
       Christus: "Romam venio iterum crucifigi." Et ait ad eum Petrus:
       "Domine, iterum crucifigeris?" Et dixit ad eum dominus: "Etiam,
       iterum crucifigar." Petrus autem dixit: "Domine, revertar et sequar
       te." Et his dictis dominus ascendit in coelum . . . Et [Petrus]
       post haec rediens in se ipsum, intellexit de sua dictum passione.:
       [772]1
     * Valde incongruum ac esse durissimum videretur ut illa ei
       specialiter possessio non serviret in qua palmam sumens martyrii
       capite est truncatus ut viveret, utile iudicavimus eandem massam
       quae Aquas Salvias nuncupatur . . . cum Christi Gratia luminaribus
       deputare.: [773]1
     * Video istic cruces non unius quidem generis, sed aliter ab aliis
       fabricatas; capite quidem conversos in terrain suspendere.: [774]1
     * Virtutes quoque in vitia deflexit; quantum coniectare licet, super
       ingenii naturam inopia rapax, metu saevus.: [775]1
     * Volo tamen ex redundantia alicuius etiam comitis apostolorum
       testimonium superinducere, idoneum confirmandi de proximo iure
       disciplinam magistrorum. Extat enim et Barnabae titulus ad
       Hebraeos, adeo satis auctoritatis viri, utquem Paulus iuxta se
       constituerit in abstinentiae tenore (1 Cor. ix. 6: [776]1
     * ad Caesarem appello.: [777]1
     * ad Catacumbas: [778]1 [779]2
     * addito maiestatis crimine, quod tunc omnium accusationum
       complementum erat: [780]1
     * affiicti suppliciis Christiani, genus hominum superstitionis novae
       ac maleficae: [781]1
     * apologia: [782]1 [783]2
     * apostoli: [784]1
     * arcisolium: [785]1 [786]2
     * area: [787]1
     * argumentum ex silentio: [788]1
     * assessores: [789]1
     * assiduae sterilitates: [790]1
     * atrocia: [791]1
     * auctor, initiator: [792]1
     * basilica beate Priscae: [793]1
     * bassi sub Nerone: [794]1
     * beato Petro apostolo in templum Apollinis.: [795]1
     * bene esse: [796]1
     * billicum confessionis: [797]1
     * brachia patibulo explicuerunt.: [798]1
     * coercitio: [799]1
     * cognitio: [800]1
     * cognitiones: [801]1
     * cognitionibus de Christianis interfui nunquam; ideo nescio quid et
       quatenus aut puniri soleat aut quaeri: [802]1
     * cognomen: [803]1 [804]2 [805]3 [806]4 [807]5 [808]6 [809]7
     * cognomina: [810]1 [811]2 [812]3
     * collegia, sodalitates: [813]1
     * commentarios: [814]1
     * consiliarii: [815]1 [816]2
     * consul suffectus: [817]1
     * continua et vincta agmina: [818]1
     * continua hinc et vincta agmina trahi ac foribus hortorum adiacere.:
       [819]1
     * continua hinc et vincta agmina trahi ac foribus hortorum adiacere.
       Atque ubi dicendam ad causam introissent: [820]1
     * convicti: [821]1
     * cubiculum: [822]1
     * cubitorium: [823]1
     * cuius corpus collegit: [824]1
     * cuius corpus ita recondit in aere et conclusit sicut beati Petri
       . . . et crucem auream super locum beati Pauli apostoli posuit
       pens. lib. cl.: [825]1
     * cuius corpus noctu collegit: [826]1
     * cuius loculum undique aere Cypro conclusit, quod est immobile; ad
       caput, pedes V; ad pedes, pedes V; ad latus dextrum, pedes V; ad
       latus sinistrum, pedes V; subter, pedes V; supra, pedes V; sic
       inclusit corpus beati Petri et recondit.: [827]1
     * cum gloria dormitionem accepit: [828]1
     * cum vero mihi Domitianus Augustus sororis suae nepotum delegaverit
       curam: [829]1
     * custodia militaris: [830]1 [831]2
     * custodia publica,: [832]1
     * de maleficis et mathematicis: [833]1
     * dedicator: [834]1
     * delatores: [835]1
     * denique urbis Romae incendium voluptatis suae spectaculum fecit:
       [836]1
     * deportatio: [837]1
     * depositio: [838]1
     * depositio martyrum: [839]1
     * dies sancti Petri epularum.: [840]1
     * discipulos: [841]1
     * discipulos oriens misit: [842]1
     * domui Vespasiani per adfinitatem innexum et gratissimum Domitiano,
       Praetorianis [Domitianus] praeposuit, patrem eius, sub Caio
       Caesare, egregie functum ea cura, dictitans, laetum militibus idem
       nomen.: [843]1
     * ecclesiae domesticae: [844]1
     * edicta quasi viventis et brevi magno inimicorum malo reversuri.:
       [845]1
     * eodem anno dominus Petrus apostolus ad coronam martyrii properavit
       ad Christum et Plautilla corpus terrenum deseruit.: [846]1
     * eodem die quo Romae Cornelius sed non eodem anno: [847]1
     * eodem tempore Augustus Constantinus fecit basilicam: [848]1
     * eoque, concubia nocte, suos liberos Sabinus, et Domitianum, fratris
       filium in capitolium accivit.: [849]1
     * episcopi: [850]1 [851]2 [852]3 [853]4 [854]5
     * episcopus: [855]1 [856]2 [857]3 [858]4
     * erexit in titulum: [859]1
     * ergo abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos: [860]1
     * esse: [861]1
     * etenim crebro vulgi rumore lacerabatur, tamquam viros claros et
       insontes ob invidiam aut metum extinxisset.: [862]1
     * exitiabilis superstitio: [863]1
     * fecit in titulo beatis Aquile et Priscae coronam ex argento pens.
       lib. VI.: [864]1
     * fenestrella: [865]1
     * flagitia: [866]1
     * frater ipsius: [867]1 [868]2
     * frumentarii: [869]1
     * gens: [870]1 [871]2 [872]3 [873]4
     * haud proinde in crimine incendii quam odio humani generis.: [874]1
     * hic titulos in urbe Romae dividit presbyteris.: [875]1
     * hoc monumentum haeredem non sequitur: [876]1
     * honestiores capite puniantur: [877]1
     * hortos suos ei spectaculo Nero obtulerat: [878]1
     * hostis generis humani: [879]1
     * imperator: [880]1
     * imperio consulari: [881]1
     * in fine vitae alii segnem, multi moderatum et civium sanguinis
       parcum credidere: [882]1
     * in fine vitae alii segnem, multi moderatum et civium sanguinis
       parcum credidere.: [883]1
     * in praedio suo: [884]1 [885]2 [886]3
     * in saevitiam unius: [887]1
     * in templum Apollinis, in Monte Aureo in Vaticanum palatii Neroniani
       iii Kai. Iul.: [888]1
     * ingens multitudo: [889]1 [890]2
     * institutum: [891]1
     * interim in iis, qui ad me tanquam Christiani deferebantur, hunc sum
       secutus modum. Interrogavi ipsos, an essent Christiani; confitentes
       iterum ac tertio interrogavi, supplicium minatus; perseverantes
       duci iussi.: [892]1
     * intra antiquae ecclesiae rudera prope S. Priscam: [893]1
     * invalidus senecta: [894]1
     * isque (Aulus Plautius) prisco instituto propinquis coram de capita
       famaque coniugis cognovit et insontem pronuntiavit.: [895]1
     * iuxta obeliscum inter duas metas: [896]1
     * leges monumentorum: [897]1
     * lex de maiestate: [898]1 [899]2
     * lex monumenti: [900]1
     * literae dimissoriae: [901]1 [902]2 [903]3
     * loculi: [904]1 [905]2
     * locus ad catacumbas: [906]1
     * locus sacer: [907]1
     * locus sacer, locus religiosus: [908]1
     * maiestas: [909]1
     * majestas: [910]1 [911]2
     * maleficae: [912]1
     * maleficus: [913]1
     * memoria: [914]1 [915]2
     * memoriae: [916]1 [917]2
     * mitem virum abhorrere a sanguine et caedibus: [918]1 [919]2
     * molitores novarum rerum.: [920]1
     * molitores rerum novarum: [921]1
     * more Iudaico: [922]1
     * mota prope etiam Parthorum arma falsi Neronis ludibrio.: [923]1
     * multitudinem Iudaeorum flagrantium nonnunquam in concionibus:
       [924]1
     * neptem: [925]1
     * nomen: [926]1
     * nomen ipsum, si flagitiis careat, an flagitia cohaerentia nomini
       puniantur' . . . nihil aliud inveni quam superstitionem pravam et
       immodicam.: [927]1
     * non longe, miliario VII.: [928]1
     * non vero "scripturae" auctoritatem ipsam sed solum argumentum inde
       haustum [Tertullianus] impugnavit.: [929]1
     * nundinum: [930]1
     * palatium Neronianum: [931]1
     * paratus: [932]1
     * passi sub Nerone: [933]1
     * pastor: [934]1
     * pastores: [935]1
     * patris tui fuisse germanum.: [936]1
     * peregrini: [937]1
     * pontifices: [938]1
     * posuit iuxta locum ubi crucifixus est, inter corpora sanctorum
       episcoporum, in templum Apollinis, in monte aureo, in vaticanum
       palatii neroniani.: [939]1
     * praedio suo: [940]1
     * praenomen: [941]1
     * praeterea quod non esset Romae Paulus neque Timotheus neque
       Barnabas, quoniam in Macedoniam missi erant a Paulo.: [942]1
     * primus inter pares: [943]1
     * prope Septizonium sordidis aedibus cubiculo vero perparvo et
       obscuro.: [944]1
     * pudenda: [945]1
     * quae scriptura valde mihi utilis videtur et ut puto divinitus
       inspirata.: [946]1
     * quasi sub umbraculo religionis insignissimae certe licitae.: [947]1
     * quinquennium Neronis: [948]1
     * quod postquam Sallustius Crispus . . . comperit metuens ne reus
       subderetur: [949]1
     * quos vocavit threptous: [950]1
     * quum orassem domi, et consedissem supra lectum, intravit et quidam
       reverenda facie etc.: [951]1
     * refert autem Brettius, multos Christianorum sub Dometiano subiisse
       martyrium; Flavia vero Dometila et Flavus Clementis consulis
       sororis filius in insulam Pontiam fugit quia se Christianum esse
       professus est.: [952]1
     * relatio: [953]1 [954]2 [955]3
     * religio licita: [956]1 [957]2 [958]3 [959]4
     * repente ex tenuissima suspicione tantum non in ipso eius consulatu
       interemit.: [960]1
     * rescissio actorum: [961]1
     * sarcophagi: [962]1
     * sed non ope humana, non largitionibus principis aut deum
       placamentis decedebat infamia, quin iussum incendium crederetur.
       Ergo abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos et quaesitissimis poenis
       adfecit, quos per flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat.
       Auctor nominis eius Christus Tiberio imperitante per procuratorem
       Pontium Pilatum supplicio adfectus erat; repressaque in praesens
       exitiabilis superstitio rursum erumpebat, non modo per Iudaeam,
       originem eius mali, sed per urbem etiam, quo cuncta undique atrocia
       aut pudenda confluunt celebranturque.: [963]1
     * sed tali dedicatore damnationis nostrae etiam gloriamur.: [964]1
     * sella gestatoria: [965]1
     * sepultus est iuxta corpus beati Petri in Vaticanum.: [966]1
     * sepultus est via Aurelia in templum Apollinis, iuxta locum ubi
       crucifixus est, iuxta palatium Neronianum, in Vaticanum, iuxta
       territorium Triumphale.: [967]1
     * sepultus est via Numentana, ubi decollatus est, ab urbe Roma :
       [968]1
     * sequitur clades forte an dolo principis incertum, nam utrumque
       auctores prodidere.: [969]1
     * seriatim: [970]1
     * si fidem commentarii voluerit haereticus, instrumenta Imperii
       loquentur.: [971]1
     * si ob gravitatem caeli interiissent; vile damnum.: [972]1
     * spina: [973]1
     * sub idem tempus inter lacum Fucinum amnemque Lirim perrupto monte,
       quo magnificentia operis a pluribus viseretur etc.: [974]1
     * suffect: [975]1
     * suffecti: [976]1
     * super corpus Petri, supra aera quod conclusit, fecit crucem ex auro
       purissimo, pens. lib. cl. in mensuram loci, ubi scriptum est hoc
       CONSTANTINVS AVGVSTVS ET HELENA AVGVSTA HANC DOMVM REGALEM SIMILI
       FVLGORE CORVSCANS AVLA CIRCVMDAT, scriptum ex litteris nigellis in
       cruce ipsa.: [977]1
     * superstitio nova ac malefica: [978]1
     * synagogas Iudaeorum fontes persecutionum: [979]1
     * tabula patronatus: [980]1
     * titulus: [981]1 [982]2 [983]3 [984]4 [985]5
     * titulus Pudentis: [986]1
     * tota haec quaestio facillime posset dissolvi si tempus Clementis
       episcopatus plane constaret.: [987]1
     * trinis viis: [988]1
     * urbs libera: [989]1
     * utrumque in Catacumbis, passi sub Nerone, Basso et Tusco
       consulibus.: [990]1
     * vario super exitu eius rumore eoque pluribus vivere eum fingentibus
       credentibusque.: [991]1
     * velut totius orbis dominam visere cupiens: [992]1
     * verna: [993]1
     * vestigia: [994]1
     * via Nomentana ad nymphas Beati Petri ubi baptizabat: [995]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of German Words and Phrases

     * Dass diese Worte [the passage about Clement and Grapte] eine
       "Fiction" seien, ist eine Annahme, die sich nicht begründen and die
       sich nicht halten lässt, wenn man sie durchdenkt.: [996]1
     * Denn aufmerksame and unparteiische Lesung des Hirten würde dem Frg.
       gezeigt haben dass derselbe geraume Zeit vor dem Episkopat des Pius
       geschrieben sein will. Wer das Buch trotz des Namens Clemens (Vis:
       [997]1
     * Der Grosse Abschnitt--c. 9-11--ist aus der Feder eines Juden
       geflossen der mit allen Fasern seiner Seele an seinem Volke hängt:
       [998]1
     * Die Himmelfahrt des Isaia, ein ältestes Zeugnis für das römische
       Martyrium des Petrus: [999]1
     * Man beachte wohl, das (gläubige) Israel kata sarka: [1000]1
     * Nicht auffallend aber konnte es nur sein, dass andere sich durch
       die starken Argumente für die frühe Abfassung der lukanischen
       Schriften als vollkommen überzeugt erklärten. Nicht nur Delbrück
       hielt mir sofort vor, ich hätte mich in einer von mir selbst sicher
       entschiedenen Frage mit unnötiger Zurückhaltung ausgedrückt,
       sondern auch Maurenbrecher erkannte in meinen Beweisführungen die
       Lösung des chronologischen Problems. In seinem Werk "Von Nazareth
       nach Golgatha" (1909) S. 22-30, gibt er die wichtigsten der von mir
       geltend gemachten Beobachtungen für eine frühe Abfassungszeit der
       Acta zutreffend und eindrucksvoll wieder and beschliesst seine
       Darlegung also: "Die Annahme (eines späteren Ursprungs and
       geschichtlichen Wertlosigkeit der Lukasschriften) ist neuerdings
       immermehr gefallen and schliesslich durch eine gründliche
       Untersuchung von Prof. Harnack in allen Teilen gänzlich widerlegt
       and beseitigt worden. Viel mehr hat sich nach jeder Richtung hin,
       wenn auch nicht die unbedingte Glaubwürdigkeit, so doch das hohe
       Alter der Apostelgeschichte ergeben. Und wenn Prof. H. selbst nur
       zögernd und erst nur in letzten Moment seiner Arbeit die Konsequenz
       seiner Ergebnisse auch für die Datierung zog, so muss man doch
       sagen, dass nur in jener von ihm vorgeschlagenen Weise so wohl der
       Schlusssatz der Acta wie die ganze Tenor des Buchs verständlich
       wird, und dass daher schon um dieses äusseren Zeugnisses willen die
       Datierung auf d. J. 62 als bewiesen und nicht nur als möglich zu
       gelten hat.: [1001]1
     * Widersetzte er (Claudius) sich energisch, wiewohl erfolglos der
       mystischen Richtung der Zeit, welche sich namentlich in der
       Vorliebe für Superstitions peregrinae: [1002]1
     * der sogenannte Marcellustext: [1003]1
     * die zuletzt angeführten Stellen mögen darauf hinweisen, dass der
       monarchische Episkopat damals in Anzug war; aber von diesem selbst
       ist in dem Buche keine Spur zu finden.: [1004]1
     * musste dem römischen Bischofe höchst unbequem werden: denn sie
       drohte die einzigartige Bedeutung des Petrus für das Abendland and
       die einzigartige Stellung Roms im Abendlande zu gefärhrden.:
       [1005]1
     * zwar nicht sicher, aber sehr wahrscheinlich: [1006]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of French Words and Phrases

     * Ann. XX dans le texte arménien, évidemment fautif.: [1007]1
     * Ce d'but, de même que plusieurs autres parties de la notice, étant
       emprunté au De Viris: [1008]1
     * Ces interpolations, à mon avis, ne doivent donc ni déconcerter ni
       rébuter la critique. Sous la couche des inventions, les traits
       originaux existent, et un grand nombre d'entre eux apparaissent
       come à fleur de sol. Il les faut dégager patiemment: [1009]1
     * En ce qui regarde Saint Pierre le chiffre de ses vingt-cinq années
       est aussi bien attesté que les chiffres d'années de ses successeurs
       depuis Xystus Ier: [1010]1
     * I1 (l'auteur) n'en tenait pas moins un rang élevé dans l'Eglise; il
       parle avec autorité; il est très-respecté des frètres auxquels il
       écit; Timothée paraît lui être subordonné. Le seul fait d'adresser
       une épitre à une grande Eglise indique un homme important, un des
       personnages qui figurent dans 1'histoire apostolique et dont le nom
       est célèbre . . . L'attribution à Barnabé est la plus
       vraisemblable.: [1011]1
     * L'auteur de la note paraît avoir mal compris le texte des Acta:
       [1012]1
     * La I Petri: [1013]1
     * La Version Vulgate (L') remontant peut-être a la fin du IIe:
       [1014]1
     * Les gentils, aux temps de Dioclétien, avaient recherché, pour les
       anéantir, les livres, les écrits religieux des fidèles. Cette
       destruction, qui nous est attestée par des procès-verbaux
       contemporains, fut rigoureusement poursuivi, et l'Eglise, après la
       tourmente, dut pourvoir à la réfection de ses archives dévastées.
       Ce fut souvent à l';aide de souvenirs de traditions orales, que
       l'on dut réconstituer alors nombre d'Acta: [1015]1
     * Les lettres de cette courte épitaphe,' remarks Marucchi, sont très
       soignées et d'une forme paléographique certainement antérieure à la
       seconde moitié du IIe: [1016]1
     * Malheureusement les Actes [des Martyrs] authentiques ont presque
       tous disparu. . . . L'Eglise romaine non possède aucun. Les actes
       de ces martyrs ont dû être détruits pendant la grande persécution
       de Dioclétien; il est certain qu'à cette époque on a brûlé les
       Archives de de 1'Eglise romaine; on a d'ailleurs agi de même en
       Afrique, ainsi que nous 1'apprend S. Augustin.: [1017]1
     * On peut dire sans exaggération que c'est la region cimetériale la
       plus vaste et la plus régulière de toute la Rome souterraine. Ses
       inscriptions gravées sur marbre, ou peintes en rouges sur des
       tuiles comme au premier étage, attestent qu'au moins en partie elle
       remonte à la plus haute antiquité. A mon avis, il y eut là un noyau
       cimetérial dès le Ile: [1018]1
     * Quant au temple d'Apollon, il y a, clans cette désignation, un
       souvenir du célèbre sanctuaire de Cybèle, qui s'élévait tout près
       du cirque et de la basilique, et qui fut, jusqu'aux dernières
       années du ive: [1019]1
     * S. Pierre, sa venue et son martyre à Rome: [1020]1
     * arrière-pensées: [1021]1
     * la mention de patènes de verre est à remarquer; elles n'étaient
       certainemeut plus en usage à la fin du Ve: [1022]1
     * venons en aux athlètes tout récents.: [1023]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [1024]ii  [1025]iii  [1026]iv  [1027]v  [1028]vi  [1029]vii
   [1030]viii  [1031]ix  [1032]x  [1033]xi  [1034]xii  [1035]xiii
   [1036]1  [1037]2  [1038]3  [1039]4  [1040]5  [1041]6  [1042]7  [1043]8
   [1044]9  [1045]10  [1046]11  [1047]12  [1048]13  [1049]14  [1050]15
   [1051]16  [1052]17  [1053]18  [1054]19  [1055]20  [1056]21  [1057]22
   [1058]23  [1059]24  [1060]25  [1061]26  [1062]27  [1063]28  [1064]29
   [1065]31  [1066]32  [1067]33  [1068]34  [1069]35  [1070]36  [1071]37
   [1072]38  [1073]39  [1074]40  [1075]41  [1076]42  [1077]43  [1078]44
   [1079]45  [1080]46  [1081]47  [1082]48  [1083]49  [1084]50  [1085]51
   [1086]52  [1087]53  [1088]54  [1089]55  [1090]56  [1091]57  [1092]58
   [1093]59  [1094]60  [1095]61  [1096]62  [1097]63  [1098]64  [1099]65
   [1100]66  [1101]67  [1102]68  [1103]69  [1104]70  [1105]71  [1106]72
   [1107]73  [1108]74  [1109]75  [1110]76  [1111]77  [1112]78  [1113]79
   [1114]80  [1115]81  [1116]82  [1117]83  [1118]84  [1119]85  [1120]86
   [1121]87  [1122]88  [1123]89  [1124]90  [1125]91  [1126]92  [1127]93
   [1128]94  [1129]95  [1130]96  [1131]97  [1132]98  [1133]99  [1134]100
   [1135]101  [1136]102  [1137]103  [1138]104  [1139]105  [1140]106
   [1141]107  [1142]108  [1143]109  [1144]110  [1145]111  [1146]112
   [1147]113  [1148]114  [1149]115  [1150]116  [1151]117  [1152]118
   [1153]119  [1154]120  [1155]121  [1156]122  [1157]123  [1158]124
   [1159]125  [1160]126  [1161]127  [1162]128  [1163]129  [1164]130
   [1165]131  [1166]132  [1167]133  [1168]134  [1169]135  [1170]136
   [1171]137  [1172]138  [1173]139  [1174]140  [1175]141  [1176]142
   [1177]143  [1178]144  [1179]146  [1180]147  [1181]148  [1182]149
   [1183]150  [1184]151  [1185]152  [1186]153  [1187]154  [1188]155
   [1189]156  [1190]157  [1191]158  [1192]159  [1193]160  [1194]161
   [1195]162  [1196]163  [1197]164  [1198]165  [1199]166  [1200]167
   [1201]168  [1202]169  [1203]170  [1204]171  [1205]172  [1206]173
   [1207]174  [1208]175  [1209]176  [1210]177  [1211]178  [1212]179
   [1213]180  [1214]181  [1215]182  [1216]183  [1217]184  [1218]185
   [1219]186  [1220]187  [1221]188  [1222]189  [1223]190  [1224]191
   [1225]192  [1226]193  [1227]194  [1228]195  [1229]196  [1230]197
   [1231]198  [1232]199  [1233]200  [1234]201  [1235]202  [1236]203
   [1237]204  [1238]205  [1239]207  [1240]208  [1241]209  [1242]210
   [1243]211  [1244]212  [1245]213  [1246]214  [1247]215  [1248]216
   [1249]217  [1250]218  [1251]219  [1252]220  [1253]221  [1254]222
   [1255]223  [1256]224  [1257]225  [1258]226  [1259]227  [1260]228
   [1261]229  [1262]230  [1263]231  [1264]232  [1265]233  [1266]234
   [1267]235  [1268]236  [1269]237  [1270]239  [1271]240  [1272]241
   [1273]242  [1274]243  [1275]244  [1276]245  [1277]246  [1278]247
   [1279]248  [1280]249  [1281]250  [1282]252  [1283]253  [1284]254
   [1285]255  [1286]256  [1287]257  [1288]258  [1289]260  [1290]261
   [1291]262  [1292]263  [1293]264  [1294]265  [1295]266  [1296]267
   [1297]268  [1298]269  [1299]270  [1300]271  [1301]272  [1302]273
   [1303]274  [1304]275  [1305]276  [1306]277  [1307]278  [1308]279
   [1309]280  [1310]281  [1311]282
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=29&scrV=42#x-p14.7
   2. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=8#x-p14.7
   3. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=28&scrV=6#x-p14.8
   4. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=54&scrV=16#vi-p11.9
   5. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=108&scrV=8#x-p5.2
   6. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii-p12.9
   7. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=17#x-p5.5
   8. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=11#x-p5.4
   9. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ix-p39.3
  10. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=25#ix-p38.3
  11. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=3#xi-p1.1
  12. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=6#xi-p1.1
  13. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=14#vii-p12.10
  14. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#v-p31.4
  15. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=22#ix-p28.8
  16. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=23#ix-p36.3
  17. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=21#xi-p25.2
  18. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=29#xi-p25.2
  19. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii-p12.11
  20. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=24#xi-p25.3
  21. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=2#x-p18.8
  22. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vii-p12.12
  23. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=19#vi-p15.1
  24. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=26#vi-p16.1
  25. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi-p16.2
  26. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v-p14.6
  27. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=25#vi-p16.3
  28. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#v-p7.22
  29. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=50#v-p5.2
  30. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=50#vii-p12.17
  31. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=52#v-p7.3
  32. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=40#vii-p12.13
  33. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#v-p7.17
  34. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#ix-p6.7
  35. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#ix-p17.6
  36. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#v-p19.14
  37. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#ix-p16.4
  38. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v-p13.9
  39. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v-p7.23
  40. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v-p13.9
  41. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#v-p7.24
  42. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=3#v-p7.19
  43. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#ix-p17.8
  44. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=18#v-p19.13
  45. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=18#ix-p6.6
  46. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=20#v-p7.20
  47. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=28&scrV=15#v-p7.18
  48. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p12.18
  49. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=10#x-p5.3
  50. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii-p12.19
  51. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=32#v-p7.8
  52. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=46#v-p7.4
  53. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v-p7.5
  54. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v-p7.13
  55. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v-p7.9
  56. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v-p7.9
  57. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v-p7.9
  58. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=26#v-p7.9
  59. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=10#v-p7.10
  60. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v-p7.14
  61. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=33#v-p7.10
  62. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=36#ix-p25.5
  63. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=37#v-p13.3
  64. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v-p7.6
  65. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v-p7.6
  66. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=30#v-p7.11
  67. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=42#v-p7.6
  68. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=42#v-p7.11
  69. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v-p9.2
  70. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iv-p26.16
  71. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v-p6.2
  72. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=54#v-p9.3
  73. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v-p9.4
  74. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v-p7.15
  75. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=25#v-p13.13
  76. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=26#v-p11.2
  77. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=31#v-p11.6
  78. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=32#v-p11.9
  79. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii-p3.1
  80. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi-p17.4
  81. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v-p11.14
  82. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=19#v-p11.16
  83. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=26#v-p13.16
  84. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii-p3.2
  85. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v-p13.2
  86. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v-p13.11
  87. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vii-p5.18
  88. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=15#v-p13.6
  89. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#vi-p17.5
  90. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=41#v-p11.10
  91. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=6#iv-p28.14
  92. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=1#iv-p11.1
  93. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=11#iv-p12.3
  94. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=18#iv-p12.3
  95. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=19#iv-p12.3
  96. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=23#v-p11.11
  97. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=24#iv-p11.3
  98. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=24#iv-p12.4
  99. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iv-p12.5
 100. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=22#vii-p2.5
 101. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=31#iv-p13.2
 102. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=33#iv-p12.11
 103. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=19#iv-p14.7
 104. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#x-p5.11
 105. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#x-p5.31
 106. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=4#vii-p2.6
 107. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=11#vii-p2.6
 108. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=16#vii-p11.9
 109. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=37#vii-p3.8
 110. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=22#vii-p3.8
 111. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=5#vii-p3.12
 112. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=11#vii-p7.3
 113. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=12#vii-p3.14
 114. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=22#vii-p5.7
 115. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=26#vii-p5.10
 116. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=25&scrV=12#vii-p6.9
 117. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=25&scrV=19#vii-p6.3
 118. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=27#vii-p8.4
 119. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=15#vii-p1.1
 120. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=15#vii-p9.4
 121. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=17#vii-p12.7
 122. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=23#vii-p11.3
 123. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=29#v-p5.3
 124. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=30#vii-p11.6
 125. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=30#v-p5.7
 126. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=30#vii-p12.16
 127. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p19.8
 128. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p14.26
 129. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv-p14.29
 130. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv-p1.1
 131. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi-p22.6
 132. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv-p14.32
 133. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv-p28.9
 134. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vi-p23.1
 135. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii-p12.2
 136. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv-p16.1
 137. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iv-p16.3
 138. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv-p16.3
 139. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv-p15.4
 140. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv-p16.3
 141. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vii-p12.4
 142. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iv-p26.4
 143. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vii-p12.5
 144. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v-p1.1
 145. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=8#vii-p12.14
 146. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=13#iv-p17.1
 147. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iv-p8.14
 148. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=6#x-p17.6
 149. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=8#xi-p23.13
 150. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=11#viii-p23.5
 151. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iv-p16.5
 152. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=0#iv-p15.2
 153. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iv-p14.12
 154. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iii-p1.3
 155. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iv-p28.2
 156. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iv-p28.4
 157. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=20#vi-p22.4
 158. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vi-p23.2
 159. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=23#vi-p22.6
 160. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iv-p14.19
 161. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vii-p2.3
 162. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=30#vii-p2.7
 163. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iv-p15.3
 164. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iii-p1.1
 165. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iv-p18.1
 166. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=7#iv-p14.23
 167. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=14#iv-p27.1
 168. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iv-p27.3
 169. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iv-p14.15
 170. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=22#iv-p19.1
 171. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=34#iv-p12.13
 172. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi-p19.13
 173. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vi-p19.14
 174. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#ix-p2.3
 175. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=5#vi-p19.15
 176. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi-p19.20
 177. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=6#ix-p23.3
 178. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v-p31.1
 179. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=18#x-p17.5
 180. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#x-p7.7
 181. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#x-p7.9
 182. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#xi-p21.5
 183. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=29#x-p7.7
 184. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=0#x-p7.6
 185. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=51#viii-p23.4
 186. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=17#x-p19.8
 187. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iv-p11.6
 188. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iv-p12.6
 189. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv-p12.15
 190. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv-p14.3
 191. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv-p14.3
 192. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv-p14.4
 193. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=23#iv-p26.13
 194. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=12#iv-p14.21
 195. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=9#x-p18.6
 196. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=23#iv-p26.10
 197. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iv-p14.5
 198. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iv-p14.6
 199. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vi-p19.17
 200. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iv-p14.21
 201. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=20#iv-p14.6
 202. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=24#vi-p23.4
 203. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vi-p23.5
 204. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p7.16
 205. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p11.3
 206. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p13.14
 207. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=19#x-p3.5
 208. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p17.6
 209. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi-p19.7
 210. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi-p17.3
 211. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=1#xii.i-p1.1
 212. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p7.16
 213. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=9#x-p3.4
 214. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=11#xii.i-p5.1
 215. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=12#x-p3.6
 216. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#x-p7.8
 217. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=5#x-p7.8
 218. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#x-p7.8
 219. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#x-p7.10
 220. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#xi-p21.6
 221. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#x-p17.7
 222. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii-p14.3
 223. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=21#vii-p14.18
 224. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii-p20.2
 225. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=13#ix-p21.2
 226. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii-p21.4
 227. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv-p16.4
 228. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii-p20.4
 229. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii-p19.2
 230. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=17#vii-p20.5
 231. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii-p19.5
 232. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vii-p22.5
 233. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vii-p20.5
 234. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv-p16.4
 235. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii-p21.4
 236. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=2#ix-p21.2
 237. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii-p22.1
 238. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii-p22.3
 239. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii-p21.2
 240. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=15#x-p18.4
 241. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii-p14.15
 242. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii-p14.12
 243. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vii-p17.3
 244. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii-p14.2
 245. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii-p14.17
 246. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vii-p14.19
 247. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii-p14.8
 248. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii-p14.21
 249. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=10#viii-p7.5
 250. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii-p14.13
 251. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii-p14.10
 252. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vii-p14.5
 253. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#viii-p23.2
 254. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=12#xi-p23.12
 255. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=7#viii-p23.3
 256. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=0#xi-p25.4
 257. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii-p22.7
 258. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ix-p25.10
 259. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#x-p5.13
 260. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#x-p5.20
 261. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=3#x-p5.43
 262. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=5#x-p17.3
 263. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=17#x-p5.14
 264. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=17#xi-p23.14
 265. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=12#ix-p25.9
 266. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=12#viii-p23.21
 267. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ix-p27.17
 268. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ix-p26.10
 269. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii-p18.14
 270. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#ix-p27.2
 271. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=9#ix-p27.21
 272. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vii-p19.3
 273. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=9#ix-p26.11
 274. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=10#ix-p27.15
 275. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vi-p8.3
 276. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=17#ix-p27.13
 277. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=19#ix-p27.15
 278. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=20#ix-p27.15
 279. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=21#ix-p27.19
 280. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=21#ix-p27.21
 281. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=21#xii.iii-p1.2
 282. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=5#x-p17.4
 283. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=7#x-p5.15
 284. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=7#x-p5.21
 285. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=7#x-p5.44
 286. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=9#x-p5.21
 287. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#viii-p23.6
 288. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii-p14.6
 289. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii-p14.20
 290. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii-p14.6
 291. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii-p11.8
 292. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii-p14.6
 293. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii-p14.9
 294. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii-p14.11
 295. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii-p14.14
 296. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii-p14.22
 297. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=5#x-p13.9
 298. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=14#viii-p27.20
 299. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=2#ix-p22.5
 300. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#viii-p23.20
 301. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#viii-p27.21
 302. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#xi-p20.14
 303. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=5#viii-p13.6
 304. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=6#ix-p17.7
 305. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=6#ix-p18.1
 306. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=6#ix-p20.3
 307. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=37#viii-p23.7
 308. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=15#ix-p20.4
 309. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=23#viii-p27.22
 310. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=26#viii-p23.20
 311. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=32#ix-p25.7
 312. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=32#xi-p20.16
 313. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=32#ix-p20.2
 314. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=32#viii-p27.19
 315. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=39#ix-p20.4
 316. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=39#viii-p23.20
 317. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=9#ix-p21.8
 318. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=0#ix-p20.12
 319. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=1#viii-p27.23
 320. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=3#ix-p20.6
 321. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=7#ix-p20.8
 322. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=7#x-p5.47
 323. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=7#xi-p23.8
 324. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=12#ix-p20.10
 325. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=17#x-p5.46
 326. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=17#x-p17.8
 327. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=17#xi-p23.8
 328. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vii-p18.15
 329. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=23#viii-p27.24
 330. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=23#ix-p25.7
 331. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=24#x-p5.47
 332. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=24#xi-p23.8
 333. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=7#viii-p27.5
 334. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=11#viii-p27.10
 335. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=12#ix-p27.11
 336. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=14#viii-p27.11
 337. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=19#ix-p17.3
 338. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=25#x-p5.24
 339. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=13#xi-p20.10
 340. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=14#ix-p17.4
 341. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#viii-p27.13
 342. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ix-p27.11
 343. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#viii-p23.8
 344. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#viii-p27.7
 345. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=12#xi-p20.12
 346. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=13#ix-p27.11
 347. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#viii-p27.15
 348. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=16#viii-p1.1
 349. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=16#ix-p17.2
 350. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=16#ix-p27.11
 351. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=19#ix-p27.11
 352. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#x-p5.29
 353. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#x-p17.2
 354. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=3#x-p17.14
 355. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=12#viii-p7.9
 356. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vi-p10.8
 357. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=13#viii-p6.4
 358. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=13#viii-p7.7
 359. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v-p19.15
 360. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=10#viii-p23.9
 361. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#x-p5.36
 362. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#x-p5.37
 363. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=3#viii-p27.27
 364. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=9#viii-p27.27
 365. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#viii-p27.27
 366. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=13#viii-p27.27
 367. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=8#viii-p27.28
 368. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=9#viii-p27.29
 369. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=9#ix-p32.5
 370. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=12#ix-p45.3
 371. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=14#ix-p32.5
 372. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=13#viii-p27.30
 373. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=8&scrV=5#ix-p45.3
 374. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=8&scrV=8#ix-p45.9
 375. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=1#ix-p38.2
 376. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=7#ix-p42.6
 377. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=8#ix-p38.4
 378. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=8#ix-p42.7
 379. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=10#viii-p27.31
 380. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=11#ix-p1.1
 381. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=11#xi-p20.20
 382. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=1#ix-p39.2
 383. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=1#ix-p42.15
 384. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=3#ix-p42.9
 385. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=7#viii-p27.32
 386. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=14#ix-p42.10
 387. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=15#ix-p32.6
 388. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=18#ix-p39.5
 389. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=8#ix-p33.1
 390. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=8#ix-p34.2
 391. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=9#xi-p20.22
 392. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=17#ix-p34.2
 393. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=3#ix-p45.3
 394. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=5#ix-p32.7
 395. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=6#viii-p27.33
 396. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=14#ix-p43.2
 397. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=18#ix-p45.3
 398. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=20#ix-p45.3
 399. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=21#ix-p45.3
 400. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=3#ix-p32.2
 401. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=6#viii-p27.26
 402. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=7#ix-p42.3
 403. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=8#ix-p42.11
 404. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=9#ix-p32.2
 405. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=9#ix-p42.4
 406. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=12#ix-p42.16
 407. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=16#ix-p34.2
 408. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=18#vi-p1.1
 409. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=18#ix-p34.2
 410. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=1#viii-p23.10
 411. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=2#ix-p33.2
 412. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=10#ix-p34.4
 413. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=20#ix-p33.4
 414. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=24#viii-p27.34
 415. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=24#ix-p32.4
 416. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=20#ix-p42.14
 417. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=4#viii-p27.35
 418. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=4#xi-p20.23
 419. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=8#ix-p43.2
 420. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=10#viii-p23.10
 421. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=20#viii-p23.10
 422. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.13
 423. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p20.4
 424. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.24
 425. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.27
 426. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.8
 427. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.26
 428. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.23
 429. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p24.2
 430. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.10
 431. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p9.1
 432. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p21.8
 433. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p18.4
 434. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p21.7
 435. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p18.10
 436. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.14
 437. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.28
 438. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.30
 439. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p14.13
 440. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.11
 441. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.25
 442. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p31.3
 443. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p20.1
 444. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p23.27
 445. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p22.8
 446. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p24.3
 447. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p24.1
 448. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p40.4
 449. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p6.6
 450. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p14.3
 451. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p17.13
 452. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p22.4
 453. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p22.2
 454. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p13.10
 455. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.22
 456. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p7.10
 457. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p21.3
 458. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p12.8
 459. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p21.4
 460. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p21.5
 461. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p27.6
 462. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p12.2
 463. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p21.3
 464. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p10.13
 465. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p28.7
 466. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p24.8
 467. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p17.10
 468. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.21
 469. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.13
 470. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p14.2
 471. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p14.2
 472. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p18.6
 473. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.4
 474. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p26.5
 475. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p4.2
 476. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p18.6
 477. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p18.3
 478. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p11.5
 479. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p27.9
 480. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p15.3
 481. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.42
 482. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.6
 483. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p24.6
 484. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p17.8
 485. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p17.9
 486. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.4
 487. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p19.12
 488. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p14.14
 489. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p6.2
 490. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p5.6
 491. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p16.9
 492. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p14.27
 493. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.41
 494. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p31.3
 495. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p32.7
 496. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p14.4
 497. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p13.7
 498. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p24.1
 499. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p28.7
 500. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p19.9
 501. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p27.6
 502. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p9.4
 503. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p17.16
 504. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.40
 505. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.3
 506. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p17.3
 507. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p13.1
 508. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p24.3
 509. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.7
 510. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p23.2
 511. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p23.11
 512. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p18.9
 513. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p23.6
 514. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p28.10
 515. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p4.4
 516. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p22.6
 517. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.21
 518. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p20.3
 519. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p9.5
 520. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p27.8
 521. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p22.4
 522. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p21.4
 523. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p10.4
 524. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p13.10
 525. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p13.8
 526. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p13.6
 527. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p22.2
 528. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p12.16
 529. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.9
 530. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p28.8
 531. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.17
 532. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.27
 533. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.49
 534. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p6.5
 535. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p13.3
 536. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p12.22
 537. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p12.21
 538. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p10.2
 539. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.13
 540. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.5
 541. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.2
 542. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.6
 543. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p16.10
 544. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p10.3
 545. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p26.2
 546. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.10
 547. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p13.17
 548. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p19.7
 549. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p23.1
 550. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p20.6
 551. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p19.22
 552. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.9
 553. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p28.5
 554. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p19.6
 555. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p11.4
 556. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p10.11
 557. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p27.38
 558. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p14.33
 559. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p6.12
 560. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p20.8
 561. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p6.13
 562. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.5
 563. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p22.4
 564. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.5
 565. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.4
 566. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.16
 567. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p11.6
 568. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p2.5
 569. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p27.8
 570. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p19.17
 571. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p13.5
 572. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p24.2
 573. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p13.7
 574. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p10.6
 575. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p19.6
 576. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p28.5
 577. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.3
 578. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p17.12
 579. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.8
 580. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.11
 581. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p11.3
 582. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p6.9
 583. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p26.14
 584. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iii-p7.5
 585. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p18.2
 586. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p26.7
 587. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p40.5
 588. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p11.17
 589. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p7.2
 590. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.9
 591. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.15
 592. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p8.12
 593. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p27.37
 594. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p21.9
 595. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p12.14
 596. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p11.8
 597. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.8
 598. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p18.5
 599. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.11
 600. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p26.11
 601. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p18.1
 602. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p18.7
 603. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p18.5
 604. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p14.6
 605. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.32
 606. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p28.12
 607. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.8
 608. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p26.4
 609. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p28.6
 610. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.26
 611. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p28.6
 612. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p4.3
 613. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p42.12
 614. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p31.2
 615. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p24.6
 616. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.19
 617. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.20
 618. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p13.11
 619. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p14.16
 620. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.4
 621. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p14.10
 622. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p22.5
 623. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p9.2
 624. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p27.12
 625. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.48
 626. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p13.2
 627. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p21.2
 628. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p7.11
 629. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p41.3
 630. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p20.12
 631. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.25
 632. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p26.8
 633. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p8.5
 634. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p13.12
 635. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p13.5
 636. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p20.7
 637. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p28.10
 638. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p18.7
 639. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p18.2
 640. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p10.2
 641. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p3.3
 642. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p40.7
 643. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p41.5
 644. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.7
 645. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p19.18
 646. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p10.7
 647. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p40.9
 648. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p5.2
 649. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p23.5
 650. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p16.1
 651. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-p2.1
 652. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p20.3
 653. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p10.1
 654. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p26.7
 655. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p9.2
 656. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p7.6
 657. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p12.11
 658. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p25.2
 659. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p9.2
 660. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p4.6
 661. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p7.1
 662. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.2
 663. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p25.7
 664. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p3.2
 665. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p24.3
 666. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p8.1
 667. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.13
 668. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p29.3
 669. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p10.7
 670. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p16.2
 671. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p3.7
 672. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p37.2
 673. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p4.2
 674. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.8
 675. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p13.7
 676. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p26.1
 677. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p32.4
 678. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p31.5
 679. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p3.3
 680. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p4.6
 681. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p16.5
 682. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p6.8
 683. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p28.4
 684. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p11.8
 685. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p22.7
 686. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p14.5
 687. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-p4.2
 688. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p25.2
 689. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p5.3
 690. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p5.7
 691. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p13.4
 692. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p4.2
 693. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p24.2
 694. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p30.3
 695. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p32.6
 696. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p12.5
 697. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p15.1
 698. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p26.6
 699. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p6.1
 700. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.12
 701. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p23.4
 702. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p2.2
 703. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p6.5
 704. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p7.1
 705. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p17.1
 706. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p19.1
 707. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p7.5
 708. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p37.3
 709. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.27
 710. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p13.2
 711. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p20.1
 712. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p13.7
 713. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p13.5
 714. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p12.2
 715. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p22.4
 716. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.21
 717. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p6.5
 718. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p5.10
 719. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p10.3
 720. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p4.8
 721. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p35.6
 722. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p9.6
 723. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p26.1
 724. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p25.5
 725. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p10.9
 726. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p44.4
 727. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p11.5
 728. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.23
 729. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p20.26
 730. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p28.3
 731. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p4.7
 732. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p5.16
 733. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p19.18
 734. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p10.5
 735. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p14.1
 736. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p25.1
 737. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p12.2
 738. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p10.1
 739. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.20
 740. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p28.2
 741. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p12.10
 742. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p27.4
 743. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.15
 744. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p10.8
 745. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.7
 746. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p26.8
 747. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.26
 748. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p25.8
 749. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p16.4
 750. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p5.2
 751. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p24.2
 752. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p12.3
 753. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p4.7
 754. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p14.1
 755. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p29.2
 756. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p10.9
 757. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p28.7
 758. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p4.3
 759. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p14.11
 760. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p10.8
 761. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p4.8
 762. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p6.1
 763. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.14
 764. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p13.1
 765. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p11.2
 766. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.4
 767. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p9.3
 768. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p5.10
 769. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p5.8
 770. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p29.4
 771. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.14
 772. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p16.3
 773. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p14.4
 774. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p6.10
 775. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p28.2
 776. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p23.2
 777. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.6
 778. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p22.1
 779. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p22.2
 780. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.10
 781. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p9.5
 782. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p14.17
 783. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p15.1
 784. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.16
 785. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p17.1
 786. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p25.1
 787. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.13
 788. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p6.7
 789. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.12
 790. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p16.5
 791. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p24.8
 792. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.8
 793. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-p3.3
 794. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p20.2
 795. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p12.4
 796. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p20.9
 797. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p44.2
 798. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p6.8
 799. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p14.2
 800. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p2.3
 801. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.25
 802. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.22
 803. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p33.9
 804. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p33.10
 805. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p42.1
 806. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p42.2
 807. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p6.8
 808. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p10.1
 809. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p12.9
 810. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-p1.2
 811. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p8.3
 812. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p22.2
 813. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p4.1
 814. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.4
 815. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.11
 816. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.14
 817. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p36.12
 818. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p28.13
 819. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p28.9
 820. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p13.3
 821. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p13.9
 822. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p19.1
 823. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.5
 824. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p26.3
 825. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p39.1
 826. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p25.14
 827. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p38.1
 828. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p35.2
 829. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p16.1
 830. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.3
 831. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.10
 832. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.2
 833. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p25.6
 834. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.7
 835. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.1
 836. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p21.5
 837. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p24.3
 838. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p12.3
 839. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p35.3
 840. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p35.4
 841. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p24.2
 842. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p24.1
 843. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p4.1
 844. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.10
 845. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p39.10
 846. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p6.2
 847. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p12.2
 848. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p12.3
 849. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p33.5
 850. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p26.8
 851. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p7.12
 852. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.16
 853. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.17
 854. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.38
 855. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p26.10
 856. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.18
 857. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.34
 858. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p23.15
 859. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p11.2
 860. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.11
 861. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p20.8
 862. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p28.6
 863. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p25.1
 864. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-p3.2
 865. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p44.3
 866. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p24.7
 867. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.18
 868. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.21
 869. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p10.5
 870. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p26.2
 871. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p37.3
 872. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p4.1
 873. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p22.1
 874. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p13.8
 875. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p12.2
 876. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.15
 877. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p14.1
 878. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p14.6
 879. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.11
 880. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p32.1
 881. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p35.2
 882. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p12.6
 883. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p32.7
 884. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p25.10
 885. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p37.4
 886. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p37.6
 887. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p14.7
 888. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p25.11
 889. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p28.7
 890. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p28.12
 891. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.13
 892. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.24
 893. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-p4.4
 894. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p12.3
 895. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.14
 896. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p11.2
 897. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.16
 898. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.5
 899. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.8
 900. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.12
 901. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.11
 902. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.15
 903. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p28.3
 904. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p2.2
 905. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p3.10
 906. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.2
 907. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.11
 908. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p39.5
 909. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.2
 910. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.1
 911. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p7.1
 912. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.3
 913. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p25.3
 914. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p13.1
 915. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p15.3
 916. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p1.3
 917. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p2.1
 918. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p32.5
 919. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p12.4
 920. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p28.5
 921. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p46.4
 922. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p27.2
 923. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p39.12
 924. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p5.4
 925. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p14.2
 926. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p33.11
 927. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p9.6
 928. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p13.6
 929. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p16.6
 930. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p36.9
 931. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p11.4
 932. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p5.22
 933. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p7.2
 934. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p5.33
 935. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p26.9
 936. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p9.1
 937. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p10.6
 938. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.17
 939. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p9.1
 940. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p25.15
 941. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p2.2
 942. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p18.11
 943. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p6.1
 944. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p13.2
 945. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p24.9
 946. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p16.8
 947. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p9.4
 948. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.19
 949. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p9.4
 950. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p18.5
 951. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p16.5
 952. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p30.2
 953. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.12
 954. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p11.17
 955. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p28.4
 956. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p9.2
 957. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p28.3
 958. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p6.5
 959. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p3.1
 960. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p31.8
 961. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p26.9
 962. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p39.6
 963. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p9.2
 964. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.6
 965. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p10.1
 966. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p13.2
 967. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p5.1
 968. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p13.5
 969. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p8.3
 970. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p10.1
 971. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p15.9
 972. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p5.11
 973. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p11.3
 974. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p12.4
 975. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p36.6
 976. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-p5.13
 977. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p38.2
 978. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p25.2
 979. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p3.5
 980. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p13.1
 981. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.13
 982. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p5.1
 983. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p10.3
 984. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p11.1
 985. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p1.9
 986. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.14
 987. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p9.8
 988. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p8.1
 989. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-p3.9
 990. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p19.2
 991. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p39.9
 992. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p21.10
 993. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p18.4
 994. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p25.7
 995. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p3.8
 996. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p19.4
 997. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p13.3
 998. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p17.6
 999. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p19.11
1000. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-p17.7
1001. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p4.6
1002. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p9.2
1003. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p37.1
1004. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p24.7
1005. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p21.14
1006. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p21.5
1007. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p21.2
1008. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p12.1
1009. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p32.3
1010. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-p12.4
1011. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-p25.2
1012. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-p6.2
1013. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-p5.2
1014. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-p14.17
1015. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p32.2
1016. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p25.3
1017. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p18.13
1018. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-p4.4
1019. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-p12.1
1020. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-p23.2
1021. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p11.7
1022. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-p4.3
1023. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-p11.5
1024. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#i-Page_ii
1025. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#i-Page_iii
1026. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#i-Page_iv
1027. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#i-Page_v
1028. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#i-Page_vi
1029. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#i-Page_vii
1030. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ii-Page_viii
1031. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ii-Page_ix
1032. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iii-Page_x
1033. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iii-Page_xi
1034. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iii-Page_xii
1035. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iii-Page_xiii
1036. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iii-Page_1
1037. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_2
1038. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_3
1039. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_4
1040. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_5
1041. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_6
1042. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_7
1043. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_8
1044. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_9
1045. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_10
1046. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_11
1047. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_12
1048. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_13
1049. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_14
1050. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_15
1051. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_16
1052. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_17
1053. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_18
1054. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_19
1055. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_20
1056. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_21
1057. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_22
1058. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_23
1059. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_24
1060. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_25
1061. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_26
1062. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_27
1063. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_28
1064. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#iv-Page_29
1065. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_31
1066. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_32
1067. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_33
1068. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_34
1069. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_35
1070. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_36
1071. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_37
1072. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_38
1073. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_39
1074. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_40
1075. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_41
1076. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_42
1077. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_43
1078. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_44
1079. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_45
1080. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_46
1081. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_47
1082. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_48
1083. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_49
1084. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_50
1085. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_51
1086. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_52
1087. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_53
1088. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_54
1089. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_55
1090. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_56
1091. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_57
1092. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_58
1093. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#v-Page_59
1094. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_60
1095. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_61
1096. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_62
1097. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_63
1098. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_64
1099. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_65
1100. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_66
1101. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_67
1102. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_68
1103. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_69
1104. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_70
1105. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_71
1106. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_72
1107. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_73
1108. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_74
1109. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_75
1110. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_76
1111. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_77
1112. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_78
1113. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_79
1114. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_80
1115. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_81
1116. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_82
1117. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_83
1118. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_84
1119. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_85
1120. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_86
1121. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vi-Page_87
1122. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_88
1123. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_89
1124. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_90
1125. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_91
1126. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_92
1127. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_93
1128. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_94
1129. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_95
1130. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_96
1131. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_97
1132. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_98
1133. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_99
1134. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_100
1135. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_101
1136. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_102
1137. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_103
1138. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_104
1139. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_105
1140. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_106
1141. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_107
1142. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_108
1143. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_109
1144. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_110
1145. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_111
1146. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_112
1147. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_113
1148. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_114
1149. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#vii-Page_115
1150. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_116
1151. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_117
1152. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_118
1153. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_119
1154. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_120
1155. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_121
1156. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_122
1157. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_123
1158. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_124
1159. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_125
1160. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_126
1161. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_127
1162. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_128
1163. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_129
1164. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_130
1165. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_131
1166. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_132
1167. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_133
1168. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_134
1169. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_135
1170. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_136
1171. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_137
1172. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_138
1173. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_139
1174. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_140
1175. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_141
1176. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_142
1177. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_143
1178. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#viii-Page_144
1179. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_146
1180. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_147
1181. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_148
1182. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_149
1183. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_150
1184. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_151
1185. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_152
1186. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_153
1187. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_154
1188. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_155
1189. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_156
1190. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_157
1191. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_158
1192. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_159
1193. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_160
1194. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_161
1195. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_162
1196. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_163
1197. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_164
1198. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_165
1199. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_166
1200. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_167
1201. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_168
1202. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_169
1203. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_170
1204. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_171
1205. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_172
1206. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_173
1207. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_174
1208. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_175
1209. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_176
1210. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_177
1211. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_178
1212. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#ix-Page_179
1213. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_180
1214. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_181
1215. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_182
1216. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_183
1217. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_184
1218. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_185
1219. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_186
1220. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_187
1221. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_188
1222. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_189
1223. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_190
1224. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_191
1225. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_192
1226. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_193
1227. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_194
1228. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_195
1229. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_196
1230. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_197
1231. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_198
1232. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_199
1233. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_200
1234. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_201
1235. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_202
1236. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_203
1237. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_204
1238. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#x-Page_205
1239. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_207
1240. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_208
1241. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_209
1242. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_210
1243. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_211
1244. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_212
1245. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_213
1246. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_214
1247. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_215
1248. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_216
1249. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_217
1250. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_218
1251. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_219
1252. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_220
1253. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_221
1254. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_222
1255. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_223
1256. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_224
1257. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_225
1258. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_226
1259. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_227
1260. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_228
1261. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_229
1262. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_230
1263. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_231
1264. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_232
1265. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_233
1266. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_234
1267. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_235
1268. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_236
1269. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_237
1270. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xi-Page_239
1271. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.i-Page_240
1272. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.i-Page_241
1273. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.i-Page_242
1274. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-Page_243
1275. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.ii-Page_244
1276. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-Page_245
1277. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-Page_246
1278. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-Page_247
1279. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-Page_248
1280. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-Page_249
1281. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iii-Page_250
1282. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-Page_252
1283. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-Page_253
1284. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-Page_254
1285. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-Page_255
1286. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-Page_256
1287. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-Page_257
1288. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.iv-Page_258
1289. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_260
1290. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_261
1291. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_262
1292. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_263
1293. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_264
1294. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_265
1295. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_266
1296. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_267
1297. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_268
1298. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_269
1299. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_270
1300. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_271
1301. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_272
1302. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.v-Page_273
1303. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_274
1304. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_275
1305. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_276
1306. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_277
1307. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_278
1308. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_279
1309. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_280
1310. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_281
1311. file:///ccel/e/edmundson/church/cache/church.html3#xii.vi-Page_282
