     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: An Humble, Affectionate, and Earnest Address to the Clergy
      Creator(s): Law, William (1686-1761)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

An Humble, Affectionate, and Earnest Address to the Clergy

   [Addr-1] The reason of my humbly and affectionately addressing this
   discourse to the clergy, is not because it treats of things not of
   common concern to all Christians, but chiefly to invite and induce
   them, as far as I can, to the serious perusal of it; and because
   whatever is essential to Christian salvation, if either neglected,
   overlooked, or mistaken by them, is of the saddest consequence both to
   themselves and the churches in which they minister. I say essential to
   salvation, for I would not turn my own thoughts, or call the attention
   of Christians, to anything but the one thing needful, the one thing
   essential and only available to our rising out of our fallen state, and
   becoming, as we were at our creation, an holy offspring of God, and
   real partakers of the divine nature.

   [Addr-2] If it be asked, What this one thing is? It is the SPIRIT OF
   GOD brought again to his FIRST POWER OF LIFE IN US. Nothing else is
   wanted by us, nothing else intended for us, by the Law, the prophets,
   and the gospel. Nothing else is, or can be effectual, to the making
   sinful man become again a godly creature.

   [Addr-3] Everything else, be it what it will, however glorious and
   divine in outward appearance, everything that angels, men, churches, or
   reformations, can do for us, is dead and helpless, but so far as it is
   the immediate work of the Spirit of God breathing and living in it.

   [Addr-4] All scripture bears full witness to this truth, and the end
   and design of all that is written, is only to call us back from the
   spirit of satan, the flesh, and the world, to be again under full
   dependence upon, and obedience to the Spirit of God, who out of free
   love and thirst after our souls, seeks to have his first power of life
   in us. When this is done, all is done that the scripture can do for us.
   Read what chapter, or doctrine of scripture you will, be ever so
   delighted with it, it will leave you as poor, as empty and unreformed
   as it found you, unless it be a delight that proceeds from, and has
   turned you wholly and solely to the Spirit of God, and strengthened
   your union with and dependence upon him. For love and delight in
   matters of scriptures, whilst it is only a delight that is merely
   human, however specious and saintlike it may appear, is but the
   self-love of fallen Adam, and can have no better a nature, till it
   proceeds from the inspiration of God, quickening his own life and
   nature within us, which alone can have or give forth a godly love. For
   if it be an immutable truth, that "no man can call Jesus, Lord, but by
   the Holy Ghost," it must be a truth equally immutable, that no one can
   have any one Christ-like temper or power of goodness but so far, and in
   such degree, as he is immediately led and governed by the Holy Spirit.

   [Addr-5] The grounds and reasons of which are as follow.

   [Addr-6] All possible goodness that either can be named, or is
   nameless, was in God from all eternity, and must to all eternity be
   inseparable from him; it can be nowhere but where God is. As therefore
   before God created anything, it was certainly true that there was but
   one that was good, so it is just the same truth, after God has created
   innumerable hosts of blessed and holy and heavenly beings, that there
   is but one that is good, and that is God.

   [Addr-7] All that can be called goodness, holiness, divine tempers,
   heavenly affections, in the creatures, are no more their own, or the
   growth of their created powers, than they were their own before they
   were created. But all that is called divine goodness and virtue in the
   creature is nothing else, but the one goodness of God manifesting a
   birth and discovery of itself in the creature, according as its created
   nature is fitted to receive it. This is the unalterable state between
   God and the creature. Goodness for ever and ever can only belong to
   God, as essential to him and inseparable from him, as his own unity.

   [Addr-8] God could not make the creature to be great and glorious in
   itself; this is as impossible, as for God to create beings into a state
   of independence on himself. "The heavens," saith David, "declare the
   glory of God"; and no creature, any more than the heavens, can declare
   any other glory but that of God. And as well might it be said, that the
   firmament shows forth its own handiwork, as that a holy divine or
   heavenly creature shows forth its own natural power.

   [Addr-9] But now, if all that is divine, great, glorious, and happy, in
   the spirits, tempers, operations, and enjoyments of the creature, is
   only so much of the greatness, glory, majesty, and blessedness of God,
   dwelling in it, and giving forth various births of his own triune life,
   light, and love, in and through the manifold forms and capacities of
   the creature to receive them, then we may infallibly see the true
   ground and nature of all true religion, and when and how we may be said
   to fulfill all our religious duty to God. For the creature's true
   religion, is its rendering to God all that is God's, it is its true
   continual acknowledging all that which it is, and has, and enjoys, in
   and from God. This is the one true religion of all intelligent
   creatures, whether in heaven, or on earth; for as they all have but one
   and the same relation to God, so though ever so different in their
   several births, states or offices, they all have but one and the same
   true religion, or right behavior towards God. Now the one relation,
   which is the ground of all true religion, and is one and the same
   between God and all intelligent creatures, is this, it is a total
   unalterable dependence upon God, an immediate continual receiving of
   every kind, and degree of goodness, blessing and happiness, that ever
   was, or can be found in them, from God alone. The highest angel has
   nothing of its own that it can offer unto God, no more light, love,
   purity, perfection, and glorious hallelujahs, that spring from itself,
   or its own powers, than the poorest creature upon earth. Could the
   angel see a spark of wisdom, goodness, or excellence, as coming from,
   or belonging to itself, its place in heaven would be lost, as sure as
   Lucifer lost his. But they are ever abiding flames of pure love, always
   ascending up to and uniting with God, for this reason, because the
   wisdom, the power, the glory, the majesty, the love, and goodness of
   God alone, is all that they see, and feel, and know, either within or
   without themselves. Songs of praise to their heavenly Father are their
   ravishing delight, because they see, and know, and feel, that it is the
   breath and Spirit of their heavenly Father that sings and rejoices in
   them. Their adoration in spirit and in truth never ceases, because they
   never cease to acknowledge the ALL of God; the ALL of God in the whole
   creation. This is the one religion of heaven, and nothing else is the
   truth of religion on earth.

   [Addr-10] The matter therefore plainly comes to this, nothing can do,
   or be, the good of religion to the intelligent creature, but the power
   and presence of God really and essentially living and working in it.
   But if this be the unchangeable nature of that goodness and blessedness
   which is to be had from our religion, then of all necessity, the
   creature must have all its religious goodness as wholly and solely from
   God's immediate operation, as it had its first goodness at its
   creation. And it is the same impossibility for the creature to help
   itself to that which is good and blessed in religion, by any
   contrivance, reasonings, or workings of its own natural powers, as to
   create itself. For the creature, after its creation, can no more take
   anything to itself that belongs to God, than it could take it, before
   it was created. And if truth forces us to hold, that the natural powers
   of the creature could only come from the one power of God, the same
   truth should surely more force us to confess, that that which comforts,
   that which enlightens, that which blesses, which gives peace, joy,
   goodness, and rest to its natural powers, can be had in no other way,
   nor by any other thing, but from God's immediate holy operation found
   in it.

   [Addr-11] Now the reason why no work of religion, but that which is
   begun, continued, and carried on by the living operation of God in the
   creature, can have any truth, goodness, or divine blessing in it, is
   because nothing can in truth seek God, but that which comes from God.
   Nothing can in truth find God as its good, but that which has the
   nature of God living in it; like can only rejoice in like; and
   therefore no religious service of the creature can have any truth,
   goodness, or blessing in it, but that which is done in the creature,
   in, and through, and by a principle and power of the divine nature
   begotten and breathing forth in it all holy tempers, affections, and
   adorations.

   [Addr-12] All true religion is, or brings forth, an essential union and
   communion of the spirit of the creature with the Spirit of the creator:
   God in it, and it in God, one life, one light, one love. The Spirit of
   God first gives, or sows the seed of divine union in the soul of every
   man; and religion is that by which it is quickened, raised, and brought
   forth to a fullness and growth of a life in God. Take a similitude of
   this, as follows. The beginning, or seed of animal breath, must first
   be born in the creature from the spirit of this world. In like manner,
   divine faith, hope, love, and resignation to God, are in the religious
   life its acts of respiration, which, so long as they are true, unite
   God and the creature in the same living and essential manner, as animal
   respiration unites the breath of the animal with the breath of this
   world.

   [Addr-13] Now as no animal could begin to respire, or unite with the
   breath of this world, but because it has its beginning to breathe
   begotten in it from the air of this world, so it is equally certain,
   that no creature, angel or man, could begin to be religious, or breathe
   forth the divine affections of faith, love, and desire towards God, but
   because a living seed of these divine affections was by the Spirit or
   {sic} God first begotten in it. And as a tree or plant can only grow
   and fructify by the same power that first gave birth to the seed, so
   faith, and hope, and love towards God, can only grow and fructify by
   the same power, that begot the first seed of them in the soul.
   Therefore divine immediate inspiration and divine religion are
   inseparable in the nature of the thing.

   [Addr-14] Take away inspiration, or suppose it to cease, and then no
   religious acts or affections can give forth anything that is godly or
   divine. For the creature can offer, or return nothing to God, but that
   which it has first received from him; therefore, if it is to offer and
   send up to God affections and aspirations that are divine and godly, it
   must of all necessity have the divine and godly nature living and
   breathing in it. Can anything reflect light, before it has received it?
   Or any other light, than that which it has received? Can any creature
   breathe forth earthly, or diabolical affections, before it is possessed
   of an earthly, or diabolical nature? Yet this is as possible, as for
   any creature to have divine affections rising up and dwelling in it,
   either before, or any further, than as it has or partakes of the divine
   nature dwelling and operating in it.

   [Addr-15] A religious faith that is uninspired, a hope, or love that
   proceeds not from the immediate working of the divine nature within us,
   can no more do any divine good to our souls, or unite them with the
   goodness of God, than an hunger after earthly food can feed us with the
   immortal bread of heaven. All that the natural or uninspired man does,
   or can do in the church, has no more of the truth or power of divine
   worship in it, than that which he does in the field, or shop, through a
   desire of riches. And the reason is, because all the acts of the
   natural man, whether relating to matters of religion or the world, must
   be equally selfish, and there is no possibility of their being
   otherwise. For self-love, self- esteem, self-seeking, and living wholly
   to self, are as strictly the whole of all that is or possibly can be in
   the natural man, as in the natural beast; the one can no more be
   better, or act above this nature, than the other. Neither can any
   creature be in a better, or higher state than this, till something
   supernatural is found in it; and this supernatural something, called in
   scripture the WORD, or SPIRIT, or INSPIRATION of God, is that alone
   from which man can have the first good thought about God, or the least
   power of having more heavenly desires in his spirit, than he has in his
   flesh.

   [Addr-16] A religion that is not wholly built upon this supernatural
   ground, but solely stands upon the powers, reasonings, and conclusions
   of the natural uninspired man, has not so much as the shadow of true
   religion in it, but is a mere nothing, in the same sense, as an idol is
   said to be nothing, because the idol has nothing of that in it which is
   pretended by it. For the work of religion has no divine good in it, but
   as it brings forth, and keeps up essential union of the spirit of man
   with the Spirit of God; which essential union cannot be made, but
   through love on both sides, nor by love, but where the love that works
   on both sides is of the same nature.

   [Addr-17] No man therefore can reach God with his love, or have union
   with him by it, but he who is inspired with that one same Spirit of
   love, with which God loved himself from all eternity, and before there
   was any creature. Infinite hosts of new created heavenly beings can
   begin no new kind of love of God, nor have the least power of beginning
   to love him at all, but so far as his own Holy Spirit of love,
   wherewith he hath from all eternity loved himself, is brought to life
   in them. This love, that was then in God alone, can be the only love in
   creatures that can draw them to God; they can have no power of cleaving
   to him, of willing that which he wills, or adoring the divine nature,
   but by partaking of that eternal Spirit of love; and therefore the
   continual immediate inspiration or operation of the Holy Spirit, is the
   one only possible ground of our continually loving God. And of this
   inspired love, and no other, it is that St. John says, "He that
   dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God." Suppose it to be any other love,
   brought forth by any other thing but the Spirit of God breathing his
   own love in us, and then it cannot be true, that he who dwells in such
   love, dwells in God.

   [Addr-18] Divine inspiration was essential to man's first created
   state. The Spirit of the triune God, breathed into, or brought to life
   in him, was that alone which made him a holy creature in the image and
   likeness of God. To have no other mover, to live under no other guide
   or leader, but the Spirit, was that which constituted all the holiness
   which the first man could have from God. Had he not been thus at the
   first, God in him and he in God, brought into the world as a true
   offspring and real birth of the Holy Spirit, no dispensation of God to
   fallen man would have directed him to the Holy Spirit, or ever have
   made mention of his inspiration in man. For fallen man could be
   directed to nothing as his good, but that which he had, and was his
   good, before he fell. And had not the Holy Spirit been his first life,
   in and by which he lived, no inspired prophets among the sons of fallen
   Adam had ever been heard of, or any holy men speaking as they were
   moved by the Holy Ghost. For the thing would have been impossible, no
   fallen man could have been inspired by the Holy Spirit, but because the
   first life of man was a true and real birth of it; and also because
   every fallen man had, by the mercy and free grace of God, a secret
   remains of his first life preserved in him, though hidden, or rather
   swallowed up by flesh and blood; which secret remains, signified and
   assured to Adam by the name of a "bruiser of the serpent," or "seed of
   the woman," was his only capacity to be called and quickened again into
   his first life, by new breathings of the Holy Spirit in him.

   [Addr-19] Hence it plainly appears that the gospel state could not be
   God's last dispensation, or the finishing of man's redemption, unless
   its whole work was a work of the Spirit of God in the spirit of man;
   that is, unless without all veils, types, and shadows, it brought the
   thing itself, or the substance of all former types and shadows, into
   real enjoyment, so as to be possessed by man in spirit, and in truth.
   Now the thing itself, and for the sake of which all God's dispensations
   have been, is that first life of God which was essentially born in the
   soul of the first man, Adam, and to which he died. But now, if the
   gospel dispensation comes at the end of all types and shadows, to bring
   forth again in man a true and full birth of that Holy Spirit which he
   had at first, then it must be plain, that the work of this dispensation
   must be solely and immediately the work of the Holy Spirit. For if man
   could no other possible way have had a holy nature and spirit at first,
   but as an offspring or birth of the Holy Spirit at his creation, it is
   certain from the nature of the thing, that fallen man, dead to his
   first holy nature, can have that same holy nature again no other way,
   but solely by the operation of that same Holy Spirit, from the breath
   of which he had at first a holy nature and life in God. Therefore
   immediate inspiration is as necessary to make fallen man alive again
   unto God, as it was to make man at first a living soul after the image
   and in the likeness of God. And continual inspiration is as necessary,
   as man's continuance in his redeemed state. For this is a certain
   truth, that that alone which begins, or gives life, must of all
   necessity be the only continuance or preservation of life. The second
   step can only be taken by that which gave power to take the first. No
   life can continue in the goodness of its first created, or redeemed
   state, but by its continuing under the influence of, and working with
   and by that powerful root, or Spirit, which at first created, or
   redeemed it. Every branch of the tree, though ever so richly brought
   forth, must wither and die, as soon as it ceases to have continual
   union with, and virtue from that root, which first brought it forth.
   And to this truth, as absolutely grounded in the nature of the thing,
   our Lord appeals as a proof and full illustration of the necessity of
   his immediate indwelling, breathing, and operating in the redeemed soul
   of man, saying, "I am the vine, ye are the branches, as the branch
   cannot bear fruit of itself, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. He
   that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit.
   If a man abides not in me, he is cast forth as a withered branch; for
   without me, ye can do nothing," John xv.

   [Addr-20] Now from these words let this conclusion be here drawn, viz.,
   that therefore to turn to Christ as a light within us, to expect life
   from nothing but his holy birth raised within us, to give ourselves up
   wholly and solely to the immediate continual influx and operation of
   this Holy Spirit, depending wholly upon it for every kind and degree of
   goodness and holiness that we want, or can receive, is and can be
   nothing else, but proud, rank enthusiasm.

   [Addr-21] Now as infinitely absurd as this conclusion is, no one that
   condemns continual immediate inspiration as gross enthusiasm, can
   possibly do it with less absurdity, or show himself a wiser man, or
   better reasoner, than he that concludes, that because without Christ we
   can do nothing, therefore we ought not to believe, expect, wait for,
   and depend upon his continual immediate operation in everything that we
   do, or would do well. As to the pride charged upon this pretended
   enthusiasm, it is the same absurdity. Christ says, "without me ye can
   do nothing," the same as if he had said, As to yourselves, and all that
   can be called your own, you are mere helpless sin and misery, and
   nothing that is good, can come from you, but as it is done by the
   continual immediate breathing and inspiration of another Spirit, given
   by God to over-rule your own, to save and deliver you from all your own
   goodness your own wisdom, and learning which always were, and always
   will be, as corrupt and impure, as earthly and sensual, as your own
   flesh and blood. Now is there any selfish creaturely pride, in fully
   believing this to be true, and in acting in full conformity to it? If
   so, then he that confesses he neither has, nor ever can have a single
   farthing, but as it is freely given him from charity, thereby declares
   himself to be a purse-proud vain boaster of his own wealth. Such is the
   spiritual pride of him, who fully acknowledges that he neither has, nor
   can have the least spark or breathing after goodness, but what is
   freely kindled, or breathed into him by the Spirit of God. Again, if it
   is spiritual pride to believe, that nothing that we ever think, or say,
   or do, either in the church, or our closets, can have any truth of
   {sic} goodness in it but which is wrought solely and immediately by the
   Spirit of God in us, then it must be said, that in order to have
   religious humility we must never forget to take some share of our
   religious virtues to ourselves, and not allow (as Christ hath said)
   that without him we can do nothing that is good. It must also be said,
   that St. Paul took too much upon him when he said, "the life that I now
   live, is not mine, but Christ's that liveth in me."

   [Addr-22] Behold a pride, and a humility, the one as good as the other,
   and both logically descended from a wisdom, that confesses it comes not
   from above.

   [Addr-23] The necessity of a continual inspiration of the Spirit of
   God, both to begin the first, and continue every step of a divine life
   in man, is a truth to which every life in nature, as well as all
   scripture, bears full witness. A natural life, a bestial life, a
   diabolical life, can subsist no longer, than whilst they are
   immediately and continually under the working power of that root or
   source, from which they sprung. Thus it is with the divine life in man,
   it can never be in him, but as a growth of life in and from God. Hence
   it is, that resisting the Spirit, quenching the Spirit, grieving the
   Spirit, is that alone which gives birth and growth to every evil that
   reigns in the world, and leaves men, and churches, not only an easy,
   but a necessary prey to the devil, the world, and the flesh. And
   nothing but obedience to the Spirit, trusting to the Spirit, walking in
   the Spirit, praying with and for its continual inspiration, can
   possibly keep either men, or churches, from being sinners, or
   idolators, in all that they do. For everything in the life, or religion
   of man, that has not the Spirit of God for its mover, director, and
   end, be it what it will, is but earthly, sensual, or devilish. The
   truth and perfection of the gospel state could not show itself, till it
   became solely a ministration of the Spirit, or a kingdom in which the
   Holy Spirit of God had the doing of all that was done in it. The
   apostles, whilst Christ was with them in the flesh, were instructed in
   heavenly truths from his mouth, and enabled to work miracles in his
   Name, yet not qualified to know and teach the mysteries of his kingdom.
   After his resurrection, he conversed with them forty days, speaking to
   them of things pertaining to the kingdom of God; nay though he breathed
   on them, and said, "receive ye the Holy Ghost," yet this also would not
   do, they were still unable to preach, or bear witness to the truth, as
   it is in Jesus. And the reason is, there was still a higher
   dispensation to come, which stood in such an opening of the divine life
   in their hearts, as could not be effected from an outward instruction
   of Christ himself. For though he had sufficiently told his disciples
   the necessity of being born again of the Spirit, yet he left them
   unborn of it, till he came again in the power of the Spirit. He
   breathed on them, and said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost," yet that which
   was said and done was not the thing itself, but only a type or outward
   signification of what they should receive, when he, being glorified,
   should come again in the fullness and power of the Spirit, breaking
   open the deadness and darkness of their hearts with light and life from
   heaven, which light did, and alone could, open and verify in their
   souls, all that he had said and promised to them whilst he was with
   them in the flesh. All this is expressly declared by Christ himself,
   saying unto them, "I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I
   go away"; therefore Christ taught them to believe the want, and
   joyfully to expect the coming of a higher and more blessed state, than
   that of his bodily presence with them. For he adds, "if I go not away,
   the comforter will not come"; therefore the comfort and blessing of
   Christ to his followers could not be had, till something more was done
   to them, and they were brought into a higher state than they could be
   by his verbal instruction of them. "But if I go away," says he, "I will
   send him unto you, and when the comforter, the Spirit of truth is come,
   he will guide you into all truth; he shall glorify me" (that is, shall
   set up my kingdom in its glory, in the power of the Spirit) "for he
   shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you: I said of mine,
   because all things that the Father hath are mine," John xvi.

   [Addr-24] Now when Christ had told them of the necessity of an higher
   state than that they were in, and the necessity of such a comforting
   illuminating guide, as they could not have till his outward teaching in
   human language was changed into the inspiration, and operation of his
   Spirit in their souls, he commands them, not to begin to bear witness
   of him to the world, from what they did and could in an human way know
   of him, his birth his life, doctrines, death, sufferings, resurrection,
   but to tarry at Jerusalem, till they were endued with power from on
   high; saying unto them, "Ye shall receive power, after that the Holy
   Ghost is come upon you. And then shall ye bear witness unto me, both in
   Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and unto the utmost part of the earth."

   [Addr-25] Here are two most important and fundamental truths fully
   demonstrated, First, that the truth and perfection of the gospel state
   could not take place, till Christ was glorified, and his kingdom among
   men made wholly and solely a continual immediate ministration of the
   Spirit: everything before this was but subservient for a time, and
   preparatory to this last dispensation, which could not have been the
   last, had it not carried man above types, figures and shadows, into the
   real possession and enjoyment of that which is the spirit and truth of
   a divine life. For the end is not come till it has found the beginning;
   that is, the last dispensation of God to fallen man cannot be come,
   till putting an end to the "bondage of weak and beggarly elements,"
   Gal. iv.9, it brings man to that dwelling in God, and God in him, which
   he had at the beginning.

   [Addr-26] Secondly, that as the apostles could not, so no man, from
   their time to the end of the world, can have any true and real
   knowledge of the spiritual blessings of Christ's redemption, or have a
   divine call, capacity, or fitness to preach, and bear witness of them
   to the world, but solely by that same divine Spirit opening all the
   mysteries of a redeeming Christ in their inward parts, as it did in the
   apostles, evangelists, and first ministers of the gospel.

   [Addr-27] For why could not the apostles, who had been eye witnesses to
   all the whole process of Christ, why could they not with their human
   apprehension declare and testify the truth of such things, till they
   "were baptized with fire, and born again of the Spirit"? It is because
   the truth of such things, or the mysteries of Christ's process, as
   knowable by man, are nothing else in themselves, but those very things
   which are done by this heavenly fire and Spirit of God in our souls.
   Therefore to know the mysteries of Christ's redemption, and to know the
   redeeming work of God in our own souls, is the same thing; the one
   cannot be before, or without the other. Therefore every man, be he who
   he will, however able in all kinds of human literature, must be an
   entire stranger to all the mysteries of gospel redemption, and can only
   talk about them as of any other tale he has been told, till they are
   brought forth, verified, fulfilled, and witnessed to by that, which is
   found, felt and enjoyed of the whole process of Christ in his soul. For
   as redemption is in its whole nature an inward spiritual work, that
   works only in the altering, changing, and regenerating the life of the
   soul, so it must be true, that nothing but the inward state of the soul
   can bear true witness to the redeeming power of Christ. For as it
   wholly consists in altering that which is the most radical in the soul,
   bringing forth a new spiritual death, and a new spiritual life, it must
   be true, that no one can know or believe the mysteries of Christ's
   redeeming power, by historically knowing, or rationally consenting to
   that which is said of him and them in written or spoken words, but only
   and solely by an inward experimental finding, and feeling the operation
   of them, in that new death, and new life, both of which must be
   effected in the soul of man, or Christ is not, cannot be found, and
   known by the soul as its salvation. It must also be equally true, that
   the redeemed state of the soul, being in itself nothing else but the
   resurrection of a divine and holy life in it, must as necessarily from
   first to last be the sole work of the breathing creating Spirit of God,
   as the first holy created state of the soul was. And all this, because
   the mysteries of Christ's redeeming power, which work and bring forth
   the renewed state of the soul, are not creaturely, finite, outward
   things, that may be found and enjoyed by verbal descriptions, or formed
   ideas of them, but are a birth and life, and spiritual operation, which
   as solely belongs to God alone, as his creating power. For nothing can
   redeem, but that same power which created the soul. Nothing can bring
   forth a good thought in it, but that which brought forth the power of
   thinking. And of every tendency towards goodness, be it ever so small,
   that same may be truly affirmed of it, which St. Paul affirmed of his
   highest state, "yet not I, but Christ that liveth in me."

   [Addr-28] But if the belief of the necessity and certainty of immediate
   continual divine inspiration, in and for everything that can be holy
   and good in us, be (as its accusers say) rank enthusiasm, then he is
   the only sober orthodox Christian, who of many a good thought and
   action that proceeds from him, frankly says, in order to avoid
   enthusiasm, My own power, and not Christ's Spirit living and breathing
   in me, has done this for me. For if all that is good is not done by
   Christ, then something that is good is done by myself. It is in vain to
   think, that there is a middle way, and that rational divines have found
   it out, as Dr. Warburton has done, who though denying immediate
   continual inspiration, yet allows that the Spirit's "ordinary influence
   occasionally assists the faithful." {Sermons, vol. i.}

   [Addr-29] Now this middle way has neither scripture nor sense in it;
   for an occasional influence or concurrence is as absurd, as an
   occasional God, and necessarily supposes such a God. For an occasional
   influence of the Spirit upon us supposes an occasional absence of the
   Spirit from us. For there could be no such thing, unless God was
   sometimes with us, and sometimes not, sometimes doing us good, as the
   inward God of our life, and sometimes doing us no good at all, but
   leaving us to be good from ourselves. Occasional influence necessarily
   implies all this blasphemous absurdity. Again, this middle way of an
   occasional influence and assistance necessarily supposes, that there is
   something of man's own that is good, or the Holy Spirit of God neither
   would, nor could assist or cooperate with it. But if there was anything
   good in man for God to assist and cooperate with, besides the SEED of
   his own divine nature, or his own WORD of life striving to bruise the
   serpent's nature within us, it could not be true, that there is only
   one that is good, and that is God And were there any goodness in
   creatures, either in heaven, or on earth, but the one goodness of the
   divine nature, living, working, manifesting itself in them, as its
   created instruments, then good creatures, both in heaven and on earth,
   would have something else to adore, besides, or along with God. For
   goodness, be it where it will, is adorable for itself, and because it
   is goodness; if therefore any degree of it belonged to the creature, it
   ought to have a share of that same adoration that is paid to the
   creator. Therefore, if to believe that nothing godly can be alive in
   us, but what has all its life from the Spirit of God living and
   breathing in us, if to look solely to it, and depend wholly upon it,
   both for the beginning, and growth of every thought and desire that can
   be holy and good in us, be proud rank enthusiasm, then it must be the
   same enthusiasm to own but one God. For he that owns more goodness than
   one, owns more gods than one. And he that believes he can have any good
   in him, but the one goodness of God, manifesting itself in him, and
   through him, owns more goodness than one. But if it be true, that God
   and goodness cannot be divided, then it must be a truth for ever and
   ever, that so much of good, so much of God, must be in the creature.

   [Addr-30] And here lies the true unchangeable distinction between God,
   and nature, and the natural creature. Nature and creature are only for
   the outward manifestation of the inward invisible unapproachable powers
   of God; they can rise no higher, nor be anything else in themselves,
   but as temples, habitations, or instruments, in which the supernatural
   God can, and does manifest himself in various degrees, bringing forth
   creatures to be good with his own goodness, to love and adore him with
   his own Spirit of love, for ever singing praises to the divine nature
   by that which they partake of it. This is the religion of divine
   inspiration, which being interpreted, is Immanuel or God within us.
   Everything short of this, is short of that religion which worships God
   in spirit and in truth. And every religious trust or confidence in
   anything, but the divine operation within us, is but a sort of image
   worship, which though it may deny the form, yet retains the power
   thereof in the heart. And he that places any religious safety in
   theological decisions, scholastic points, in particular doctrines and
   opinions, that must be held about the scripture words of "faith,"
   "justification," "sanctification," "election," and "reprobation," so
   far departs from the true worship of the living God within him, and
   sets up an idol of notions to be worshiped, if not instead of, yet
   along with him. And I believe it may be taken for a certain truth, that
   every society of Christians, whose religion stands upon this ground,
   however ardent, laborious, and good their zeal may seem to be in such
   matters, yet in spite of all, sooner or later, it will be found that
   nature is at the bottom, and that a selfish, earthly, overbearing pride
   in their own definitions and doctrines of words, will by degrees creep
   up to the same height, and become that same fleshly wisdom, doing those
   very same things, which they exclaim against in popes, cardinals, and
   Jesuits. Nor can it possibly be otherwise. For a letter-learned zeal
   has but one nature wherever it is, it can only do that for Christians,
   which it did for Jews. As it anciently brought forth scribes,
   Pharisees, hypocrites, and crucifiers of Christ, as it afterwards
   brought forth heresies, schisms, popes, papal decrees, images,
   anathemas, transubstantiations, so in Protestant countries it will be
   doing the same thing, only with other materials; images of wood and
   clay, will only be given up for images of doctrines; grace and works,
   imputed sin, and imputed righteousness, election and reprobation, will
   have their Synods of Dort, as truly evangelical, as any Council of
   Trent.

   [Addr-31] This must be the case of all fallen Christendom, as well
   popish as Protestant, till single men, and churches, know, confess, and
   firmly adhere to this one scripture truth, which the blessed Behmen
   prefixed as a motto to most of his epistles, viz., "That our salvation
   is in the life of Jesus Christ in us." And that, because this alone was
   the divine perfection of man before he fell, and will be his perfection
   when he is one with Christ in heaven. Everything besides this, or that
   is not solely aiming at and essentially leading to it, is but mere
   Babel in all sects and divisions of Christians, living to themselves,
   and their own old man under a seeming holiness of Christian strife and
   contention about scripture works. But this truth of truths, fully
   possessed, and firmly adhered to, brings God and man together, puts an
   end to every Lo here, and Lo there, and turns the whole faith of man to
   a Christ that can nowhere be a savior to him, but as essentially born
   in the inmost spirit of his soul, nor possible to be born there by any
   other means, but the immediate inspiration and working power of the
   Holy Spirit within him. To this man alone all scripture gives daily
   edification; the words of Christ and his apostles fall like a fire into
   him. And what is it that they kindle there? Not notions, not itching
   ears, nor rambling desires after new and new expounders of them, but a
   holy flame of love, to be always with, always attending to, that Christ
   and his Holy Spirit within him, which alone can make him to be and do
   all that, which the words of Christ and his apostles have taught. For
   there is no possibility of being like-minded with Christ in anything
   that he taught, or having the truth of one Christian virtue, but by the
   nature and Spirit of Christ become essentially living in us. Read all
   our savior's divine sermon from the mount, consent to the goodness of
   every part of it, yet the time of practicing it will never come, till
   you have a new nature from Christ, and are as vitally in him, and he in
   you, as the vine in the branch, and the branch in the vine. "Blessed
   are the pure in heart, for they shall see God," is a divine truth, but
   will do us no divine good, unless we receive it as saying neither more
   nor less, than "Blessed are they that are born again of the Spirit, for
   they alone can see God." For no blessedness, either of truth or life,
   can be found either in men or angels, but where the Spirit and life of
   God is essentially born within them. And all men or churches, not
   placing all in the life, light, and guidance of the Holy Spirit of
   Christ, but pretending to act in the name, and for the glory of God,
   from opinions which their logic and learning have collected from
   scripture words, or from what a Calvin, an Arminius, a Socinus, or some
   smaller name, has told them to be right or wrong, all such, are but
   where the apostles were, when "by the way there was a strife among them
   who should be the greatest." And how much soever they may say, and
   boast of their great zeal for truth, and the only glory of God, yet
   their own open notorious behavior towards one another, is proof enough,
   that the great strife amongst them is, which shall be the greatest
   sect, or have the largest number of followers. A strife, from the same
   root, and just as useful to Christianity, as that of the carnal
   apostles, who should be the greatest. For not numbers of men, or
   kingdoms professing Christianity, but numbers redeemed from the death
   of Adam to the life of Christ are the glory of the Christian church.
   And in whatever national Christianity anything else is meant or sought
   after, by the profession of the gospel, but a new heavenly life,
   through the mediatorial nature and Spirit of the eternal Son of God,
   born in the fallen soul, wherever this spirituality of the
   gospel-redemption is denied or overlooked, there the spirit of self, of
   satanic and worldly subtlety, will be church and priest, and supreme
   power, in all that is called religion.

   [Addr-32] But to return now to the doctrine of continual inspiration.
   The natural or unregenerate man, educated in pagan learning, and
   scholastic theology, seeing the strength of his genius in the search
   after knowledge, how easily and learnedly he can talk, and write,
   criticize and determine upon all scripture words and facts, looks at
   all this as a full proof of his own religious wisdom, power and
   goodness, and calls immediate inspiration enthusiasm, not considering,
   that all the woes denounced by Christ against scribes, Pharisees, and
   hypocrites, are so many woes now at this day denounced against every
   appearance and show of religion, that the natural man can practice.

   [Addr-33] And what is well to be noted, everyone, however high in human
   literature, is but this very natural man, and can only have the
   goodness of a carnal secular religion, till as empty of all, as a new
   born child, the Spirit of God gets a full birth in him, and becomes the
   inspirer and doer of all that he wills, does, and aims at, in his whole
   course of religion.

   [Addr-34] Our divine master compares the religion of the learned
   Pharisees "to whited sepulchers, outwardly beautiful, but inwardly full
   of rottenness, stench, and dead men's bones."

   [Addr-35] Now whence was it, that a religion, so serious in its
   restraints, so beautiful in its outward form and practices, and
   commanding such reverence from all that beheld it, was yet charged by
   truth itself with having inwardly such an abominable nature? It was
   only for this one reason, because it was a religion of self. Therefore,
   from the beginning to the end of the world, it must be true, that where
   self is kept alive, has power, and keeps up its own interests, whether
   in speaking, writing, teaching or defending the most specious number of
   scripture doctrines and religious forms, there is that very old
   Pharisee still alive, whom Christ with so much severity of language
   constantly condemned. And the reason of such heavy condemnation is,
   because self is the only root, or rather the sum total of all sin;
   every sin that can be named is centered in it, and the creature can sin
   no higher, than he can live to self. For self is the fullness of
   atheism and idolatry, it is nothing else but the creature broken off
   from God and Christ; it is the power of satan living and working in us,
   and the sad continuance of that first turning from God, which was the
   whole fall or death of our first Father.

   [Addr-36] And yet, sad and satanical as this self is, what is so much
   cherished and nourished with our daily love, fears, and cares about it?
   How much worldly wisdom, how much laborious learning, how many
   subtleties of contrivance, and how many flattering applications and
   submissions are made to the world, that this apostate self may have its
   fullness, both of inward joys, and outward glory?

   [Addr-37] But to all this it must yet be added, that a religion of
   self, of worldly glory and prosperity carried on under the gospel
   state, has more of a diabolical nature than that of the Jewish
   Pharisees. It is the highest and last working of the mystery of
   iniquity, because it lives to self, satan, and the world, in and by a
   daily profession of denying and dying to self, of being crucified with
   Christ, of being led by his Spirit, of being risen from the world, and
   set with him in heavenly places.

   [Addr-38] Let then the writers against continual immediate divine
   inspiration take this for a certain truth, that by so doing, they do
   all they can to draw man from that which is the very truth and
   perfection of the gospel state, and are, and can be, no better than
   pitiable advocates for a religion of self, more blamable and abominable
   now, than that which was of old condemned by Christ. For whatever is
   pretended to be done in gospel religion, by any other spirit or power,
   but that of the Holy Ghost bringing it forth, whether it be praying,
   preaching, or practicing any duties, is all of it but the religion of
   self, and can be nothing else. For all that is born of the flesh, is
   flesh, and nothing is spiritual, but that which has its whole birth
   from the Spirit. But man, not ruled and governed by the Spirit, has
   only the nature of corrupt flesh, is under the full power and guidance
   of fallen nature, and is that very natural man, to whom the things of
   God are foolishness. But man boldly rejecting, and preaching against a
   continual immediate divine inspiration, is an anti-apostle, he lays
   another foundation, than that which Christ has laid, he teaches that
   Christ needs not, must not, be all in all in us, and is a preacher up
   of the folly of fearing to grieve, quench, and resist the Holy Spirit.
   For when, or where, or how could everyone of us be in danger of
   grieving, quenching, or resisting the Spirit, unless his holy
   breathings and inspirations were always within us? Or how could the sin
   against the Holy Ghost have a more dreadful nature, than that against
   the Father and the Son, but because the continual immediate guidance
   and operation of the Spirit, is the last and highest manifestation of
   the Holy Trinity in the fallen soul of man? It is not because the Holy
   Ghost is more worthy, or higher in nature than the Father and the Son,
   but because Father and Son come forth in their own highest power of
   redeeming love, through the covenant of a continual immediate
   inspiration of the Spirit, to be always dwelling and working in the
   soul. Many weak things have been conjectured, and published to the
   world, about the sin against the Holy Ghost; whereas the whole nature
   of it lies in this, that it is a sinning, or standing out against the
   last and highest dispensation of God for the full redemption of man.
   Christ says, "If I had not come, they had not had sin," that is, they
   had not had such a weight of guilt upon them; therefore the sinning
   against Christ come into the flesh, was of a more unpardonable nature,
   than sinning against the Father under the Law. So likewise sinning
   against the Holy Ghost is of a more unpardonable nature than sinning
   against the Father under the Law, or against the Son as come in the
   flesh, because these two preceding dispensations were but preparatory
   to the coming, or full ministration of the Spirit. But when Father and
   Son were come in the power and manifestation of the Spirit, then he
   that refuses or resists this ministration of the Spirit, resists all
   that the Holy Trinity can do to restore and revive the first life of
   God in the soul, and so commits the unpardonable sin, and which is
   therefore unpardonable, because there remains no further, or higher
   power to remove it out of the soul For no sin is pardonable, because of
   its own nature: or that which is in itself, but because there is
   something yet to come that can remove it out of the soul; nor can any
   sin be unpardonable, but because it has withstood, or turned from that
   which was the last and highest remedy for the removal of it.

   [Addr-39] Hence it is, that grieving, quenching, or resisting the
   Spirit, is the sin of all sins, that most of all stops the work of
   redemption, and in the highest degree separates man from all union with
   God. But there could be no such sin, but because the Holy Spirit is
   always breathing, willing, and working within us. For what spirit can
   be grieved by us, but that which has its will within us disobeyed? What
   spirit can be quenched by us, but that which is, and ever would be, a
   holy fire of life within us? What spirit can be resisted by us, but
   that which is, and has its working within us? A spirit on the outside
   of us cannot be the Spirit of God, nor could such a spirit be any more
   quenched, or hindered by our spirit, than a man by indignation at a
   storm could stop its rage. Now, dreadful as the abovementioned sin is,
   I would ask all the writers against continual immediate divine
   inspiration, how they could more effectually lead men into an habitual
   state of sinning against the Holy Ghost, than by such doctrine? For how
   can we possibly avoid the sin of grieving, quenching, the Spirit, but
   by continually reverencing his holy presence within us, by continually
   waiting for, trusting, and solely attending to that which the Spirit of
   God wills, works, and manifests within us? To turn men from this
   continual dependence upon the Holy Spirit, is turning them from all
   true knowledge of God. For without this, there is no possibility of any
   edifying, saving knowledge of God. For though we have ever so many
   mathematical demonstrations of his being, we are without all real
   knowledge of him, till his own quickening Spirit within us manifests
   him, as a power of life, light, love, and goodness, essentially found,
   vitally felt, and adored in our souls. This is the one knowledge of
   God, which is eternal life, because it is the life of God manifested in
   the soul, that knowledge of which Christ says, No one knoweth the
   Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son revealeth him.
   Therefore this knowledge is only possible to be found in him, who is in
   Christ a new creature, for so it is that Christ revealeth the Father.
   But if none belong to God, but those who are led by the Spirit of God,
   if we are reprobates unless the Spirit of Christ be living in us, who
   need be told, that all that we have to trust to or depend upon, as
   children of God and Christ, is the continual immediate guidance,
   unction, and teaching of this Holy Spirit within us? Or how can we more
   profanely sin against this Spirit and power of God within us, or more
   expressly call men from the power of God to satan, than by ridiculing a
   faith and hope that look wholly and solely to his continual immediate
   breathings and operations, for all that can be holy and good in us?

   [Addr-40] "When I am lifted up from the earth," says Christ, "I will
   draw all men to me." Therefore the one great power of Christ in and
   over the souls of men is after he is in heaven; then begins the true
   full power of his drawing, because it is by his Spirit in man that he
   draws. But who can more resist this drawing, or defeat its operation in
   us, than he that preaches against, and condemns the belief of a
   continual and immediate inspiration of the Spirit, when Christ's
   drawing can be in nothing else, nor be powerful any other way?

   [Addr-41] Now that which we are here taught, is the whole end of all
   scripture; for all that is there said, however learnedly read, or
   studied by Hebrew or Greek skill, fails of its only end, till it leads
   and brings us to an essential God within us, to feel and find all that
   which the scriptures speak of God, of man, of life and death, of good
   and evil, of heaven and hell, as essentially verified in our own souls.
   For all is within man that can be either good or evil to him: God
   within him, is his divine life, his divine light, and his divine love:
   satan within him is his life of self, of earthly wisdom, of diabolical
   falseness, wrath, pride, and vanity of every kind. There is no middle
   way between these two. He that is not under the power of the one, is
   under the power of the other. And the reason is, man was created in and
   under the power of the divine life; so far therefore as he loses, or
   turns from this life of God, so far he falls under the power of self,
   of satan, and worldly wisdom. When St. Peter, full of an human good
   love towards Christ, advised him to avoid his sufferings, Christ
   rejected him with a "Get thee behind me, satan," and only gave this
   reason for it, "for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but
   the things that be of men." A plain proof, that whatever is not of and
   from the Holy Spirit of God in us, however plausible it may outwardly
   seem to men, to their wisdom, and human goodness, is yet in itself
   nothing else but the power of satan within us. And as St. Paul said
   truly of himself, "By the grace of God I am what I am"; so every wise
   {sic}, every scribe, every disputer of this world, every truster to the
   strength of his own rational learning, everyone that is under the power
   of his own fallen nature, never free from desires of honors and
   preferments, ever thirsting to be rewarded for his theological
   abilities, ever fearing to be abased and despised, always thankful to
   those who flatter him with his distinguished merit, everyone that is
   such, be he who he will, may as truly say of himself, Through my
   turning and trusting to something else than the grace and inspiration
   of God's Spirit, I am what I am. For nothing else hinders any professor
   of Christ from being able truly to say with St. Paul, "God forbid that
   I should glory in anything but the cross of Christ, by which I am
   crucified to the world, and the world to me." Nothing makes him
   incapable of finding that which St. Paul found, when he said, "I can do
   all things through Christ that strengtheneth me"; nothing hinders all
   this, but his disregard of a Christ within him, his choosing to have a
   religion of self, of laborious learning, and worldly greatness, rather
   than be such a gospel fool for Christ, as to renounce all that which he
   renounced, and to seek no more earthly honor and praise than he did,
   and to will nothing, know nothing, seek nothing, but that which the
   Spirit of God and Christ knows, wills, and seeks in him. Here, and here
   alone, lies the Christian's full and certain power of overcoming self,
   the devil, and the world. But Christians, seeking and turning to
   anything else, but to be led and inspired by the one Spirit of God and
   Christ, will bring forth a Christendom that in the sight of God will
   have no other name, than a spiritual Babylon, a spiritual Egypt, and
   Sodom, a scarlet whore, a devouring beast, and red dragon. For all
   these names belong to all men, however learned, and to all churches,
   whether greater or less, in which the spirit of this world has any
   share of power. This was the fall of the whole church soon after the
   apostolic ages; and all human reformations, begun by ecclesiastical
   learning, and supported by civil power, will signify little or nothing,
   nay often make things worse, till all churches, dying to all own will,
   all own wisdom, all own advancement, seek for no reforming power but
   from that Spirit of God which converted sinners, publicans, harlots,
   Jews, and heathens, into an holy apostolical church at the first, a
   church which knew they were of God, that they belonged to God, by that
   Spirit which he had given them, and which worked in them.

   [Addr-42] "Ye are not in the flesh," says the apostle, "but in the
   Spirit"; but then he adds, as the only ground of this, "if so be that
   the Spirit of God dwelleth in you"; surely he means, if so be ye are
   moved, guided, and governed by that, which the Spirit wills, works and
   inspires within you. And then to show the absolute necessity of this
   life of God in the soul, he adds, "If any man hath not the Spirit of
   Christ, he is none of his." And that this is the state to which God has
   appointed, and called all Christians, he thus declares, "God hath sent
   forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father."
   Gal. iv.6. The same thing, most surely, as if he had said, Nothing in
   you can cry, or pray to God as its Father, but the Spirit of his Son
   Christ come to life in you. Which is also as true of every tendency in
   the soul towards God or goodness; so much as there is of it, so much
   there is of the seed of the woman striving to bring forth a full birth
   of Christ in the soul.

   [Addr-43] "Lo, I am always with you," says the holy Jesus, "even to the
   end of the world." How is he with us? Not outwardly, every illiterate
   man knows; not inwardly, says many a learned doctor, because a Christ
   within us is as gross enthusiasm, or Quakerism, as the light within us.
   How then shall the faith of the common Christian find any comfort in
   these words of Christ's promise, unless the spirit brings him into a
   remembrance and belief, that Christ is in him, and with him, as the
   vine is with and in the branch. Christ says, "Without me ye can do
   nothing"; and also, "If any man loves me, my Father will love him, and
   we will come unto him, and make our abode with him." Now if without him
   we can do nothing, then all the love that a man can possibly have for
   Christ, must be from the power and life of Christ in him, and from such
   a love, so begotten, man has the Father and the Son dwelling and making
   their abode in him. What higher proof, or fuller certainty can there
   be, that the whole work of redemption in the soul of man is and can be
   nothing else, but the inward, continual, immediate operation of Father,
   Son, and Holy Spirit, raising up again their own first life in the
   soul, to which our first father died?

   [Addr-44] Again, Christ, after his glorification in heaven, says,
   "Behold I STAND at the DOOR and KNOCK." He does not say, Behold ye have
   me in the scriptures. Now what is the DOOR at which Christ, at the
   right-hand of God in heaven, KNOCKS? Surely it is the heart, to which
   Christ is always present. He goes on, IF ANY MAN HEARS MY VOICE; how
   hears, but by the hearing of the heart, or what voice, but that which
   is the speaking or sounding of Christ within him; he adds, AND OPENS
   THE DOOR, that is, will be a living holy nature, and spirit born within
   him, AND SUP WITH HIM, and HE WITH ME. Behold the last finishing work
   of a redeeming Jesus, entered into the heart that opens to him,
   bringing forth the joy, the blessing, and perfection of that first life
   of God in the soul, which was lost by the fall, set forth as a supper,
   or feast of the heavenly Jesus with the soul, and the soul with him.
   Can anyone justly call it enthusiasm to say, that this supping of the
   soul with this glorified Christ within it, must mean something more
   heavenly transacted in the soul than that last supper which he
   celebrated with his disciples, whilst he was with them in flesh. For
   that supper of bread and wine was such, as a Judas could partake of,
   and could only be an outward type or signification of that inward and
   blessed nourishment, with which the believing soul should be feasted,
   when the glorified Son of God should as a creating Spirit enter into
   us, quickening, and raising up his own heavenly nature and life within
   us. Now this continual knocking of Christ at the door of the heart,
   sets forth the case or nature of a continual immediate divine
   inspiration within us; it is always with us, but there must be an
   opening of the heart to it; and though it is always there, yet it is
   only felt and found by those, who are attentive to it, depend upon, and
   humbly wait for it. Now let anyone tell me how he can believe anything
   of this voice of Christ, how he can listen to it, hear, or obey it, but
   by such a faith, as keeps him habitually turned to an immediate
   constant inspiration of the Spirit of Christ within him? Or how any
   heathenish profane person, can do more despite to this presence and
   power of Christ in his own soul, or more effectually lead others into
   it, than that ecclesiastic, who makes a mock at the light within, a
   Christ within and openly blasphemes that faith, and hope, and trust,
   which solely relies upon being moved by the Spirit, as its only power
   of doing that which is right, and good, and pious, either towards God
   or man. Let every man, whom this concerns, lay it to heart. Time, and
   the things of time, will soon have an end; and he that in time trusts
   to anything but the Spirit and power of God working in his heart, will
   be ill fitted to enter into eternity; God must be all in all in us
   here, or we cannot be his hereafter. Time works only for eternity; and
   poverty eternal must as certainly follow him, who dies only fully
   stuffed with human learning, as he who dies only full of worldly
   riches. The folly of thinking to have any divine learning, but that
   which the Holy Spirit teaches, or to make ourselves rich in knowledge
   towards God, by heaps of common place learning crowded into our minds,
   will leave us as dreadfully cheated, as that rich builder of barns in
   the gospel, to whom it was said, "Thou fool, this night, shall thy soul
   be required of thee. And then, whose shall all these things be?" Luke
   xii. So is every man that treasures up a religious learning that comes
   not wholly from the Spirit of God. But to return. To this inward
   continual attention to the continual working of the Holy Spirit within
   us, the apostle calls us in these words, "See that ye refuse not him
   that speaketh; for if they escaped not, who refused him that spoke on
   earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn from him, that
   speaketh from heaven," Heb. xii.25. Now what is this speaking from
   heaven, which it is so dangerous to refuse, or resist? Surely not
   outward voices from heaven. Or what could the apostle's advice signify
   to us, unless it be such a speaking from heaven, as we may and must be
   always either obeying or refusing? St. James saith, "Resist the devil,
   and he will flee from you." What devil? Surely not an outward creature
   or spirit, that tempts us by an outward power. Or what resistance can
   we make to the devil, but that of inwardly falling away, or turning
   from the workings of his evil nature and spirit within us? They
   therefore who call us from waiting for, depending upon, and attending
   to the continual secret inspirations and breathings of the Holy Spirit
   within us, call us to RESIST God in the same manner as the apostle
   exhorts us to resist the devil. For God being only a spiritual good,
   and the devil our spiritual evil, neither the one nor the other can be
   resisted, or not resisted by us, but so far as their spiritual
   operations within us are either turned from, or obeyed by us. St. James
   having shown us, that resisting the devil is the only way to make him
   flee from us, that is, to lose his power in us, immediately adds, how
   we are to behave towards God, that he may not flee from us, or his holy
   work be stopped in us. "Draw near," says he, "to God, and God will draw
   near to you." What is this drawing near? Surely not by any local
   motion, either in God or us. But the same is meant, as if he had said,
   Resist not God, that is, let his holy will within you have its full
   work; keep wholly, obediently attentive to that, which he is and has,
   and does within you, and then God will draw near to you, that is, will
   more and more manifest the power of his holy presence in you, and make
   you more and more partakers of the divine nature. Further, what a
   blindness is it in the forementioned writers, to charge private persons
   with the enthusiasm of holding the necessity, and certainty of
   continual immediate inspiration, and to attack them as enemies to the
   established church, when everybody's eyes see, that collect after
   collect, in the established liturgy, teaches and requires them to
   believe, and pray for the continual inspiration of the Spirit, as that
   alone, by which they can have the least good thought, or desire? Thus,
   "O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not able to please thee,
   mercifully grant that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule
   our hearts." Is it possible for words more strongly to express the
   necessity of a continual divine inspiration? Or can inspiration be
   higher, or more immediate in prophets and apostles, than that which
   directs, that which rules our hearts, not now and then, but in all
   things? Or can the absolute necessity of this be more fully declared,
   than by saying, that if it is not in this degree both of height and
   continuance in and over our hearts, nothing that is done by us can be
   pleasing to God, that is, can have any union with him?

   [Addr-45] Now the matter is not at all about the different effects or
   works proceeding from inspiration, as whether by it a man be made a
   saint in himself, or sent by God with a prophetic message to others,
   this affects not the nature and necessity of inspiration, which is just
   as great, just as necessary in itself to all true goodness, as to all
   true prophecy. All scripture is of divine inspiration. But why so?
   "Because holy men of old spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost."
   Now the above collect as well as Christ and his apostles oblige us in
   like manner to hold, that all holiness is by divine inspiration, and
   that therefore there could have been no holy men of old, or in any
   latter times, but solely for this reason, because "They LIVED as they
   were moved by the Holy Ghost." Again, the liturgy prays thus, "O God,
   from whom all good things do come, grant that by thy holy inspiration
   we may think those things that be good, and by thy merciful guiding may
   perform the same." Now, if in any of my writings I have ever said
   anything higher, or further of the nature and necessity of continual
   divine inspiration, than this church- prayer does, I refuse no censure
   that shall be passed upon me. But if I have, from all that we know of
   God, of nature, and creature, shown the utter impossibility of any
   kind, or degree of goodness to be in us, but from the divine nature
   living and breathing in us, if I have shown that all scripture, Christ
   and his apostles, over and over say the same thing; that our church
   liturgy is daily praying according to it; what kinder thing can I say
   of those churchmen who accuse me of enthusiasm, than that which Christ
   said of his blind crucifiers, "Father, forgive them, for they know not
   what they do."

   [Addr-46] It is to no purpose to object to all this, that these
   kingdoms are over-run with enthusiasts of all kinds, and that Moravians
   with their several divisions, and Methodists of various kinds, are
   everywhere acting in the wildest manner, under the pretense of being
   called and led by the Spirit. Be it so, or not so, is a matter I meddle
   not with; nor is the doctrine I am upon in the least affected by it.
   For what an argument would this be; enthusiasts of the present and
   former ages have made a bad use of the doctrine of being led by the
   Spirit of God, ergo, "He is enthusiastic, or helps forward enthusiasm,
   who preaches up the doctrine of being led by the Spirit of God." Now
   absurd as this is, was any of my accusers as high in genius, as bulky
   in learning, as colossus was in stature, he would be at a loss to bring
   a stronger argument than this, to prove me an enthusiast, or an abettor
   of them.

   [Addr-47] But as I do not begin to doubt about the necessity, the
   truth, and perfection of gospel religion, when told that whole nations
   and churches have, under a pretense of regard to it, and for the sake
   of it, done all the bad things that can be charged upon this or that
   leading enthusiast, whether you call those bad things, schism, perjury,
   rebellion, worldly craft, and hypocrisy. So I give not up the
   necessity, the truth, and perfection of looking wholly to the Spirit of
   God and Christ within me, as my promised inspirer, and only worker of
   all that can be good in me, I give not this up, because in this, or
   that age, both spiritual pride and fleshly lusts have prospered by it,
   or because satan has often led people into all the heights of
   self-glory, and self-seeking under a pretense of being inspired with
   gospel humility, and gospel self-denial.

   [Addr-48] Another charge upon me, equally false, and I may say, more
   senseless, is that I am a declared enemy to the use of reason in
   religion. And why? Because in all my writings, I teach that reason is
   to be denied. I own, I have not only taught this, but have again and
   again proved the absolute necessity of it. And this, because Christ has
   made it absolutely necessary, by saying, "Whosoever will come after me,
   let him deny himself." For how can a man deny himself, without denying
   his reason, unless reason be no part of himself? Or how can a rational
   creature whose chief distinction from brutes is that of his reason, be
   called to deny himself any other way, than by denying that which is
   peculiar to himself? Let the matter be thus expressed, man is not to
   deny his reason. Well, how then? Why, (N.B.) he is only to deny
   himself. Can there be a greater folly of words? And yet it is their
   wisdom of words, who allow the denying of self to be good doctrine, but
   boggle, and cry out at the denying of reason, as quite bad. For how can
   a man deny himself, but by denying that which is the life, and spirit,
   and power of self? What makes a man a sinner? Nothing but the power and
   working of his natural reason. And therefore, if our natural reason is
   not to be denied, we must keep up and follow that which works every sin
   that ever was, or can be in us. For we can sin nowhere, or in anything,
   but where our natural reason or understanding has its power in us. What
   is meant in all scripture by the flesh and its works? Is it something
   distinct, and different from the workings of our rational and
   intelligent nature? No, it is our whole intelligent, rational nature,
   that constitutes the flesh or the carnal man, who could not be
   criminally so, any more than the beasts, but because his carnality has
   all its evil from his intelligent nature or reason, being the life and
   power of it. And everything which our Lord says of self, is so much
   said of our natural reason; and all that the scripture says of the
   flesh and its evil nature, is so much said of the evil state of our
   natural reason, which therefore is, ought, and must be denied, in the
   same manner and degree as self and flesh is, and must be denied.

   [Addr-49] I have elsewhere shown the gross darkness and ignorance which
   govern that which is called metaphysics in the schools, "that it is so
   great, that if you were to say, that God first creates a soul out of
   nothing, and when that is done, then takes an understanding faculty and
   puts it into it, after that, adds a will, and then a memory, all as
   independently made, as when a tailor first makes the body of a coat,
   and then adds sleeves, and pockets to it were you to say this, the
   schools of Descartes, Malebranche, or Locke, could have nothing to say
   against it." {Spirit of Love, First Part.}

   [Addr-50] And here truth obliges me to say, that scholastic divinity is
   in as great ignorance about the most fundamental truths of the gospel,
   as I have again and again shown, in regard to the nature of the fall of
   man, and all the scripture expressions concerning the new birth; and
   here also concerning the doctrine, of a man's denying himself, which
   modern learning supposes to be possible without, or different from a
   man's denying his own natural reason; which is an absurdity of the
   greatest magnitude. For what is self, but that which a man is, and has
   in his natural capacity? Or what is the fullness of his natural
   capacity, but the strength and power of his reason? How then can any
   man deny himself, but by denying that which gives self its whole
   nature, name, and power? If man was not a rational creature, he could
   not be called to deny himself, he could not need, or receive the
   benefit and goodness of self-denial: no man therefore can obey the
   precept of denying himself, or have any benefit or goodness from it,
   but so far as he denies, or dies to his own natural reason, because the
   self of man, and the natural reason of man, are strictly the same
   thing. Again, our blessed Lord said in his agony, "Not my will, but
   thine be done." And had not this been the form of his whole life, he
   had not lived without sin. Now thus to deny our own will, that God's
   will may be done in us, is the height of our calling; and so far as we
   keep from our own natural will, so far we keep from sin. But now, if
   our own natural will, as having all sin and evil in it, is always to be
   denied, whatever it costs us, I would fain know, how our natural reason
   can ever escape, or how we can deny our own will, and not deny that
   rational or intelligent power, in and from which the will has its whole
   existence and continual direction? Or how there can be always a badness
   of our own will, which is not the badness of our own natural
   intellectual power? Therefore it is a truth of the utmost certainty,
   that as much as we are obliged to deny our own natural will that the
   will of God may be done in us, so much are we obliged to deny our own
   natural reason and understanding that our own will may not be done, or
   followed by us. For whoever lives to his own natural reason, he
   necessarily lives to his own natural will. For our natural will, in
   whatever state it is, is nothing else but our natural reason willing
   this, or that.

   [Addr-51] Now hard as this may seem to unregenerate nature, and yet
   harder to nature highly exalted, and big with the glory of all that,
   which wits, poets, orators, critics, sophists, and historians have
   enriched it with, yet true it is, and a truth as certain as the fall of
   man, that this full denial of our own natural will, and our own natural
   reason, is the only possible way for divine knowledge, divine light,
   and divine goodness, to have any place or power of birth in us. All
   other religious knowledge, got any other way, let it be as great as it
   will, is only great in vanity, emptiness, and delusion. For nothing but
   that which comes immediately from God, can have anything godly in it,
   and all that which comes from self, and natural reason, however
   outwardly colored, can have no better a nature within, that
   self-seeking, self- esteem, and fleshly wisdom, which (N.B.) are those
   very works of the devil in us, which Christ came into the world to
   destroy. For the efforts of natural reason, and self-abilities, to be
   great in religious knowledge from our own particular talents, are as
   satanical things as any we carry about us, and most of all fix us in
   the highest contrariety to that state, which our Lord affirms to be
   absolutely necessary.

   [Addr-52] "Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye
   cannot enter into the kingdom of God." Now as sure as this is
   necessary, so sure is it, that no one can be thus converted, or come
   under the good influence of this childlike nature, till natural reason,
   self, and own will, are all equally denied. For all the evil and
   corruption of our fallen nature consists in this, it is an awakened
   life of own reason, own will broken off from God, and so fallen into
   the selfish workings of its own earthly nature.

   [Addr-53] Now whether this self broken off from God, reasons, wills,
   and contends about the difference of scripture words and opinions, or
   reasons against them all, the same evil state of fallen nature, the
   same loss of life, the same separation from God, the same evil tempers
   of flesh and blood, will be equally strengthened and inflamed by the
   one as by the other. Hence it is, that papists and Protestants are
   hating, fighting, and killing one another for the sake of their
   different excellent opinions, and yet, as to the lusts of the flesh,
   the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, they are in the highest
   union and communion with one another. For if you expect a zealous
   Protestant to be therefore a new born creature alive unto God, or a
   zealous papist to be therefore dead to all divine goodness, you may be
   said to have lived in the world without either eyes or ears. And the
   reason why it must be so, is because bad syllogisms for
   transubstantiation, and better syllogisms against it, signify no more
   towards the casting satan out of our souls, than a bad or better taste
   for painting.

   [Addr-54] Hence also it is, that Christendom, full of the nicest
   decisions about faith, grace, works, merits, satisfactions, heresies,
   schisms, is full of all those evil tempers which prevailed in the
   heathen world, when none of these things were ever thought of.

   [Addr-55] A scholar, pitying the blindness and folly of those who live
   to themselves in the cares and pleasures of this vain life, thinks
   himself divinely employed, and to have escaped the pollutions of the
   world, because he is, day after day, dividing, dissecting, and mending
   church- opinions, fixing heresies here, schisms there; forgetting all
   the while, that a carnal self and natural reason have the doing of all
   that is done by this learned zeal, and are as busy and active in him,
   as in the reasoning infidel, or projecting worldling. For where self is
   wholly denied, there nothing can be called heresy, schism, or
   wickedness, but the want of loving God with our whole heart, and our
   neighbor as ourselves; nor anything be called truth, life, or
   salvation, but the Spirit, nature, and power of Christ living and
   manifesting itself in us, as it did in him. But where self or the
   natural man is become great in religious learning, there the greater
   the scholar, the more firmly will he be fixed in their religion, whose
   God is their belly. I write not to reason, says the blessed Jacob
   Behmen; O enthusiasm! says the mouth of learning: and yet Jacob said as
   sober a truth, as if he had said, I write not to self and own will; for
   natural reason, self and own will, always did, and always must see
   through the same eyes, and hear through the same ears. Now let it only
   be supposed, that Behmen and myself, when we speak of natural reason,
   mean only the natural man (as is over and over declared by us) and then
   Behmen's saying, that he writes neither from reason, nor to the natural
   reason of others, is only saying that very same thing as St. Paul says,
   that "the natural man receiveith not the things of the Spirit of God,
   for they are foolishness unto him, (N.B.) neither can he know them,
   (N.B.) because they are spiritually discerned."

   [Addr-56] But that I may fully show the perverseness of my accusers, in
   charging me with denying the use of reason in religion, see here a word
   or two of what I have said at large, and in the plainest words, more
   than twenty-four years ago, which doctrine I have maintained in all
   that I have since wrote. My words are these.

   [Addr-57] "You shall see reason possessed of all that belongs to it. I
   will grant it to have as great a share in the good things of religion,
   as in the good things of this life; that it can assist the soul, just
   as it can assist the body, that it has the same power and virtue in the
   spiritual, that it has in the natural world; that it can communicate to
   us as much of the one, as of the other, and is of the same use and
   importance in the one as in the other. Can you ask more?" All which I
   thus make out in the following manner.

   [Addr-58] "Man, considered as a member of this world, who is to have
   his share of the good that is in it, is a sensible, and a rational
   creature, that is, he has a certain number of senses, as seeing,
   hearing, tasting, touching, and smelling, by which he is sensible of
   that which the outward world, in which he is placed, can do for him, or
   communicate to him, and so is sensible of what kind and degree of
   happiness he can have from it.

   [Addr-59] "Now besides these organs of sense, he has a power or faculty
   of reasoning upon the ideas, which he has received from these senses.

   [Addr-60] "Now how is it, that the good things of this world are
   communicated to man? How is he put in possession of them? To what part
   of him are they proposed? Are his senses, or his reason, the means of
   his having so much as he has or can have from this world?

   [Addr-61] "Now here, you must degrade reason just as much as it is
   degraded by religion, and are obliged to set it as low with respect to
   the things of this world, as it is set with respect to the things of
   the spiritual world. It is no more the means of communicating the good
   things of the one, than of the other. And as St. Paul says, "The
   natural man cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God," for this
   reason, because they are spiritually discerned; so you must of
   necessity say, the rational man cannot receive the things of this
   world, for this reason, because they are sensibly received, that is, by
   the organs of sense. Reason therefore has no higher office or power in
   the things of this world, than in the things of religion; and religion
   does no more violence to your reason, or rejects it any other way, than
   all the good things of this world reject it; it is not seeing, it is
   not hearing, tasting, or feeling the things of this life; it can supply
   the place of no one of these senses.

   [Addr-62] "Now it is only thus helpless and useless in religion; it is
   neither seeing, nor hearing, tasting, nor feeling of spiritual things;
   therefore in the things of religion, and in the things of this world,
   it has one and the same insignificance. It is the sensibility of the
   soul that must receive what this world can communicate to it; it is the
   sensibility of the soul that must receive what God can communicate:
   reason may follow after in either case, and view through its own glass
   what is done, but it can no do no more. Reason may be here of the same
   service to us, as when we want any of the enjoyments of this life; it
   may direct us how and where they are to be had; it may take away a
   cover from our eyes, or open our window shutters when we want the
   light; but it can do no more towards seeing, than to make way for the
   light to act upon our eyes. This is all its office and ability in the
   things of religion; it may remove that which hinders the sensibility of
   the soul, or prevents the divine light's acting upon it, but the
   activity of the mind upon its own ideas or images, which the senses
   have caused it to form from that which has been stirred up in them, but
   has nothing of the nature of that which it speculates upon by ideas; it
   does not become dark, when it reasons upon the cause or nature of
   darkness, nor becomes light, when it reasons about it; neither is it
   religion, nor gets anything of the nature of religion, when it is
   wholly taken up in descriptions and definitions of religious doctrines
   and virtues.

   [Addr-63] "For the good of religion is like the good of food and drink
   to the creature that wants it. And if instead of giving such an one
   bread and wine, you should teach him to seek for relief by attending to
   clear ideas of the nature of bread, of different ways of making it, he
   would be left to die in the want of sustenance, just as the religion of
   reasoning leaves the soul to perish in the want of that good which it
   was to have from religion. And yet as a man may have the benefit of
   food much assisted by the right use of his reason, though reason has
   not the good of food in it, so a man may have the good of religion much
   assisted and secured to him, by the right use of his reason, though
   reason has not the good of religion in it. And as it would be great
   folly and perverseness, to accuse a man as an enemy to the true use of
   reasoning about food, because he declares that reason is not food, nor
   can supply the place of it, so is it equally such, to accuse a man as
   an enemy to the use of reasoning in religion, because he declares that
   reasoning is not religion, nor can supply the place of it. We have no
   want of religion, but because we want to have more of the divine nature
   in us than we have in our fallen nature. But if this be the truth of
   the matter (and who can deny it?) then we are sure that nothing can be
   our good in religion, but that which communicates to us something of
   God, or which alters our state of existence in God, and makes us
   partakers of the divine nature, in such a manner and degree as we
   wanted. What a folly is it then to put any trust in a religion of
   rational notions and opinions logically deduced from scripture words?
   Do we not see sinners of all sorts, and men under the power of every
   corrupt passion, equally zealous for such a religion? Proof enough,
   that it has not the good of religion in it, nor any contrariety to the
   vices of the heart; it neither kills them, nor is killed by them. For
   as pride, hypocrisy, envy or malice, do not take away from the mind its
   geometrical or critical abilities; so a man may be most logical in his
   religion of reason, words, doctrines, and opinions, when he has nothing
   of the true good of religion in him.

   [Addr-64] "But as soon as it is known and confessed, that all the
   happiness or misery of all creatures consists only in this, as they are
   more or less possessed of God, or as they differently partake of this
   divine nature, then it must be equally known, that nothing but God can
   do or be any religious good to us, and also that God cannot do, or be
   any religious good to us, but by the communication of himself, or the
   manifestation of his own life within us."

   [Addr-65] Hence may be seen the great and like blindness both of
   infidels and Christians; the one in trusting to their own reason
   dwelling in its own logical conclusions; the other in trusting to their
   own reason dwelling in learned opinions about scripture words and
   phrases, and doctrines built upon them. "For as soon as it is known and
   confessed, that God is all in all, that in him we live and move and
   have our being, that we can have nothing separately, or out of him, but
   everything in him, that we have no being or degree of being but in him,
   that he can give us nothing as our good but himself, nor any degree of
   salvation from our fallen nature, but in such degree as he again
   communicates something more of himself to us, as soon as this is known,
   then it is known with the utmost evidence, that to put a religious
   trust in our own reason, whether confined to itself, or working in
   doctrines about scripture words, has the nature of that same idolatry
   that puts a religious trust in the sun, a departed saint, or a graven
   image." {Demonstration of the Gross Errors in the Plain Account} And as
   image-worship has often boasted of its divine power, because of the
   wonders of zeal and devotion that have been raised thereby in
   thousands, and ten thousands of its followers, so it is no marvel, if
   opinion- worship should often have and boast of the same effects. But
   the truth of the whole matter lies here: as the WORD manifested in the
   flesh or become man, is the one mediator, or restorer of union between
   God and man, so to seeing eyes it must be evident, that nothing but
   this one mediatorial nature of Christ, essentially brought to life in
   our souls, can be our salvation through Christ Jesus. For that which
   saved and exalted that humanity in which Christ dwelt, must be the
   salvation of every human creature in the world. But to return. What
   poor divinity knowledge comes from great scholars, and great readers,
   may be sufficiently seen from the two following judicious quotations in
   a late Dissertation on Enthusiasm; the one is taken from Dr.
   Warburton's sermons, the other from a pastoral letter of Mr. Stinstra,
   a preacher among the Mennonists of Friesland. That from Dr. Warburton
   stands thus: "By them (that is, by the writings of the New Testament)
   the prophetic promise of our savior, that the comforter should abide
   for ever, was eminently fulfilled. For though his ordinary influence
   occasionally assists the faithful, yet his constant abode and supreme
   illumination is in the sacred scriptures." {Dissertation, page 10.} Dr.
   Warburton's doctrine is this, that the inspired books of the New
   Testament is that comforter, or spirit of truth, and illuminator, which
   is meant by Christ's being always with his church. Let us therefore put
   the doctor's doctrine into the letter of the text, which will best show
   how true or false it is.

   [Addr-66] Our Lord says, "It is expedient for you that I go away, or
   that comforter will not come"; that is, it is expedient for you, that I
   leave off teaching you in words, that sound only into your outward
   ears, that you may have the same words in writing, for your outward
   eyes to look upon; for if I do not depart from this vocal way of
   teaching you, the comforter will not come, that is, ye will not have
   the comfort of my words written on paper. But if I go away, I will send
   written books, which shall lead you into such a truth of words as you
   could not have, whilst they were only spoken from my mouth; but being
   written on paper, they will be my spiritual, heavenly, constant abode
   with you, and the most supreme illustration you can receive from me.

   [Addr-67] Christ says further: "I have many things to say unto you, but
   ye cannot bear them now: howbeit when he, the spirit of truth, is come,
   he shall guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself,
   for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you"; that is,
   though you cannot be sufficiently instructed from my words at present,
   yet when they shall hereafter come to you in written books, they will
   give you a knowledge of all truth, for they shall not speak of
   themselves, but shall receive words from me, and show them unto you.
   Again, Christ says, "These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs;
   but the time cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs,
   but will show you plainly of the Father." That is, hitherto you have
   only had spoken proverbs from me, and therefore you have not plainly
   known the Father; but the time cometh when these spoken proverbs shall
   be put into writing, and then you shall plainly know the Father. Again,
   Christ adds. "Ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will see you again,
   and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you."
   That is, you are now troubled at my personal departure from you, but
   some written books shall be my seeing you again, and in that visit you
   shall have such joy as cannot be taken from you.

   [Addr-68] Christ also says, "If any man loves me, my Father will love
   him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him." That is,
   according to the doctor's theology, certain books of scripture will
   come to him, and make their abode with him; for he expressly confines
   the constant abode and supreme illumination of God to the holy
   scriptures. Therefore (horrible to say) God's inward presence, his
   operating power of life and light in our souls, his dwelling in us, and
   we in him, is something of a lower nature, that only may occasionally
   happen, and has less of God in it than the dead letter of scripture,
   which alone is his constant abode and supreme illumination. Miserable
   fruits of a paradoxical genius!

   [Addr-69] Christ from heaven says, "Behold I stand at the door, and
   knock; if any man hear my voice, and open unto me, I will come into him
   and sup with him." This is his true eminent fulfilling of his prophetic
   promise of being a comforter, and spirit of truth to his church to the
   end of the world. But according to the doctor, we are to understand,
   that not the heavenly Christ, but the New Testament continually stands
   and knocks at the door, wanting to enter into the heart, and sup with
   it; which is no better than holding, that when Christ calls himself
   alpha and omega, he means not himself, but the New Testament. Again, "I
   am the vine, ye are the branches; as the branch cannot bear fruit of
   itself, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in
   me; for without me, ye can do nothing." Now take the doctor's comment,
   and then the truth of all these words of Christ was only temporary, and
   could be true no longer, than till the books of the New Testament were
   written; for then all this, which Christ has affirmed of himself, of
   the certainty and necessity of his life and power in them, ended in
   Christ, and passed over to the written words of the New Testament, and
   they are the true vine, and we its branches, they are that without
   which we can do nothing. For thus it must be, if, as the doctor
   affirms, the writings of the New Testament are that, by which we are to
   understand the constant abode and supreme illumination of God in man.
   Now absurd, and even blasphemous, as this interpretation of the
   foregoing text it, it must be evident to every reader, that it is all
   the doctor's own; for the letter of scripture is only made here to
   claim that divinity to itself, which the doctor has openly affirmed to
   be true of it.

   [Addr-70] "Rabbi," says Nicodemus to Christ, "we know that thou art a
   teacher come from God." Now that which was here truly said of Christ in
   the flesh, is the very truth that must be said of the scripture
   teaching in ink and paper; it is a teacher come from God, and therefore
   fully to be believed, highly reverenced, and strictly followed. But as
   Christ's teaching in the flesh was only preparatory to his future vital
   teaching by the Spirit, so the teaching of scripture by words written
   with ink and paper is only preparatory, or introductory to all that
   inward essential teaching of God, which is by his Spirit and truth
   within us. Every other opinion of the holy scripture, but that of an
   outward teacher and guide to God's inward teaching and illumination in
   our souls, is but making an idol-god of it: I say an idol-god; for to
   those who rest in it as the constant abode and supreme illumination of
   God with them, it can be nothing else. For, if nothing of divine faith,
   love, hope, or goodness, can have the least birth, or place in us, but
   by divine inspiration, they who think these virtues may be sufficiently
   raised in us by the letter of scripture, do in truth and reality make
   the letter of scripture their inspiring god. The apostles preached and
   wrote to the people by divine inspiration. But what do they say of
   their inspired doctrine and teachings? What virtue and power was there
   in them? Do they say that their words and teachings were the very
   promised comforter, the spirit of truth, the true abode and supreme
   illumination of God in the souls of men? So far from such a blasphemous
   thought, that they affirm the direct contrary, and compare all their
   inspired teachings and instructions to the dead works of bare planting
   and watering, and which must continue dead, till life comes into them
   from another and much higher power. "I have planted," says St. Paul,
   "Apollos has watered, but God gave the increase." And then further to
   show that this planting and watering, which was the highest work that
   an inspired apostle could do, was yet in itself to be considered as a
   lifeless, powerless thing, he adds, "So then, neither is he that
   planteth anything, nor he that watereth, but God that giveth the
   increase." But now, if this must be said of all that which the inspired
   apostles taught in outward words, that it was nothing in itself, was
   without power, without life, and only such a preparation towards life,
   as is that of planting and watering, must not that same be said of
   their inspired teachings, when left behind them in writing? For what
   else are the apostolical scriptures, but those very instructions and
   teachings put into writing, which they affirmed to be but bare planting
   and watering, quite powerless in themselves, till the living Spirit of
   God worked with them? Or will anyone say, that what Paul, Peter, John,
   spoke by inspiration from their own mouths, was indeed bare planting
   and watering, in order to be capable of receiving life from God; but
   when these apostolical teachings and instructions were written on
   paper, they were raised out of their first inability, got the nature of
   God himself, became spirit and life, and might be called the great
   quickening power of God, or, as the doctor says, the constant abode and
   supreme illumination of his Spirit with us?

   [Addr-71] It would be great folly and perverseness, to charge me here
   with slighting, or lessening the true value, use, and importance of the
   inspired apostolical scriptures; for if the charge was just, it must
   lie against Paul, and not against me, since I say nothing of them, but
   that which he says, and in his own express words, viz., that all their
   labor of preaching, instructing, and writing by divine inspiration, had
   in themselves no other nature, use, or power, than that of such
   planting and watering as could not fructify till a higher power than
   was in them gave life and growth to that which they planted and
   watered.

   [Addr-72] I exceedingly love, and highly reverence the divine authority
   of the sacred writings of the apostles and evangelists, and would
   gladly persuade everyone, to be as deeply affected with them, and pay
   as profound a regard to them, as they would to an Elijah, a St. John
   Baptist, or a Paul whom they knew to be immediately sent from heaven
   with God's message to them. I reverence them as a literal truth of and
   from God, as much the greatest heavenly blessing that can be outwardly
   bestowed upon us. I reverence them as doing, or fitted to do all that
   good amongst Christians now, which the apostles did in their day, and
   as of the same use and benefit to the church of every age, as their
   planting and watering was to the first.

   [Addr-73] But now, if this is not thought that fullness of regard that
   is due to the holy messengers of God; if anyone will still be so
   learnedly wise, as to affirm, that though Paul's preaching in his
   epistles, whilst he was alive, was indeed only bare planting and
   watering, but the same epistles, being published after his death, got
   another nature, became full of divine and living power, such a one has
   no right to laugh (as the doctor does) at the silly Mahometan, who
   believes the Alcoran to be uncreated. For wherever there is divine
   efficacy, there, there must be an uncreated power. And if, as the
   doctor says, the scriptures of the New Testament are the only constant
   abode and supreme illumination of the Spirit of God with us, all that
   is said of the eternal Spirit of God, of the uncreated light, might and
   ought to be said of them; that they are the WORD that was God, was with
   God, and are our true Immanuel, or God within us.

   [Addr-74] I shall now only add this friendly hint to the doctor, that
   he has a remedy at hand in his own sermon, how he may be delivered from
   thus grossly mistaking the spirit of the gospel, as well as the Law of
   Moses. St. Paul, (says the doctor) "had a quick and lively imagination,
   and an extensive and intimate acquaintance with those masters in moral
   painting, the classic writers, (N.B.) all which he proudly sacrificed
   to the glory of the everlasting gospel." {Sermons, vol i., page 229.}

   [Addr-75] Now if the doctor did that, though it was only from humility,
   which he says the apostle did proudly, such humility might be as great
   a good to him, as that pride was to the apostle. And indeed, one would
   have thought, that as soon as the doctor had discovered these writers
   to be only great masters in moral painting, it should have had the same
   effect upon him, as if he had found them great masters in delusion. For
   where there is moral painting, there, there is moral delusion. And the
   spirit, the life, the purity, and divine simplicity of gospel truth, is
   more eluded, lost, and destroyed by moral paintings, whether in books
   or pulpits, than by any material colorings put upon images of wood or
   clay, to excite spiritual devotion in churches. Again, if the
   everlasting gospel is now as glorious a thing, as it was in St. Paul's
   days; if the highest, most accomplished classic knowledge is so
   unsuitable to the light and Spirit of the gospel, that it is fit for
   nothing but to be cast away, or as the doctor says, "to be all
   sacrificed to the glory of the gospel," how wonderful is it, that this
   should never come into his head from the beginning to the end of his
   three long Legation-volumes, or that he should come piping hot with
   fresh and fresh classic beauties found out by himself in a Shakespeare,
   a Pope, to preach from the pulpit the divine wisdom of a loss and dung,
   that by so doing he might win Christ, and be found in him!

   [Addr-76] Let it be supposed, that our Lord was to come again for a
   while in the flesh, and that his coming was for this end, to do that
   for the Christian world cumbered with much learning, which he did to
   poor Martha, only cumbered with much serving, who thereby neglected
   that good part which Mary had chosen; must we suppose that the doctor
   would hasten to meet him with his sacred alliances, his bundles of
   pagan trash, and hieroglyphic profundities, as his full proof that
   Mary's good part, which shall never be taken from her, had been chosen
   for himself and all his readers? As well might it be thought, that the
   pope would come richly laden with his blessed images, his heavenly
   decrees, his divine bulls, as infallible proofs of his being born again
   from above, and solely devoted to the one thing needful.

   [Addr-77] Let the doctor figure to himself the gaudy pageantry of a
   divine high mass in a Romish cathedral; let him wonder at that flagrant
   daring contrariety that it hath to that first gospel- church of Christ,
   viz., "where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I
   in the midst of them"; would he not be still fuller of wonder, if he
   should hear the pope declaring that all this heathenish show of
   invented fopperies was his projected defense of that first church of
   Christ? But if the doctor would see a Protestant wonder full as great,
   he need only look at his own theatrical parading show of heathen
   mysteries, and heathenish learning, set forth in highest pomp. To what
   end? Why to bring forth, what he calls (as the pope above) his
   projected defense of Christianity.

   [Addr-78] O vainest of all vain projects! For what is Christianity, but
   that which Christ was whilst on earth? What can it be, but that which
   it is, and has from him? He is a king, who has all power in heaven and
   on earth, and his kingdom, like himself, is not of this world. Away
   then with the projects of popish pomp, and pagan literature to support
   it; they are as wise contrivances, as a high tower of Babel to defend
   it against the gates of hell.

   [Addr-79] I come now to the quotation from the pastoral letter of Mr.
   Stinstra. "A judicious writer," (says the Dissertation), "observes,
   that sound understanding and reason are that on which, and by which,
   God principally operates (N.B.) when he finds it proper to assist
   (N.B.) our weakness by his Spirit." {Dissertation, page 73.}

   [Addr-80] I cannot more illustrate the sense, or extol the judgment,
   both of the author, and quoter of this striking passage, than by the
   following words.

   [Addr-81] "A judicious naturalist observes, that sound and strong lungs
   are that on which, and by which, the air or spirit of this world
   principally operates, when (N.B.) he finds it proper to assist, (N.B.)
   the weakness of our lungs, by his breathing into them." Now if any
   right minded man should happen to find his heart edified, his
   understanding enlightened, by the above passage on divine inspiration,
   he will be much pleased at my assuring him, that the pastoral letter of
   Mr. Stinstra, and the Dissertation on Enthusiasm by Mr. Green, are from
   the beginning to the end full as good, in every respect, as that is.

   [Addr-82] These two instances are proof enough, that as soon as any man
   trusts to natural abilities, skill in languages, and commonplace
   learning, as the true means of entering into the kingdom of God, a
   kingdom, which is nothing else but righteousness, peace, and joy in the
   Holy Ghost, he gives himself up to certain delusion, and can escape no
   error that is popular, or that suits his state and situation in the
   learned, religious world. He has sold his birth-right in the gospel
   state of divine illumination, to make a figure and noise with the
   sounding brass and tinkling cymbals of the natural man.

   [Addr-83] Whence is it, that we see genius and natural abilities to be
   equally pleased with, and equally contending for the errors and
   absurdities of every system of religion, under which they are educated?
   It is because genius and natural abilities are just the same things,
   and must have the same nature now, as they had in the ancient schools
   of the peripatetic, academic, stoic, and atheistical philosophers. "The
   temptation of honor, which the academic exercise of wit" (as Dr. W.
   says) "was supposed to bring to its professor," {Divine Legation of
   Moses, Book I., page 33.} has still its power among church disputants.
   Nor can it possibly ever be otherwise, till parts and genius, do, as
   the blind, the deaf, the dumb, and lepers formerly did, go to be healed
   of their natural disorders by the inspiration of that oracle, who said,
   "I am the light of the world, he that followeth me, walketh not in
   darkness." "No man cometh unto the Father but by me." Well therefore
   might St. Paul say, "I have determined to know nothing among you, but
   Christ, and him crucified." And had it not been for this determination,
   he had never known, what he then knew, when he said, "The life that I
   now live, is not mine, but Christ's that liveth in me." Now did the
   apostle here overstretch the matter? Was it a spirit of enthusiasm, and
   not of Christ living in him, that made this declaration? Was he here
   making way for ignorance and darkness to extinguish the light that came
   down from heaven, and was the light of the world? Did he here undermine
   the true ground and rock on which the church of Christ was to stand,
   and prevail against the gates of hell? Did he by setting up this
   knowledge, as the best and only knowledge that an apostle need to have,
   break down the fences of Christ's vineyard, rob the church of all its
   strong holds, leave it defenseless, without a pale, and a ready prey to
   infidels? Who can say this, but that "spirit of anti-Christ, that
   confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh?" For, as
   Christ's intending nothing, knowing nothing, willing nothing, but
   purely and solely the whole course of his crucifying process, was the
   whole truth of his being come in the flesh, was his doing the whole
   will of him that sent him, was his overcoming the world, death, and
   hell, so he that embraces this process, as Christ embraces it, who is
   wholly given up to it, as Christ was, he has the will of Christ, and
   the mind of Christ, and therefore may well desire to know nothing else.
   To this man alone, is the world, death, and hell, known to be overcome
   in him, as they were in Christ; to him alone is Christ become the
   resurrection and the life; and he that knows this, he knows with St.
   Paul that all other knowledge may, and will be cast away as dung. Now
   if St. Paul, having rejected all other knowledge but that of a
   crucified savior, which to the Jew was a stumbling-block, and to the
   Greek foolishness, if he had afterwards wrote three such
   Legation-volumes as the doctor has done, for the food and nourishment
   of Christ's sheep, who can have no life in them but by eating the true
   bread that came down from heaven, must they not have been called Paul's
   full recantation of all that he had taught of a Christ crucified?

   [Addr-84] The other instance of delusion from book learning, relates to
   Mr. Green, who wanting to write on divine inspiration, runs from book
   to book, from country to country, to pick up reports wherever he could
   find them, concerning divine inspiration, from this and that judicious
   author, that so he might be sure of compiling a judicious dissertation
   on the subject. All which he might have known to be mere delusion and
   lost labor, had he but remembered, or regarded any one single saying
   either of Christ or his apostles concerning the Holy Spirit and his
   operations. For not a word is said by them, but fully shows that all
   knowledge or perception of the Spirit is nothing else but the enjoyment
   of the Spirit, and that no man can know more of him than that which the
   Spirit himself is, and does, and manifests of his power in man.

   [Addr-85] "The things of God," says St. Paul, "knoweth no man, but the
   Spirit of God." Is not this decisive upon the matter? Is not this proof
   enough, that nothing in man but the Spirit of God in him, can know what
   the Spirit's work in man is and does? The fruits of the Spirit, so
   often mentioned in scripture, are not things different, or separate
   from the Spirit; and if the Spirit is not always working in us, his
   fruits must be as absent from us as he is. St. John says, "Hereby we
   know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us." A
   demonstration, that the Spirit can no other way make himself known to
   us, but by his dwelling and working in us. St. James says, "Every good
   and perfect gift cometh from ABOVE": but now does not he in reality
   deny this, who seeks for the highest gift of knowledge from BELOW, from
   the poor contrivance of a commonplace book? Again, "if any man lacketh
   wisdom, let him ask it of God"; St. James does not say, let him go ask
   Peter, or Paul, or John, because he knew that divine wisdom was nothing
   else, but divine inspiration. But Mr. Green has got together his
   ingenious, his eminent writers, his excellent, learned, judicious
   authors, his cool, rational- morality doctors (a set of men whose
   glorious names we read no more of in the gospel, than of the profound
   Aristotle, or the divine Cicero) and these are to do that for him,
   which the whole college of apostles could do for nobody. Now this
   doctrine, that nothing but the Spirit can know the things that be of
   God, and that the enjoyment of the Spirit, is all the knowledge that we
   can have of him, is a truth taught us, not only by all scripture, but
   by the whole nature of things. For everything that can be seen, known,
   heard, felt, must be manifested by itself, and not by another. It is
   not possible for anything but light to manifest light, nor for anything
   but darkness to make darkness to be known. Yet this is more possible,
   than for anything but divine inspiration to make divine inspiration to
   be known. Hence there is a degree of delusion still higher, to be noted
   in such writers as Mr. Green; for his collection of ingenious, eminent,
   rational authors, of whom he asks counsel concerning the necessity or
   certainty of the immediate inspiration of the Spirit, are such as deny
   it, and write against it. Therefore the proceeding is just as wise, as
   if a man was to consult some ingenious and eminent atheists, about the
   truth and certainty of God's immediate continual providence; or ask a
   few selected Deists, how, or what he was to believe of the nature and
   power of gospel faith. Now there are the Holy Spirit's own operations,
   and there are reports about them. The only true reports, are those that
   are made by inspired persons; and if there were no such persons, there
   could be no true reports of the matter. And therefore to consult
   uninspired persons, and such as deny and reproach the pretense to
   inspiration, to be rightly instructed about the truth of immediate
   continual divine inspiration, is a degree of blindness greater than can
   be charged upon the old Jewish scribes and Pharisees.

   [Addr-86] The reports that are to be acknowledged as true concerning
   the Holy Spirit and his operations, are those that are recorded in
   scripture; that is, the scriptures are an infallible history, or
   relation of that which the Holy Spirit is, and does, and works in true
   believers; and also an infallible direction how we are to seek, and
   wait, and trust in his good power over us. But then the scriptures
   themselves, though thus true and infallible in these reports and
   instructions about the Holy Spirit, yet they can go no further than to
   be a true history; they cannot give to the reader of them the
   possession, the sensibility, and enjoyment of that which they relate.
   This is plain, not only from the nature of a written history or
   instruction, but from the express words of our Lord, saying, "Except a
   man be born again of the Spirit, he cannot see or enter into the
   kingdom of God." Therefore the new birth from above, or of the Spirit,
   is that alone which gives true knowledge and perception of that which
   is the kingdom of God. The history may relate truths enough about it;
   but the kingdom of God, being nothing else but the power and presence
   of God, dwelling and ruling in our souls, this can only manifest
   itself, and can manifest itself to nothing in man but to the new birth.
   For everything else in man is deaf and dumb and blind to the kingdom of
   God; but when that which died in Adam is made alive again by the
   quickening Spirit from above, this being the birth which came at first
   from God, and a partaker of the divine nature, this knows, and enjoys
   the kingdom of God.

   [Addr-87] "I am the way, the truth, and the life," says Christ: this
   record of scripture is true; but what a delusion, for a man to think
   that he knows and finds this to be true, and that Christ is all this
   benefit and blessing to him, because he assents, consents, and
   contends, it may be, for the truth of those words. This is impossible.
   The new birth is here again the only power of entrance; everything else
   knocks at the door in vain: I know you not says Christ to everything,
   but the new birth. "I am the way, the truth and the life"; this tells
   us neither more nor less, than if Christ had said, I am the kingdom of
   God, into which nothing can enter, but that which is born of the
   Spirit.

   [Addr-88] Here again may be seen, in the highest degree of certainty,
   the absolute necessity of immediate divine inspiration through every
   part of the Christian life. For if a birth of the Spirit is that alone
   that can enter into, or receive the kingdom of God come amongst men,
   that alone which can find Christ to be the way, the truth and the life,
   then a continual life or breathing of the Spirit in us, must be as
   necessary as the first birth of the Spirit. For a birth of the Spirit
   is only to make a beginning of a life of the Spirit: birth is only in
   order to life; if therefore the life of the Spirit continues not, the
   birth is lost, and the cessation of its breathing in us is nothing else
   but death again to the kingdom of God, that is, to everything that is
   or can be godly. Therefore the immediate continual inspiration of the
   Spirit, as the only possible power and preservation of a godly life,
   stands upon the same ground, and is as absolutely necessary to
   salvation, as the new birth.

   [Addr-89] Take away this power and working life of the Spirit from
   being the one life of all that is done in the church, and then, though
   it be ever so outwardly glorious in its extent, or ever so full of
   learned members, it can be nothing else in the sight of God but the
   wise Greeks and the carnal Jews become a body of water-baptized
   Christians. For no one can be in a better state than this, the wisdom
   of the Greek, the carnality of the Jew, must have the whole government
   of him, till he is born of and led by the Spirit of God; this alone is
   the kingdom of God, and everything else is the kingdom of this world,
   in which satan is declared to be the prince. Poor, miserable man! that
   strives, with all the sophistry of human wit, to be delivered from the
   immediate continual operation and governance of the Spirit of God, not
   considering, that where God is not, there is the devil, and where the
   Spirit rules not, there all is the work of the flesh, though nothing be
   talked of but spiritual and Christian matters. I say talked of; for the
   best ability of the natural man can go no further than talk, and
   notions, and opinions about scripture words and facts; in these, he may
   be a great critic, an acute logician, a powerful orator, and know
   everything of scripture, except the Spirit and the truth.

   [Addr-90] How much then is it to be lamented, as well as impossible to
   be denied, that though all scripture assures us, that the things of the
   Spirit of God are and must, to the end of the world, be foolishness to
   the natural man, yet from one end of learned Christendom to the other,
   nothing is thought of as the true and proper means of attaining divine
   knowledge, but that which every natural, selfish, proud, envious,
   false, vain-glorious, worldly man can do. Where is that divinity
   student who thinks, or was ever taught to think, of partaking of the
   light of the gospel any other way, than by doing with the scriptures
   that which he does with pagan writers, whether poets, orators, or
   comedians, viz., exercise his logic, rhetoric, and critical skill, in
   descanting upon them? This done, he is thought by himself, and often by
   others, to have a sufficiency of divine apostolical knowledge. What
   wonder therefore, if it should sometimes happen, that the very same
   vain, corrupt, puffing literature, that raises one man to be a
   poet-laureate, should set another in a divinity chair?

   [Addr-91] How is it that the logical, critical, learned Deist comes by
   his infidelity? Why just by the same help of the same good powers of
   the natural man, as many a learned Christian comes to know, embrace,
   and contend for the faith of the gospel. For, drop the power and
   reality of divine inspiration, and then all is dropped that can set the
   believer above, or give him any godly difference from the infidel. For
   the Christian's faith has no goodness in it, but that it comes from
   above, is born of the Spirit; and the Deist's infidelity has no badness
   in it, but because it comes from below, is born of the will of the
   flesh and the will of men, and rejects the necessity of being born
   again out of the corruption of fallen nature. The Christian therefore
   that rejects, reproaches, and writes against the necessity of immediate
   divine inspiration, pleads the whole cause of infidelity; he confirms
   the ground, on which it stands; and has nothing to prove the goodness
   of his own Christianity, but that which equally proves to the Deist the
   goodness of his infidelity. For without the new birth, or which is the
   same thing, without immediate continual divine inspiration, the
   difference between the Christian and the infidel is quite lost; and
   whether the uninspired unregenerate son of Adam be in the church, or
   out of the church, he is still that child of this world, that fallen
   Adam, and mere natural man, to whom the things of the Spirit of God are
   and must be foolishness. For a full proof of this no more need be seen,
   than that which you cannot help seeing, that the same shining virtues,
   and the same glaring vices are common to them both. For the Christian,
   not made such by the Spirit of God continually inspiring and working in
   him, has only a Christianity of his own making, and can have only such
   appearances of virtues, and will have such reality of vices, as natural
   self wants to have. Let him therefore renounce what is called natural
   religion as much as he will, yet unless he is a new born and divinely
   inspired Christian, he must live and die in all his natural corruption.

   [Addr-92] Through all scripture nothing else is aimed at or intended
   for man, as his Christianity, but the divine life, nor anything hinted
   at, as having the least power to raise or beget it, but the holy
   life-giving Spirit of God. How gross therefore is that blindness, which
   reading the gospel, and the history of gospel Christians, cannot see
   these two fundamental truths, (1) "That nothing is divine knowledge in
   man, but the divine life": (2) "That the divine life is nothing else
   but a birth of the divine nature within him"?

   [Addr-93] But this truth being lost or given up, vain learning and a
   worldly spirit, being in possession of the gospel-book, set up kingdoms
   of strife and division. For what end? Why, that the unity of the church
   may not be lost. Multiply systems of empty notions and opinions: for
   what? Why, that words and forms may do that for the church now, which
   to the first church, of Christ's own forming, could only be done by
   being born of the Spirit.

   [Addr-94] Hence it is, that the scripture-scholar is looked upon as
   having divine knowledge of its matters, when he is as ready at chapter
   and verse, as the critic is at every page of Cicero. And nothing is
   looked upon as defective in divinity knowledge, but such supposed
   mistakes of the genius of the Hebrew, or Greek letter, as the sublime
   students of the immortal words of a Milton, or a Shakespeare, charge as
   blunders upon one another.

   [Addr-95] Now to call such scripture skill divine knowledge, is just as
   solid and judicious, as if a man was said, or thought to know, that
   which St. John knew, because he could say his whole gospel and epistles
   by heart, without missing a word of them. For a literal knowledge of
   scripture is but like having all scripture in the memory, and is so far
   from being a divine perception of the things spoken of, that the most
   vicious wicked scholar in the world may attain to the highest
   perfection in it. But divine knowledge and wickedness of life are so
   inconsistent, that they are mutual death and destruction to one
   another; where the one is alive, the other must be dead. Judas Iscariot
   knew Jesus Christ, and all that he said and did to his crucifixion; he
   knew what it was to be at the Lord's table, and to partake of his
   supper of bread and wine. But yet, with much more truth it may be said,
   that he knew nothing of all this, and had no better knowledge of it
   than Pontius Pilate had. Now all knowledge of Christ, but that which is
   from divine inspiration, or the new birth, is but as poor and
   profitless, as Judas his knowledge was. It may say to Christ, as he
   did, Hail master; but no one can call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy
   Spirit. This empty letter-learned knowledge, which the natural man can
   as easily have of the sacred scripture and religious matters, as of any
   other books or human affairs, this being taken for divine knowledge,
   has spread such darkness and delusion all over Christendom, as may be
   reckoned no less than a general apostasy from the gospel state of
   divine illumination. For the gospel state is in its whole nature
   nothing else; it has but one light, and that is the Lamb of God; it has
   but one life, and that is by the Spirit of God. Whatever is not of and
   from this light, and governed by this Spirit, call it by what high name
   you will, is no more a part of the gospel state, nor will have a better
   end, than that which entereth into the mouth, and corrupteth in the
   belly.

   [Addr-96] That one light and Spirit, which was only one from all
   eternity, before angels or any heavenly beings were created, must to
   all eternity be that one only light and Spirit, by which angels or men
   can ever have any union or communion with God. Every other light is but
   the light whence beasts have their sense and subtlety; every other
   spirit, is but that which gives to flesh and blood all its lusts and
   appetites. Nothing else but the loss of the one light and Spirit of God
   turned an order of angels into devils. Nothing else but the loss of
   that same light and Spirit took from the divine Adam his first crown of
   paradisaical glory, stripped him more naked than the beasts, and left
   him a prey to devils, and in the jaws of eternal death. What therefore
   can have the least share of power towards man's redemption, but the
   light and Spirit of God making again a birth of themselves in him, as
   they did in his first glorious creation? Or what can possibly begin, or
   bring forth this return of his first lost birth, but solely that which
   is done by this eternal light and Spirit. Hence it is, that the gospel
   state is by our Lord affirmed to be a kingdom of heaven at hand, or
   come among men, because it has the nature of no worldly thing or
   creaturely power, is to serve no worldly ends, can be helped by no
   worldly power, receives nothing from man but man's full denial of
   himself, stands upon nothing that is finite or transitory, has no
   existence but in that working power of God that created and upholds
   heaven and earth, and is a kingdom of God become man, and a kingdom of
   men united to God, through a continual immediate divine illumination.
   What scripture of the New Testament can you read, that does not prove
   this to be the gospel state, a kingdom of God, into which none can
   enter but by being born of the Spirit, none can continue to be alive in
   it but by being led by the Spirit, and in which not a thought, or
   desire, or action, can be allowed to have any part in it, but as it is
   a fruit of the Spirit?

   [Addr-97] "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in
   heaven." What is God's kingdom in heaven, but the manifestation of what
   God is, and what he does in his heavenly creatures? How is his will
   done there, but because his Holy Spirit is the life, the power, and
   mover of all that live in it. We daily read this prayer, we extol it
   under the name of the Lord's Prayer, and yet (for the sake of
   orthodoxy) preach and write against all that is prayed for in it. For
   nothing but a continual, essential, immediate divine illumination can
   do that which we pray may be done.

   [Addr-98] For where can God's kingdom be come, but where every other
   power but his is at an end, and driven out of it? How can his will only
   be done, but where the Spirit that wills in God wills in the creature?

   [Addr-99] What now have parts, and literature, and the natural
   abilities of man, that they can do here? Just as much as they can do at
   the resurrection of the dead; for all that is to be done here is
   nothing else but resurrection and life. Therefore, that which gave eyes
   to the blind, cleansed the lepers, cast out devils, and raised the
   dead, that alone can and must do all that is to be done in this gospel
   kingdom of God. For every the smallest work or fruit of grace must be
   as solely done by God, as the greatest miracle in nature; and the
   reason is, because every work of grace is the same overcoming of
   nature, as when the dead are raised to life. Yet vain man would be
   thought to be something, to have great power and ability in this
   kingdom of grace, not because he has happened to be made a scholar, has
   run through all languages and histories, has been long exercised in
   conjectures and criticisms, and has his head as full of all notions,
   theological, poetical, and philosophical, as a dictionary is full of
   all sorts of words.

   [Addr-100] Now let this simple question decide the whole matter here:
   has this great scholar any more power of saying to this mountain, "Be
   thou removed hence, and cast into the sea," than the illiterate
   Christian has? If not, he is just as weak, as powerless, and little in
   the kingdom of God as he is. But if the illiterate man's faith should
   happen to be nearer to the bulk of a grain of mustard seed, than that
   of the prodigious scholar, the illiterate Christian stands much above
   him in the kingdom of God.

   [Addr-101] Look now at the present state of Christendom, glorying in
   the light of Greek and Roman learning (which an age or two ago broke
   forth) as a light that has helped the gospel to shine with a luster,
   that it scarce ever had before. Look at this, and you will see the fall
   of the present church from its first gospel state, to have much
   likeness to the fall of the first divine man from the glory of
   paradisaical innocence and heavenly purity into an earthly state, and
   bestial life of worldly craft and serpentine subtlety.

   [Addr-102] In the first gospel church, heathen light had no other name
   than heathen darkness; and the wisdom of words was no more sought
   after, than that friendship of the world which is enmity with God. In
   that new born church, the tree of life, which grew in the midst of
   paradise, took root and grew up again. In the present church, the tree
   of life is hissed at, as the visionary food of deluded enthusiasts; and
   the tree of death, called the tree of knowledge of good and evil, has
   the eyes and hearts of priest and people, and is thought to do as much
   good to Christians, as it did evil to the first inhabitants of
   paradise. This tree, that brought death and corruption into human
   nature at first, is now called a tree of light, and is day and night
   well watered with every corrupt stream, however distant, or muddy with
   earth, that can be drawn to it.

   [Addr-103] The simplicity indeed, both of the gospel letter and
   doctrine, has the shine and polish of classic literature laid thick
   upon it. Cicero is in the pulpit, Aristotle writes Christian ethics,
   Euclid demonstrates infidelity and absurdity to be the same thing.
   Greece had but one Longinus, Rome had but one Quintilian; but in our
   present church, they are as common as patriots in the state.

   [Addr-104] But now, what follows from this new risen light? Why,
   Aristotle's atheism, Cicero's height of pride and depth of
   dissimulation, and every refined or gross species of Greek and Roman
   vices, are as glaring in this new enlightened Christian church, as ever
   they were in old pagan Greece or Rome. Would you find a gospel-
   Christian in all this midday glory of learning, you may light a candle,
   as the philosopher did in the midday sun, to find an honest man.

   [Addr-105] And indeed, if we consider the nature of our salvation,
   either with respect to that which alone can save us, or that from which
   we are to be saved, it will be plain, that the wit and elegance of
   classic literature, brought into a Christian church to make the
   doctrines of the cross have a better salvation-effect upon fallen man,
   is but like calling in the assistance of balls and masquerades, to make
   the lent-penitence go deeper into the heart, and more effectually drive
   all levity and impurity out of it. How poorly was the gospel at first
   preached, if the wisdom of words, and the gifts of natural wit and
   imagination had been its genuine helps? But alas, they stand in the
   same contrariety to one another, as self-denial and self-gratification.
   To know the truth of gospel salvation, is to know that man's natural
   wisdom is to be equally sacrificed with his natural folly; for they are
   but one and the same thing, only called sometimes by one name, and
   sometimes by the other.

   [Addr-106] His intellectual faculties are, by the fall, in a much worse
   state than his natural animal appetites, and want a much greater self-
   denial. And when own will, own understanding, and own imagination have
   their natural strength indulged and gratified, and are made seemingly
   rich and honorable with the treasures acquired from a study of the
   belles lettres, they will just as much help poor fallen man to be like-
   minded with Christ, as the art of cookery, well and daily studied, will
   help a professor of the gospel to the spirit and practice of Christian
   abstinence. To know all this to be strictly the truth, no more need be
   known, than these two things: (1) that our salvation consists wholly in
   being saved from ourselves, or that which we are by nature; (2) that in
   the whole nature of things, nothing could be this salvation, or savior
   to us, but such an humility of God manifested in human nature, as is
   beyond all expression. Hence, the first unalterable term of this savior
   to fallen man, is this, "Except a man denies himself, forsakes all that
   he has, yea and his own life, he cannot be my disciple." And to show,
   that this is but the beginning, or ground of man's salvation, the
   savior adds, "Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly of heart." What a
   light is here, for those that can bear, or love the light! Self is the
   whole evil of fallen nature; self-denial is our capacity of being
   saved; humility is our savior. This is every man's short lesson of
   life; and he that has well learned it, is scholar enough, and has had
   all the benefit of a most finished education. Then old Adam with all
   his ignorance is cast out of him; and when Christ's humility is
   learned, then he has the very mind of Christ, and that which brings him
   forth a son of God.

   [Addr-107] Who then can enough wonder at that bulk of libraries, which
   has taken place of this short lesson of the gospel, or at that number
   of champion disputants, who from age to age, have been all in arms to
   support and defend a set of opinions, doctrines, and practices, all
   which may be most cordially embraced, without the least degree of self-
   denial, and most firmly held fast, without getting the least degree of
   humility by it?

   [Addr-108] What a grossness of ignorance, both of man and his savior,
   to run to Greek and Roman schools to learn how to put off Adam, and to
   put on Christ? To drink at the fountains of pagan poets and orators, in
   order more divinely to drink of the cup that Christ drank of? What can
   come of all this, but that which is already too much come, a
   Ciceronian- gospeller, instead of a gospel- penitent? Instead of the
   depth, the truth and spirit of the humble publican, seeking to regain
   paradise, only by a broken heart, crying, "God, be merciful to me a
   sinner," the high-bred classic will live in daily transports at the
   enormous {See Milton's Enormous Bliss.} sublime of a Milton, flying
   thither on the unfeathered wings of high sounding words.

   [Addr-109] This will be more or less the case with all the salvation-
   doctrines of Christ, whilst under classical acquisition and
   administration. Those divine truths, which are no further good and
   redeeming, but as they are spirit and life in us, which can have no
   entrance, or birth, but in the death of self, in a broken and contrite
   heart, will serve only to help classic painters (as Dr. W {As this
   address was wrote some time ago, in which are certain strictures upon
   Dr. Warburton's writings, who has lately been consecrated a Right
   Reverend Lord Bishop; I thought it more candid not to alter my style,
   than to take the advantage of charging such gross errors on a Bishop of
   Gloucester, which I only found in a Mr. and Dr. Warburton.} calls them)
   to lavish out their colors on their own paper monuments of lifeless
   virtues.

   [Addr-110] How came the learned heathens by their pride and vanity, by
   their inability to come under the humility of the cross? It was because
   the natural man shined in the false glory of his own cultivated
   abilities. Have wit and parts, an elegant taste, any more good or
   redeeming virtue in Christians, than they had in heathens? As well
   might it be said, that own will is good, and has a redeeming virtue in
   a Christian, but bad and destructive in a heathen. I said a redeeming
   virtue in it; because nothing is or can be a religious good to fallen
   man, but that which has a redeeming virtue in it, or is, so far as it
   goes, a true renewal of the divine life in the soul. Therefore, said
   our only redeemer, "Without me, ye can do nothing." Whatever is not his
   immediate work in us is at best but a mere nothing with respect to the
   good of our redemption. A tower of Babel may to its builders' eyes seem
   to hide its head in the clouds, but as to its reaching of heaven, it is
   no nearer to that, than the earth on which it stands. It is thus with
   all the buildings of man's wisdom and natural abilities in the things
   of salvation; he may take the logic of Aristotle, add to that the
   rhetoric of Tully, and then ascend as high as he can on the ladder of
   poetic imagination, yet no more is done to the reviving the lost life
   of God in his soul, than by a tower of brick and mortar to reach
   heaven.

   [Addr-111] Self is the root, the tree, and the branches of all the
   evils of our fallen state. We are without God, because we are in the
   life of self. Self-love, self-esteem, and self-seeking, are the very
   essence, and life of pride; and the devil the first father of pride, is
   never absent from them, nor without power in them. To die to these
   essential properties of self, is to make the devil depart from us. But
   as soon as we would have self-abilities have a share in our good works,
   the satanic spirit of pride is in union with us, and we are working for
   the maintenance of self-love, self-esteem, and self-seeking.

   [Addr-112] All the vices of fallen angels and men have their birth and
   power in the pride of self, or I may better say, in the atheism and
   idolatry of self; for self is both atheist and idolator. It is atheist,
   because it has rejected God; it is an idolator, because it is its own
   idol. On the other hand, all the virtues of the heavenly life are the
   virtues of humility. Not a joy, or glory, or praise in heaven, but is
   what it is through humility. It is humility alone that makes the
   unpassable gulf between heaven and hell. No angels in heaven, but
   because humility is in all their breath; no devils in hell, but because
   the fire of pride is their whole fire of life.

   [Addr-113] What is then, or in what lies the great struggle for eternal
   life? It all lies in the strife between PRIDE and HUMILITY: all other
   things, be they what they will, are but as under workmen; pride and
   humility are the two master powers, the two kingdoms of strife for the
   eternal possession of man.

   [Addr-114] And here it is to be observed, that every son of Adam is in
   the service of pride and self, be he doing what he will, till a
   humility that comes solely from heaven has been his redeemer. Till
   then, all that he doth will be only done by the right hand, that the
   left hand may know it. And he that thinks it possible for the natural
   man to get a better humility than this from his own right reason (as it
   is often miscalled) refined by education, shows himself quite ignorant
   of this one most plain and capital truth of the gospel, namely, that
   there never was, nor ever will be, but one humility in the whole world,
   and that is the one humility of Christ, which never any man, since the
   fall of Adam, had the least degree of but from Christ. Humility is one,
   in the same sense and truth, as Christ is one, the mediator is one,
   redemption is one. There are not two Lambs of God that take away the
   sins of the world. But if there was any humility besides that of
   Christ, there would be something else besides him that could take away
   the sins of the world. "All that came before me," says Christ, "were
   thieves and robbers": we are used to confine this to persons; but the
   same is as true of every virtue, whether it has the name of humility,
   charity, piety, or anything else; if it comes before Christ, however
   good it may pretend to be, it is but a cheat, a thief, and a robber,
   under the name of godly virtue. And the reason is, because pride and
   self have the all of man, till man has his all from Christ. He
   therefore only fights the good fight, whose strife is, that the
   self-idolatrous nature which he hath from Adam may be brought to death,
   by the supernatural humility of Christ brought to life in him.

   [Addr-115] The enemies to man's rising out of the fall of Adam, through
   the Spirit and power of Christ, are many. But the one great dragon-
   enemy, called anti-Christ, is SELF-EXALTATION. This is his birth, his
   pomp, his power, and his throne; when self-exaltation ceases, the last
   enemy is destroyed, and all that came from the pride and death of Adam
   is swallowed up in victory.

   [Addr-116] There has been much sharp looking out, to see where and what
   anti-Christ is, or by what marks he may be known. Some say he has been
   in the Christian world almost ever since the gospel times, nay, that he
   was even then beginning to appear and show himself. Others say he came
   in with this, or that pope; others that he is not yet come, but near at
   hand. Others will have it, that he has been here, and there, but driven
   from one place to another by several new risen Protestant sects.

   [Addr-117] But to know with certainty, where and what anti-Christ is,
   and who is with him, and who against him, you need only read this short
   description which Christ gives of himself. "(1) I can do nothing of
   myself. (2) I came not to do my own will. (3) I seek not my own glory.
   (4) I am meek and lowly of heart." Now if this is Christ, then self-
   ability or self-exaltation, being the highest and fullest contrariety
   to all this, must be alone the one great anti-Christ, that opposes and
   withstands the whole nature and Spirit of Christ.

   [Addr-118] What therefore has everyone so much to fear, to renounce and
   abhor, as every inward sensibility of self-exaltation, and every
   outward work that proceeds from it. But now, at what things shall a man
   look, to see that working of self which raises pride to its strongest
   life, and most of all hinders the birth of the humble Jesus in his
   soul? Shall he call the pomps and vanities of the world the highest
   works of self-adoration? Shall he look at the fops and beaux, and
   painted ladies, to see the pride that has the most of anti-Christ in
   it? No, by no means. These are indeed marks, shameful enough, of the
   vain, foolish heart of man, but yet, comparatively speaking, they are
   but the skin- deep follies of that pride which the fall of man has
   begotten and brought forth in him. Would you see the deepest root, and
   iron-strength of pride and self-adoration, you must enter into the dark
   chamber of man's fiery soul, where the light of God (which alone gives
   humility and meek submission to all created spirits) being extinguished
   by the death which Adam died, satan, or which is the same thing
   self-exaltation became the strong man that kept possession of the
   house, till a stronger than he should come upon him. In this secret
   source of an eternal fiery soul, glorying in the astral light of this
   world, a swelling kingdom of pomps and vanities is set up in the heart
   of man, of which, all outward pomps and vanities are but its childish
   transitory playthings. The inward strong man of pride, the diabolical
   self, has his higher works within; he dwells in the strength of the
   heart, and has every power and faculty of the soul offering continual
   incense to him. His memory, his will, his understanding, his
   imagination, are always at work for him, and for no one else. His
   memory is the faithful repository of all the fine things that self has
   ever done; and lest anything of them should be lost or forgotten, she
   is continually setting them before his eyes. His will, though it has
   all the world before it, yet goes after nothing, but as self sends it.
   His understanding is ever upon the stretch for new projects to enlarge
   the dominions of self; and if this fails, imagination comes in, as the
   last and truest support of self, she makes him a king and mighty lord
   of castles in the air.

   [Addr-119] This is that full-born natural self, that must be pulled out
   of the heart, and totally denied, or there can be no disciple of
   Christ; which is only saying this plain truth, that the apostate
   self-idolatrous nature of the old man must be put off, or there can be
   no new creature in Christ.

   [Addr-120] Now what is it in the human soul that most of all hinders
   the death of this old man? What is it that above all other things
   strengthens and exalts the life of self, and makes it the master and
   governor of all the powers of the heart and soul? It is the fancied
   riches of parts, the glitter of genius, the flights of imagination, the
   glory of learning, and the self-conceited strength of natural reason:
   these are the strongholds of fallen nature, the master-builders of
   pride's temple in the heart of man, and which, as so many priests, keep
   up the daily worship of idol-self. And here let it be well, and well
   observed, that all these magnified talents of the natural man are
   started up through his miserable fall from the life of God in his soul.
   Wit, genius, learning, and natural reason, would never have had any
   more a name among men, than blindness, ignorance, and sickness, had man
   continued, as at first, an holy image of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
   Everything then that dwelt in him, or came from him, would have only
   said so much of God, and nothing of himself, have manifested nothing to
   him but the heavenly powers of the triune life of God dwelling in him.
   He would have had no more sense or consciousness of his own wit, or
   natural reason, or any power of goodness in all that he was, and did,
   than of his own creating power, at beholding the created heavens and
   earth. It is his dreadful fall from the life of God in his soul, that
   has furnished him with the substantial riches of his bestial appetites
   and lusts. And when the lusts of the flesh have spent out their life,
   when the dark thick body of earthly flesh and blood shall be forced to
   let the soul go loose, all these bright talents will end with that
   system of fleshly lusts, in which they begun; and that of man which
   remains will have nothing of its own, nothing that can say, I do this,
   or I do that; but all that it has or does, will be either the glory of
   God manifested in it, or the power of hell in full possession of it.
   The time of man's playing with parts, wit, and abilities, and of
   fancying himself to be something great and considerable in the
   intellectual world, may be much shorter, but can be no longer, than he
   can eat and drink with the animals of this world. When the time comes,
   that fine buildings, rich settlements, acquired honors, and rabbi,
   rabbi, must take their leave of him, all the stately structures, which
   genius, learning, and flights of imagination, have painted inwardly on
   his brain and outwardly on paper, must bear full witness to Solomon's
   vanity of vanities.

   [Addr-121] Let then the high accomplished scholar reflect, that he
   comes by his wit, and parts, and acute abilities, just as the serpent
   came by his subtlety; let him reflect, that he might as well dream of
   acquiring angelic purity to his animal nature by multiplying new
   invented delights for his earthly passions and tempers, as of raising
   his soul into divine knowledge through the well exercised powers of his
   natural reason and imagination.

   [Addr-122] The finest intellectual power, and that which has the best
   help in it towards bringing man again into the region of divine light,
   is that poor despised thing called simplicity. This is that which stops
   the workings of the fallen life of nature, and leaves room for God to
   work again in the soul, according to the good pleasure of his holy
   will. It stands in such a waiting posture before God, and in such
   readiness for the divine birth, as the plants of the earth wait for the
   inflowing riches of the light and air. But the self-assuming workings
   of man's natural powers shut him up in himself, closely barred up
   against the inflowing riches of the light and Spirit of God.

   [Addr-123] Yet so it is, in this fallen state of the gospel church,
   that with these proud endowments of fallen nature, the classic scholar,
   full fraught with pagan light and skill, comes forth to play the critic
   and orator with the simplicity of salvation mysteries; mysteries which
   mean nothing else but the inward work of the triune God in the soul of
   man, nor any other work there, but the raising up of a dead Adam into a
   living Christ of God.

   [Addr-124] However, to make way for parts, criticism, and language-
   learning, to have the full management of salvation doctrines, the well-
   read scholar gives out, that the ancient way of knowing the things of
   God, taught and practiced by fishermen- apostles, is obsolete. They
   indeed wanted to have divine knowledge from the immediate continual
   operation of the Holy Spirit, but this state was only for a time, till
   genius, and learning entered into the pale of the church. Behold, if
   ever, "the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place!" For
   as soon as the doctrine is set up, that man's natural parts and
   acquired learning have full right and power to sit in the divinity
   chair, and to guide men into that truth which was once the only office
   and power of the Holy Spirit, as soon as this is done, and so far as it
   is received, it may with the greatest truth be said, that the kingdom
   of God is entirely shut up, and only a kingdom of scribes, Pharisees,
   and hypocrites, can come instead of it. For by this doctrine the whole
   nature and power of gospel religion is much more denied, than by
   setting up the infallibility of the pope; for though his claim to
   infallibility is false, yet he claims it from and under the Holy
   Spirit; but the Protestant scholar has his divinity knowledge, his
   power in the kingdom of truth, from himself, his own logic, and learned
   reason. Christ has nowhere instituted an infallible pope; and it is
   full as certain, that he has nowhere spoke one single word, or given
   the least power to logic, learning, or the natural powers of man, in
   his kingdom. He has never said to them, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on
   earth, shall be bound in heaven"; never said to them, "go ye and teach
   all nations," no more than he has ever said to wolves, "go ye, and feed
   my sheep." Christ indeed said of himself, according to the flesh, it is
   expedient for you that I go away. But where has he said of himself
   according to the spirit, "It is also expedient for you that I go away,
   that your own natural abilities and learned reason may have the
   guidance of you into all truth?" This is nowhere said, unless logic can
   prove it from these words, "Without me ye can do nothing," and, "Lo, I
   am with you to the end of the world."

   [Addr-125] The first and main doctrine of Christ and his apostles was,
   to tell the Jews, "that the kingdom of God was at hand," or was come to
   them. Proof enough surely, that their church was not that kingdom of
   God, though by God's appointment, and under laws of his own commanding.
   But why not, when it was thus set up by God? It was because it had
   human and worldly things in it, consisted of carnal ordinances, and had
   only types, and figures, and shadows of a kingdom of God that was to
   come. Of this kingdom, Christ says, "My kingdom is not of this world";
   and as a proof of it, he adds, "if it was of this world, then would my
   servants fight for me"; which was saying, that it was so different in
   kind, and so superior in nature to this world, that no sort of worldly
   power could either help, or hinder it. But of this world, into which
   the kingdom of God was come, the holy one of God says, "In the world ye
   shall have tribulation, but be of good comfort, I have overcome the
   world." Now how was it that Christ's victory was their victory? It was,
   because he was in them, and they in him, "Because I live, ye shall live
   also; in that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and you in me,
   and I in you."

   [Addr-126] This was the kingdom of God come to them, the same kingdom
   of God in which Adam was born and begun his first glorious life, when
   the image and likeness of the Holy Trinity had an outward glory, like
   that which broke through the body of Christ, when on "Mount Tabor his
   face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light." To
   the children of this kingdom, says its almighty king, "When they bring
   you before magistrates and powers, take no thought how, or what ye
   shall answer, or what ye shall say unto them, for the Holy Ghost shall
   teach you in that same hour what ye ought to say. For it is not ye that
   speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you."

   [Addr-127] No higher, or other thing is here said, than in these other
   words, "Take no thought, what ye shall eat, or drink, or wherewithal ye
   shall be clothed, but seek first the kingdom of God, and his
   righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you." This is
   the truth of the kingdom of God, come unto men, and this is the birth-
   right privilege of all that are living members of it, to be delivered
   from their own natural spirit which they had from Adam, from the spirit
   and wisdom of this world, and through the whole course of their lives
   only to say, and do, and be that, which the Spirit of their Father
   worketh in them.

   [Addr-128] But now, is not this kingdom gone away from us, are we not
   left comfortless, if instead of this Spirit of our Father speaking,
   doing, and working everything in us and for us, we are left again to
   our own natural powers, to run to every Lo here, and Lo there, to find
   a share in that kingdom of God, which once was, and never can be
   anything else but God, the wisdom and power of God manifested in our
   flesh? Had it not been as well, nay better for us, to have been still
   under types and figures, sacrificing bulls and goats by divine
   appointment, than to be brought under a religion that must be spirit
   and life and then left to the jarring interests of the wisdom of the
   Greek, and the carnality of the Jew, how to be living members of it?
   For where the Spirit of God is not the continual immediate governor of
   spiritual things, nothing better can come of it. For the truth and full
   proof of this, no more need be appealed to than all the libraries and
   churches of Christendom for many ages to this day.

   [Addr-129] What is the difference between man's own righteousness and
   man's own light in religion? They are strictly the same thing, do one
   and the same work, namely, keep up and strengthen every evil, vanity,
   and corruption of fallen nature. Nothing saves a man from his own
   righteousness, but that which saves and delivers him from his own
   light. The Jew that was most of all set against the gospel, and unable
   to receive it was he that trusted in his own righteousness; this was
   the rich man, to whom it was as hard to enter into the kingdom of
   heaven as for a camel to go through the eye of a needle. But the
   Christian, that trusts in his own light, is the very Jew that trusted
   in his own righteousness; and all that he gets by the gospel, is only
   that which the Pharisee got by the Law, namely, to be further from
   entering into the kingdom of God than publicans and harlots. How comes
   it, that a beast, a scarlet whore, a horned dragon, and other the most
   horrible descriptions of diabolical power, have been by the Spirit of
   God made descriptions of the Christian church? How comes it, that the
   Spirit describes the gospel-church as driven into a wilderness; the two
   faithful witnesses, Moses and Jesus, as prophesying so many ages in
   sackcloth, and slain in the streets of spiritual Sodom and Egypt? It is
   because man's own natural light, man's own conceited righteousness, his
   serpentine subtlety, his self-love, his sensual spirit and worldly
   power, have seized the mysteries of salvation that came down from
   heaven, and built them up into a kingdom of envious strife and
   contention, for learned glory, spiritual merchandise, and worldly
   power. This is the beast, the whore, and dragon, that has governed, and
   will govern in every private Christian, and public church, till, dead
   to all that is self, they turn to God; not to a God that they have only
   heard of with their ears, and their fathers have told them, but to a
   God of life, light, and power, found living and working within them, as
   the essential life, light, and power of their own lives. For God is
   only our God, by a birth of his own divine nature within us. This, and
   nothing but this, is our whole relation to, our only fellowship with
   him, our whole knowledge of him, our whole power of having any part in
   the mysteries of gospel-salvation. Nothing can seek the kingdom of God,
   or hunger and thirst after his righteousness, nothing can cry, "Abba
   Father," nothing can pray, "Thy kingdom come," nothing can say of
   Christ, "My Lord, and my God," but that which is born of God, and is
   the divine nature itself become creaturely in us. Nothing but God in
   man can be a godly life in man. Hence is that of the apostle, "The
   letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." But you will say, can this
   be true of the spiritual divine letter of the gospel? Can it kill, or
   give death? Yes, it kills, when it is rested in; when it is taken for
   divine power, and supposed to have goodness in itself; for then it
   kills the Spirit of God in man, quenches his holy fire within us, and
   is set up instead of it. It gives death, when it is built into systems
   of strife and contention about words, notions, and opinions, and makes
   the kingdom of God to consist, not in power, but in words. When it is
   thus used, then of necessity it kills, because it keeps from that which
   alone is life and can give life. This then is the whole of the matter;
   all the literal truths, and variety of doctrines and expressions of the
   written word, have but one nature, one end, and one errand, they all
   say nothing else to man but that one thing which Christ said, in these
   words, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
   refresh you"; just the same, as when it is said, "Jesus Christ, who is
   of God made unto us wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification"; this is
   the only refreshment from Christ. Again, "But ye are washed, but ye are
   cleansed in the Name of our Lord Jesus"; just the same as when it is
   said, "Except ye abide in me, and I in you, ye have no life in you."
   Again, "By grace ye are saved, by faith ye are saved," says neither
   more nor less than this, "He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my
   blood, hath eternal life"; the same as when Christ says, "Without me ye
   can do nothing"; the same as the apostle says, "Yet not I, but Christ
   that liveth in me"; the same as "Christ in us the hope of glory; if
   Christ be not in you, ye are reprobates." Therefore to come to Christ,
   to have our heavy laden, fallen nature refreshed by him, to be born
   spirit of his Spirit, to have his heavenly flesh and heavenly blood
   made living in us, before we put off the bestial body and blood of
   death which we have from Adam, is the one only thing taught and meant
   by all that is so variously said in the scriptures of the merits and
   benefits of Christ to us. It is the SPIRIT, the BODY, the BLOOD of
   Christ within us that is our whole peace with God, our whole adoption,
   our whole redemption, our whole justification, our whole glorification;
   and this is the one thing said, and meant by that new birth, of which
   Christ says, "Except a man be born again from above, he cannot enter
   into the kingdom of God." Now, the true ground why all that is said of
   Christ in such a variety of expressions has only one meaning, and
   points only to one and the same thing is this, it is because the whole
   state and nature of fallen man wants only one thing, and that one thing
   is a real birth of the divine nature made living again in him, as at
   the first; and then all is done, that can be done, by all the mysteries
   of the birth, and whole process of Christ, for our salvation. All the
   Law, the prophets, and the gospel are fulfilled, when there is in
   Christ a new creature, having life in and from him, as really as the
   branch has its life in and from the vine. And when all scripture is
   thus understood, and all that either Christ says of himself, or his
   apostles say of him, are all heard, or read, only as one and the same
   call to come to Christ, in hunger and thirst to be filled and blessed
   with his divine nature made living within us; then, and then only, the
   letter kills not, but as a sure guide leads directly to life. But
   grammar, logic, and criticism knowing nothing of scripture but its
   words, bring forth nothing but their own wisdom of words, and a
   religion of wrangle, hatred, and contention, about the meaning of them.

   [Addr-130] But lamentable as this is, the letter of scripture has been
   so long the usurped province of school-critics, and learned reasoners
   making their markets of it, that the difference between literal,
   notional, and living divine knowledge, is almost quite lost in the
   Christian world. So that if any awakened souls are here or there found
   among Christians, who think that more must be known of God, of Christ,
   and the powers of the world to come, than every scholar can know by
   reading the letter of scripture, immediately the cry of enthusiasm,
   whether they be priests, or people, is sent after them. A procedure,
   which could only have some excuse, if these critics could first prove,
   that the apostle's text ought to be thus read, "The spirit killeth, but
   the letter giveth life."

   [Addr-131] The true nature, and full distinction between literal and
   divine knowledge, is set forth in the highest degree of clearness in
   these words of our savior, "The kingdom of God is like a treasure in a
   field": thus far is the true use and benefit, and utmost power of the
   letter, it can tell us of a treasure that we want, a treasure that
   belongs to us, and how and where it is to be found; but when it is
   added, that a "man goes and sells all that he has, and buys that
   field," then begins the divine knowledge, which is nothing else, but
   the treasure possessed and enjoyed. Now what is here said, is the same
   that is said in these other words of Christ, "Except a man denies
   himself and forsakes all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple"; that
   is, he cannot partake of my mind, my Spirit, and my nature, and
   therefore cannot know me; he is only a hearer of a treasure, without
   entering into the possession and enjoyment of it. And thus it is with
   all scripture, the letter can only direct to the doing of that which it
   cannot do, and give notice of something that it cannot give.

   [Addr-132] Now clear and evident as this distinction is, between a mere
   literal direction to a thing and a real participation of it, which
   alone is a true perception of it, the generality of Christians seem
   quite insensible of any other religious perception, or knowledge of
   divine things, but such ideas or notions of them, as a man can form
   from scripture words. Whereas good and evil, the only objects of
   religious knowledge, are an inward state and growth of our life, they
   are in us, are a part of us, just in the same manner as seeing and
   hearing are in us, and we can have no real knowledge of them any other
   way, than as we have of our own seeing and hearing. And as no man can
   get or lose his seeing or hearing, or have less or more of them, by any
   ideas or notions that he forms about them, just so it is with that
   which is the power of good, and the power of evil in us; notions and
   ideas have no effect upon it. Yet no other knowledge is thought of, or
   sought after, or esteemed of any value, but that which is notional and
   the work of the brain.

   [Addr-133] Thus, as soon as a man of speculation can demonstrate that,
   which he calls the being and attributes of God, he thinks, and others
   think, that he truly knows God. But what excuse can be made for such an
   imagination, when plain scripture has told him, that to know God is
   eternal life, that is, to know God is to have the power, the life, and
   the Spirit of God manifested in him, and therefore it is eternal life.
   "No man knoweth the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
   revealeth him." Because the revelation of the Son is the birth of the
   Son in the soul, and this new creature in Christ has alone knowledge of
   God, what he is, and does, and works in the creature.

   [Addr-134] Again, another, forming an opinion of faith from the letter
   of scripture, straightway imagines that he knows what faith is, and
   that he is in the faith. Sad delusion! For to know what faith is, or
   that we are in the faith, is to know that Christ is in us of a truth;
   it is to know the power of his life, his sufferings, his death, his
   resurrection and ascension, made good in our souls. To be in the faith,
   is to have done with all notions and opinions about it, because it is
   found and felt by its living power and fruits within us, which are
   righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. All which are three
   names or powers peculiar to Jesus Christ; he alone is our
   righteousness, our peace, our joy in the Holy Ghost. And therefore
   faith is not in us, by reason of this or that opinion, assent or
   consent, but it is Christ, or the divine nature in us; or its
   operations could not be righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
   Ghost. "By faith ye are save," has no other meaning than by Christ ye
   are saved. And if faith in its whole nature, in its root and growth,
   was anything else but Christ, or a birth of the divine nature within
   us, it could do us no good, no power could be ascribed to it, it could
   not be our victory, it could not overcome the world, the flesh, and the
   devil. Every faith that is not Christ in us is but a dead faith.

   [Addr-135] How trifling therefore (to say no worse of it) is that
   learning, which sets up a difference between faith and its works,
   between a justification by faith, and justification by its works. Is
   there any difference between Christ, as a redeemer, and his redeeming
   works? Can they be set above one another in their redeeming efficacy?
   If not, then faith and its works, which are nothing else but Christ in
   us, can have no separation from, or excellency above one another, but
   are as strictly one, as Christ is one, and no more two things, than our
   savior and our salvation are two different things in us. Everything
   that is said of faith, from Adam to this day, is only so much said of
   the power, and life of a redeeming Christ, working within us; so that
   to divide faith from its works is as absurd, as to divide a thing from
   its self, a circle from its roundness. No salvation would have ever
   been ascribed to faith, but because it is, in the strictest sense,
   Christ himself, the power of God, living and working in us. It never
   would have been said of faith, that every power of the world, the
   flesh, and the devil, must yield to it, but because it is that very
   Christ within us, without whom we can do nothing. But if without Christ
   we can do nothing, and yet all things are possible to our faith, can
   there be a fuller demonstration that our faith is nothing else but
   Christ, born, and living within us? Whatever therefore there is of
   power within us, that tends to salvation, call it by what name you
   will, either faith, or hope, or prayer, or hunger after the kingdom of
   God and his righteousness, it is all but one power, and that one power
   is Christ within us. If therefore faith and its good works are but one
   and the same Christ living in us, the distinction between a good faith
   and its good works, and all the contentious volumes that have been
   written about it, are as mere ignorant jargon, as a distinction made
   and contended for, between life and its living operations.

   [Addr-136] When the holy church of Christ, the kingdom of God came
   among men, was first set up, it was the apostle's boast, that all other
   wisdom or learning was sunk into nothing. "Where," says he, "is the
   wise, the scribe, the disputer of this world? Hath not God made them
   foolishness?" But now, it is the boast of all churches, that they are
   full of the wise, the scribes, the disputers of this world, who sit
   with learned pomp in the apostle's chair, and have the mysteries of the
   kingdom of God committed to them.

   [Addr-137] Hence it is, that from a religion of heavenly love, built
   upon the redeeming life and doctrine of a Son of God dying to save the
   whole world, division, bitterness, envy, pride, strife, hatred, and
   persecution, nay every outrage of war and bloodshed, breathe and break
   forth with more strength in learned Christendom, than ever they did
   from a religion of pagan idolatry, set up by satan.

   [Addr-138] It may perhaps be here said, Must there then be no learning
   or scholarship, no recondite erudition in the Christian church? Must
   there be nothing thought of, or got by the gospel, but mere salvation?
   Must its ministers know nothing, teach nothing, nothing but the full
   denial of self, poverty of spirit, meekness, and humility, and
   unwearied patience, a never ceasing love, an absolute renunciation of
   the pomps and vanities of the world, a full dependence upon our
   heavenly Father; no joy or rejoicing but in the Holy Ghost; no wisdom
   but that which God gives; no walking but as Christ walked; no reward or
   glory for their labors of love, but that of being found in Christ,
   flesh of his flesh, bone of his bones, spirit of his Spirit, and
   clothed with the wedding- garment when the bridegroom comes, "when the
   Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
   the archangel, and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ
   shall rise first"?

   [Addr-139] To this the first answer is, Happy, thrice happy are they,
   who are only the thus learned preachers of the gospel, who through all
   their ministry, seek nothing for themselves or others, but to be taught
   of God; hunger after nothing but the bread of life that came down from
   heaven, owning no master but Christ, no teacher but his Holy Spirit; as
   unable to join with the diggers in pagan pits of learning, as with
   those that "labor for the wind, and give their money for that which is
   not bread."

   [Addr-140] Secondly, with regard to the demand of learned knowledge in
   the Christian church, it may be answered, that all that has been said
   above, is only for the increase and promotion of it, and that all
   ignorance and darkness may be driven quite out of it. The church of
   Christ is the seat or school of all the highest knowledge that the
   human nature is capable of in this life. Ignorance is everywhere but in
   the church of Christ. The Law, the prophets, and the gospel, are the
   only treasures of all that can be called the knowledge either of God or
   man; and he in whom the Law, the prophets, and the gospel are
   fulfilled, is the only well-educated man, and one of the first-rate
   scholars in the world. But now, who is he, that has this wisdom from
   these rich treasures? Who is he, in whom all is known and fulfilled
   which they teach? The lip of truth has told us, that it is he, and he
   alone, "who loves God with all his heart, with all his soul, with all
   his mind, and with all his strength, and his neighbor as himself." This
   is the man that is all wisdom, all light, and let into full possession
   of all that is meant by all the mysteries contained in the Law, the
   prophets, and the gospel. Where this divine love is wanting, and a
   diabolical self sits in its place, there may be great wits, shining
   critics, orators, poets, as easily as there may be a profound
   Machiavel, a learned Hobbs, or an atheistical Virtuoso. But would you
   divinely know the mysteries of nature, the ground and reason of good
   and evil in this world, the relation and connection between the visible
   and invisible world, how the things of time proceed from, are
   influenced by, and depend upon the things and powers of eternity, there
   is but one only key of entrance; nothing can open the vision, but
   seeing with the eyes of that same love, which begun and carries on all
   that is, and works in visible and invisible nature. Would you divinely
   know the mysteries of grace and salvation, would you go forth as a
   faithful witness of gospel truths, stay till this fire of divine love
   has had its perfect work in you. For till your heart is an altar, on
   which this heavenly fire never goes out, you are dead in yourself, and
   can only be a speaker of dead words, about things that never had any
   life within you. For without a real birth of this divine love in the
   essence of your soul, be as learned and polite as you will, your heart
   is but the dark heart of fallen Adam, and your knowledge of the kingdom
   of God will be only like that which murdering Cain had. For everything
   is murder, but that which love does. If love is not the breath of your
   life, the spirit that forms and governs everything that proceeds from
   you, everything that has your labor, your allowance and consent, you
   are broken off from the works of God, you have felt his creation, you
   are without God, and your name, and nature, and works, can have no
   other name, or nature, but that which is called pride, wrath, envy,
   hypocrisy, hatred, revenge, and self-exaltation, under the power of
   satan in his kingdom of darkness. Nothing can possibly save you from
   being the certain prey of all these evil spirits, through the whole
   course of your life, but a birth of that love which is God himself, his
   light, and Spirit within you.

   [Addr-141] There is no knowledge in heaven, but what proceeds from this
   birth of love, nor is there any difference between the highest light of
   an angel, and the horrid darkness of a devil, but that which love has
   made. But now, since divine love can have no beginning, but from a
   birth of the divine nature in us, therefore says St. John, we love him
   because he FIRST loved us, the same as saying, we desire God, because
   he first desired us; for we could not desire God, but because he first
   desired us, we could not turn to God, but because he first turned to
   us. And so it is, that we could not love God, but because he first
   loved us, that is, because he first by our creation brought forth, and
   by our redemption continued and kept up that same birth of his own
   Spirit of love in us. For as his Holy Spirit must first be a gift to
   us, or born in us, and then we have that which can worship God in
   spirit, so his love must of all necessity be a gift to us, or born in
   us, and then we have that of God in us which alone can love him with
   his own love. A truth absolutely asserted in these words; "Love is of
   God, and he that loveth, is born of God."

   [Addr-142] Let this be my excuse to the learned world, for owning no
   school of wisdom, but where the one only lesson is divine love; and the
   one only teacher the Spirit of God. Let no one call this wild or
   extravagant; it is no wilder a step, no more injurious to man, to truth
   and goodness, than the owning no God but one. For to be called from
   everything but divine love and the Spirit of God, is only being called
   from everything that has the curse of fallen nature in it. And no man
   can come from under this curse, till he is born again of divine love
   and the Spirit of God. For thus to be born, is as much the one sole
   happiness, joy, and glory of men, both now and ever, as it is the sole
   joy and glory of angels eternally in the heavens. Believe me then, thou
   great scholar, that all that thou hast got of wisdom or learning, day
   after day, in any other school but this, will stand thee in as much
   stead, fill thee with as high heavenly comfort at the hour of death, as
   all the long dreams, which night after night, thou hast ever had in thy
   sleep. And till a man knows this, with as much fullness of conviction
   as he knows the vanity of a dream, he has his full proof, that he is
   not yet in the light of truth, not yet taught of God, nor like-minded
   with Christ.

   [Addr-143] One of Christ's followers said, "Lord, suffer me first to go
   and bury my father"; the answer was, "Let the dead bury their dead,
   follow thou me." Another said to him, "Let me first go bid them
   farewell, that are at home in my house"; Jesus answered, "No man having
   put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of
   God." Now let it be supposed that a third had said, Lord, I have left
   several deep-learned books at home, written by the greatest masters of
   grammar, logic and eloquence, suffer me first to go back for them, lest
   losing the light which I had from them, I might mistake the depth and
   truth of thy heavenly doctrines, or be less able to prove and teach
   them powerfully to others. Would not such a request as this have had a
   folly and absurdity in it, not chargeable upon those two other requests
   which Christ rejected? And yet, what can scholastic, classic, and
   critical divinity say for itself, but that very same thing, which this
   requester here said?

   [Addr-144] The holy Jesus said, "I am the light of the world, he that
   followeth me, walketh not in darkness." Here spiritual light and
   darkness are as immutably fixed, and separated from one another, as the
   light and darkness of this world were divided on the first day of the
   creation. Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, is the one only light
   both of men and angels. Fallen nature, the selfish will, proud tempers,
   the highest abilities, the natural sagacity, cunning arts and
   subtleties, that are or can be in fallen men and angels, are nothing
   else but their fullness of spiritual darkness, from which nothing but
   works of darkness can come forth. In a word, darkness is the whole
   natural man; light is the new born man from above. Therefore says the
   Christ of God, "I am the light of the world," because he alone is the
   birth of heaven in the fallen souls of men. But now, who can more
   reject this divine light, or more plainly choose darkness instead of
   it, than he who seeks to have his mind enriched, the faculties of his
   fallen soul cultivated by the literature of poets, orators,
   philosophers, sophists, sceptics, and critics, born and bred up in the
   worship and praises of idol gods and goddesses? What is this, but like
   going to the serpent to be taught the innocent spirit of the dove; or
   to the elegant lusts of Anacreon and Ovid, to learn purity of heart,
   and kindle the flame of heavenly love in our souls? Look where you
   will, this is the wisdom of those who seek to pagans for skill to work
   in Christ's vineyard who from long labors in restoring the grammar, and
   finding out hidden beauties of some old vicious book, set up for
   qualified artists to polish the gospel pearl of great price. Surely
   this is no better a proof of their savoring the things that are of God,
   than Peter gave, when his master said to him, "Get thee behind me,
   satan." A grave ecclesiastic, bringing forth out of his closet skillful
   meditations on the commentaries of Homer, or the astonishing beauties
   of a modern Dunciad, has as much reason to think that he is walking in
   the light of Christ, and led by the Spirit of God, as they have who are
   only eating and drinking, and rising up to play.

   [Addr-145] But to see the exceeding folly of expecting ability in
   divine knowledge, from anything that is the wit, wisdom, or spirit of
   the natural man, you need only read these words of the holy messenger
   of God, the Elias that was to come. "I indeed," says he, "baptize you
   with water, but he that cometh after me, whose shoe's latchet I am not
   worthy to unloose, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with
   fire." Now if this which the Baptist said of Christ is not our faith,
   if we do not receive it as the truth in which we are firmly to stand,
   then, be as learned as we will, we have no better a faith, or higher
   wisdom, than those blind rabbis who received not the testimony of John.
   A fire and Spirit from above was the news which he published to the
   world; this, and nothing else, was his kingdom of God that was at hand.
   Now if this fire and Spirit from above has not baptized us into a birth
   of the life of God in our souls, we have not found that Christ and
   kingdom of God, to which John bore witness. But if (what is still
   worse)l we are so bewitched through the sorcery of learning, as to turn
   writers and preachers against this inward, and only redeeming heavenly
   fire and Spirit, we are baptized with the spirit of those, to whom our
   Lord said, "Woe unto you scribes, Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut up
   the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye neither go in yourselves,
   neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in."

   [Addr-146] For what is, or can be the fall of a divine Adam under the
   power of sin, satan, and hell, but the extinction of that heavenly fire
   and Spirit, which was his first union with God and all heavenly beings.
   Say now, that he had not this heavenly fire and Spirit at the first,
   that nothing lived or breathed in him but that astral fire and spirit
   which is the life and spirit of all earthly animals, and then you have
   a religion as divine as that of the old Sadducees, who allowed of no
   resurrection, angel, or spirit. For, deny the truth and fullness of a
   divine life in the first man, and then his fall and redemption are
   equally empty sounds about nothing. For what can he be fallen from, or
   redeemed to, if he has now all that fire and spirit of life which he
   ever had, or ought to have, and if all that is more than this, is but
   the fiction and dream of a distempered brain? Tell me, why that burning
   and shining light, that man that was more than a prophet, should come
   with his water, and the Son of God, God of God, should come with his
   fire- baptism, if man neither wanted, nor could receive a higher water,
   and fire of life, than that which he has in common with the beasts of
   the field? Why is there all this stir about religions, expiations and
   atonements, why all these priestly ordinations, consecrations,
   churches, sacraments, and prayers? For if the fire and spirit of this
   world is the one life, and highest life, both of man and beasts, we
   have it unasked for, and on the same terms as the beasts have it, and
   can only lose it, as they do when they lose their existence.

   [Addr-147] But if fire and Spirit from heaven can alone make heavenly
   creatures, and us, to be children of an heavenly Father; if the Son of
   God took our fallen nature upon him, that the first heavenly fire and
   Spirit might again come to life in us, if divine life, divine light,
   and divine goodness, can only come from them, and only in such degree,
   as they are kindled in our souls, what a poverty of sense is it in
   those, who are called to a resurrection of the first divine life, where
   a new creature is taught by that same unction from above whence all the
   angels and principalities of heaven have their light and glory, what a
   poverty of sense, I say, in such, to set themselves down at the feet of
   a Master Tully, and a Master Aristotle, who only differ from the
   meanest of all other corrupt men, as the teaching serpent differed from
   his fellow animals, by being more subtle than all the beasts of the
   field.

   [Addr-148] Behold then your state, ye ministers, that wait at Christian
   altars, who will have neither faith, nor hope, nor desire of heavenly
   fire kindled in your souls, you have a priesthood, and an altar not fit
   to be named with that, which in Jewish days had a holy fire from God
   descending upon it, which made priest and sacrifice acceptable to God,
   though only type and pledge of that inward celestial fire, which Christ
   would kindle into a never ceasing burning, in the living temples of his
   new born children from above.

   [Addr-149] Complain then no more of atheists, infidels, and such like
   open enemies to the gospel kingdom of God; for whilst you call heavenly
   fire and Spirit, kindled into the same essential life in us as they are
   in holy angels, downright frenzy, and mystic madness, you do all that
   infidel work within the church, which they do on the outside of it. And
   if through a learned fear of having that done to your earthly reason,
   which was done to Enoch when God took him, you will own no higher a
   regeneration, no more birth of God in your souls, than can be had by a
   few cold drops of water sprinkled on the face, any of the heathen gods
   of wood and stone are good enough for such an elementary priesthood.
   For let this be told you, as a truth from God, that till heavenly fire
   and Spirit have a fullness of a birth within you, you can rise no
   higher by your highest learning, than to be elegant orators about
   scripture words.

   [Addr-150] Our Lord has said, "The kingdom of God is within you," that
   is, the heavenly fire and Spirit, which are the true kingdom and
   manifestation of God, are within you. And indeed, where can it be else?
   Yet what learned pains are taken to remove the literal meaning from
   these words, as too visionary a thing for learned ears. And yet it is a
   truth obvious to common sense, that even this outward world of stars
   and elements, neither does, nor can belong to us, or we to it, but so
   far as it is, literally speaking, a kingdom within us. For the outward
   kingdom or powers of this world signify nothing to a worldly man that
   is dead; but no man is dead, but because the kingdom of this world,
   with all its powers of fire, light, and spirit, stands only outwardly
   about him, but has lost its life and powers within him.

   [Addr-151] Say now, out of reverence to sound literature, and
   abhorrence of enthusiasm, that the kingdom of God is not really and
   virtually within, that its heavenly fire, light, and Spirit, are not,
   ought not to be born in a sober right-minded follower of Christ, and
   then you have a good disciple of Christ, as absolutely dead to the
   kingdom of heaven, as the corpse that has nothing of the fire, spirit,
   and light of this world in it, is dead to all the outward world round
   about it.

   [Addr-152] What a sobriety of faith and sound doctrine is it, to preach
   up a necessity of being living members of the kingdom of heaven, and at
   the same time the necessity of orthodoxly holding, that a heavenly
   birth neither is, nor can, nor ought to be within us! For if it either
   is, or could, or ought to be within us, then it could not be a
   brain-sick folly to believe, that the literal words of Christ had no
   deceit, falsity, or delusion in them, when he said, "Except a man be
   born again from above, he cannot see, or enter into the kingdom of
   God." That is, he cannot possibly have any godlike or divine goodness,
   he cannot be a child of a heavenly Father, but from the nature and
   Spirit of his heavenly Father, but from the nature and Spirit of his
   heavenly Father brought to a real birth of life in him. Now if, without
   this divine birth, all that we have in us is but fallen Adam, a birth
   of sin, the flesh, and the devil, if the power of this heavenly birth
   is all the power of goodness that is or was, or ever can be in a son of
   Adam; and if logic, learning, and criticism, are almost everywhere set
   in high places, to pronounce and prove it to be mere enthusiasm and
   spiritual frenzy, what wonder is it, if folly of doctrine, wickedness
   of life, lusts of the flesh, profaneness of spirit, wantonness of wit,
   contempt of goodness and profession of Christianity, should all of them
   seem to have their full establishment among us?

   [Addr-153] What wonder, if sacraments, church-prayers, and preachings,
   leave high and low, learned and unlearned, men and women, priests and
   people, as unaltered in all their aged vices, as they leave children
   unchanged in their childish follies? For where the one only fountain of
   life and goodness is forsaken, where the seed of the divine birth is
   not alive, and going forwards in the birth, all the difference between
   man and man is as nothing with respect to the kingdom of God. It
   matters not what name is given to the old earthly man of Adam's bestial
   flesh and blood, whether he be called a zealous churchman, a
   stiff-necked Jew, a polite civilized heathen, or a grave infidel; under
   all these names, the unregenerate old man has but one and the same
   nature, without any other difference, but that which time, and place,
   education, complexion, hypocrisy, and worldly wisdom, happen to make in
   him. By such a one, whether he be papist, or Protestant, the gospel is
   only kept as a book, and all that is within it is only so much
   condemnation to the keeper, just as the old man, a Jew, has kept the
   book of the Law and the prophets, only to be more fully condemned by
   them.

   [Addr-154] That the Jewish and Christian church stand at this day in
   the same kind of apostasy, or fallen state, must be manifest to
   everyone, that will not shut his eyes against it. Why are the Jews in a
   fallen state? It is because they have refused him, who in his whole
   process was the truth, the substance, the life, and fulfilling of all
   that which was outwardly taught, and prescribed in their Law and
   prophets.

   [Addr-155] But is it not as easy to see, that the whole Christian
   church are in a fallen state, and for the same reason, because they are
   fallen or turned away from that Holy Spirit who was promised, and given
   to be the one only power, life, and fulfilling of all that which was
   outwardly taught, and prescribed by the gospel. For the Holy Spirit to
   come was just the same ALL, and FULFILLING of the whole gospel, as a
   Christ to come was the all, and the fulfilling of the Law. The Jew
   therefore with his Old Testament, not owning Christ in all his process
   to be the truth and life, and fulfiller of their Law, is just in that
   same apostasy, as the Christian with his New Testament, not owning the
   Holy Spirit in all his operations, to be his only light, guide, and
   governor. For as all types and figures in the Law were but empty
   shadows without Christ's being the life and power of them, so all that
   is written in the gospel is but dead letter, unless the Holy Spirit in
   man be the living reader, the living rememberer, and the living doer of
   them. Therefore, where the Holy Spirit is not thus owned and received,
   as the whole power and life of the gospel state, it is no marvel, that
   Christians have no more of gospel virtues, than the Jews have of
   patriarchal holiness, or that the same lusts and vices which prosper
   amongst Jews, should break forth with as much strength in fallen
   Christendom. For the New Testament not ending in the coming of the Holy
   Spirit, with fullness of power over sin and hell, and the devil, is but
   the same, and no better a help to heaven, than the Old Testament
   without the coming of a messiah. Need I now say any more, to
   demonstrate the truth of that which I first said was the one thing
   absolutely essential, and only available to man's salvation, namely,
   the SPIRIT of God brought again to his FIRST POWER OF LIFE IN US. This
   was the glory of man's creation, and this alone can be the glory of his
   redemption. All besides this, that passes for a time betwixt God and
   man, be it what it will, shows only our fall and distance from God, and
   in its best state has only the nature of a good road, which is only
   good, because that which we want is at the end of it. Whilst God calls
   us by various outward dispensations, by creaturely things, figurative
   institutions, it is a full proof, that we are not yet in our true
   state, or that union with God which is intended by our redemption.

   [Addr-156] God said to Moses, "Put off thy shoes, for the place whereon
   thou standest is holy ground." Now this which God said to Moses, is
   only that very same thing, which circumcision, the Law, sacrifices, and
   sacraments, say to man. They are in themselves nothing else but outward
   significations of inward impurity, and lost holiness, and can do no
   more in themselves but intimate, point, and direct to an inward life
   and new birth from above, that is to be sought after.

   [Addr-157] But here lies the great mistake, or rather idolatrous abuse
   of all God's outward dispensations. They are taken for the thing
   itself, for the truth and essence of religion. That which the learned
   Jews did with the outward letter of their Law, that same do learned
   Christians with the outward letter of their gospel. Why did the Jewish
   church so furiously and obstinately cry out against Christ, Let him be
   crucified? It was because their letter-learned ears, their worldly
   spirit and temple-orthodoxy, would not bear to hear of an inward
   savior, not bear to hear of being born again of his Spirit, of eating
   his flesh, and drinking his blood, of his dwelling in them, and they in
   him. To have their Law of ordinances, their temple-pomp sunk into such
   a fulfilling savior as this, was such enthusiastic jargon to their
   ears, as forced their sober, rational theology, to call Christ,
   Beelzebub, his doctrine, blasphemy, and all for the sake of Moses and
   rabbinic orthodoxy.

   [Addr-158] Need it now be asked, whether the true Christ of the gospel
   be less blasphemed, less crucified, by that Christian theology which
   rejects an inward Christ, a savior living and working in the soul, as
   its inward light and life, generating his own nature and Spirit in it,
   as its only redemption, whether that which rejects all this as mystic
   madness be not that very same old Jewish wisdom sprung up in Christian
   theology, which said of Christ when teaching these very things, "He is
   mad, why hear ye him?" Our blessed Lord in a parable sets forth the
   blind Jews, as saying of himself, "We will not have this man to reign
   OVER us." The sober-minded Christian scholar has none of this Jewish
   blindness, he only says of Christ, we will not have this man to REIGN
   IN US, and so keeps clear of such mystic absurdity as St. Paul fell
   into, when he enthusiastically said, "Yet not I, but Christ that liveth
   in me."

   [Addr-159] Christian doctors reproach the old learned rabbis, for their
   vain faith, and carnal desire of a glorious, temporal, outward Christ,
   who should set up their temple-worship all over the world. Vanity
   indeed, and learned blindness enough?

   [Addr-160] But nevertheless, in these condemners of rabbinic blindness,
   St. Paul's words are remarkably verified, viz., "Wherein thou judgest
   another, thou condemnest thyself, for thou that judgest dost the same
   thing." For, take away all that from Christ which Christian doctors
   call enthusiasm, suppose him not to be an inward birth, a new life and
   Spirit within us, but only an outward, separate, distant heavenly
   prince, no more really in us, than our high cathedrals are in the third
   heavens, but only by an invisible hand from his throne on high, some
   way or other raising and helping great scholars, or great temporal
   powers, to make a rock in every nation for his church to stand upon;
   suppose all this (which is the very marrow of modern divinity) and then
   you have that very outward Christ, and that very outward kingdom, which
   the carnal Jew dreamed of, and for the sake of which the spiritual
   Christ was then nailed to the cross, and is still crucified by the new
   risen Jew in the Christian church. If it now be asked, whence, or from
   what, comes all this spiritual blindness, which from age to age thus
   mistakes and defeats all the gracious designs of God towards fallen
   mankind? Look at the origin of the first sin, and you see it all. Had
   Eve desired no knowledge but what came from God, paradise had been the
   habitation of her and all her offspring. If after paradise lost, Jews
   and Christians had desired no knowledge but what came from God, the Law
   and prophets had kept the Jew close to the first tree of life, and the
   Christian church had been a kingdom of God, and communion of saints to
   this day.

   [Addr-161] But now corruption, sin, death, and every evil of the world,
   have entered into the church, the spouse of Christ, just as they
   entered into Eve, the spouse of Adam in paradise, in the same way, and
   from the same cause, viz., a desire of more, or other knowledge, than
   that which comes from God alone. This desire is the serpent's voice
   within every man, which does all that to him, and in him, which the
   serpent at the tree did to Eve. It carries on the first deceit, it
   shows and recommends to him that same beautiful tree of own will, own
   wit, and own wisdom, springing up within him, which Eve saw in the
   garden; and yet so blind is this love of wisdom as not to see, that his
   eating of it is in the strictest truth his eating of the same forbidden
   fruits as Eve did, and keeping up in himself all that death and
   separation from God, which the first knowledge- hunger brought forth.

   [Addr-162] Let then the eager searcher into words for wisdom, the book-
   devourer, the opinion-broker, the exalter of human reason, and every
   projecting builder of religious systems, be told this, that the thirst
   and pride of being learnedly wise in the things of God, is keeping up
   the grossest ignorance of them, and is nothing else but Eve's old
   serpent, and Eve's evil birth within them, and does no better work in
   the church of Christ, than her thirst after wisdom did in the paradise
   of God. Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth, is the one only way by
   which any man ever did, or ever can attain divine knowledge, and divine
   goodness. To knock at any other door but this, is but like asking life
   of that which is itself dead, or praying to him for bread who has
   nothing but stones to give.

   [Addr-163] Now strange as all this may seem to the labor-learned
   possessor of far-fetched book- riches, yet it is saying no more, nor
   anything else, but that which Christ said in these words, "Except ye be
   converted, and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the
   kingdom of God." For, if classic gospellers, linguist critics,
   scripture-logicians, salvation orators, able dealers in the grammatic
   powers of Hebrew, Greek, and Roman phrases, idioms, tropes, figures,
   can show, that by raising themselves high in these attainments, they
   are the very men that are sunk down from themselves into Christ's
   little children of the kingdom of God, then it may be also said, that
   he who is laboring, scheming, and fighting for all the riches he can
   get from both the Indies, is the very man that has left all to follow
   Christ, the very man that "labors not for the meat that perishes."

   [Addr-164] Show me a man whose heart has no desire, or prayer in it,
   but to love God with his whole soul and spirit, and his neighbor as
   himself, and then you have shown me the man who knows Christ, and is
   known of him; the best and wisest man in the world, in whom the first
   paradisaical wisdom and goodness are come to life. Not a single precept
   in the gospel, but is the precept of his own heart, and the joy of that
   new-born heavenly love which is the life and light of his soul. In this
   man, all that came from the old serpent is trod under his feet, not a
   spark of self, of pride, of wrath, of envy, of covetousness, or worldly
   wisdom, can have the least abode in him, because that love, which
   fulfilleth the whole Law and the prophets, that love which is God and
   Christ, both in angels and men, is the love that gives birth, and life,
   and growth to everything that is either thought, or word, or action in
   him. And if he has no share or part with foolish errors, cannot be
   tossed about with every wind of doctrine, it is because, to be always
   governed by this love, is the same thing as to be always taught of God.

   [Addr-165] On the other hand, show me a scholar as full of learning, as
   the Vatican is of books, and he will be just as likely to give all that
   he has for the gospel-pearl, as he would be, if he was as rich as
   Croesus. Let no one here imagine, that I am writing against all human
   literature, arts and sciences, or that I wish the world to be without
   them. I am no more an enemy to them, than to the common useful labors
   of life. It is literal learning, verbal contention, and critical strife
   about the things of God, that I charge with folly and mischief to
   religion. And in this, I have all learned Christendom, both popish and
   Protestant on my side. For they both agree in charging each other with
   a bad and false gospel-state, because of that which their learning,
   logic, and criticism do for them. Say not then, that it is only the
   illiterate enthusiast that condemns human learning in the gospel
   kingdom of God. For when he condemns the blindness and mischief of
   popish logic and criticism, he has all the learned Protestant world
   with him; and when he lays the same charge to Protestant learning, he
   has a much larger kingdom of popish great scholars, logically and
   learnedly affirming the same thing. So that the private person,
   charging human learning with so much mischief to the church, is so far
   from being led by enthusiasm, that he is led by all the church-learning
   that is in the world.

   [Addr-166] Again, all learned Christendom agrees in the same charge
   against temporal power in the church, as hurtful to the very being and
   progress of a salvation-kingdom that is not of this world, as
   supporting doctrines that human learning has brought into it. And true
   it is and must be, that human power can only support and help forward
   human things. The Protestant brings proof from a thousand years'
   learning and doctrines, that the pope is an unjust usurper of temporal
   power in the church, which is Christ's spiritual spouse. The papist
   brings the learning of as many ages to show that a temporal head of the
   church is an anti-Christian usurpation. And yet (N.B.) he who holds
   Christ to be the one, only head, heart, and life of the church, and
   that no man can call Jesus, Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, passes with
   the learned of both these people for a brain-sick enthusiast. Is it not
   then high time to look out for some better ground to stand upon, than
   such learning as this? Now look where you will, through all the whole
   nature of things, no divine wisdom, knowledge, goodness, and
   deliverance from sin, are anywhere to be found for fallen man, but in
   these two points; (1) a total entire entrance into the whole process of
   Christ; (2) a total resignation to, and sole dependence upon the
   continual operation of the Holy Ghost, or Christ come again in the
   Spirit, to be our never-ceasing light, teacher, and guide into all
   those ways of virtue, in which he himself walked in the flesh. All
   besides this, call it by what name you will, is but dead work, a vain
   labor of the old man, to new create himself. And here let it be well
   observed, that in these two points consists the whole of that mystic
   divinity, to which a Jewish orthodoxy at this day is so great an enemy.
   For nothing else is meant, or taught by it, but a total dying to self
   (called the process or cross of Christ) that a new creature (called
   Christ in us, or Christ come in the Spirit) may be begotten in the
   purity, and perfection of the first man's union with God. Now, let the
   Christian world forget, or depart from this one mystic way of
   salvation, let anything else be thought of or trusted to but the cross
   of Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, and then, though churches, and
   preachers, and prayers, and sacraments are everywhere in plenty, yet
   nothing better can come of it than a Christian kingdom of pagan vices,
   along with a mouth-belief of an holy catholic church, and communion of
   saints. To this melancholy truth, all Christendom both at home and
   abroad bears full witness. Who need be told, that there is not a
   corruption or depravity of human nature, no kinds of pride, wrath,
   envy, malice, and self-love; no sorts of hypocrisy, falseness, cursing,
   swearing, perjury, and cheating; no wantonness of lust in every kind of
   debauchery, but are as common all over Christendom, as towns and
   villages? But to pass these by, I shall only instance in two or three
   particulars, which though little observed, and less condemned, yet
   fully show that the beast, the whore, and the fiery dragon, are in
   possession of Protestant as well as popish churches.

   [Addr-167] And first, can it be said that Mammmon is less served by
   Christians, than by Jews and infidels? Or can there be a fuller proof
   that Christians, Jews, and infidels, are equally fallen from God and
   all divine worship, since truth itself has told us, that we cannot
   serve God and Mammon? Is not this as unalterable a truth, and of as
   great moment, as if it had been said, Ye cannot serve God and Baal? Or
   can it with any truth or sense be affirmed, that the Mammonist has more
   of Christ in him than the Baalist, or is more or less an idolator for
   being called a Christian, a Jew, or an infidel? Look now at all those
   particulars which Christ charged upon the Jewish priests, scribes, and
   Pharisees, and you will see them all acted over again in the fallen
   state of Christendom. And if God's prophets were again in the world,
   they would have just the same complaints against the fallen Christian
   church, as they had against the old carnal stiff-necked Jews, namely,
   "that of their silver and gold they had made themselves idols," Hos.
   viii.4. For though figured idol-gods of gold are not now worshipped
   either by Jews or Christians, yet silver and gold with that which
   belongs to them is the Mammon god, that sits and reigns in their
   hearts. How else could there be that universal strife through all
   Christendom, who should stand in the richest and highest place, to
   preach up the humility of Christ, and offer spiritual sacrifices unto
   God? What god but Mammon could put into the hearts of Christ's
   ambassadors, to make, or want to make a gain of that gospel, which from
   the beginning to the end means nothing else but death to self, and
   separation from every view, temper, and affection, that has any
   connection with the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
   pride of life? Our blessed Lord said a word to the Jews, that might
   well have made their ears to tingle, when he told them that they "had
   made his Father's house a den of thieves"; because sheep and oxen were
   sold, and money-changers sitting in the outer court of the temple. Now
   if you will say, that Mammon has brought forth no profanation like this
   in our Christian church, your best proof must be this, because our
   church-sale, is not oxen and sheep, but holy things, cures of souls,
   parsonages, vicarages, and our money-changers, our buyers, and sellers,
   are chiefly consecrated persons.

   [Addr-168] Look at things spiritual, and things temporal, and say if
   you can, that the same arts, the same passions, and worldly wisdom, are
   not as visibly active in the one, as in the other. For if Christ at
   leaving the world had said to his disciples, "Labor to be rich; Make
   full provision for the flesh; Be conformed to the world; Court the
   favor and interest of great men. Clothe yourselves with all the worldly
   honors, distinctions, and powers you can get"; I appeal to every man,
   whether popish and Protestant churches need do anything else, than that
   which they now do, and have done for ages, to prove their faithfulness
   to such a master, and their full obedience to his precepts. And now,
   what is all this in truth and reality, but the same whore riding upon
   the same beast, not here or there, but through all fallen Christendom,
   where God has only, in every age, people, and language, his seven
   thousands, who have not bowed the knee to Mammon?

   [Addr-169] Again, secondly, "Ye have heard," says our Lord, "that it
   hath been said by them of old; thou shalt not forswear thyself, but
   shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths." The Jews practiced promissory
   oaths, and thought all was well, when there was a performance of them.
   But this, with numbers of other Jewish practices, was not to be allowed
   in this kingdom of God, that was then come into the world. Christ
   totally rejects, and absolutely forbids it, saying, "I say unto you,
   swear not at all." But instead of it, he appoints and absolutely
   demands a most perfect simplicity of language, to support and adorn the
   mutual communication of those, whom he had created again unto
   righteousness, and given power to become sons of God saying, "Let your
   communication be YEA, YEA, and NAY, NAY, for (N.B.) whatsoever is more
   than this, cometh of evil." What more could have been done by Christ to
   prevent the use, or hinder the entrance of an oath into his church?
   What then shall we say of the present universal Christendom? For if
   Christ had commanded the direct contrary, had he said, "Behold I give
   you this new commandment, let not a simple YEA and NAY be of any avail
   in all your communication but let oaths be required of all that bear my
   name, as a proof that they belong to me, and act in all their dealings
   as become saints; for whatsoever is less than this, cometh of evil."
   Had this been Christ's new commandment, all the churches of
   Christendom, as well popish as Protestant, and these reformed kingdoms
   of Great Britain and Ireland, might have much to boast of their
   obedience to it. For through town and country, in all ignorant
   villages, in all learned colleges, in all courts spiritual and
   temporal, what with law-oaths, simony-oaths, bribery-oaths, election-
   oaths, there is more swearing and forswearing, than all history reports
   of any idol- worshipping nations. It was said of old, "Because of
   swearing, the land mourneth"; it is full as true to say now, Because of
   swearing, the land rejoiceth in iniquity, is full of profaneness, and
   without any fear or awe of the divine majesty, daily swallowing down
   all manner of oaths, in the same good state of mind, and with as much
   serious reflection, as pot -companions swallow down their liquor.

   [Addr-170] "He that despiseth me," says Christ, "despiseth not me, but
   him that sent me." Can that church, which absolutely requires that
   which Christ has absolutely forbidden, be free from the most open and
   public despising of Christ, which in full contrariety to his express
   word, refuses the sufficiency of that yea and nay, which he has
   commanded to be sufficient; and what is still more wonderful, compels
   all orders of Christians to swear by that very book, which says to all,
   whether high or low, prince, priest, or people, SWEAR NOT AT ALL?

   [Addr-171] If the swearing law was to order, that instead of kissing
   the gospel-book, the swearer should say, "In remembrance of, and in
   regard to the words of Christ, forbidding me to swear, I make this
   oath," who would not see the open contempt of Christ and his gospel?
   But the contempt of both is as truly there, when the gospel-book is
   kissed by the swearer; for the book has nothing relating to oaths, but
   those words of Christ, which absolutely forbid the use of them.
   Instead, therefore, of a SO HELP ME GOD and his HOLY GOSPEL, it might
   have been much better, if every swearing law through all Christendom
   had obliged every swearer to finish his oath with these words, Let God
   and his holy gospel PARDON ME IN THIS ONE THING.

   [Addr-172] If it here be asked, whether I would have all private
   Christians to beggar themselves, and lose all their right and title to
   house and land, which by the laws of Christendom, cannot be preserved
   without certain promissory oaths? I say not so. But my answer is, that
   as the Jews were of old carried captive into Babylon, so as real a
   captivity, and full as great, must happen to all private Christians,
   born and living under a fallen state of governing Christendom. For
   whether it be a pope, or a Nebuchadnezzar, popish, or Protestant church
   governors, that make the goods and properties of private Christians,
   only possible to be possessed by obedience to their swearing laws, the
   captivity is the same. And as God bore with the want of a Jerusalem-
   worship in those Jews, whose captivity suffered them not to perform it,
   so it may well be hoped and believed, that he will bear with that want
   of gospel purity, in the yea and nay of private Christians, which their
   captivity under a fallen state of Christian government suffers them not
   constantly to adhere to. And also, that the piety of private
   Christians, loving and longing after gospel-purity of communication,
   under the church-captivity, will be as acceptable to God, as the piety
   of captive Jews was, who though living under heathen laws, and forced
   to say their prayers in Babylon, yet had always their eyes turned
   towards, and their hearts longing after Jerusalem and its holy worship.

   [Addr-173] What I write, is not to show that Christendom's oaths, and
   the manner of them, are not to be submitted to by any private good
   Christian, but to show in the plainest manner, that the laws of
   Christendom, which make them necessary, are a full proof that the
   spirit which governs all Christendom, is fallen away from the Spirit of
   Christ. And also to show, that if gross impiety runs through all the
   Christian world, if much and much the greatest part of swearing
   Christians have lost all pious fear of oaths and swearing, it is
   because the necessity of swearing meets every man, in almost
   everything, at the peril of losing all that he has, or can have, unless
   he will swear.

   [Addr-174] When the matter of an oath is a manifest lie, or an
   engagement to do some wicked thing, all is to be suffered, rather than
   take it. But where there is nothing false or bad, affirmed or promised,
   nor any blame chargeable, but that of going further than our Lord's yea
   and nay, it is plain from Christ's words, that the evil is only in
   that, and there, from whence the oath comes.

   [Addr-175] When a person swears of his own accord, or wantonly, then
   the oath comes of, or from the evil of his own heart. But when a
   Christian, in whose heart the simplicity and purity of gospel-language
   is written and loved, when he submits to use more than a yea or nay,
   compelled by that authority which makes the refusal to be the loss of
   goods, and bodily imprisonment, then such departure from
   gospel-language comes of and from the evil in that power which required
   it, whether it be a pope, a kirk, a church, an assembly of divines, or
   a Nebuchadnezzar. All this, I say, is plain from Christ's own words.
   "Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay." But why so? It is because
   whatsoever is more than this cometh of evil, that is, is caused by
   evil. Therefore the evil that is in the use of an imposed oath, is by
   the words of Christ, charged upon and confined to that, which causes or
   forces it to be done. For that which the oath comes from, is that which
   our savior calls the evil of it but the oath comes from that which
   causes it, therefore, that which causes swearing, is by our savior's
   words charged with all the evil of the oath. But (N.B.) all this
   supposed freedom from the evil of an imposed oath, in the private
   Christian's submission to the use of it, is only then and there, where
   what is affirmed, or denied by the oath, has all that innocence, truth,
   or righteousness in it, which the true yea or nay of Christ might
   justly affirm, or deny.

   [Addr-176] But here let it be well observed, that nothing that has here
   been said, is intended to blame the piety of those, who on no account
   whatsoever will be prevailed upon to take any kind of oath, because our
   Lord and master has said, "Swear not at all." I am so far from blaming
   this, or looking upon it, as the effect of a false or blind piety, that
   I wish with all my heart, it may come to be the piety of all the three
   estates of this kingdom; and that all swearing, whether in secular or
   religious matters, may by all the authority of the nation be as utterly
   condemned, as absolutely renounced, and declared to be as anti-
   Christian, as the pope's supremacy.

   [Addr-177] In a word, that which calls for, and requires oaths among
   Christians, requires that which Christ forbids; but governing
   Christendom everywhere establishes, requires, and even compels
   Christians to swear, therefore governing Christendom is fallen from
   Christ, and acts by and through that spirit, which being contrary to
   Christ, is and must be called ANTICHRIST.

   [Addr-178] But to proceed now to a third and last instance, which I
   shall mention, of the full power of anti-Christ in and through every
   part of governing Christendom.

   [Addr-179] In the darkest ages of Romish superstition, a martial spirit
   of zeal and glory for the gospel, broke forth in kings, cardinals,
   bishops, monks, and friars, to lead the sheep of Christ, saints,
   pilgrims, penitents, and sinners of all kinds, to proceed in battle
   array, to kill, devour, and drive the Turks from the land of Palestine,
   and the old earthly Jerusalem. These bloodthirsty expeditions were
   called an holy war, because it was fighting for the holy land; they
   were called also a crusade, because crosses and crucifixes made the
   greatest glitter among the sharpened instruments of human murder. Thus
   under the banner of the cross went forth an army of church wolves, to
   destroy the lives of those, whom the Lamb of God died on the cross to
   save.

   [Addr-180] The light which broke out at the reformation, abhorred the
   bloody superstitious zeal of these catholic heroes. But (N.B.) what
   followed from this new risen, reforming light, what came forth instead
   of these holy crusades? Why wars, if possible, still more diabolical.
   Christian kingdoms with bloodthirsty piety, destroying, devouring, and
   burning one another, for the sake of that which was called popery, and
   that which was called Protestantism.

   [Addr-181] Now who can help seeing, that satan, the prince of the
   powers of darkness, had here a much greater triumph over Christendom,
   than in all the holy wars and crusades that went before? For all that
   was then done, by such high-spirited fighters for old Jerusalem's
   earth, could not be said to be so much done against gospel-light,
   because not one in a thousand of those holy warriors were allowed to
   see what was in the gospel. But now, with the gospel opened in
   everyone's hands, papists and Protestants make open war against every
   divine virtue that belonged to Christ, or that can unite them with that
   Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world: I say against
   every divine, redeeming virtue of the Lamb of God, for these are the
   enemies which Christian war conquers. For there is not a virtue of
   gospel-goodness, but has its death-blow from it. For no virtue has any
   gospel-goodness in it any further, than as it has its birth and growth
   in and from the Spirit of Christ; where his nature and Spirit is not,
   there is nothing but the heathen to be found, which is but saying the
   same truth, as when the apostle said, that he who hath not, or is not
   led by the Spirit of Christ, is none of his.

   [Addr-182] Now fancy to yourself Christ, the Lamb of God, after his
   divine sermon on the mount, putting himself at the head of a blood-
   thirsty army, or St. Paul going forth with a squadron of fire and
   brimstone, to make more havoc in human lives than a devouring
   earthquake.

   [Addr-183] But if this be too blasphemous an absurdity to be supposed,
   what follows, but that the Christian who acts in the destroying fury of
   war, acts in full contrariety to the whole nature and Spirit of Christ,
   and can no more be said to be led by his Spirit, or be one with him,
   than those his enemies who "came forth with swords and staves to take
   him."

   [Addr-184] Blinded Protestants think they have the glory of
   slaughtering blind papists; and the victorious papist claims the merit
   of having conquered the troops of heretics: but alas! the conquest is
   equally great on both sides, both are entitled to the same victory; and
   the glorious victory on both sides, is only that of having gospel
   goodness equally under their feet.

   [Addr-185] When a Most Christian Majesty, with his catholic church,
   sings a Te Deum at the high altar, for rivers of Protestant blood
   poured out; or an evangelic church sings praise and glory to the Lamb
   of God, for helping them from his holy throne in heaven, to make popish
   towns like to Sodom and Gomorrah, they blaspheme God as much as Cain
   would have done, had he offered a sacrifice of praise to God for
   helping him to murder his brother. Let such worshippers of God be told
   this, that the field of blood gives all its glory to satan, who was a
   murderer from the beginning, and will to the end of his reign be the
   only receiver of all the glory, that can come from it.

   [Addr-186] A glorious Alexander in the heathen world is a shame and
   reproach to the human nature, and does more mischief to mankind in a
   few years, than all the wild beasts, in every wilderness upon earth,
   have ever done from the beginning of the world to this day. But the
   same hero, making the same ravage from country to country with
   Christian soldiers, has more thanks from the devil, than twenty pagan
   Alexanders would ever have had. To make men kill men, is meat and drink
   to that roaring adversary of mankind, who goeth about seeking whom he
   may devour. But to make Christians kill Christians for the sake of
   Christ's church, is his highest triumph over the highest mark, which
   Christ has set upon those whom he has purchased by his blood. "This
   commandment," says he, "I give unto you, that ye love one another. By
   this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one
   another as I have loved you."

   [Addr-187] Can the duelist, who had rather sheathe his sword in the
   bowels of his brother, than stifle that which he calls an affront, can
   he be said to have this mark of his belonging to Christ? and may not he
   that is called his SECOND, more justly be said to be second to none in
   the love of human murder? Now, what is the difference between the
   haughty duelist with his provided second, meeting his adversary with
   sword and pistol behind a hedge, or a house, and two kingdoms with
   their high-spirited regiments slaughtering one another in the field of
   battle? It is the difference that is between the murder of one man, and
   the murder of an hundred thousand.

   [Addr-188] Now imagine the duelist fasting and confessing his sins to
   God today, because he is engaged to fight his brother tomorrow; fancy
   again the conqueror got into his closet, on his bended knees, lifting
   up hands and heart to God for blessing his weapons with the death of
   his brother; and then you have a picture in little of the great piety,
   that begins and ends the wars all over heavenly Christendom.

   [Addr-189] What blindness can well be greater, than to think that a
   Christian kingdom, as such, can have any other goodness, or union with
   Christ, but that very goodness, which makes the private Christian to be
   one with him, and a partaker of the divine nature? Or that pride,
   wrath, ambition, envy, covetousness, rapine, resentment, revenge,
   hatred, mischief, and murder, are only the works of the devil, whilst
   they are committed by private or single men; but when carried on by all
   the strength and authority, all the hearts, hands, and voices of a
   whole nation, that the devil is then quite driven out of them, loses
   all his right and power in them, and they become holy matter of church
   thanksgivings, and the sacred oratory of pulpits.

   [Addr-190] Look at that which the private Christian is to do to his
   neighbor, or his enemy, and you see that very thing, which one
   Christian kingdom is to do to another. Look at that which proves a man
   to be not led and governed by the Spirit of Christ, and you see that,
   which proves a kingdom to be under the dominion and power of satan.
   Wherever pride is, there the devil is riding in his first fiery
   chariot; and wherever wrath is, there he has his first murdering sword
   at work. What is it, that fallen man wants to be redeemed from, but
   pride and wrath, envy and covetousness? He can have no higher
   separation or apostasy from God, no fuller union with satan and his
   angels, than he has of the spirit of these tempers: they constitute
   that, which whether you call it SELF, or satan in him, the meaning is
   the same. Now suppose man not fallen into this self or satan, and then
   there could be no more war or fighting in him, than there was in the
   WORD made man in our flesh. Or suppose him redeemed from his fallen
   nature, by a new birth of the Lamb of God born in his soul, and then he
   can no more be hired to kill men gloriously in the field, than to carry
   a dark lantern by night to a powder-plot.

   [Addr-191] Love, goodness, and communication of good, is the immutable
   glory and perfection of the divine nature, and nothing can have union
   with God, but that which partakes of this goodness. The love that
   brought forth the existence of all things, changes not through the fall
   of its creatures, but is continually at work, to bring back all fallen
   nature and creature to their first state of goodness. All that passes
   for a time between God and his fallen creature, is but one and the same
   thing, working for one and the same end; and though this is called
   wrath, that called punishment, curse, and death, it is all from the
   beginning to the end, nothing but the work of the first creating love,
   and means nothing else, does nothing else, but those works of purifying
   fire, which must, and alone can burn away all that dark evil, which
   separates the creature from its first created union with God. God's
   providence, from the fall to the restitution of all things, is doing
   the same thing, as when he said to the dark chaos of fallen nature,
   "Let there be light"; he still says, and will continue saying the same
   thing, till there is no evil of darkness left in all that is nature and
   creature. God creating, God illuminating, God sanctifying, God
   threatening and punishing, God forgiving and redeeming, is but one and
   the same essential, immutable, never ceasing working of the divine
   nature. That in God which illuminates and glorifies saints and angels
   in heaven, is that very same working of the divine nature, which
   wounds, pains, punishes, and purifies sinners upon earth. And (N.B.)
   every number of destroyed sinners, whether thrown by Noah's flood, or
   Sodom's brimstone, into the terrible furnace of a life, insensible of
   anything but new forms of raging misery till judgment's day, must
   through the all -working, all- redeeming love of God, which never
   ceases, come at last to know that they had lost, and have found again
   such a God of love as this.

   [Addr-192] And if long and long ages of fiery pain, and tormenting
   darkness, fall to the share of many, or most of God's apostate
   creatures, they will last no longer, than till the great fire of God
   has melted all arrogance into humility, and all that is SELF has died
   in the long agonies and bloody sweat of a lost God, which is that
   all-saving cross of Christ, which will never give up its redeeming
   power, till sin and sinners have no more a name among the creatures of
   God. And if long ages hereafter can only do that for a soul, departing
   this life under a load of sins, which days and nights might have done
   for a most hardened pharaoh, or a most wicked Nero, whilst in the body,
   it is because, whilst the soul is in the body, it has only the nature
   and state of fallen Adam, but when flesh and blood are taken from it,
   the strong apostate nature of fallen angels is found in it, which must
   have its state and place in that blackness of darkness of a fiery
   wrath, that burns in them and their kingdom.

   [Addr-193] O poor sinner, whoever thou art, repent and turn to God,
   whilst thou hast Adam's flesh upon thee; for as long as that lasts, the
   kingdom of God is nigh at hand; but if thou diest without Adam's
   repentance, black lakes, bottomless pits, ages of a gnawing worm, and
   fire that never ceases to burn, will stand between thee and a kingdom
   of heaven afar off.

   [Addr-194] To prevent all this, and make thee a child of the first
   resurrection, Jesus Christ, God and man, the only begotten Son of this
   infinite love, came into the world in the name, and under the character
   of infinite pity, boundless compassion, inexpressible meekness,
   bleeding love, nameless humility, never ending patience, long
   suffering, and bowels of redeeming mercy, called the Lamb of God, who
   with all these supernatural virtues taketh away the sins of the world.

   [Addr-195] Now from this view of God's infinite love and mercy in
   Christ Jesus, willing nothing, seeking nothing through all the regions
   of his providence, but that sinners of all kinds, the boldest rebels
   against all his goodness, may have their proper remedy, their necessary
   means of being full delivered from all that hurt, mischief, and
   destruction, which in full opposition to their God and creator, they
   had brought upon themselves; from this view, I say, of God and Christ,
   using every miracle of love and wisdom to give recovery of life, health
   and salvation to all that have rebelled against them, look at the
   murdering monster of WAR. And what can its name, or nature be, but a
   fiery great dragon, a full figure of satan broke loose, and fighting
   against every redeeming virtue of the Lamb of God?

   [Addr-196] The temporal miseries and wrongs which war carries along
   with it, wherever it goes, are neither to be numbered or expressed.
   What thievery bears any proportion to that, which with the boldness of
   drum and trumpet plunders the innocent of all that they have? And if
   themselves are left alive with all their limbs, or their daughters
   unravished, they have many times only the ashes of their consumed
   houses to lie down upon. What honor has war not gotten from its tens
   and tens of hundreds or thousands of men slaughtered on heaps, with as
   little regret or concern, as at loads of rubbish thrown into a pit?
   Who, but the fiery dragon, would put wreaths of laurel on such heroes'
   heads? Who but he could say unto them, "Well done, good and faithful
   servants"?

   [Addr-197] But there is still an evil of war much greater, though less
   regarded. Who reflects, how many hundreds of thousands, nay millions of
   young men, born into this world for no other end, but that they may be
   born again of Christ, and from sons of Adam's misery become sons of
   God, and fellow heirs with Christ in everlasting glory; who reflects, I
   say, what nameless numbers of these are robbed of God's precious gift
   of life to them, before they have known the one sole benefit of living;
   who are not suffered to stay in this world, till age and experience
   have done their best for them, have helped them to know the inward
   voice and operation of God's Spirit, helped them to find, and feel that
   evil, curse, and sting of sin and death, which must be taken from
   within them, before they can die the death of the righteous; but
   instead of all this, have been either violently forced, or tempted in
   the fire of youth, and full strength of sinful lusts, to forget God,
   eternity, and their own souls, and rush into a kill or be killed, with
   as much furious haste, and goodness of spirit, as tiger kills tiger for
   the sake of his prey?

   [Addr-198] That God's providence over his fallen creatures is nothing
   else but a providence of love and salvation, turning through ways of
   infinite wisdom, sooner or later, all kinds of evil into a new good,
   making that which was lost to be found, that which was dead to be alive
   again; not willing that one single sinner should want that which can
   save him from eternal death, is a truth as certain, as that God's Name
   is, I AM that I AM.

   [Addr-199] Among unfallen creatures in heaven, God's Name and nature is
   LOVE, LIGHT, and GLORY. To the fallen sons of Adam, that which was
   love, light, and glory in heaven, becomes infinite PITY and COMPASSION
   on earth, in a God clothed with the nature of his fallen creature,
   bearing all its infirmities, entering into all its troubles, and in the
   meek innocence of a Lamb of God living a life, and dying a death, of
   all the sufferings due to sin. Hence it was, that when this DIVINE PITY
   suffered its own life-giving blood to be poured on the ground, all
   outward nature made full declaration of its atoning and redeeming
   power; the strength of the earth did quake, the hardness of rocks was
   forced to split and long-covered graves to give up their dead. A
   certain passage, that all that came by the curse into nature and
   creature must give up its power; that all kinds of hellish wrath,
   hardened malice, fiery pride, selfish wills, tormenting envy, and
   earthly passions, which kept men under the power of satan, must have
   their fullness of death, and fullness of a new life, from that
   all-powerful, all-purifying blood of the Lamb, which will never cease
   washing RED into WHITE, till the earth is washed into the crystal
   purity of that glassy sea, which is before the throne of God, and all
   the sons of Adam clothed in such white, as fits them for their several
   mansions in their heavenly Father's house.

   [Addr-200] Sing, O ye heavens, and shout all ye lower parts of the
   earth, this is OUR GOD that varies not, whose first creating love for
   {sic} knows no change, but into a redeeming pity towards all his fallen
   creatures.

   [Addr-201] Look now at warring Christendom, what smallest drop of pity
   towards sinners is to be found in it? Or how could a spirit all
   hellish, more fully contrive and hasten their destruction? It stirs up
   and kindles every passion of fallen nature that is contrary to the all-
   humble, all- meek, all-loving, all-forgiving, all-saving Spirit of
   Christ. It unites, it drives, and compels nameless numbers of
   unconverted sinners to fall, murdering and murdered among flashes of
   fire, with the wrath and swiftness of lightning, into a fire infinitely
   worse than that in which they died. O sad subject for thanksgiving
   days, whether in popish or Protestant churches! For if there is a joy
   of all the angels in heaven for one sinner that repents, what a joy
   must there be in hell over such multitudes of sinners, not suffered to
   repent? And if they who have "converted many to righteousness, shall
   shine as the stars in the firmament for ever," what Chorazin's woe may
   they not justly fear, whose proud wrath and vain glory have robbed such
   numberless troops of poor wretches, of all time and place of knowing
   what righteousness they wanted, for the salvation of their immortal
   souls.

   [Addr-202] Here my pen trembles in my hand; but when, O when will one
   single Christian church, people, or language, tremble at the share they
   have in this death of sinners!

   [Addr-203] For the GLORY OF HIS MAJESTY'S ARMS, said once a Most
   Christian king: now if at that time, his catholic church had called a
   solemn assembly to unite hearts and voices in this pious prayer, "O
   blessed Jesus, dear redeeming Lamb of God, who camest down from heaven,
   to save men's lives, and not destroy them, go along, we humbly pray
   thee, with our bomb-vessels and fire-ships, suffer not our thundering
   cannon to roar in vain, but let thy tender hand of love and mercy
   direct their balls to more heads and hearts of thine own redeemed
   creatures, than the poor skill of man is able of itself to do": Had not
   such prayers had more of the man of the earth, more of the son of
   perdition in them, than the Most Christian king's glorying in his arms?

   [Addr-204] Again, would you further see the fall of the universal
   church, from being led by the Spirit of Christ, to be guided by the
   inspiration of the great fiery dragon, look at all European Christendom
   sailing round the globe with fire and sword, and every murdering art of
   war, to seize the possessions, and kill the inhabitants of both the
   Indies. What natural right of man, what supernatural virtue which
   Christ brought down from heaven, was not here trodden under foot? All
   that you ever read or heard of heathen barbarity, was here outdone by
   Christian conquerors. And to this day, what wars of Christians against
   Christians, blended with scalping heathens, still keep staining the
   earth and the seas with human blood, for a miserable share in the
   spoils of a plundered heathen world! A world, which should have heard,
   or seen, or felt nothing from the followers of Christ, but a divine
   love, that had forced them from distant lands, and through the perils
   of long seas, to visit strangers with those glad tidings of peace and
   salvation to all the world, which angels from heaven, and shepherds on
   earth, proclaimed at the birth of Christ.

   [Addr-205] Here now, let the wisdom of this world be as wise as ever it
   will, and from its learned throne condemn all this as enthusiasm; it
   need be no trouble to anyone, to be condemned by that wisdom, which God
   himself has condemned as foolishness with him. For the wisdom of this
   world has all the contrariety to salvation-wisdom, that the flesh has
   to the spirit, earth to heaven, or damnation to salvation. It is a
   wisdom, whose spirit and breath keep all the evil that is in fallen man
   alive, and which in its highest excellence has only the full grown
   nature of that carnal mind, which is enmity against God. It is a wisdom
   that is sensual, and devilish, that hinders man from knowing, and dying
   all those deaths, without which there can be no new life. It is a
   wisdom that turns all salvation-truths into empty, learned tales, that
   instead of helping the sinner to confess his sins, and feel the misery
   that is hid under them, helps him to an art of hiding, nay of defending
   them. For that which the lusts and passions do contrary to the wisdom
   from above, is proved to be right reason by this wisdom from below,
   whose greatest skill is shown, in keeping all the powers and passions
   of the natural man in peace and prosperity; and so the poor blinded
   sinner lives and dies in a total ignorance of all that light, blessing,
   and salvation, which could only be had by a broken and contrite heart.
   For (N.B.) with respect to conscience, this is the chief office of
   worldly wisdom; it is to keep all things quiet in the old man, that
   whether busied in things spiritual, or temporal, he may keep up the
   lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
   without any disturbance from religious phantoms, and dreams of mystic
   idiots, who for want of sober sense and sound learning, think that
   Christ really meant what he said in these words, "Except a man be born
   again of the Spirit, or from above, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
   God." For this wisdom, come to its highest perfection, is a classic
   moral painter, which though it cannot alter the nature, yet can change
   the colors of everything; it can give to the most heavenly virtue such
   an outward form and color, as will force the stoutest of aged and
   learned men to run away from it; and to a vice of the greatest
   deformity it can pencil such charming features, as will make every
   child of this world, wish to live and die with it. Its next perfection
   is that of a flattering orator, who has praise and dispraise at his own
   free disposal; for as they are all of his own making, so he can dispose
   them on whom, and on what he will; not only as outward interesting
   occasions call for them, but also as the inward necessities, the ups
   and downs of his own poor self want them. For self, however willing to
   be always strong, has its weak hours, and would be ever tottering,
   unless this elbow-orator kept him every day (though perhaps not every
   night) free from the disturbing whispers of a seed of God in his soul.
   Now join (if you please) learning and religion to act in fellowship
   with this worldly wisdom, and make their best of it, and then you will
   have a depravity of craft and subtlety as high as flesh and blood can
   carry it, which will bring forth a glittering Pharisee, with a hardness
   of heart, greater than that of the sinner publican.

   [Addr-206] "Demas," says St. Paul, "hath forsaken me, having loved this
   present world." Here you see all the good and blessing that is
   inseparable from the wisdom of this world, it always does the same
   thing, and has the same effect wherever it is; it will do to high and
   low, learned or unlearned, clergy or laity, that same unavoidably which
   it did to Demas; it will make them forsake Christ, turn their backs on
   every grace and virtue of his Holy Spirit, as certainly as the love of
   the world made Demas to forsake Paul.

   [Addr-207] This wisdom has asked me, how it is possible for Christian
   kingdoms in the neighborhood of one another to preserve themselves,
   unless the strength and weapons of war are everyone's defense, against
   such invasions, encroachments, and robberies, as would otherwise be the
   fate of Christian kingdoms from one another.

   [Addr-208] This question is so far from needing to be answered by me,
   that it is wholly on my side; it confesses all, and proves all that I
   have said of the fallen state of Christendom, to be strictly true. For
   if this is the governing spirit of Christian kingdoms, that no one of
   them can subsist in safety from its neighboring Christian kingdoms, but
   by its weapons of war, are not all Christian kingdoms equally in the
   same unchristian state, as two neighboring bloody knaves, who cannot be
   safe from one another, but as each other's murdering arms preserve and
   protect them? This plea therefore for Christendom's wars, proves
   nothing else but the want of Christianity all over the Christian world,
   and stands upon no better a foundation of righteousness and goodness,
   than when one murdering knave kills another that would have killed him.

   [Addr-209] But to know whether Christianity wants, or admits of war,
   Christianity is to be considered as in its right state. Now the true
   state of the world turned Christian, is thus described by the great
   gospel-prophet, who showed what a change it was to make in the fallen
   state of the world. "It shall come to pass," says he, "in the last
   days," that is, in the days of Christendom, "that the mountain of the
   Lord's house" (his Christian kingdom) "shall be established in the top
   of the mountains, and all nations shall flow into it; and many people
   shall say, Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord's house, and he
   will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths," Isaiah ii.2.

   [Addr-210] Now what follows from this going up of the nations to the
   mountain of the Lord's house, from his teaching them of his ways, and
   their walking in his paths? The holy prophet expressly tells you in his
   following words, "They shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and
   their spears into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up its sword
   against nation, (N.B.) neither shall they learn war any more." This is
   the prophet's true Christendom, with one and the same essential divine
   mark set upon it, as when the Lamb of God said, "By this shall all men
   know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another as I have loved
   you." Christ's kingdom of God is nowhere come, but where the works of
   the devil are destroyed, and men are turned from the power of satan
   unto God. God is only another name for the highest and only good; and
   the highest and only good means nothing else but LOVE with all its
   WORKS. Satan is only another name for the whole and all of evil, and
   the whole of evil is nothing else but its whole contrariety to love.
   And the sum total of all contrariety to love is contained in pride,
   wrath, strife, self, envy, hatred, revenge, mischief, and murder. Look
   at these with all their fruits that belong to them, and then you see
   all the princely power that satan is, and has in this fallen world.

   [Addr-211] Would you see when and where the kingdoms of this fallen
   world are become a kingdom of God, the gospel prophet tells you, that
   it is then and there where all enmity ceases. "The wolf," says he,
   "shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the
   kid. The calf and the young lion and the fatling together, and a little
   child shall lead them. The cow and the bear shall feed, and their young
   ones shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
   The suckling child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's den." For,
   (N.B.) "they shall not HURT or DESTROY in all my holy mountain," that
   is, through all holy Christendom, Isaiah xi.6.

   [Addr-212] See here a kingdom of God on the earth; it is nothing else
   but a kingdom of mere love, where all HURT and DESTROYING is done away,
   and every work of enmity changed into one united power of heavenly
   love. But observe again and again, whence this comes to pass, that
   God's kingdom on earth is, and can be nothing else, but the power of
   reigning love; the prophet tells you, it is because in the day of his
   kingdom, "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
   waters cover the sea." Therefore, O Christendom, thy wars are thy
   certain proofs, that thou art all over as full of an ignorance of God,
   as the waters cover the sea.

   [Addr-213] As to the present fallen state of universal Christendom,
   working under the spirit and power of the great fiery dragon, it is not
   my intention, in anything I am here upon, to show how any part of it
   can subsist, or preserve itself from being devoured by every other
   part, but by its own dragon weapons.

   [Addr-214] But the Christendom which I mean, that neither wants, nor
   allows war, is only that where Christ is king, and his Holy Spirit the
   only governor of the wills, affections, and designs of all that belong
   to it. It is my complaint against, and charge upon all the nations of
   Christendom, that this necessity of murdering arms is the dragon's
   monster, that is equally brought forth by all and every part of fallen
   Christendom; and that therefore all and every part, as well popish as
   Protestant, are at one and the same distance from the Spirit of their
   Lord and savior the Lamb of God, and therefore all want one and the
   same entire reformation.

   [Addr-215] In these last ages of fallen Christendom, many reformations
   have taken place; but alas! truth must be forced to say, that they have
   been in all their variety, little better than so many run-away births
   of one and the same mother, so many lesser Babels come out of Babylon
   the great. For among all the reformers, the one only true reformation
   has never yet been thought of. A change of place, of governors, of
   opinions, together with new formed outward models, is all the
   reformation that has yet been attempted.

   [Addr-216] The wisdom of this world, with its worldly spirit, was the
   only thing that had overcome the church, and had carried it into
   captivity. For in captivity it certainly is, as soon as it is turned
   into a kingdom of this world; and a kingdom of this world it certainly
   is, as soon as worldly wisdom has its power in it. Not a false
   doctrine, not a bad discipline, not an usurped power, or corrupt
   practice ever has prevailed, or does prevail in the church, but has had
   its whole birth and growth from worldly wisdom.

   [Addr-217] This wisdom was the great evil root, at which the reforming
   ax should have been laid, and must be laid, before the church can be
   again that virgin spouse of Christ, which it was at the beginning. "If
   any man," says St. Paul, "will be wise, let him become a fool in this
   world." This admits of no exception, it is a maxim as universal and
   unalterable, as that which says, "If any man will follow Christ, let
   him deny himself." For no man has any more to deny than that, which the
   wisdom and spirit of this world are, and do in him. For all that is in
   this world, the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride
   of life, are the very things in which alone the wisdom of this world
   lives, and moves, and has its being. It can be no other, can rise no
   higher, nor be any better, than they are and do. For as heavenly wisdom
   is the whole of all heavenly goodness, so earthly wisdom has the whole
   evil of all the earthly nature.

   [Addr-218] St. Paul speaks of a natural man, that cannot know the
   things of God, but to whom they are mere foolishness. This natural man
   is only another name for the wisdom of this world; but though he cannot
   know the things that be of God, yet he can know their names, and learn
   to speak that which the saints of God have spoken about them. He can
   make profession of them, be eloquent in their praise, and set them
   forth in such a desirable view, as shall make them quite agreeable to
   the children of worldly wisdom. This is the natural man, who having got
   into the church, and church power, has turned the things of God into
   things of this world. Had this man been kept out of the church, the
   church had kept its first purity to this day; for its fallen state is
   nothing else but its fall into the hands of the natural man of this
   world. And when this is the state of the church, the wisdom of this
   world (which always loves its own) will be in love with it, will spare
   no cost to maintain it, will make laws, fight battles in defense of it,
   and condemn every man as heretical, who dares speak a word against this
   glorious image of a church, which the wisdom of this world has set up.

   [Addr-219] This is the great anti-Christ, which is neither better nor
   worse, nor anything else, but the spirit of satan working against
   Christ, in the strength and subtlety of earthly wisdom.

   [Addr-220] If therefore you take anything to be church- reformation,
   but a full departure from the wisdom of this world, or anything to be
   your entrance into a salvation-church, but the nature, Spirit, and
   works of Christ, become living in you, then, whether papist or
   Protestant, reformation or no reformation, all will be just as much
   good to you, as when a Sadducee turns publican, or from a publican
   becomes a Pharisee. For the church of Christ, as it is the door of
   salvation, is nothing else but Christ himself. Christ in us, or we in
   his church, is the same thing. When that is alive, wills, and works in
   you, which was alive in Christ, then you are in his church; for that
   which he was, that must they be who are his. Without this, it matters
   not what pale you are in. To everything but the new creature, Christ
   says, "I know you not"; and to every virtue that worldly wisdom puts
   on, "Get thee behind me, satan, for thou savorest not the things that
   be of God." And the reason why it must be thus, why worldly wisdom,
   though under a religious form, is and can be nothing else, but that
   which is called satan, or anti-Christ, is because all that we are, and
   have from this world, is that very enmity against God, that whole evil
   which separates us from him, and constitutes all that death and
   damnation that belongs to our fallen state. And so sure as the life of
   this world is our separation from God, so sure is it, that a total
   departure from every subtlety and prosperity of worldly wisdom, is
   absolutely necessary to change an evil son of Adam into a holy son of
   God. And here it is well to be observed, that the church of Christ is
   solely for this end, to make us holy as he is holy. But nothing can do
   this, but that which has full power to change a sinner into a saint.
   And he who has not found that power in the church, may be assured that
   he is not yet a true son of that church. For the church brings forth no
   other births, but holy children of God; it has no other end, no other
   nature or work, but that of changing a sinner into a saint. But this
   can only be done, just as the change of night into day is done, or as
   the darkness is quite lost in the light. Something as contrary to the
   whole nature of sin, as light is to darkness, and as powerful over it,
   as the light is powerful over darkness, can alone do this. Creeds,
   canons, articles of religion, stately churches, learned priests,
   singing, preaching, and praying in the best contrived form of words,
   can no more raise a dead sinner into a living saint, than a fine system
   of light and colors can change the night into day. For, (N.B.) that
   which cannot help you to all goodness, cannot help you to any goodness,
   nor can that take away any sin but that which can take away all sin.

   [Addr-221] On this ground it is, that the apostle said, "Circumcision
   is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing"; and on the same ground it
   must be said, that popery is nothing, and Protestantism is nothing,
   because all is nothing, as to salvation, but a sinner changed into a
   saint, or the apostle's new creature. Call nothing therefore your holy,
   salvation -church, but that which takes away all your sins; this is the
   only way not to be deceived with the cry about churches, reformations,
   and divisions. If it be asked, What is meant by taking away all our
   sins? The whole is fully told us in these words, "To as many as
   believed, to them he gave power to become sons of God." This is the
   true taking away, or forgiveness of sins; not a strong imagination, or
   brain-fancy, that on such an hour, on such a day, or in such a place,
   you felt and knew assuredly that all your sins were forgiven you: by
   such a forgiveness of sins, that which made you a sinner is not
   destroyed, but you will have every day the same necessity of confessing
   yourself a miserable sinner, as you had that morning, when your sins
   were not forgiven you till the afternoon. The true forgiveness of sins
   is only then, when that which sinned in us is done away, or become
   powerless in us; but nothing can do this, but that power by which we
   became sons of God. A blind man has then only a deliverance from his
   blindness, when he is put in full possession of seeing eyes; this is
   the only doing away of his darkness. Just so, and no otherwise, are our
   sins forgiven us, or done away, when the power by which we become sons
   of God, or the new creature, is so given to us, so possessed by us, as
   seeing eyes are given to and possessed by the man, who before that was
   all blindness. And as our old man can only then be said to be truly put
   off, when the new man in Christ is raised to life in his stead, so our
   sins are only then truly blotted out, or done away, when an unsinning
   nature, or a birth of God that sinneth not, is come to be the ruling
   life in us.

   [Addr-222] Many are the marks, which the learned have given us of the
   true church; but be that as it will, no man, whether learned or
   unlearned, can have any mark or proof of his own true church-
   membership, but his being dead unto all sin, and alive unto all
   righteousness. This cannot be more plainly told us, than in these words
   of our Lord, "He that committeth sin, is the servant of sin"; but
   surely that servant of sin, cannot at the same time be a living member
   of Christ's body, or that new creature, who dwells in Christ, and
   Christ in him. To suppose a man born again from above, yet under a
   necessity of continuing to sin, is as absurd as to suppose, that the
   true Christian is only to have so much of the nature of Christ born in
   him, as is consistent with as real a power of satan still dwelling in
   him. "If the son," says Christ, "shall make you free, then ye shall be
   free indeed." What is this, but saying, if Christ be come to life in
   you, then a true freedom from all necessity of sinning is given to you.
   Now if this is hindered, and cannot come to pass in the faithful
   follower of Christ, it must be, because both the willing and working of
   Christ in man is too weak to overcome that, which the devil wills and
   works in him. All this absurdity, and even blasphemy, is necessarily
   implied in that common doctrine of books and pulpits, which teaches,
   that the Christian can never have done sinning as long as he lives.
   Well therefore may Christendom sleep as securely as it does, under the
   power of sin, without any thought, hope, or desire of doing God's will
   on earth, as it is done in heaven; without any concern at their not
   being pure, as he who has called them is pure, or walking as he walked.

   [Addr-223] The scripture knows no Christians but saints, who in all
   things act as becometh saints. But now if the scripture saint did not
   mean a man that escheweth all evil, and was holy in all his
   conversation, saint and no saint would have only such difference, as
   one carnal man will always have from another. Preachers and writers
   comfort the half Christians with telling them, that God requires not a
   perfect, sinless obedience, but accepts the sincerity of our weak
   endeavors instead of it. Here, if ever, the blind lead the blind. For
   St. Paul, comparing the way of salvation to a race, says, "In a race
   all run, but ONE obtaineth the prize: so run that ye may obtain." Now
   if Paul had seeing eyes, must not they be blind who teach, that God
   accepts of all that run in the religious race, and requires not that
   any should obtain the prize. How easy was it to see, that the sincerity
   of our weak endeavors was quite a different thing from that, which
   alone is, and can be the required perfection of our lives. The first
   God accepts, that is, bears with. But why or how? Not because he seeks
   or requires no more, but he bears with them, because though at a great
   distance from, they are, or may be making towards that perfection, or
   new creature, which he absolutely requires, which is the fullness of
   the stature of Christ, and is that which Paul says, is the ONE that
   obtains the prize.

   [Addr-224] The same which Paul says, is said by Christ in other words,
   "Strive," says he, "to enter in at the strait gate." Here our best
   endeavors are called for, and therefore accepted by God, and yet at the
   same time he adds, "that many shall strive to enter in, but shall not
   be able." Why so, whence comes this? It is because Christ himself is
   the one door into life. Here the strivers mentioned by Christ, and
   those which St. Paul calls runners in a race, are the very same
   persons; and Christ calling himself the one door of entrance, is the
   same thing as when Paul says, that one only receives the prize, and
   that one, which alone obtains the prize, or that enters through the
   right door, is that new creature in whom Christ is truly born. For
   whether you consider things natural or supernatural, nothing but Christ
   in us, can be our hope of glory.

   [Addr-225] The pleader for imperfection further supports himself by
   saying, No man in the world, Christ excepted, was ever without sin. And
   so say I too; and with the apostle I also add, "That if we say we have
   not sinned, we make him a liar." But then it is as true to say, that we
   make him a liar, if we deny the possibility of our ever being freed
   from a necessity of sinning. For the same Word of God says, "If we
   confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our sins, and
   (N.B.) to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."

   [Addr-226] But surely he that is left under a necessity of sinning as
   long as he lives, can no more be said to be cleansed from all
   unrighteousness, than a man who must be a cripple to his dying day, can
   be said to be cured of all his lameness. What weaker conclusion can
   well be made, than to infer, that because Christ was the only man that
   was born and lived free from sin, therefore no man on earth can be
   raised to a freedom from sinning; no better than concluding, that
   because the old man is everyone's birth from Adam, therefore there can
   be no such thing as a new man, created unto righteousness, through
   Christ Jesus, living and being all in all in him; no better sense or
   logic, than to say, that because our redeemer could not find us
   anything else but sinners, therefore he must of all necessity leave us
   to be sinners.

   [Addr-227] Of Christ it only can be said, that he is in himself the
   true vine; but of every branch that is his, and grows in him, it must
   be as truly said, that the life and spirit of the true vine, is the
   life and spirit of its branches, and that as is the vine, so are its
   branches. And here let it be well noted, that if the branch has not the
   life and goodness of the vine in it, it can only be, because it is
   broken off from the vine, and therefore a withered branch, fit for the
   fire. But if the branches abide in the vine, then Christ says this
   glorious thing of them, "Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be
   done unto you," John xv.7. The very same glorious thing, which he had
   before said of himself, "Father, I thank thee, that thou hast heard
   me," and (N.B.) "I knew that thou hearest me always," John xi.41. Now
   say that this new creature, who is in such union, communion, and power
   with God, because Christ is in him, and he in Christ, as really as the
   vine is in the branches, and the branches in the vine, say that he must
   be a servant of sin, as long as he lives in this world, and then your
   absurdity will be as great, as if you had said, that Christ in us must
   partake of our corruption.

   [Addr-228] The sober divine, who abhors the pride of enthusiasts, for
   the sake of humility, says of himself and all men, we are poor, blind,
   imperfect creatures; all our natural faculties are perverted,
   corrupted, and out of their right state; and therefore nothing that is
   perfect can come from us, or be done by us. Truth enough! And the very
   same truth, as when the apostle says, "The natural man knoweth not the
   things that be of God, he cannot know them, they are foolishness to
   him." This is the man that we all are by nature. But what scripture
   ever spoke of, or required any perfect works from this man, any more
   than it requires the Ethiopian to change his skin? Or what an
   instructed divine must he be, who considers this old natural man as the
   Christian, and therefore rejects Christian perfection, because this old
   man cannot attain to it? What greater blindness, than to appeal to our
   fallen state, as a proof of a weakness and corruption which we must
   have, when we are redeemed from it? Is this any wiser, than saying,
   that sin and corruption must be there where Christ is, because it is
   there where he is not?

   [Addr-229] Our Lord has said this absolute truth, that unless we be
   born again from above, there is no possible entrance into the kingdom
   of God. What this new birth is in us, and what we get by it, is as
   expressly told us by his beloved apostle, saying, "That which is born
   of God sinneth not." This is as true and unalterable, as to say, that
   which is born of the devil can do nothing else but add sin to sin. To
   what end do we pray, that "this day we may fall into no sin," if no
   such day can be had? But if sinning can be made to cease in us for one
   day, what can do this for us, but that which can do the same tomorrow?
   What benefit in praying, that "God's will may be done on earth, as it
   is in heaven," if the earth as long as it lasts must have as many
   sinners, as it has men upon it? How vainly does the church pray for the
   baptized person, "that he may have power and strength to have victory,
   and to triumph against the devil, the world, and the flesh," if this
   victorious triumph can never be obtained; if notwithstanding this
   baptism and prayer, he must continue committing sin, and so be a
   servant of sin, as long as he lives? What sense can there be in making
   a communion of saints to be an article of our creed, if at that same
   time we are to believe that Christians, as long as they live, must in
   some degree or other follow, and be led by the lusts of the flesh, the
   lust of the eyes, and the pride of life?

   [Addr-230] Whence now comes all this folly of doctrines? It is because
   the church is no longer that spiritual house of God, in which nothing
   is intended and sought after, but spiritual power and spiritual life,
   that is become a mere human building, made up of worldly power, worldly
   learning, and worldly prosperity in gospel matters. And therefore all
   the frailties, follies, and imperfections of human nature, must have as
   much life in the church, as in any other human society. And the best
   sons of such a church, must be forced to plead such imperfections in
   the members of it, as must be where the old fallen human nature is
   still alive. And alive it there must be, and its life defended, where
   the being continually moved, and led by the Spirit of God, is rejected
   as gross enthusiasm. For nothing but a full birth, and continual
   breathing and inspiration of the Holy Spirit in the new born creature,
   can be a deliverance from all that which is earthly, sensual, and
   devilish in our fallen nature. This new creature, born again in Christ,
   of that ETERNAL WORD which created all things in heaven and on earth,
   is both the rock and church, of which Christ says, "The gates of hell
   shall never prevail against it." For prevail they will, and must
   against everything, but the new creature. And every fallen man, be he
   where he will, or who he will, is yet in his fallen state, and his
   whole life is a mere Egyptian bondage, and Babylonian captivity, till
   the heavenly church, or the new birth from above, has taken him out of
   it.

   [Addr-231] See how St. Paul sets forth the salvation- church, as being
   nothing else, and doing nothing else, but merely as the mother of this
   new birth. "Know ye not," says he, "that so many of us as were baptized
   into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore we are
   buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised
   from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk
   in newness of life." Here we have the one true church, infallibly
   described, and yet no other church, but the new creature. He goes on,
   "For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
   shall also be in the likeness of his resurrection." Therefore to be in
   Christ, or in his church, belongs to no one, but because the old man is
   put off, and the new creature risen in Christ, is put on. The same
   thing is said again in these words, "Knowing this, that our old man is
   crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
   (N.B.) HENCEFORTH we should not serve sin"; therefore the true church
   is nowhere but in the new creature, that henceforth sinneth not, nor is
   any longer a servant to sin. Away then with all the tedious volumes of
   church unity, church power, and church salvation. Ask neither a Council
   of Trent, nor a Synod of Dort, nor an assembly of divines, for a
   definition of the church. The apostle has given you, not a definition,
   but the unchangeable nature of it in these words. But now "being made
   free from sin, and become servants of God, yet have your fruits unto
   holiness, and the end everlasting life." Therefore to be in the true
   salvation-church, and to be in Christ that new creature which sinneth
   not, is strictly the same thing.

   [Addr-232] What now is become of this true church, or where must the
   man go, who would fain be a living member of it? He need go nowhere;
   because wherever he is, that which is to save him, and that which he is
   to be saved from, is always with him. SELF is all the evil that he has,
   and God is all the goodness that he ever can have; but self is always
   with him, and God is always with him. Death to self is his only
   entrance into the church of life, and nothing but God can give death to
   self. Self is an inward life, and God is an inward Spirit of life;
   therefore nothing kills that which must be killed in us, or quickens
   that which must come to life in us, but the inward work of God in the
   soul, and the inward work of the soul in God. This is that mystic
   religion, which, though it has nothing in it but that same Spirit, that
   same truth, and that same life, which always was, and always must be
   the religion of all God's holy angels and saints in heaven, is by the
   wisdom of this world accounted to be madness. As wisely done, as to
   reckon him mad, who says, that the vanity of things temporal cannot be,
   or give life to the things that are eternal; or that the circumcision
   of the flesh is but as poor a thing, as the whetting of the knife, in
   comparison of that inward mystic circumcision of the heart, which can
   only be done by "that WORD of God, which is sharper than any two edged
   sword, and pierces to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit,"
   Heb. iv.1. Now fancy to yourself a rabbi-doctor, laughing at this
   circumcision of the two edged sword of God, as gospel madness, and then
   you see that very same Christian orthodoxy, which at this day condemns
   the inward working life of God in the soul, as mystic madness.

   [Addr-233] Look at all that is outward, and all that you then see, has
   no more of salvation in it, than the stars and elements. Look at all
   the good works you can think of, they have no goodness for you, but
   when the good Spirit of God is the doer of them in you. For all the
   outward works of religion may be done by the natural man, he can
   observe all church-duties, stick close to doctrines, and put on the
   semblance of every outward virtue; thus high he can go. But no
   Christian, till led and governed by the Spirit of God, can go any
   higher than this feigned, outward formality of this natural man; to
   which he can add nothing, but his own natural fleshly zeal in the
   defense of it. For all zeal must be of this kind, till it is the zeal
   of that which is born of God, and calls every creature only to that
   same new birth from above. "My little children," says St. Paul, "of
   whom I travail again in birth, till Christ be formed in you." This is
   the whole labor of an apostle to the end of the world. He has nothing
   to preach to sinners, but the absolute necessity, the true way, and the
   certain means, of being born again from above. But if dropping this one
   thing only necessary and only available, he becomes a disputing
   reformer about words and opinions, and helps Christians to be zealously
   separated from one another, for the sake of being saved by different
   notions of faith, works, justification, or election, he has forgot his
   errand, and is become a blind leader of all, who are blind enough to
   follow him. For all that is called faith, works, justification,
   sanctification, or election are only so many different expressions of
   that which the restored divine life is, and does in us, and have no
   existence anywhere, or in anything, but the new creature. And the
   reason why everything that is, or can be good in us, or to us, is
   nothing else but this divine birth from above, is because the divine
   nature dead in Adam, was his entire loss of every divine virtue, and
   his whole fall under the power of this world, the flesh, and the devil;
   and therefore the divine nature brought again to life in man, in his
   faith, his hope, his prayer, his works, his justification,
   sanctification, election, or salvation. And that ELECTION, which
   systematical doctors have taken out of its place, and built it into an
   absolute irreversible decree of God, has no other nature, no other
   effect, or power of salvation, but that which equally belongs to our
   faith, hope, prayer, love of God, and love of our neighbor; and just so
   far as these divine virtues are in us, just so far are we the elect of
   God, which means nothing else but the beloved of God; and nothing makes
   us the beloved of God, but his own first image and likeness rising up
   again in us. Would you plainly know what is meant by being elected of
   God, the same is plainly meant, as when the scripture says, "God
   heareth those only who call upon him"; or that he can only be "found by
   those who seek him"; so he only elects those and that which elect him.
   Again, "He that honoreth me, him will I honor," says God: "He that
   loveth me," says Christ, "shall be beloved of me and my Father." This
   is the mystery of election (N.B.) as it relates to salvation. At divers
   times and in sundry manners, God may have, and has had his chosen
   vessels for particular offices, messages, and appointments; but as to
   salvation from our fallen state, every son of Adam is his chosen
   vessel, and this as certainly, as that every son of Adam has the seed
   of the woman, the incorruptible seed of the WORD born along with him;
   and this is God's unchangeable universal election, which chooses, or
   wills the salvation of all men. For the ground of all union, communion,
   or love between God and the creature, lies wholly in the divine nature.
   That which is divine in man tends towards God, elects God; and God only
   and solely elects his own birth, nature, and likeness in man. But
   seeing his own birth, a seed of his own divine nature is in every man,
   to suppose God by an arbitrary power, willing and decreeing its eternal
   happiness in some, and willing and decreeing its eternal misery in
   others, is a blasphemous absurdity, and supposes a greater injustice in
   God, than the wickedest creatures can possibly commit against one
   another.

   [Addr-234] But truth, to the eternal praise and glory of God, will
   eternally say, that his love is as universal and unchangeable as his
   being, that his mercy over all his works can no more cease, than his
   omnipotence can begin to grow weak. God's mark of an universal
   salvation set upon all mankind, was first given in these words, "The
   seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent": therefore
   wherever the serpent is, there his head is to be bruised. This was
   God's infallible assurance, or omnipresent promise, that all that died
   in Adam, should have its first birth of glory again. The eternal Son of
   God came into the world, only for the sake of this new birth, to give
   God the glory of restoring it to all the dead sons of fallen Adam. All
   the mysteries of this incarnate, suffering, dying Son of God, all the
   price that he paid for our redemption, all the washings that we have
   from his all-cleansing blood poured out for us, all the life that we
   receive from eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, have their
   infinite value, their high glory, and amazing greatness in this,
   because nothing less than these supernatural mysteries of a God-man,
   could raise that new creature out of Adam's death, which could be again
   a living temple, and deified habitation of the Spirit of God.

   [Addr-235] That this new birth of the Spirit, or the divine life in
   man, was the truth, the substance, and sole end of his miraculous
   mysteries, is plainly told us by Christ himself, who at the end of all
   his process on earth, tells his disciples, what was to be the blessed,
   and full effect of it, namely, that the Holy Spirit, the comforter
   (being now fully purchased for them) should after his ascension, come
   in the stead of a Christ in the flesh. "If I go not away," says he,
   "the comforter will not come; but if I go away, I will send him unto
   you, and he shall guide you into all truth." Therefore all that Christ
   was, did, suffered, dying in the flesh, and ascending into heaven, was
   for this sole end, to purchase for all his followers a new birth, new
   life, and new light, in and by the Spirit of God restored to them, and
   living in them, as their support, comforter, and guide into all truth.
   And this was his, "LO, I AM WITH YOU ALWAY, EVEN UNTO THE END OF THE
   WORLD."

   FINIS.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Isaiah

   [1]2   [2]11

   Hosea

   [3]8

   Luke

   [4]12

   John

   [5]11   [6]15   [7]15   [8]16

   Galatians

   [9]4   [10]4

   Hebrews

   [11]4   [12]12
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=0#i-p209.1
   2. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=0#i-p211.1
   3. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=8&scrV=0#i-p167.1
   4. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=0#i-p44.1
   5. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=0#i-p227.2
   6. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=0#i-p19.1
   7. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=0#i-p227.1
   8. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=0#i-p23.1
   9. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=0#i-p25.1
  10. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=0#i-p42.1
  11. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=0#i-p232.1
  12. file:///ccel/l/law/clergy/cache/clergy.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=0#i-p44.2
