     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: A COLLECTION OF LETTERS
      Creator(s): Law, William (1686-1761)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

  A COLLECTION OF LETTERS

  On the Most Interesting and Important SUBJECTS,

  AND ON Several Occasions.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter I.

   To Mr. J. L.

   My dear and most worthy friend,

   [Ltrs-1-1] For so I must salute you, as having long dwelt in my heart
   under that idea, though personally unknown to me. I shall not trouble
   you with apologizing for this long silence, but speak directly to the
   matters of yours, concerning your difficulty to join in any church
   communion.

   [Ltrs-1-2] Religion, or church communion is in its true nature, both
   external and internal, which are thus united, and thus distinguished;
   the one is the outward sign, the other the inward truth signified by
   it: the one never was, nor ever can be, in its true state without the
   other.

   [Ltrs-1-3] The inward truth, or church, is regeneration, or the life,
   spirit, and power of Christ, quickened and brought to life, in the
   soul.

   [Ltrs-1-4] The outward sign, or church, is that outward form, or manner
   of life, that bears full witness to the truth of this regenerated life
   of Christ, formed or revealed in the soul.

   [Ltrs-1-5] The inward truth gives forth its outward proper
   manifestations of itself, and these manifestations bring forth the true
   outward church, and make it to be visible, and outwardly known.

   [Ltrs-1-6] As thus, everything in the inward life, spirit, and will of
   Christ, when it becomes living, dwelling and working in the spirit of
   our minds, or inward man, is the inward church, or kingdom of God set
   up within us: and everything in the outward behavior, and visible
   conversation of Christ, whilst dwelling amongst men, when practiced and
   followed by us, in the form and manner of our life, makes us the
   members of that outward church, which he set up in this world.

   [Ltrs-1-7] Inwardly nothing lived in Christ, but the sole will of God,
   a perpetual regard to his glory, and one continual desire of the
   salvation of all mankind. When this spirit is in us, then are we
   inwardly one with Christ, and united to God through him.

   [Ltrs-1-8] Outwardly Christ exercised every kind of love, kindness and
   compassion to the souls and bodies of men; nothing was visible in the
   outward form of his life, but humility and lowliness of state in every
   shape; a contented want, or rather total disregard of all worldly
   riches, power, ease or pleasure; a continual meekness, gentleness,
   patience and resignation, not only to the will of God, but to the
   haughty powers of the world, to the perverseness, and contradiction of
   all the evil and malice of men, and all the hardships and troubles of
   human life: now this, and such like outward behavior of Christ, thus
   separate from, and contrary to the spirit, wisdom and way, of this
   world, was that very outward church, of which he willed all mankind to
   become visible, and living members. And whoever in the spirit of
   Christ, lives in the outward exercise of these virtues, lives as to
   himself in the highest perfection of church unity, and is the true
   inward and outward Christian. He is all that he can be, he hath all
   that he can have, he doth all that he can do, and enjoyeth all that he
   can enjoy, as a member of Christ's body, or church in this world.

   [Ltrs-1-9] For as Christ was God and man, come down from heaven, for no
   other end, but fully to restore the union that was lost betwixt God and
   man, so church unity is, and can be nothing else, but the unity of
   this, or that man, or number of men with God, through the power and
   nature of Christ. And therefore it must be the truth, and the whole
   truth, that nothing more is required, nor will anything less be able,
   to make anyone a true member of the one church of Christ, out of which
   there is no salvation and in which there is no condemnation, but only
   and solely his conformity to, and union with the inward spirit, and
   outward form of Christ's life and behavior in this world. This is the
   one fold under one shepherd; though the sheep are scattered, or feeding
   in valleys, or on mountains ever so distant, or separate from one
   another.

   [Ltrs-1-10] On the other hand, not only every unreasonable unjust
   action, be it done to whom it will, not only every unkind, proud,
   wrathful, scornful, disdainful inward thought, or outward behavior to
   any person, but every unreadiness to do good of all kinds, to all that
   we can; every unwillingness to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to
   weep with them that weep, and love our neighbor as ourselves; every
   aversion to be inwardly all love, and outwardly all meekness,
   gentleness, courtesy, and condescension in words and actions towards
   every creature, for whom Christ died, makes us schismatics, though we
   be ever so daily gathered together, into one and the same place,
   joining in one and the same form of creeds, prayers and praises offered
   to God, and is truly a leaving, or breaking that church unity, which
   makes us one with Christ, as our head, and unites us with men, as the
   members of his body.

   [Ltrs-1-11] That the matter is thus; that the true church unity
   consists in our walking as Christ walked, fully appears, as from many
   others, so from these plain words of our Lord himself: "Ye are not of
   this world, as I am not of this world, but I have chosen you out of the
   world." Therefore to have that contrariety to the world, which Christ
   had, is the one necessary and full proof of our being his, of our
   belonging to him, and being one with him.

   [Ltrs-1-12] Again, "Abide in me, and I in you, if ye abide in me, ye
   shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done to you. If a man abide not
   in me, he is cast forth as a branch withered, etc. For without me ye
   can do nothing."

   [Ltrs-1-13] Therefore the one true proof of our being living members of
   Christ's church on earth, or only dead branches, fit for the fire, is
   nothing else but our being, or not being inwardly of that spirit, and
   outwardly of that behavior, which Christ manifested to the world.

   [Ltrs-1-14] Again, "This is my commandment, that ye love one another as
   I have loved you, and by this shall all men know that ye are my
   disciples."

   [Ltrs-1-15] Therefore the true and sufficient mark of our outward
   church membership, is there only, and fully, outwardly known, and found
   in every man, where the outward form of Christ's loving behavior to all
   men, is outwardly seen and known to be in him. These and like passages
   of Christ and his apostles (though quite overlooked by most modern
   defenders of the one church) are the only places that speak home to the
   truth, and reality of church unity.

   [Ltrs-1-16] It may now be reasonably asked, What is the divine service,
   or worship in this church? For every church must have its divine
   service and worship which is the life, strength, and support of it.

   [Ltrs-1-17] It is answered: "That no man can call Christ Lord, but by
   the Holy Ghost." Therefore nothing is, or can be a divine service in
   that church, which has Christ for its Lord, but what has the Holy
   Spirit for its beginner, doer, and finisher. For if it be certain that
   no one can own Christ as his Lord, but by the Holy Spirit, then it must
   be equally certain, that no one can serve or worship God through Christ
   his Lord, in any other way, help, power, or means, but so far as it is
   done, in, and by the power of that same Holy Spirit. Whatsoever is born
   of the flesh is flesh; that is, whatsoever proceeds from, or is done by
   the natural powers of man, from his birth of flesh and blood, is merely
   human, earthly, and corrupt, and can no more do anything that is
   heavenly, or perform a service or worship that is divine, than our
   present flesh and blood can enter into the kingdom of heaven. Thus
   saith the apostle, "Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so
   be, the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. Now if any man hath not the
   Spirit of Christ, he is none of his." And consequently if not his, he
   can perform no divine service to him. Nor can any worship cease to be
   carnal, or become divine, but by its being all that it is, and doing
   all that it doth, by the power, and presence of Christ dwelling in our
   souls, and helping us by his Holy Spirit to cry in truth and reality,
   Abba Father.

   [Ltrs-1-18] The New Testament never calls us to do, or offer, or allows
   anything to be done or offered to God, as a divine service, or worship,
   but what is done in the truth, and reality of faith, of hope, of love,
   and obedience to God.

   [Ltrs-1-19] But through all the New Testament, no faith, no hope, no
   love is allowed to be true, and godly, but only that faith, that hope,
   which solely proceeds from, and is the fruit of the Holy Spirit,
   living, dwelling, and working in our whole heart, and soul, and spirit.

   [Ltrs-1-20] This spirituality of the Christian religion, is the reason
   why it was first preached to the world under the name of the kingdom of
   God, because under this new dispensation, freed from veils, shadows,
   and figures of good things absent or to come, God himself is
   manifested, ruling in us and over us, as an essential light of our
   lives, as an indwelling Word of power, as a life-giving Spirit within
   us, forming us by a new birth, to become a chosen generation, a royal
   priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices to God, through a new and
   living way which Christ hath consecrated for us. The truth and
   perfection of which state, is plainly set forth by the following prayer
   of Christ, viz., "that they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me,
   and I in thee, that they also may be in us--I in them and thou in me,
   that they be made perfect in one, and that the love wherewith thou hast
   loved me, may be in them, and I in them." Now for the truth and
   certainty of this spiritual kingdom, in which are only spiritual
   worshippers baptized from above, into an union, and communion with
   Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, through the mysterious union of God and
   man in the one mediator Jesus Christ; for the truth, I say, of this
   spiritual state of Christianity, we have the plainest words of Christ,
   expressly declaring that the Jerusalem service, and consequently every
   thing, or service that has the nature of it, was to have its end in the
   establishment of his church.

   [Ltrs-1-21] "Believe me," saith he, "the hour cometh when ye shall
   neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father: but
   the hour cometh and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
   Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship
   him."

   [Ltrs-1-22] Therefore it must be certain in the highest degree, that
   Christ cannot, nor could set up any other kind of worship, or
   worshippers, but such as the Father seeketh; because he and his Father
   were one, both in will and work. And the reason and necessity of this
   kind of worship, is added by Christ in the following words, "God is a
   spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
   truth."

   [Ltrs-1-23] Therefore if Christ had not only and solely set up this
   truth of spiritual worship, he had been but another Moses, and though a
   better teacher, yet still but as a schoolmaster, to some higher state
   of religion, that was yet wanted, and must be revealed, if so be that
   man was to be restored to his true state of life, union, and happiness
   in and with the divine nature. For as God is a spirit, and our life is
   spiritual, so no religious worship can be in its true perfection, or
   bring us into the possession of our highest good, till it raises all
   that is spirit and life in us, into union and communion with spirit and
   life in God.

   [Ltrs-1-24] If it should here be asked, how we are to become and
   continue worshippers of the Father in spirit and truth? It is answered;
   all consists in turning inwards, in attention to that, which is daily
   and hourly stirring, living, and working in our hearts.

   [Ltrs-1-25] Now though the scripture nowhere gives this direction in
   these very words, yet, since it is said in scripture, that God dwelleth
   not in temples made with hands, but in the temple of our hearts, since
   the kingdom of God is said to be within us, and not to come with
   outward observation, but to be in us, as a secret, living seed of the
   incorruptible Word; since our hearts is our whole life, and we are said
   to live, and move, and have our being in God, it is directly telling us
   that we are to turn inwards, if we would turn to, and find God.

   [Ltrs-1-26] It is directly telling us, that in what manner we are
   within, as the worship is done there, so is God in such manner within
   us; and that he is no otherwise our God, our life, our rest and
   happiness, than so far as the working of our hearts, is a willing and
   choosing, a hungering and thirsting to find, feel and enjoy the life-
   giving power of his holy presence in our souls.

   [Ltrs-1-27] To be inwardly therefore attentive to God, showing the good
   and the evil, distinguishing the light from the darkness in our own
   souls; to listen to the voice of his ever speaking Word, and to watch
   the movings of his ever sanctifying Spirit within us, waiting and
   longing in the spirit of prayer, of faith and hope, of love and
   resignation, to be inwardly quickened and revived in the image, and
   according to the likeness of that Son, in whom he is well pleased, is
   the worshipping of God with our whole heart and soul, in spirit and in
   truth.

   [Ltrs-1-28] It is living to God, in and through the power of Christ, as
   he lived; it is praying with him, and by his Spirit, that continual
   prayer which he always had, whether speaking to the multitude, or
   healing their diseases, or alone by himself in the stillness of nights,
   and loneliness of mountains. For this inward prayer, in which the whole
   heart, and soul, and spirit, loves, worships, and applies to a God, not
   absent or distant, but to a Trinity of goodness and mercy, of light and
   love, of glory and majesty, dwelling, and working within us, willing
   and desiring to do all that in the temple of our hearts, which is done
   and always doing in his own temple in heaven, is a prayer, that only
   needs outward words for the sake of others; and of which it may be
   said, as Christ said: "Father, I knew that thou always hearest me, but
   because of the people, which stand by, I said it."

   [Ltrs-1-29] I begin to apprehend, worthy sir, that you will think I am
   gone too far about, and not come close enough to the matter in hand.
   But I hope it is not so: I have gone through all that I have said, only
   to show, that church unity or communion, is not a matter that depends
   on any particular society, or outward thing, but is complete, or
   defective, in such degree, as we live in unity with, or contrariety to
   the inward spirit and outward example of Christ. For no union signifies
   anything to us, or our salvation, but union with God, through Christ,
   and nothing unites us to Christ, or makes us to be his, but his Holy
   Spirit dwelling, and working inwardly and outwardly in us, as it did in
   him.

   [Ltrs-1-30] This is the only church unity, that concerns the
   conscience, and when we are in this unity, we are in union with Christ,
   and with everyone who is united to him, however distant, or separated
   from us, by human inclosures.

   [Ltrs-1-31] I come now to consider the church under another, and more
   common idea of it, namely as external, and about which, all the
   Christian world is at enmity, strife, and debate.

   [Ltrs-1-32] After Christianity had been a few ages in the world, it
   became national, and obtained the protection, and patronage of the
   princes of this world.

   [Ltrs-1-33] Hence it was enriched with many gifts and privileges, and
   strengthened by powers, that were foreign to the nature of it; and
   churchmen, beginning to quarrel about Christian doctrines, were
   supported in their strife and division from one another, by the
   temporal powers, under which they lived.

   [Ltrs-1-34] This state of the church hath continued to this day, where
   almost every age hath multiplied the number of divided churches,
   brought forth, by the union of the civil and ecclesiastical power.

   [Ltrs-1-35] This state therefore of external churches, hath the nature
   of things merely human, and is subject to such alterations, changes,
   and corruptions, as the forms and revolutions of temporal government
   all over the world. And therefore the private Christian, who, as such,
   is a member of a kingdom, that is not of this world, has little or no
   concern in it.

   [Ltrs-1-36] Without entering into the merits of divided churches, which
   I shall not do here, or anywhere else; thus much I think, may with
   truth be affirmed, that where the church and state are incorporated,
   and under one and the same power, all the evil passions, corrupt views,
   and worldly interests, which form and transform, turn and overturn all
   outward things, must be expected often to come to pass, as well in the
   church, as in the state, with which it is united.

   [Ltrs-1-37] But as private Christians have no power, or call to govern
   the world, or set up thrones according to the principles of truth and
   righteousness, but are by the spirit of the gospel obliged to submit
   to, and be contented with that state of government, good or bad, under
   which the providence of God has placed them, so are they in like
   manner, to exercise a patient submission, and resignation under such an
   imperfect state of the outward church, which providence has not
   prevented, and only to take care, to be inwardly found such worshippers
   in spirit and in truth, as the Father seeketh.

   [Ltrs-1-38] I mean not by this, as some have done, that any evil
   however great in the beginning, or continuing of usurped power, either
   in the church or state, loses its evil nature, and may be called right
   and good, as soon as providence has suffered it to become successful.

   [Ltrs-1-39] No, by no means. Success, though always to be owned to have
   God's permission, leaves all things in their own nature, neither good
   because successful, nor bad, because defeated and suppressed.

   [Ltrs-1-40] The wickedness of the Jews conspiring and effecting the
   death of Christ, was not only permitted, but suitable to the designs of
   providence, in the redemption of mankind. But that the evil nature of
   their wickedness did not lose its guilt, because suffered by God to be
   successful, but still continues, is plain from the curse of God still
   abiding upon it to this day.

   [Ltrs-1-41] The duty of private Christians, with regard to providence
   in such cases, is not to call that good which before was evil, or that
   evil which before was good, but patiently to suffer, and humbly
   acquiesce under all that bad outward course of things, either in church
   or state, which the providence of God has not thought fit to prevent,
   and that for these reasons: first, as fully knowing that all things
   must work together for good, to those who love God; secondly, as
   piously believing that in all successful wickedness, whether of princes
   against their people, or of people against their princes, there is
   always something hid under it, which in its way and degree, will like
   the successful wickedness of the Jews towards Christ, help forward that
   salvation, for which Christ hath laid down his life.

   [Ltrs-1-42] Who can say, what a good, and blessing, the Christian world
   had been deprived of, had the righteous providence of God not permitted
   the princes of the heathen world, to make such bloody havoc of the
   first Christians.

   [Ltrs-1-43] But suppose errors of the following kind got into the
   church, viz., 1. The scripture baptism of the whole body under water,
   only as it were mimicked, by scattering a few drops of water on a new-
   born child's face. 2. The Supper of the Lord in one church, held to be
   bread and wine changed into the real flesh and blood of Christ: in
   another, as bread and wine, not changed into, but substantially united
   with the real flesh and blood of Christ: in another, mere bread and
   wine, only made memorials of the body and blood of Christ. In one
   church this, in another that form and manner of consecration held to be
   essential; in another, all priestly consecration rejected, as rank
   superstition. 3. Suppose the original apostolical constitution of
   church assemblies, where all meet together, that all in their turns,
   might prophesy one by one, that all might learn, and all be comforted,
   should in some churches be so changed, that all praying, speaking or
   prophesying, as from the power, and presence of Christ amongst them,
   was quite prohibited; where one and the same long, tedious, humanly-
   contrived form of worship, is daily, from year's end to year's end, to
   be read by one, who is become their only speaker and instructor, not
   because he alone is daily full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, but
   because he is either hired to that office, or because, by some means or
   other, the church and churchyard are become his freehold. Is not such a
   state of church assemblies, in full contrariety to the first
   assemblies, and to the apostle's injunction; "quench not the Spirit,
   despise not prophesyings"? 4. Suppose again, that in the settled
   service of the church, certain prayers and petitions, not according to
   truth and righteousness, or suitable to the goodness of the evangelical
   spirit, are read, as prayers for success in unChristian wars, prayers
   for the destruction of our Christian brethren, called our enemies,
   thanksgivings for the violent slaughter and successful killing of
   mankind: when these are made parts of the church service, are we in
   obedience to the providence of God, suffering things in church
   assemblies to come to this pass, to unite and bear a part in such
   church service?

   [Ltrs-1-44] My answer to all this, shall be only personal; that is,
   what I would do myself, in these supposed cases.

   [Ltrs-1-45] First, as to any defects, mutilation, or variations in the
   outward form, and performance of baptism and the Supper of the Lord in
   the church, I am under little, or no concern about them; and that for
   this very good reason, because all that is inwardly meant, taught, or
   intended by them, as the life, spirit, and full benefit of them, is
   subject to no human power, is wholly transacted between God and myself,
   and cannot be taken from me, by any alteration made by man, in the
   outward celebration of them.

   [Ltrs-1-46] If the church, in my baptism, should sprinkle a little
   milk, or wine, instead of water, upon my face it would be no defective
   baptism to me, if I had all that inward disposition of repentance, of
   faith in Christ, to be born again of him, which was meant, figured, and
   implied by such immersion into water, as was the first baptism.

   [Ltrs-1-47] The same may be said of the Supper of the Lord, however
   altered, or varied in its outward manner from what it was at first, if
   the inward truth, pointed at by it, is in me, is loved and adhered to
   by me, I have all the benefit that was meant, or could be had by it,
   when it was kept to a tittle in the same outward form, in which the
   first church used it.

   [Ltrs-1-48] And therefore the outward celebration of these sacraments
   is reverenced by me, wherever they are observed, as standing in the
   same place and significant of the same inward blessing, as in their
   first institution.

   [Ltrs-1-49] As to the fore-mentioned supposed prayers, though I am
   present when they are read in the church, I neither make, nor need I
   make them, any more my own prayers, than I make, or need to make all
   the curses in the psalms, to be my own curses, when I hear both priest
   and people reading them in church, as a part of divine service. Nor is
   there any more hypocrisy, or insincerity, in one case, than in the
   other.

   [Ltrs-1-50] I join therefore in the public assemblies, not because of
   the purity, or perfection of that which is done, or to be found there,
   but because of that which is meant and intended by them: they mean the
   holy, public worship of God; they mean the edification of Christians;
   they are of great use to many people; they keep the world from a total
   forgetfulness of God; they help the ignorant and letterless to such a
   knowledge of God, and the scriptures, as they would not have without
   them.

   [Ltrs-1-51] And therefore, fallen as these church assemblies are, from
   their first spiritual state, I reverence them, as the venerable remains
   of all that, which once was, and will, I hope, be again, the glory of
   church assemblies, viz., the ministration of the spirit, and not of the
   dead letter.

   [Ltrs-1-52] And there are two very great signs of the near approach of
   this day, in two very numerous, yet very different kinds of people in
   these kingdoms.

   [Ltrs-1-53] In the one sort, an extraordinary increase of new
   separations, particularity of opinions, methods, and religious
   distinctions, is worked up to its utmost height. And we see them almost
   every day running with eagerness from one method to another, in quest
   of something, by the help of a new form, which they have not been able
   to find in the old one.

   [Ltrs-1-54] Now, as the vanity and emptiness of any thing, or way, is
   then only fully discovered and felt, when it has run all its lengths,
   and worked itself up to its highest pitch, so that nothing remains
   untried, to keep up the deceit; so when religious division, strife of
   opinions, invented forms, and all outward distinctions, have done their
   utmost, have no further that they can go, nor anything more to try,
   then is their inevitable fall at hand; and if the zeal was simple and
   upright, all must end in this full conviction, viz., that vanity and
   emptiness, burden and deceit, must follow us in every course we take,
   till we have done with all our own running, to expect all, and receive
   all, from the invisible God dwelling in, and blessing our hearts with
   all heavenly gifts, by a birth of his eternal, all- creating Word, and
   life-giving Spirit brought forth in our souls.

   [Ltrs-1-55] The other sign I mentioned, is to be found in another kind
   of a much awakened people, in most parts of these kingdoms, who in the
   midst of the noise and multiplicity of all church-strife, having heard
   the still, and secret voice of the true shepherd, are turned inwards,
   and wholly attentive to the inward truth, spirit and life of religion,
   searching after the mystical, spiritual instruction, which leads them
   from the outward cry, of a "Lo here," or "there, is Christ," to seek to
   him and his redeeming spirit within them, as the only safe guide from
   inward darkness to inward light; and from outward shadows into the
   substantial, ever-enduring truth; which truth is nothing else, but the
   everlasting union of the soul with God, as its only good, through the
   spirit and nature of Christ truly formed and fully revealed in it. But
   to go no further; I shall only add, that as yet, I know of no better
   way of thinking or acting, than as above, with regard to the universal
   fallen state of all churches; for fallen they all are, as certainly as
   they are divided.

   [Ltrs-1-56] Every church distinction is more or less in the corrupt
   state of every selfish, carnal, self- willed, worldly minded, partial
   man, and is what it is, and acts as it acts, for its own glory, its own
   interest and advancement, by that same spirit, which keeps the selfish,
   partial man solely attached to his own will, his own wisdom, self-
   regard, and self-seeking. And all that is wanting to be removed from
   every church, or Christian society, in order to its being a part of the
   heavenly Jerusalem, is that which may be called its own, human will,
   carnal wisdom, and self- seeking spirit; which is all to be given up,
   by turning the eyes and hearts of all its members, to an inward
   adoration, and total dependence upon the supernatural, invisible,
   omnipresent God of all spirits; to the inward teachings of Christ, as
   the power, the wisdom, and the light of God, working within them every
   good, and blessing, and purity, which they can ever receive, either on
   earth, or in heaven.

   [Ltrs-1-57] Under this light, I am neither Protestant, nor papist,
   according to the common acceptation of the words. I cannot consider
   myself as belonging only to one society of Christians, in separation
   and distinction from all others. It would be as hurtful to me, if not
   more so, than any worldly partiality And therefore as the defects,
   corruptions, and imperfections, which, some way or other, are to be
   found in all churches, hinder not my communion with that, under which
   my lot is fallen, so neither do they hinder my being in full union, and
   hearty fellowship with all that is Christian, holy, and good, in every
   other church division.

   [Ltrs-1-58] And as I know, that God and Christ, and holy angels, stand
   thus disposed towards all that is good in all men, and in all churches,
   notwithstanding the mixture in them, is like that of tares growing up
   with the wheat, so I am not afraid, but humbly desirous, of living and
   dying in this disposition towards them.

   I am, worthy Sir,

   With much Truth of Love and Respect,

   Your faithful Friend,

   And hearty Servant.

   King's Cliffe,

   Feb. 28, 1756.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter II.

   To the Reverend Mr. S.

   My dear friend and brother,

   [Ltrs-2-1] I hope my long silence has not occasioned your being
   offended at me, or any suspicion, that I have disregarded you, or the
   matter you wrote upon. If I were to offer at a reason in excuse of it,
   it would be an invented one, for it has never been known to myself. But
   I was contented to know, that my heart was right towards you, full of
   all good will and desire to serve you, in the way that God should lead
   me to it. And so it is come to pass, that you have not heard from me
   sooner.

   [Ltrs-2-2] It is a great pleasure to me to think (as you say) that my
   letter to you, will also be to two of your brethren, who stand in the
   same state of earnestness, to know how to be faithful and useful in
   their ministry, as you do: I hope God will increase your number.

   [Ltrs-2-3] The first business of a clergyman awakened by God into a
   sensibility, and love of the truths of the gospel, and of making them
   equally felt, and loved by others, is thankfully, joyfully and calmly,
   to adhere to, and give way to the increase of this new-risen light, and
   by true introversion of his heart to God, as the sole author of it,
   humbly beg of him, that all that, which he feels a desire of doing to
   those under his cure, may be first truly and fully done in himself.

   [Ltrs-2-4] Now the way to become more and more awakened, to feel more
   and more of this first conviction, or work of God within you, is not to
   reflect and reason yourself into a further and deeper sensibility of
   it, by finding out arguments to strengthen it in your mind. But the one
   true way is, in faith and love to keep close to the presence and power
   of God, which has manifested itself within you, willingly resigned to,
   and solely depending upon the one work of his all- creating Word, and
   all-quickening Spirit, which is always more or less powerful in us,
   according as we are more or less trusting to, and depending upon it.

   [Ltrs-2-5] And thus it is, that by faith we are saved, because God is
   always ours, in such proportion as we are his; as our faith is in him,
   such is his power and presence in us. What an error therefore, to turn
   one thought from him, or cast a look after any help but his; for if we
   ask all of him, if we seek for all in him, if we knock only at his own
   door of mercy in Christ Jesus, and patiently wait and abide there,
   God's kingdom must come, and his will must be done in us.

   [Ltrs-2-6] For God is always present, and always working towards the
   life of the soul, and its deliverance from captivity under flesh and
   blood. But this inward work of God, though never ceasing, or altering,
   is yet always, and only hindered by the activity of our own nature, and
   faculties, by bad men through their obedience to earthly passions, and
   by good men through their striving to be good in their own way, by
   their natural strength, and a multiplicity of seemingly holy labors and
   contrivances.

   [Ltrs-2-7] Both these sorts of people obstruct the work of God upon
   their souls. For we can cooperate with God no other way, than by
   submitting to the work of God, and seeking, and leaving ourselves to
   it.

   [Ltrs-2-8] For the whole nature of the fallen soul, consists in its
   being fallen from God, into itself, into a self-government and
   activity, under its own powers broken off from God, and therefore dying
   to self, as well to our reason, as our passions and desires, is the
   first and indispensable step in Christian redemption, and brings forth
   that conversion to God, by which Christ becomes formed and revealed in
   us. And nothing hinders this conversion from being fruitful in all
   good, and gaining all that we want from God, but the retaining
   something to dwell in as our own, whether it be earthly satisfactions,
   or a righteousness of human endeavors.

   [Ltrs-2-9] And therefore all the progress of your first conviction,
   which by the grace of God you have had from above, and from within,
   consists in the simplicity of your faith, in adhering to it, as solely
   the work of God in your soul, which can only go on in God's way, and
   can never cease to go on in you, any more than God can cease to be that
   which he is, but so far as it is stopped by your want of faith in it,
   or trusting to something else along with it. God is found, as soon as
   he alone is sought; but to seek God alone, is nothing else but the
   giving up ourselves wholly unto him. For God is not absent from us in
   any other respect, than as the spirit of our mind is turned from him,
   and not left wholly to him.

   [Ltrs-2-10] This spirit of faith, which not here, or there, or now and
   then, but everywhere, and in all things, looks up to God alone, trusts
   solely in him, depends absolutely upon him, expects all from him, and
   does all it does for him, is the utmost perfection of piety in this
   life. The worship of God in spirit and truth, can go no higher, it does
   that which is its duty to do; it hath all that it wants, it doth all
   that it will, it is one power, one spirit, one will, and one working
   with God. And this is that union or oneness with God, in which man was
   at first created, and to which he is again called, and will be fully
   restored by God and man being made one Christ.

   [Ltrs-2-11] "Stephen was a man full of faith and the Holy Ghost." These
   are always together, the one can never be without the other.

   [Ltrs-2-12] This was Stephen's qualification for the deaconship, not
   because of anything high or peculiar in that office, but because the
   gospel dispensation was the opening a kingdom of God amongst men, a
   spiritual theocracy, in which as God, and man fallen from God, were
   united in Christ, so an union of immediate operation between God and
   man was restored. Hence this dispensation was called, in distinction
   from all that went before it in outward types, figures, and shadows, a
   ministration of the Spirit, that is, an immediate operation of the
   Spirit of God itself in man, in which nothing human, creaturely, or
   depending upon the power of man's wit, ability or natural powers, had
   any place, but all things begun in, and under obedience to the Spirit,
   and all were done in the power and strength of faith united with God.

   [Ltrs-2-13] Therefore to be a faithful minister of this new covenant
   between God and man, is to live by faith alone, to act only, and
   constantly under its power, to desire no will, understanding, or
   ability as a laborer in Christ's vineyard, but what comes from faith,
   and full dependence upon God's immediate operation in and upon us.

   [Ltrs-2-14] This is that very thing, which is expressly commanded by
   St. Peter, saying, "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of
   God, if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God
   giveth." For all which he giveth this reason, which will be a reason as
   long as the world standeth, viz., "that in all things God may be
   glorified through Jesus Christ." A plain and sufficient declaration,
   that where this is not done, there God is not glorified by Christians
   through Christ Jesus.

   [Ltrs-2-15] God created men and angels solely for the glory of his
   love; and therefore angels and men, can give no other glory to God, but
   that of yielding themselves up to the work of his creating love,
   manifesting itself in the several powers of their natural life, so that
   the first creating love, which brought them into being, may go on
   creating, and working in them, according to its own never-ceasing will,
   to communicate good for ever and ever. This is their living to the
   praise and glory of God, namely by owning themselves, in all that they
   are, and have, and do, to be mere instruments of his power, presence,
   and goodness in them, and to them; which is all the glory they can
   return to their creator, and all the glory for which he created them.
   We can no otherwise give religious glory to God, than by worshipping
   him in spirit and in truth, seeing Christ has said, that "the Father
   seeketh such to worship him."

   [Ltrs-2-16] But we can no otherwise worship God in spirit and in truth,
   than as our spirit in truth and reality, seeks only to, depends only
   upon, and in all things adores, the life-giving power of his universal
   Spirit; as the creator, upholder, and doer of all that is or can be
   good, either in time or eternity. For nothing can be good, but that
   which is according to the will of God, and nothing can be according to
   the will of God, but that which is done by his own Spirit. This is
   unchangeable, whether in heaven, or on earth. And this is the one end
   of all the dispensations of God, however various, towards fallen man,
   viz., to bring man into an union with God. Comply with all the outward
   modes and institutions of religion, believe the letter, own the meaning
   of scripture facts, symbols, figures, representations, and doctrines,
   but if you stand in any other use of them, or seek to gain some other
   good from them, than that of being led out of your own self, from your
   own will, and own spirit, that the will of God, and the Spirit of God,
   may do all that is willed, and done by you; however fixed, and steadily
   you may adhere to such a religion, you stand as fixed and steadily in
   your own fallen state. For the restoration of fallen man, is nothing
   else but the restoration of him to his first state, under the will and
   Spirit of God, in and for which he was created.

   [Ltrs-2-17] You may here perhaps, my dear friend, think that I am
   speaking too much at large, and not closely enough to the particular
   matter of your enquiry. But my intention hath been, so to speak to you
   on this occasion, as to lay a ground for a proper behavior, under every
   circumstance of the outward work of your ministry. All things must be
   set right in yourself first, before you can rightly assist others,
   towards the attaining to the same state.

   [Ltrs-2-18] I do not mean, that you must be first in a state of
   perfection, before you can be fitted to teach others. But I mean that
   you must first see, in what you place your own perfection, and have the
   witness in yourself of the truth of it, before you can rightly direct
   others in the way to it; otherwise your instruction would be of such
   practical things, of which you had no practical knowledge.

   [Ltrs-2-19] For this reason, I have said all that is said above, to
   help you to set out under a right sense of all that, which religion is
   to do for yourself, and why, and how, and by what means alone, it can
   be done in you. When these two things are not notionally but
   practically known, and adhered to, then are you enabled, according to
   your measure, to speak of things, and truths of religion, to those that
   are ignorant, or insensible of them.

   [Ltrs-2-20] Hence you may learn, what you are chiefly to drive at, in
   all your discourses from the pulpit, and conversation; namely, to turn
   the attention of men to a power of good, and a power of evil, both of
   them born and living within them. For in these two things, or states of
   the soul of every man, lies the full proof of the whole nature, both of
   the fall, and redemption from it.

   [Ltrs-2-21] Were we not naturally evil, by a birth of evil essentially
   born and living in us, we should want no redemption; and had we not a
   birth of something divine in us, we could not be redeemed. Inward evil
   can only be cured, or overcome by an inward good.

   [Ltrs-2-22] And therefore, as all our salvation is an inward work, or
   struggle of two births within us, so all the work of your outward
   instruction, must be to call everyone home to himself, and help every
   heart to know its own state, to seek, and find, and feel his inward
   life and death, which have their birth, and growth, and strife against
   one another, in every son of Adam.

   [Ltrs-2-23] And as this is the one good way of preaching, so it is, of
   all others, the most powerful, and penetrating into the hearts of all
   men, let their condition be what it will.

   [Ltrs-2-24] For as these two states are certainly in every soul of man,
   however blended, smothered, and undistinguished, in their operations
   for a time, yet they have each of them, in some degree, their hearing
   ears, which though ever so sunk into dullness, will be forced, more or
   less, to feel the power of that voice, which speaks nothing but what
   is, and must be in some sort spoken within themselves.

   [Ltrs-2-25] And this is the true end of outward preaching, namely, to
   give loud notice of the call of God in their souls, which though
   unheard, or neglected by them, is yet always subsisting within them. It
   is to make such outward sounds, as may reach and stir up the inward
   hearing of the heart. It is so to strike all the outward senses of the
   soul, that from sleeping in an inward insensibility of its own life and
   death, it may be brought into an awakened and feeling perception of
   itself, and be forced to know, that the evil of death which is in it,
   will be its eternal master, unless the good of life that is in it,
   seeks for victory in the name and power and mediation of Christ, the
   only prince of life, and Lord of glory, and who only hath the keys of
   heaven, of death and hell in his hands.

   [Ltrs-2-26] Thus far, and no further, goes the labor and ministry of
   man, in the preaching of the Word, whether it be of Paul, or Cephas.

   [Ltrs-2-27] Hence also you will be well qualified, to open in your
   hearers, a right sense and knowledge of the truth and reality of every
   virtue, and every vice, that you are discoursing upon.

   [Ltrs-2-28] For since all that is good and evil, is only so to them,
   because it lives in the life of their heart; they may easily be taught,
   that no virtue, whether it be humility, or charity, has any goodness in
   it, but as it springs in, and from the heart, nor any vice, whether it
   be pride, or wrath, is any further renounced, than as its power, and
   place in the heart is destroyed. And thus the insignificancy and vanity
   of an outward formality, of a virtuous behavior, and everything short
   of a new heart, and new spirit in, and through the power of Christ,
   dwelling vitally in them, may be fully shown to be self-delusion, and
   self-destruction.

   [Ltrs-2-29] Your next great point, as a preacher, should be to bring
   men to an entire faith in, and absolute dependence upon, the continual
   power and operation of the Spirit of God in them.

   [Ltrs-2-30] All churches, even down to the Socinians, are forced, in
   obedience to the letter of scripture, to hold something of this
   doctrine.

   [Ltrs-2-31] But as the practice of all churches, for many ages, has had
   as much recourse to learning, art, and science, to qualify ministers
   for the preaching of the gospel, as if it was merely a work of man's
   wisdom, so ecclesiastics, for the most part, come forth in the power of
   human qualifications, and are more or less full of themselves, and
   trusting to their own ability, according as they are more or less
   proficients in science, and literature, languages and rhetoric.

   [Ltrs-2-32] To this, more than to any one other cause, is the great
   apostasy of all Christendom to be attributed. This was the door, at
   which the whole spirit of the world, entered into possession of the
   Christian church.

   [Ltrs-2-33] Worldly lusts, and interests, vanity, pride, envy,
   contention, bitterness, and ambition, the death of all that is good in
   the soul, have now, and always had their nourishment, power, and
   support, from a sense of the merit, and sufficiency of literal
   accomplishment.

   [Ltrs-2-34] Humility, meekness, patience, faith, hope, contempt of the
   world, and heavenly affections (the very life of Jesus in the soul) are
   by few people less earnestly desired, or more hard to be practiced,
   than by great wits, classical critics, linguists, historians, and
   orators in holy orders.

   [Ltrs-2-35] Now to bring man to a right practical knowledge, of that
   full dependence upon, and faith in the continual operation of the Holy
   Spirit, as the only raiser and preserver of the life of God in their
   hearts, and souls, and spirits, it is not enough, you sometimes, or
   often preach upon the subject, but everything that you inculcate,
   should be directed constantly to it, and all that you exhort men to,
   should be required, only as a means of obtaining, and concurring with,
   that Holy Spirit, which is, and only can be, the life and truth of
   goodness. And all that you turn them from, should be as from something
   that resists, and grieves that blessed Spirit of God, which always
   wills and desires to remove, all evil out of our souls, and make us
   again to be sanctified partakers of the divine nature.

   [Ltrs-2-36] For as they only are Christians, who are born again of the
   Spirit, so nothing should be taught to Christians, but as a work of the
   Spirit; nor anything sought, but by the power of the Spirit, as well in
   hearing, as in teaching. It is owing to the want of this, that there is
   so much preaching and hearing, and so little benefit either of the
   preacher or hearer.

   [Ltrs-2-37] The labor of the preacher is, for the most part, to display
   logic, argument, and eloquence, upon religious subjects; and so he is
   just as much carried out of himself, and united to God by his own
   religious discourses, as the pleader at the bar is, by his law, and
   oratory upon right and wrong.

   [Ltrs-2-38] And the hearers, by their regarding such accomplishments,
   go away just as much helped, to be new men in Christ Jesus, as by
   hearing a cause of great equity well pleaded at the bar.

   [Ltrs-2-39] Now in both these cases, with regard to preacher and
   people, the error is of the same kind, namely, a trusting to a power in
   themselves; the one in an ability, to persuade powerfully; the other in
   an ability, to act according to that which they hear.

   [Ltrs-2-40] And so the natural man goes on preaching, and the natural
   man goes on hearing of the things of God, in a fruitless course of
   life. And thus it must be, so long as either preacher or hearers, seek
   anything else but to edify, and be edified in, and through the
   immediate power and essential presence of the Holy Spirit, working in
   them.

   [Ltrs-2-41] The way therefore to be a faithful, and fruitful laborer in
   the vineyard of Christ, is to stand yourself in a full dependence on
   the Spirit of God, as having no good power, but as his instrument, and
   by his influence, in all that you do; and to call others, not to their
   own strength or rational powers, but to a full hope, and faith of
   having all that they want, from God alone; not as teaching them to be
   good by men, but by men and outward instruction, calling them to
   himself, to a birth of essential, inherent living goodness, wisdom and
   holiness from his own eternal WORD and Holy Spirit, living and dwelling
   in them. For as God is all that the fallen soul wants, so nothing but
   God alone, can communicate himself to it; all therefore is lost labor,
   but the total conversion of the soul, to the immediate essential
   operation of God in it.

   [Ltrs-2-42] As to the other parts of your office, whether they relate
   to things prescribed, or to such as are to be done, according to your
   best discretion, there will not be much difficulty, if you stand in the
   state as above described.

   [Ltrs-2-43] As to several outward forms, and orders in the church, they
   must be supposed to partake, in their degree, of that spirit, which has
   so long borne rule in all church divisions. But the private man, who
   has sufficient call to the ministry, is not to consider, how outward
   things should be, according to the primitive plan, but how the inward
   truth, which is meant by them, may be fully adhered to.

   [Ltrs-2-44] Baptism and the Lord's Supper, as differently practiced in
   almost every particular church, may afford ground of scruple about
   them, since almost every church in these matters, is condemned by all
   other churches.

   [Ltrs-2-45] But the way to be above, and free from these scruples, is
   to keep yourself, and your people wholly intent to that spiritual good,
   of which these institutions are the appointed outward figures, namely
   to that spiritual regeneration, which is meant by baptism, and to the
   spiritual living in Christ, and Christ in us, which is meant by the
   Supper of the Lord. And then, though the sacraments practiced by you
   should have any outward imperfection in them, they would be of the same
   benefit to you, as they were to those, who used them in their first,
   outwardly perfect form. And thus you will be led neither to overrate,
   nor disregard such use of them, as is according to the present state of
   the church. It is only the inward regenerate Christian, that knows how
   to make a right use of all outward things. His soul being in such a
   state of union with God, and man, as it ought to be, it takes
   everything by the right handles, and turns everything into a means of
   carrying on this love towards God and man. To the pure, all things are
   pure.

   [Ltrs-2-46] When you visit the sick, or well awakened, or dully
   senseless, use no pre-contrived knowledge, or rules, how you are to
   proceed with them, but go as in obedience to God, as on his errand, and
   say only what the love of God and man suggests to your heart, without
   any anxiety about the success of it; that is God's work. Only see that
   the love the tenderness, and patience of God towards sinners, be
   uppermost in all that you do to man. Think not, that here severity, and
   there tenderness, is to be shown; for nothing is to be shown to man,
   but his want of God; nothing can show him this so powerfully, so
   convincingly, as love. And as love is the fulfilling of the whole Law,
   so love is the fulfilling of all the work of the ministry.

   I am, with my best Wishes

   To you and your Brethren,

   Your most affectionate Friend,

   And willing Servant.

   April 19th, 1756.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter III.

   To a Clergyman of Bucks.

   [Ltrs-3-1] I am much surprised, my friend, that you should still want
   more to be said, about the doctrine of imputation, whether of Adam's
   sin, or the righteousness of Christ to his followers. Our polluted
   sinful birth of Adam, is all the sin we can have from him; and our
   supernatural birth of Christ, is all the righteousness that we possibly
   can have from him. Imputation neither hath, nor can have anything to do
   in either case; sin and righteousness are both inward and innate
   things, and the sole work of the spirit, that lives in us. That which
   is born of God, is godly, and cannot sin; and that which is born of
   sinful man, cannot be without a sinful nature and tempers. Cain could
   not possibly have any other natural life, than that which was in Adam;
   and therefore so sure as Adam in soul, spirit, and body, was all sin
   and corruption, so sure is it, that all his offspring must come from
   him in the same depravity of soul, spirit and body. And to talk of
   their having this disordered fallen nature, not from their natural
   birth, but by an outward imputation of it to them, is quite absurd, as
   to say, that they have their hands and feet, or the whole form of their
   body, not from their natural birth, but by an outward imputation of
   such a form, and members to them. Suppose it was said, that Adam's evil
   and polluted condition of body and soul, was not the natural effect of
   his transgression, but independently of that, came upon him from God's
   imputing it to him, as his, though it was not his. What a blasphemy
   would this be? And yet not less than that, of saying, that his children
   have their evil nature, the sinful state of their wills and affections,
   not by their natural birth from him, but independently of that, solely
   from God's imputing Adam's sinful nature to Cain, though he was by
   birth free from sin, and born in the purity and perfection, in which
   Adam was created; for so he must have been, if his birth had nothing of
   sinful Adam in it. But if Cain was not so born, then he had his sin,
   not by an imputation of another's sin to him, but plainly in the same
   way of natural birth, as every man has his natural life and form of his
   body, from parents of the same nature and form. And indeed, to speak of
   sin imputed to a person that has it not, and so made his, is the same
   absurdity, as speaking of will and affections, imputed to a person that
   has them not, and so made his. For sin is nowhere but in, and from the
   will and affections, and therefore to make sin to be there by
   imputation, where it is not, has no more sense in it, than to make will
   and affections, to be by imputation in a creature that has them not.

   [Ltrs-3-2] "As in Adam all die," says the text: is not this the same,
   as saying, that all men have their fallen nature, because born of Adam?
   Say, this dos not follow, and then the matter will stand thus: "In Adam
   all die" : but why, or how? Why because no man hath the evil of a
   mortal fallen nature from his birth from Adam, but merely by God's free
   imputation of it to him.

   [Ltrs-3-3] But such a free imputation of Adam's sinful state to his
   children, when they had it not by natural birth, is quite blasphemous,
   and leaves no room for magnifying the free grace of God in Christ
   Jesus; since free grace comes only to help man out of a sinful state
   which he had not by natural birth, but came upon him, by God's free
   imputation of it to him, when he had it not. Thus, the adorable love of
   God in his free grace in Christ Jesus, is quite destroyed, upon
   supposition, that mankind have not their sinful state from their
   natural birth from Adam, but by a free imputation of it by God to them.

   [Ltrs-3-4] Take now the other part of the text, so "in Christ shall all
   be made alive." Is it not a flat denial of all this, to say, they are
   not made alive by a birth of that to which Adam died, brought to life
   again in them, but are accounted as if they were alive, by the
   imputation of Christ's life to them, but not born in them? Could dead
   Lazarus have been said to have been made alive again, if still lying in
   the grave, he had only been accounted as alive, by having the nature of
   a living man, only imputed to him?

   [Ltrs-3-5] Our Lord said to a leper, whom he had cleansed, "Go, show
   thyself to the priest." But if instead of cleansing him, he had bid him
   go to the priest, to be accounted as a clean man, by the imputation of
   another's cleanness to him, had he not still been under all the evil of
   his own leprosy? Now this is strictly the case of the righteousness of
   Christ, only outwardly imputed to us, and not inwardly born within us.
   A fiction, that runs counter to all that Christ and his apostles, have
   said of the nature of our salvation. We want Christ's righteousness,
   because by our natural birth, we are inwardly full of evil; therefore
   saith Christ, "Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the
   kingdom of God." Does not this place all in a birth? But a birth, and
   outward imputation, are inconsistent; that which is born in us, cannot
   be said, to be outwardly imputed to us. "I am the vine," saith Christ,
   "ye are the branches." Now if this be a true representation of the
   matter, then these two plain doctrines of Christ, affirming, (1) the
   absolute necessity of a new birth from above, and (2) declaring this
   birth to be as really brought forth in us, as the life of the vine is
   really in the branches, do, as far as words can do it, entirely reject
   the notion of a righteousness imputed to us from without; a
   righteousness, that has no more to do with our own life, after it is
   imputed to us, than it had a thousand years before we were born. For
   that which is not in us, or ours, by a birth of itself in us, can never
   be any nearer to us, or have a more real union with us, after it is
   called ours, than before it was so called. I say called, for
   imputation, whether of sin, or righteousness, if its power is not
   living in us, is no more than mere calling that ours, which is not
   ours.

   [Ltrs-3-6] It is needless to cite places of scripture, affirming that
   all consists in a Christ revealed, begotten, formed and living in us.
   Let this one word of Paul suffice, "Yet not I, but Christ that liveth
   in me." He does not say, a Christ who is only called his, or outwardly
   imputed to him, but quite the contrary, a Christ who liveth in him.

   [Ltrs-3-7] Again, if Christ's holy nature, be not a birth in us, but
   only outwardly imputed to us, then no virtue, or power of an holy life,
   can have any more real existence, or vital growth in us, than in the
   devils, but are only outwardly imputed to us, and not to them, only
   called ours, and not theirs, though we have no more of them within us,
   than they have. Thus, be ye "holy, for I am holy; be ye perfect, as
   your Father, which is in heaven, is perfect; thou shalt love the Lord
   thy God with all thy heart." All these are but vain exhortations to do,
   and be, that which is not within our sphere, but entirely inconsistent
   with it. For these virtues are, in their whole nature, nothing else but
   the very righteousness of Christ, therefore if that can be only
   outwardly imputed to us, the same must be said of all those virtues,
   that they can have no real life or growth in us, but only outwardly
   imputed to us. And indeed, unless Christ be truly and essentially born
   in us, we can have no more of any Christian virtue, but the empty,
   outward name of it: for neither man, nor angel ever did, or can thus
   love God with all his heart, be holy because God is holy, be perfect as
   he is perfect, but because there is a spirit born and living in them,
   which is of God, from God, and partakes of the divine nature.

   [Ltrs-3-8] Further, say that the Holy Spirit is not born and living in
   us, that his operation is not inwardly in us, as the spirit of our
   spirit, the life of our life, but only outwardly imputed to us, as if
   he was in us, though he be not there: what a blasphemy would this be!
   And yet full as well, as to say the same of Christ, and his
   righteousness. For if Christ was only outwardly imputed to us, the same
   must, of all necessity be said of the Holy Spirit; for where and what
   Christ is, there and that is the Holy Spirit. How constantly are we
   told in scripture, that they only are sons of God, "who are led by the
   Spirit of God"; that unless "a man hath the Spirit of Christ, he is
   none of his; that if Christ be not in us, we are reprobates." Now I
   would ask, can any man be truly said to be led by the spirit of the
   world, the flesh and the devil, who has nothing of this spirit living
   in him, but only outwardly imputed to him? Can any creature be said to
   be led by the spirit of man, who has not the nature of man within him,
   but only outwardly imputed to him? Yes, just as a beast may be said to
   be a Newtonian philosopher, by having Sir Isaac's system outwardly
   imputed to him.

   [Ltrs-3-9] Take notice, sir, that if Christ's righteous and holy nature
   is only outwardly imputed to Christians, then all of them, whether they
   are called good, or bad, are without any difference as to their inward
   man, and all under the same unaltered evil of their fallen nature, as
   much after, as they were before Christ's righteousness was imputed to
   them. When a good man has anything falsely laid to his charge, is not
   this outwardly imputing something to him, that is not his, does not
   belong to him? But is not his own inward goodness just in the same
   fullness of truth in him, after such an imputation of evil to him, as
   it was before it was so imputed. Now this is the whole nature of
   imputation; and therefore if the righteous nature of Christ is only
   outwardly imputed to the sinner, it leaves him in all the evil of his
   fallen nature, and can no more make him inwardly good, than a good man
   can be made inwardly evil, by having an evil outwardly imputed to him,
   that is not his.

   [Ltrs-3-10] The relation between Christ and the fallen soul, is thus:
   Christ is the one mediator between God and man, and that which his
   mediation consists in, is the restoring that life in man, which was his
   first created union with God. Nothing separated man from God, or made
   him want a mediator, but the loss of his first divine life; and
   therefore nothing can mediate, or be a means of union again between God
   and man, but that which can, and doth raise again in man, that divine
   life which was his first union with God. Everything therefore, that is
   said of this one mediator, as redeeming, ransoming, justifying,
   sanctifying, making peace, or reconciliation, however variously
   expressed, has no other nature, or meaning, but that of making fallen
   man, inwardly alive again in God. He in whom Christ is the way, the
   truth, and the life, has just that same change made in him, just that
   same done to him, as he that has his sins washed and cleansed by the
   blood of the Lamb. For these different expressions mean only one and
   the same thing, and that one thing, is Christ in us, our hope of glory.
   This is justification, sanctification, redemption, peace,
   reconciliation, and everlasting union with God. Trifling therefore, to
   the last degree, is their orthodoxy, who raise disputes, and set up
   different doctrines, on the different meaning of these words, and the
   danger of not knowing, or not stiffly contending for the blessed
   difference between justification and sanctification, full as trifling,
   as to raise disputes, and set up different doctrines on the different
   names given to Jesus Christ, as Word of God, son of man, Lamb of God,
   alpha and omega, mediator, Immanuel, atonement, reconciliation,
   resurrection, and the great danger of ascribing that to Christ, as our
   reconciliation, which only belongs to him, as called the resurrection
   and the life. Figure to yourself such an orthodox dispute as this, and
   then you will see the importance of that pious zeal, which will not
   suffer justification and sanctification to encroach upon one another.

   [Ltrs-3-11] What an egregious folly, to be learnedly laborious in
   dividing and distinguishing those different names of Christ, or the
   different effects of his purchasing, justifying, or sanctifying our
   souls, when all that these things are told us for, and all the benefit
   that we can receive from them, lies solely in this one word of Christ,
   "if anyone will be my disciple" (that is, if anyone will have the
   benefit of all that I am, and of all that is said of me) "let him deny
   himself, take up his cross and follow me." Then, and then only, all the
   different names of Christ, and all the different powers ascribed to
   him, will be, not critically, but blessedly known and understood to be
   one, as God is one, whether he be called I AM, or the creator of heaven
   and earth, or the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

   [Ltrs-3-12] But to proceed: all that is said of the nature, office, and
   qualities of Christ, in order to be our redeemer, is so much said of
   the necessity of their being essentially found, and realized in every
   soul, that is to partake of his redemption. If "Christ be not in us, we
   are none of his." But how can Christ be in us, but because all that
   which Christ was, in the Spirit and nature of his whole process, is in
   us, as it was in him? If the same mind be not in us, which was in
   Christ Jesus; if that which loved, that which willed, that which
   suffered in him, be not the same spirit in us, we shall never reign
   with him. He may be truly called a redeemer, but we are not his
   redeemed, for such as the redeemer is, such are they that are redeemed.

   [Ltrs-3-13] "To him that overcometh," saith Christ, "will I grant to
   sit with me on my throne, (N.B.) even as I overcame, and am set down
   with my Father on his throne." What becomes now of the vain fiction of
   an outward imputation? Is Christ's victory here imputed to us? Is not
   the contrary as strongly taught us, as words can do it? "To him that
   overcometh, even as I also overcame."

   [Ltrs-3-14] Can we have fuller proof, that Christ's righteous nature
   must be inwardly born, living and manifesting itself in us, as it did
   in him; how else can we overcome, even as he overcame? That Spirit
   which overcame in Christ, was manifest in the flesh, for no other end,
   but that the same conquering Spirit might be born in us. And when that
   is done, then all is done, by that grace of God, which bringeth
   salvation, justification, sanctification, or the new creature. For
   whether you call it by one, or by all these names, it is the white
   stone with the new name written in it, which no man knoweth, but he
   that hath received it. And that for this reason, because it is no
   outwardly imputed thing, but is the new name, the new nature and Spirit
   of Christ, become all in all in us, and so only to be known by those,
   who have it brought to life in them.

   [Ltrs-3-15] Again, "This is my blood, which is shed for many, for the
   remission of sins"; what follows? Why, "Drink ye all of this. If we
   suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. The blood of Jesus
   Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all iniquity; who hath washed us
   from our sins in his blood." Now to show you, that all these different
   sayings have but one and the same doctrine, you need only read the
   following decisive words: "These are they that came out of the great
   tribulation," (that, is have trodden the wine press with Christ) "and
   have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb." Here you see is no
   outward imputation of the sufferings of Christ, but "their coming out
   of great tribulation," or passing through the whole process of Christ,
   was that alone, which made their "robes to be washed in the blood of
   the Lamb." And no other doctrine is in this text, than if it had been
   said, "these are they, who having denied themselves, taken up their
   daily cross, and followed Christ, have thereby washed their robes in
   the blood of the Lamb." Through all the New Testament, this is the one
   doctrine of salvation through the blood of Christ, it is "drinking the
   cup, that he drank of," and not the bitterness of his cup outwardly
   imputed to us.

   [Ltrs-3-16] You tell me, my friend, that the seraphic Aspatio is quite
   transported with the thought of the imputation of Christ's
   righteousness to the sinner, and that it should in the account of God,
   be esteemed as his. It may be so, transport seems to be as natural to
   Aspatio, as flying is to a bird. But surely, a more transporting, a
   more glorious thing it is, both to the glory of God, and the good of
   man, that the sinner is, through the righteous nature of Christ, born
   and brought to life in him, set up again in his first likeness and
   image of God. For if man's righteousness is not essentially restored in
   him, as it was essentially in him at the first, has he not less of God
   in him, by his redemption, than he had at his creation? Is it to the
   happiness of man, and the glory of God, that God has not obtained that
   dwelling in man, for which he alone created him?

   [Ltrs-3-17] Is it matter of transport to think, that fallen man will to
   all eternity live destitute of his first heavenly nature, his first
   divine life, which he had in, and from God? But this must be the case,
   if Christ's righteousness is only outwardly imputed to him, and not
   essentially born in him.

   [Ltrs-3-18] Transports, my friend, are but poor proofs of truth, or of
   the goodness of the heart, from whence they proceed. Martyrdom has had
   its fools, as well as its saints, and zealots may live and die in a
   joy, that has all its strength from delusion.

   [Ltrs-3-19] You may see a man drowned in tears, at beholding, and
   kissing a wooden crucifix, and the same man condemning another, as a
   wicked heretic, who only honors the cross, by being daily baptized into
   the death of Christ. Nay, so blind is opinion-zeal, that some good
   Christian pastors will not scruple to tell you, they could find no joy
   in their own state, no strength, or comfort in their labors of love
   towards their flocks, but because they know, and are assured from St.
   Paul, that God never had, nor ever will have, mercy on all men, but
   that an unknown multitude of them, are through all ages of the world,
   inevitably decreed by God to an eternal fire, and damnation of hell,
   and an unknown number of others, to an irresistible salvation.

   [Ltrs-3-20] Wonder not then, if the inquisition has its pious
   defenders, for inquisition-cruelty, nay, every barbarity that must have
   an end, is mere mercy, if compared with this doctrine. And to be in
   love with it, to draw sweet comfort from it, and wish it God speed, is
   a love that absolutely forbids the loving our neighbor, as ourselves,
   and makes the wish, that all men might be saved, no less than a
   rebellion against God. It is a love, with which, the cursed hater of
   all men, would willingly unite and take comfort; for could he know from
   St. Paul, that millions, and millions of mankind, are created and
   doomed to be his eternal slaves, he might be as content with this
   doctrine, as some good preachers are, and cease "going about as a
   roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour"; as knowing, that his
   kingdom, was so sufficiently provided for, without any labors of his
   own.

   [Ltrs-3-21] Oh, the sweetness of God's election, cries out the ravished
   preacher! Oh, the sweetness of God's reprobation! might the hellish
   satan well say, could he believe that God had made him a free gift of
   such myriads, and myriads of men, of all nations, tongues and
   languages, from the beginning to the end of the world, and reserved so
   small a number for himself. This is the blessed fruit of the imputation
   doctrine.

   [Ltrs-3-22] What a complaint, and condemnation is there made in
   scripture, of those who sacrificed their sons and daughters unto
   devils? And yet, this reprobation doctrine, represents God, as
   sacrificing myriads of his own creatures, made in his own image, to an
   everlasting hell.

   [Ltrs-3-23] There is not an absurdity of heathenish faith and religion,
   but what is less shocking than this doctrine, and yet so blindly are
   some zealous doctors of the gospel bigoted to it, as to set it forth,
   as the glorious manifestation of the supreme sovereignty of God.

   [Ltrs-3-24] My friend, let any old woman preach to you, rather than
   these doctors.

   [Ltrs-3-25] But to end in one word, Christ's righteousness is ours, in
   our redemption, just in the same manner, as it was Adam's in his first
   holy birth. For Adam had then no righteousness in him, but that which
   was created in Christ Jesus. And that is the one only reason, why there
   could be no other redeemer but Christ, because the loss of Christ, was
   that death which Adam died by his fall; and therefore no possibility of
   coming out of his fallen state, but in, and by a birth of Christ's
   righteous nature, essentially born and living in him, as it was living
   in him before he fell.

   [Ltrs-3-26] "Little children," saith St. John, "let no man deceive you;
   (N.B.) he that doth righteousness, is righteous, (N.B.) even as he is
   righteous." Therefore to expect, or trust to be made righteous, by the
   righteousness of another, only outwardly imputed to us, is, according
   to the apostle deceiving ourselves.

   [Ltrs-3-27] Either man, by the mediation of Christ, is united again
   with God, or he is not; if he is not, then he has no more of the divine
   life in him, after his redemption, than he had before he was redeemed.
   But if he is again united with God, as he was at his creation, then his
   redemption must wholly consist in the birth of a divine nature and
   Spirit, essentially brought to life in him. That which is spirit in
   man, must be godlike, before it can united with that Spirit, which is
   God. And was there not a divine Spirit in man, truly born of God,
   proceeding from the Spirit of God, as his real offspring, no union of
   will, love, or desire, could be between God and man. For this is a
   truth, that extends itself through all that is natural, or
   supernatural, that like can only unite with like. There is not
   separation between things, but that which is effected by contrariety.
   If therefore nothing in man was a partaker of the divine nature, man
   must in his whole nature, be forever separated from God, and stand in
   the same impossibility of being united with him, that two the most
   contrary things, do to one another. So sure, therefore, as the
   mediation of Christ, is by himself declared to be for this end, viz.,
   "that they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee,
   that they also may be one in us; I in them, and thou in me, that they
   may be made perfect in one"; so sure is it, that an outwardly imputed
   Christ, is as absurd in itself, and as contrary to scripture, as an
   outwardly imputed God.

   Farewell.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter IV.

   In Answer to a Scruple.

   [Ltrs-4-1] That you may have a full answer to your scruple, concerning
   these words, "the folly of debtor and creditor," in the second part of
   the Spirit of Love, I will set forth the doctrine from whence it is
   taken. Great part of that book, is to clear up, and assert the true
   scripture doctrine of the nature, necessity, and merit of our Lord's
   sufferings and death, as an atonement, and satisfaction before God, in
   the work of our redemption. No point of Christianity has been more
   mistaken, in our common systems of gospel doctrine, or given greater
   offense than this, and yet nothing clearer, or more reasonably to be
   believed, when it stands in its own scriptural manifestation.

   [Ltrs-4-2] Now the right ground of understanding the true meaning of
   every different expression, relating to Christ as our savior, or
   salvation, lies in these two things: 1. What Christ is in himself. 2.
   What he does, or intends to do for us.

   [Ltrs-4-3] The scripture saith, "God was manifested in the flesh"; this
   describes his whole nature, what he was in himself, viz., the deity
   become man. What he is, and does in us, and for us, is expressed in the
   following words, "He was manifested to destroy the works of the devil";
   and again, "as in Adam all die, so in Christ, shall all be made alive."

   [Ltrs-4-4] Now according to this ground, every expression concerning
   our savior, is to have its true infallible meaning fixed. Everything
   that is said of his birth, his life, his sufferings, his death, his
   resurrection and ascension, are all of them, both with respect to God,
   and ourselves, of one and the same efficacy, full of one and the same
   merit, and all for one and the same end, viz., to destroy in man the
   works of the devil, and to make all that died in Adam, to be alive
   again in Christ.

   [Ltrs-4-5] Suppose now, any one of these to be wanting, and the same
   will follow from it, as if they were all wanting. Had his birth been
   otherwise than it was, not God as well as man, he could have made no
   beginning of a divine life in us. Had not his life been without sin,
   his death upon the cross could have done us no good, nor could have
   been the one mediator between God and sinful man. Had his sufferings
   been less than they were, had there been any evil, trial, or
   temptation, which had not attacked him, through the whole course of his
   life, with all its force, he could not have been said, to have overcome
   them. So sure therefore as Christ, as a son of man was to overcome all
   that the world, the flesh, and the devil, could do to fallen man; so
   sure is it, that all the evils, which they could possibly bring upon
   fallen man, were to be felt, and suffered by him, as absolutely
   necessary in the nature of the thing, to prove his victorious
   superiority over them. Had he not given up his body to an ignominious
   death, in all the horrors of a soul, that had lost its God: he could
   not have suffered that in, and for man, which every man must have
   suffered, who had died in his fallen state. But Christ dying, and
   sacrificing himself, as he did, in and through that horrible death,
   which was fallen man's gate to eternal misery, and conquering this
   state of man, as he had every evil power of the world, the flesh, and
   the devil, then it was, that he could say to those, who were all their
   life in fear of this death, be of good comfort, I have overcome this
   death, and that upon the same ground, as he said to his followers,
   under a sense of worldly tribulations, "be of good comfort, I have
   overcome the world." And thus his death, had no other nature, with
   respect to us, than every other part of his process, that was
   antecedent to it, only as it was the last, and greatest, and finishing
   part of that redeeming work, which was begun by his divine birth, and
   carried on in, and through his sinless, perfect life. And as I said,
   that the death of man unredeemed, was his gate into an eternal
   separation from God, so Christ's entrance into this gate of damnation,
   and pouring out his blood, thus forsaken of God, had a suffering in it,
   that thoughts can no more conceive, than words express.

   [Ltrs-4-6] Hence it is, by way of eminence, justly said, to be the
   highest price, that he paid for us; and that by his blood it is that we
   are washed, and redeemed, not only because of its greatness in itself,
   but because it finished, and for ever completed the whole redeeming
   work, which he had to do for us in the flesh. Hence it was, that
   through the Old Testament, this sacrifice of his death, is the great
   thing mostly pointed at in all its sacrifices, types, and figures;
   hence also is all the boast of it in the gospel. Well therefore may the
   church, through all ages, have ascribed so much to the merit of his
   blood shed for us; well may it have been celebrated, as the one great
   price, by which we are ransomed from the power of death and hell;
   because though all that he was, and did, antecedently to it, was
   equally necessary to our salvation, yet all had been without any
   effect, unless by his so dying, this damnable death had been swallowed
   up in victory.

   [Ltrs-4-7] In short, had not Christ been real God, as well as real man,
   he could have made no beginning in the work of our salvation, and had
   he not ended his life in such a sacrifice, as he did, he could never
   have said, "It is finished." He therefore, who denieth the truth, the
   certainty, and absolute necessity of these two essential points, is in
   the abomination of Socinianism, and is that very liar and anti-Christ
   described by St. John in his first epistle.

   [Ltrs-4-8] Again, though Christ's death was thus absolutely necessary
   in the very nature of the thing, thus great in its merits and effects,
   yet unless his resurrection had followed, we had been yet in our sins,
   nor could he, till risen from the grave, have purchased a resurrection
   for us. Lastly, had he not ascended into heaven, he could not have had
   the power of drawing, as he said, all men to himself. Every part
   therefore of our savior's character, or process, has its full and equal
   share in all that, which is said of him, as our peace with God, our
   righteousness, our justification, our ransom, our atonement, our
   satisfaction, our life and new birth; for all these different
   expressions, have no difference in doctrine, but whether separately, or
   jointly taken, signify nothing else, but this one thing, that he was
   the true and full destroyer of all the works of the devil in man, and
   the true raiser of a divine life, in all that died in Adam.

   [Ltrs-4-9] And here, sir, you are well to observe, that all that Christ
   was, did, suffered, and obtained, was purely and solely on the account,
   and for the sake of altering, or removing that which was wrong, evil,
   and miserable in man, or in scripture words, "God was in Christ Jesus,
   reconciling the world to himself," that is, taking away from man every
   property, or power of evil, that kept him in a state of separation from
   God. Thus it was, and to this end, that "God was in Christ Jesus" in
   his whole process.

   [Ltrs-4-10] Unreasonably therefore have our scholastic systems of the
   gospel, separated the sacrifice of Christ's death, from the other parts
   of his process, and considered it as something chiefly done with regard
   to God, to alter, or atone an infinite wrath, that was raised in God
   against fallen man, which infinity of just vengeance, or vindictive
   justice, must have devoured the sinner, unless an infinite satisfaction
   had been made to it, by the death of Christ.

   [Ltrs-4-11] All this, is in the grossest ignorance of God, of the
   reason and ground, and effects of Christ's death, and in full
   contradiction to the express letter of scripture. For there we are
   told, that God is love, and that the infinity of his love was that
   alone, which showed itself towards fallen man, and wanted to have
   satisfaction done to it; which love-desire could not be fulfilled,
   could not be satisfied with anything less than man's full deliverance
   from all the evil of his fallen state. That love, which has the
   infinity of God, nay, which is God himself, was so immutably great
   towards man, though fallen from him, "that he spared not his only
   begotten Son"; and why did he not spare him? It was because nothing but
   the incarnate life of his eternal Son, passing through all the
   miserable states of lost man, could regenerate his first divine life in
   him. Can you possibly be told this, in stronger words than these, "God
   so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son"; how did he
   give him? Why, in his whole process. And to what end did he give him?
   Why, "that all who believe in him, might not perish, but have
   everlasting life." Away then with the superstitious dream, of an
   infinite wrath in God towards poor fallen man, which could never cease,
   till an infinite satisfaction was made to it. All scripture denies it,
   and the light of nature abhors it. The birth, the life, the death of
   Christ, though so different things, have but one and the same
   operation, and that operation is solely in man, to drive all evil out
   of his fallen nature, and delight the heart of God, that desires his
   salvation. God is love, and has no other will towards man, but the will
   of love. That love, which from itself began the creation of an holy
   Adam, from itself began the redemption of a fallen Adam. The death of
   Christ was a sacrifice from the love of God the Son towards man, to
   overcome thereby that damnable death, which, otherwise, every son of
   Adam must have died; it was a sacrifice offered to the same love, in
   God the Father; a sacrifice, equally loved and desired by both of them,
   because, in the nature of the thing, as absolutely necessary to alter
   and overcome that evil, which belonged to man's state of death, as the
   incarnation of the WORD, was absolutely necessary in the nature of the
   thing, to make man to be alive again in God.

   [Ltrs-4-12] This is the one only true, and full confutation of
   Socinianism.

   [Ltrs-4-13] But to have recourse to a supposed wrath, or vindictive
   justice, in a God incensed towards fallen man, in order to confute the
   Socinian, who denies the necessity, and effects of Christ's death, is
   only opposing one great falsity with another. For wrath has no more
   place in God, than love has in the devil. Wrath began with devils,
   hell, and fallen nature, and can have no possible existence anywhere,
   or in anything, but where devils, hell, and fallen nature, have their
   power of working.

   [Ltrs-4-14] Do not, my friend, be here so furious, as to say, that if
   it was strictly true, that there was no wrath in God, you would burn
   your Bible: for if it was strictly true, you would never have had a
   Bible to burn; nor any more messages from heaven about man's salvation,
   than from hell. For if you will have wrath in the most high God, you
   can have no other, or better a God, than that which the atheistical
   Spinoza invented.

   [Ltrs-4-15] For if wrath is in the supreme God, then nature is in God,
   and if so, then God is nature, and nothing else; for nature cannot be
   above itself. Therefore if nature is in the most high God, then the
   lowest working of nature, is the true supreme God. And so instead of a
   supernatural God, who created heaven and earth, heaven and earth, and
   all things else, are the only God.

   [Ltrs-4-16] This is the atheistical absurdity, that necessarily follows
   from the supposing a wrath in God; for wrath can no more be anywhere,
   but in nature, than storms and tempests can be, where there is nothing
   that moves.

   [Ltrs-4-17] Let me here, sir, observe to you the barefaced calumny,
   that Dr. Warburton has ventured to cast upon me, in charging my
   writings with Spinozism, though all that I have wrote for these last
   twenty years, has been such a full contradiction of it, as is not to be
   found in any book, that has been purposely wrote against it. Had I only
   proved, as I have done, by a variety of proofs, that wrath cannot
   possibly be in the true God, I had sufficiently confuted Spinozism; for
   if not wrath, then nothing of nature is in God. But I have gone much
   further, and have, in my Appeal, the book of Regeneration, the Spirit
   of Prayer, the Spirit of Love, and the Way to Divine Knowledge, opened
   the true ground of the unchangeable distinction between God and nature,
   making all nature, whether temporal or eternal, its own proof, that it
   is not, cannot be God, but purely and solely the WANT of God, and can
   be nothing else in itself but a restless, painful want, till a
   supernatural God manifests himself in it. This is a doctrine, which the
   learned of all ages have known nothing of; not a book ancient or modern
   in all our libraries, has so much as attempted to open the ground of
   nature, to show its birth and state, and its essential unalterable
   distinction from the one abyssal, supernatural God; and how all the
   glories, powers, and perfections of the hidden, unapproachable God,
   have their wonderful manifestation in nature and creature. This is a
   blessing reserved by God for these last times, to be opened in his
   chosen instrument, the poor, illiterate Behmen. And this I will venture
   to say, that he who will declare war against him, has no choice of any
   other weapons, but raillery and reproach. To call the blessed man, a
   possessed cobbler, will be doing something; to call his writings,
   senseless jargon, may stand his learned adversary in great stead; but
   if he tries to overcome him any other way, his success will be like
   his, who knocks his head against a post. But no more of this here.

   [Ltrs-4-18] And now, sir, what shall I say of my learned, accusing
   doctor? Why only this, that if he knows how to forgive himself, then
   there will be one thing at least, in which we are both of us like-
   minded.

   [Ltrs-4-19] A word or two now to yourself and friends, who are so loath
   to own a God who is all love: let me tell you, if you will have wrath
   in the supreme God, you must have a God, in whom is selfishness, envy,
   and pride, with all the properties of fallen nature. For as it is
   impossible for one of these to be without the other in the creature, so
   if any one of them was in God, all the other must be there. They are
   the four essential elements of hell, or fallen nature, which mutually
   beget, and are begotten of one another; where one is, there are all of
   them, and where all are not, there cannot be one of them. Every pride
   consists of three things, selfishness, envy, and wrath. And so of every
   one of them, take which you will, it consists of the other three, so
   that to separate them, is to separate a thing from itself.

   [Ltrs-4-20] Divine love is just as contrary to them, as God is to the
   devil; and where love is not, there God is not, and where the work is
   not wholly the working of love, it is no work of God, but the selfish,
   wrathful, proud, envious working of the diabolical nature, fallen from
   its first blessed subjection to, and union with the supernatural God of
   love.

   [Ltrs-4-21] To talk (as some do) of a good wrath in God, which is only
   so called, because it has a likeness to, and produces like effects to
   those that come from wrath in the creature, is but calling that a good
   wrath, which is like a bad wrath, and is no better, no wiser, than to
   talk of a good envy, a good pride in God, which are only so called,
   because they have a likeness to that, which is a bad pride, and a bad
   envy in the creature. Can anything be more profanely absurd than this?
   Which yet is the best that can be said by those, who will have it the
   glory of God, to be wrathful, who think all is lost, that the gospel
   salvation is blasphemed, if the same love that created man in glory,
   should be his only redeemer, when he had fallen from it. Not
   considering, that salvation could never have come into the world, but
   because, all that good and blessing, which love can be, and do to the
   creature, must be done, and doing for ever and ever, by that first
   creating God, whose name and nature, whose will and working, is love,
   the same yesterday, today, and forever.

   [Ltrs-4-22] And now, sir, need I say much more, to remove your scruple
   about the following passage in the Spirit of Love, "No wrath in God, no
   fictitious atonement, no folly of debtor and creditor, no suffering for
   suffering's sake, but a Christ suffering and dying, as his same victory
   over death and hell, as when he rose from the dead and ascended into
   heaven." {Spirit of Love, Second Part.}

   [Ltrs-4-23] I said folly of debtor and creditor, because Christ's
   overcoming man's damnable death, by his victorious passage through it,
   has nothing in it that has any likeness to the transaction of a debtor
   paying his creditor; nothing was done in it by way of payment of a
   debt, any more than Christ paid a debt for Lazarus, when he raised him
   from the dead, or paid a debt for the man born blind, whom he helped to
   seeing eyes. For the good that is done us by the death of Christ, is a
   good that relates solely to ourselves. Nothing in it, is given to, or
   received but by ourselves; it overcomes, and saves us from our own evil
   of death, just as that, which Christ did to Lazarus, and the blind man,
   overcame the death that was in the one, and the darkness that was in
   the other.

   [Ltrs-4-24] You appeal to a parable of our Lord's, which has no more
   relation to the nature and efficacy of Christ's death, than the parable
   of the tares of the field. St. Peter saith, "How oft shall my brother
   sin against me, and I forgive him, till seven times?" Christ answereth,
   "Not until seven times, but until seventy times seven." And then he
   sets forth this doctrine of continual forgiveness in the following
   parable.

   [Ltrs-4-25] "The kingdom of God is likened to a certain king, who would
   take account of his servants." Read the whole parable, and you will be
   forced to see, that nothing else is intended to be taught by it, but
   that one conclusion, which Christ draws from it: "So likewise shall my
   heavenly Father do unto you, if ye from your hearts, forgive not
   everyone his brother their trespasses." All that the parable saith, is
   neither more nor less, than is said in these other words, "Be ye
   merciful, as your Father which is in heaven is merciful": again, the
   doctrine of this parable, quite overthrows that, which systematic
   doctors intend by debtor and creditor; for their doctrine is, that the
   injured authority of God must have full satisfaction made to it, and
   thence it is, that they ground the necessity of so great a payment, as
   Christ made to it. Whereas this parable of the kingdom of God, sets
   forth a king, (N.B.) frankly forgiving, and not requiring any payment
   at all, either from the debtor himself, or from anyone else for him.
   Can there therefore be a greater folly, than to appeal to this, and the
   like scriptures, to make God a creditor, whose vindictive wrath against
   his debtor, will not be appeased, till full payment is made to it? And
   what a blind persisting is it in the same folly, to urge the petition
   in the Lord's Prayer, "forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
   debtors," as another proof, that God is that creditor, who will be
   fully paid the debts, that are due to him? For surely, if God requires
   us to expect, and pray for the forgiveness of our debts, it is badly
   concluded from thence, that therefore full payment of them, must be
   made. The truth is, this petition teaches the same frank forgiveness,
   as the foregoing parable, and is utterly inconsistent with the doctrine
   of an infinite satisfaction, necessary to be made; for if so, then the
   petition ought to have been thus, "forgive us our debts, as we forgive
   our debtors," (N.B.) "when full payment is made, either by themselves,
   or by someone else for them."

   [Ltrs-4-26] In a word, vindictive wrath in God, that will not forgive,
   till a satisfaction equal to the offense, is made to it, sets the
   goodness of God in a lower state, than that which has been found in
   thousands of mankind. The truth of the matter, is this, the divinity of
   Christ, and his whole process through life and death, was absolutely
   necessary in the nature of the thing, to raise man out of the death of
   sin, into a heavenly birth of life. And the necessity of all this, is
   grounded upon the certainty of man's fall, from a divine, into a
   bestial life of this world. The Socinian blasphemy consists in the
   denial of these points, the deity of Christ, and the fall of man, and
   the necessity of Christ's death. Our scholastic doctors, own the fall
   of man, but know, or own nothing of the true nature and depth of it.
   They own the truth of Christ's divinity, and the necessity of his
   sufferings; they plead for the certainty of these things from scripture
   words, but see not into the ground of them, or in what, the absolute
   necessity of them consists. Hence it is, that when opposed by Socinian
   reasoning, they are at a loss how to support these great truths, and
   are forced to humanize the matter, and to suppose such a vindictive
   wrath in God, as usually breaks forth in great princes, when a revolt
   is made, against their sovereign authority.

   [Ltrs-4-27] What a paltry logic, to say, God is righteousness and
   justice, as well as love, and therefore his love cannot help, or
   forgive the sinner, till his justice, or righteous wrath has
   satisfaction? Every word here, is in full ignorance of the things
   spoken of. For what is love in God, but his unchangeable love of his
   own goodness, his impossibility of loving anything else but it, his
   impossibility of suffering anything that is unrighteous, to have any
   communion with him? What is God's forgiving sinful man? It is nothing
   else in its whole nature, but God's making him righteous again. There
   is no other forgiveness of sin, but being made free from it. Therefore
   the compassionate love of God, that forgives sin, is no other, than
   God's love of his own righteousness, for the sake of which, and through
   the love of which, he makes man righteous again. This is the one
   righteousness of God, that is rigorous, that makes no abatements, that
   must be satisfied, must be fulfilled in every creature that is to have
   communion with him. And this righteousness that is thus rigorous, is
   nothing else but the unalterable purity and perfection of the divine
   love, which from eternity to eternity can love nothing but its own
   righteousness, can will nothing but its own goodness, and therefore can
   will nothing towards fallen man, but the return of his lost goodness,
   by a new birth of the divine life in him, which is the true forgiveness
   of sins. For what is the sinful state of man? It is nothing else, but
   the loss of that divine nature, which cannot commit sin; therefore the
   forgiving man's sin, is in the truth and reality of it, nothing else,
   but the revival of that nature in man, which being born of God sinneth
   not. Lastly, let me ask these dividers of the divine nature, what
   different shares, or different work, had the righteousness, and the
   love of God in the creation of man? Was there then something done by
   the love of God, which ought not to be ascribed to the righteousness of
   God? Who can be so weak, as to say this? But if the love and the
   righteousness of God, is one, as God is one, and had but one work in
   the creation of man, it must be the highest absurdity, to say, that in
   the redemption of man, the love, and the righteousness of God, must
   have, not only different, but contrary works, that the love of God
   cannot act, till the righteousness of God, as something different from
   it, is first satisfied.

   [Ltrs-4-28] All that which we call the attributes of God, are only so
   many human ways of our conceiving that Abyssal All, which can neither
   be spoken, nor conceived by us. And this way of thinking, and speaking
   of God, is suitable to our capacities, has its good use, and helps to
   express our adoration of him, and his perfections. But to conclude, and
   contend, that there must therefore be, different qualities in God,
   answerable, or according to our different ways of thinking, and
   speaking of his perfections, is rather blaspheming, than truly
   glorifying his name, and nature. For omnipotent love, inconceivable
   goodness, is that unity of God, which we can neither conceive, as it is
   in itself, nor divide into this, or that. The importance of the subject
   I have been upon, has led me further than I intended. But for the full
   illustration of it, I refer you to the Second Part of the Spirit of
   Love. And so committing you to a God, who has no will towards you, but
   in, and through the life, and death, the Spirit and power of the holy
   Jesus, to deliver you from all your natural evil, and make you his
   beloved son, in whom, he can be well pleased to all eternity, I bid you
   farewell.

   July 18, 1757.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter V.

   To a Clergyman in the North of England.

   My dear Brother,

   [Ltrs-5-1] Live as you now do, in such activity of spirit, and
   multiplied ways of being good, and though you were to live half an
   hundred years longer, you would stick in the same mire, and end your
   life in the same complaints, as filled your last letter to me. You tell
   me, that after all the great change you have made in your life, you
   find nothing of that inward good and satisfaction, which you have so
   much expected, and more especially since you have been a reader of the
   books, recommended by me.

   [Ltrs-5-2] But, sir, you quite mistake the matter, you have not changed
   your life; for that which is, and only can truly be called your life,
   is in the same state as when I first knew you. Nothing is in your life,
   whether it be good or bad, but that which WILLS and HUNGERS in you; and
   your own life neither is, nor can be anything else but this. Therefore
   nothing reaches your life, or can make a real change in it, from bad to
   good, from falseness to truth, but the right will and the right hunger.
   Practice as many rules as you will, take up this or that new opinion,
   be daily reading better and better books, follow this or that able man,
   the bread of life is not there. Nothing will be fed in you, but the
   vanity and self-conceited righteousness of your own old man. And thus
   it must be with you, till all that is within you is become one will,
   and one hunger after that which angels eat in heaven.

   [Ltrs-5-3] But now, if will and hunger are the whole of every natural
   life, then you may know this great truth with the utmost certainty,
   namely, that eating is the one preservation of every life, from the
   highest angel in heaven, to the lowest living creature on earth. That
   which the life eats not, that the life has not. Now everything that
   lives on earth, is a birth or production of the astral, elementary
   fire, light, and spirit, to which water is always essential, and it
   continues in life, tastes and enjoys the good of its life, no longer
   than these powers and virtues of the stars and elements are essentially
   and continually eaten by it.

   [Ltrs-5-4] It is just so with the immortal, heavenly life of the soul,
   it is a birth of those same powers, in their highest glory, in the
   invisible world; a world, where the triune deity of Father, Son and
   Holy Ghost, brings forth a triune glorious habitation for itself, of
   fire, light, and spirit, opening an infinity of wonders, births, and
   beauties in a crystal transparent sea, called the kingdom of heaven.

   [Ltrs-5-5] Out of these powers, or out of this kingdom of heaven, are
   the births of all holy, angelic creatures; nothing lives or moves in
   them, but that fire, light, and spirit, which comes as a birth from
   Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and nothing feeds, keeps up, and exalts
   this heavenly fire, light, and spirit, but the hidden, inconceivable,
   supernatural Trinity, which is before, and deeper than all nature, and
   can only manifest itself, and communicate its goodness, by such an
   outward birth of its own unapproachable glory. And here you may find a
   glorious meaning of those words of our Lord, saying, "my kingdom is not
   of this world," because it is a kingdom of those heavenly powers of the
   triune God, which give food and nourishment, purity and perfection to
   the fire, light, and spirit of those divine creatures, which are to be
   holy as he is holy, perfect as he is perfect, in his own heavenly
   kingdom.

   [Ltrs-5-6] Here therefore, in this spiritual eating of that same
   invisible good, which gives life, and perfection of life to all the
   angels of God, and not in any human contrivances, or activity of your
   own, are you to place your all, as to the change of your life; it all
   consists in the right hunger, and the right food, and in nothing else.

   [Ltrs-5-7] The fall of Adam, and the origin of all sin and misery,
   began in his lust and hunger after the knowledge of good and evil in
   the kingdom of this world. By this, he left, and lost the food which
   heaven gives. He died to all the influences and enjoyments of his first
   fire, light, and spirit, which was his vital union with God, in the
   kingdom of heaven. All the evil that was hid in this earthly creation,
   and its numerous creatures, opened, and diffused itself with all the
   power of a poisonous food, through his whole soul and body. But in all
   this, nothing more came upon him, or was done to him, than that which
   his own hunger had eaten. Here you have the fullest demonstration, how
   every change in the life of man is, and only can be made, namely, by
   hungering, and eating. Adam had not fallen, had known no death, or
   extinction of that heavenly fire, light, and spirit, which was his
   first birth in God, but because he hungered after the state of the
   animal life in this world, which has no other fire, light, and spirit
   in it, but that which gives a transitory life, or diverse, contrary
   lusts and appetites, to all the beasts, birds, and insects.

   [Ltrs-5-8] This is the doctrine of the Old Testament, concerning the
   power of hunger and eating in the first Adam. On the other hand, in
   conformity to this, and in full proof of the truth of it, that it must
   have been so; the second Adam, the Lord from heaven, in the New
   Testament, has declared, that hunger and eating is that alone, which
   can help fallen man to that first heavenly fire, light, and spirit,
   with the spiritual flesh and blood that belonged to it; saying again
   and again, in a variety of the strongest expressions, this great truth,
   that except a man eat his flesh, and drink his blood, he hath no life
   in him, that is, no life of that celestial body and blood, which Adam
   lost, and which alone can live in the fire, light, and spirit of
   heaven.

   [Ltrs-5-9] Every spirit that is creaturely, and every desire of the
   spirit, has always something bodily, as its own birth. No spiritual
   creature can begin to be, but by beginning to be bodily. For creaturely
   existence, and bodily existence, is the same thing; the spirit is not,
   cannot be in the form of a creature, till it has its body; and its body
   is the manifestation of spirit, both to itself, and other beings.

   [Ltrs-5-10] Live in the love, the patience, the meekness, and humility
   of Christ, and then the celestial, transparent, spiritual body of
   Christ's flesh and blood, is continually forming itself, and growing in
   and from, and about your soul, till it comes to the fullness of the
   stature in Christ Jesus; and this is your true, substantial, vital
   eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of Christ, which will
   afterwards become your body of glory to all eternity. And though your
   astral reason, and outward senses, whilst you are in Adam's bodily
   flesh, know nothing of this inward body of Christ, yet there it is, as
   surely as you have the love, the patience, the meekness, and humility
   of Christ; for where the true Spirit of Christ is, there is his true
   spiritual body.

   [Ltrs-5-11] On the other hand, live to selfishness, to diabolical
   pride, wrath, envy, and covetousness, and then nothing can hinder these
   tempers, from forming within you such a spiritual body to your soul, as
   that which devils have, and dwell, and work in.

   [Ltrs-5-12] Be as unwilling as you will, through learned wisdom, or
   fear of enthusiasm, to believe this, your unbelief can last no longer,
   than till Adam's flesh and blood leave you, and then, as sure as your
   soul lives, you will, and must have it living, either in the spiritual
   body of fallen angels, or in the spiritual body of the redeeming Jesus.
   Oh, sir, trifle away no more time in many matters, your first spiritual
   body must come again. Without it, you are the very man that came to the
   marriage feast, not "having on a wedding garment." He was bound hands
   and feet, and cast into utter darkness, that is, he was the chained
   prisoner of his own dark, hellish, spiritual body, which had been all
   his life growing up in him, from that which his soul had daily eaten,
   and hungered after; and so was become those very chains of darkness,
   under which the fallen angels are reserved unto the judgment of the
   great day.

   [Ltrs-5-13] Now there is no being saved or preserved from this body of
   chains and darkness, but by the one hunger and thirst after
   righteousness that is in Christ Jesus, and by eating that, which begets
   heavenly spiritual flesh and blood to the soul. The two trees of
   paradise, with their two fruits, viz., of death to the eater of the
   one, and life to the eater of the other, were infallible signs, and
   full proofs, that from the beginning to the end of the world, death and
   life, happiness and misery, can proceed from nothing else, but that
   which the lust and hunger of the soul chooseth for its food. Now
   spiritual eating is by the mouth of desire, and desire is nothing else
   but will, and hunger, therefore, that which you will, and hunger after,
   that you are continually eating, whether it be good, or bad, and that,
   be it which it will, forms the strength of your life, or which is the
   same thing, forms the body of your soul. If you have many wills, and
   many hungers, all that you eat is only the food of so many spiritual
   diseases, and burdens your soul with a complication of inward
   distempers. And under this working of so many wills, it is, that
   religious people have no more good, or health and strength from the
   true religion, than a man who has a complication of bodily distempers,
   has from the most healthful food. For no will or hunger, be it turned
   which way it will, or seem ever so small or trifling, is without its
   effect. For as we can have nothing but as our will works, so we must
   have always some effect from it. It cannot be insignificant because
   nothing is significant, but that which it does.

   [Ltrs-5-14] Do not now say, that you have this one will, and one
   hunger, and yet find not the food of life by it. For as sure as you are
   forced to complain, so sure is it, that you have it not. "Not my will,
   but thine be done"; when this is the one will of the soul, all
   complaints are over, then it is, that patience drinks water of life out
   of every cup; and to every craving of the old man, this one hunger
   continually says, "I have meat to eat, that ye know nothing of."

   [Ltrs-5-15] "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done," is the one will, and
   one hunger, that feeds the soul with the life-giving bread of heaven.
   This will is always fulfilled, it cannot possibly be sent empty away,
   for God's kingdom must manifest itself with all its riches in that
   soul, which wills nothing else; it never was, nor can be lost, but by
   the will, that seeks something else. Hence you may know with the utmost
   certainty, that if you have no inward peace, if religious comfort is
   still wanting, it is because you have more wills than one. For the
   multiplicity of wills, is the very essence of fallen nature, and all
   its evil, misery, and separation from God lies in it; and as soon as
   you return to, and allow only this one will, you are returned to God,
   and must find the blessedness of his kingdom within you.

   [Ltrs-5-16] Give yourself up to ever so many good works, read, preach,
   pray, visit the sick, build hospitals, clothe the naked, yet if
   anything goes along with these, or in the doing of them you have
   anything else, that you will and hunger after, but that God's kingdom
   may come, and his will be done, they are not the works of the new- born
   from above, and so cannot be his life-giving food. For the new creature
   in Christ is that one will, and one hunger that was in Christ; and
   therefore where that is wanting, there is wanting that new creature,
   which alone can have his conversation, which alone can daily eat and
   drink at God's table, receiving in all that it does, continual life
   from "every word, that proceedeth out of the mouth of God."

   [Ltrs-5-17] From what word, and from what mouth of God? Why only from
   that hidden, supernatural power of the triune deity, which speaks, and
   breathes continual nourishment to that heavenly fire, light, and
   spirit, in and from which, all that are about the throne of God, have
   their inward joy above all thought, and their outward glory, that can
   only be figured, or hinted to us, by pearls, sapphires, and rainbow
   beauties.

   [Ltrs-5-18] It is from this power of the triune God, working in the
   fire, light, spirit, and spiritual water, or body of your new-born
   creature, that all the good, and comfort, and joy of religion, which
   you want, is to be found, and found by nothing, but the resurrection of
   that divine, and heavenly nature, which came forth in the first man.

   [Ltrs-5-19] Do not take these to be too high flown words, for they are
   no higher, than the truth; for if that which is in you, is not as high
   as heaven, you will never come there. That heavenly fire, light, and
   spirit, which makes the angelic life to be all divine, must as
   certainly be your inward likeness to God; and that which God is, and
   works in angels, that he must be, and work in you, or you can never be
   like to, or equal with them, as Christ has said. To be outwardly
   glorious, as they are, you must stay till this corruptible shall have
   put on incorruption, but to have the same inward glory of the same
   celestial fire, light, and spirit, burning, shining, and breathing in
   your inward man, as angels have, belongs to you, as born at first of
   the triune breath of the living God, and born again of Christ, out of
   Adam's death, to have, and be, all that by a wonder of redemption,
   which was your divine birthright at first by a wonder of creation.

   [Ltrs-5-20] And now, my dear friend, choose your side: would you be
   honorable in church, or state, put on the whole armor of this world,
   praise that which man praises, clothe yourself with all the graces and
   perfections of the belles lettres, and be an orator, and critic, as
   fast as ever you can, and above all, be strong in the power of
   flattering words.

   [Ltrs-5-21] But if the other side is your choice; would you be found in
   Christ, and know the power of his resurrection; would you taste the
   powers of the world to come, and find the continual influences of the
   triune God, feeding and keeping up his divine life in your triune soul,
   you must give up all for that one will, and one hunger, which keeps the
   angels of God in the full feasts, of ever new, and never-ceasing
   delights in the nameless, boundless riches of eternity.

   [Ltrs-5-22] Think it not too hard, or too severe a restraint, to have
   but one will, and one hunger; it is no harder a restraint, than to be
   kept from all that can bring forth pain, and sorrow to your soul; no
   greater severity, than to be excluded from every place, but the kingdom
   of God. For to have but this one will, and one hunger, is to have every
   evil of life, and all enemies put under your feet. It is to have done
   with everything, that can defile, betray, disappoint, or hurt that
   eternal nature, which must have its life within you. On the other hand,
   everything that is not the effect and fruit of this one will, and one
   hunger, must sooner or later, be torn from you with the utmost smart,
   or become food for that gnawing worm, which dieth not.

   [Ltrs-5-23] Do you ask, how you are to come at this one will, and one
   hunger, I refer you to no power of your own, and yet refer you to that
   which is within yourself.

   [Ltrs-5-24] Angels in heaven, are not good and happy by anything they
   can do to themselves, but solely by that which is done to them. Now
   that Holy Spirit, which does God's will in heaven, and is the goodness
   and happiness of all its inhabitants, that same Spirit is every man's
   portion upon earth, and the gift of God within him. It is but lost
   labor, to strive by any power of your reason, or self-activity, to work
   up this one will and one hunger within you, or to kindle the true
   ardency of a divine desire, by anything that your natural man can do.
   This is as impossible, as for fallen Adam to have been his own
   redeemer, or a dead man to give life to himself. The one will, and one
   hunger which alone can eat the true nourishment of the divine life, is
   nothing else but the divine nature within you, which died in Adam no
   other death, but that of being suppressed and buried for a while, under
   a load and multiplicity of earthly wills.

   [Ltrs-5-25] Hence it is, that nothing can put an end to this
   multiplicity of wills in fallen man, which is his death to God, nothing
   can be the resurrection of the divine nature within him, which is his
   only salvation, but the CROSS of Christ, not that wooden cross, on
   which he was crucified, but that cross on which he was crucified
   through the whole course of his life in the flesh. It is our fellowship
   with him on this cross, through the whole course of our lives, that is
   our union with him, it alone gives power to the divine nature within
   us, to arise out of its death, and breathe again in us, in one will,
   and one hunger after nothing but God.

   [Ltrs-5-26] To be like-minded with Christ, is to live in every
   contrariety to self, the world, the flesh, and the devil, as he did;
   this is our belonging to him, our being one with him, having life from
   him, and washing our robes in the blood of the Lamb. For then, and then
   only are we washed, and cleansed by his blood, when we drink his blood,
   and we drink his blood, when we willingly drink of the cup that he
   drank of.

   [Ltrs-5-27] Again, not to be like-minded with Christ, is to be
   separated from him. To have another mind than he had, is to be in the
   state of those, who crucified him. Such as the redeemer was, such are
   they that are redeemed. As Adam was, such are they that are born of
   him. Life from Adam, and life from Christ, is the one single thing,
   that makes the one our destroyer, the other our redeemer. But to have
   done, cast not about in your mind, how you are to have the one will,
   and one hunger, which is always eating at God's table, and continually
   fed with the bread of life; the thing is already done to your hands. "I
   am the way, the truth, and the life," saith Christ, the same as if he
   had said, the way is nowhere, the truth is nowhere, the life is
   nowhere, but in me. What room therefore for any learned contrivances,
   or further enquiry about the matter? Follow Christ in the denial of all
   the wills of self, and then all is put away that separates you from
   God: the heaven-born new creature will come to life in you, which alone
   knows, and enjoys the things of God, and has his daily food of gladness
   in that manifold BLESSED, and BLESSED, which Christ preached on the
   mount.

   [Ltrs-5-28] Tell me then no more of your new skill in Hebrew words, of
   your Paris editions of all the ancient fathers, your complete
   collection of the councils, commentators, and church historians,. Did
   Christ mean anything like this, when he said, "I am the way, the truth
   and the life"? Did the apostle mean anything like this, when he said,
   "No man can call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost"? Great, good, and
   divine teachers, you say, were many of the fathers: I say nothing to
   it, but that much more great, good, and divine is he, who is always
   teaching within you, ever standing and knocking at the door of your
   heart, with the words of eternal life.

   [Ltrs-5-29] You perhaps may ask, why I go on writing books myself, if
   there is but one true, and divine teacher? I answer, though there is
   but one bridegroom, that can furnish the blessing of the marriage
   feast, yet his servants are sent out to invite the guests. This is the
   unalterable difference between Christ's teaching, and the teaching of
   those, who only publish the glad tidings of him. They are not the
   bridegroom, and therefore have not the bridegroom's voice. They are not
   the light, but only sent to bear witness of it. And as the Baptist
   said, "He must increase, but I must decrease"; so every faithful
   teacher saith of his doctrine, it must decrease, and end, as soon as it
   has led to the true teacher.

   [Ltrs-5-30] All that I have written for near thirty years, has been
   only to show, that we have no master but Christ, nor can have any
   living divine knowledge, but from his holy nature born and revealed in
   us. Not a word in favor of Jacob Behmen, but because, above every
   writer in the world, he has made all that is found in the kingdom of
   grace, and the kingdom of nature, to be one continual demonstration,
   that dying to self, to be born again of Christ, is the one only
   possible salvation of the sons of fallen Adam.

   [Ltrs-5-31] But I will have done, as soon as I have given you a little
   piece of history, which your friend Academicus, has given of himself:
   "When I had," says he, "taken my degrees in the university, I consulted
   several great divines to put me in a method of studying divinity. It
   would take up near half a day to tell you the work, which my learned
   friends cut out for me. One told me, that Hebrew words are all; that
   they must be read without points, and then the Old Testament is an
   opened book. He recommended to me a cart load of lexicons, critics, and
   commentators upon the Hebrew Bible. Another tells me, the Greek Bible
   is the best, that it corrects the Hebrew in many places, and refers me
   to a large number of books learnedly writ in defense of it. Another
   tells me that church history is the main matter, that I must begin with
   the first fathers, and follow them through every age, not forgetting to
   take the lives of the Roman emperors along with me, as striking great
   light into the state of the church in their times. Then I must have
   recourse to all the councils held, and the canons made in every age:
   which would enable me to see with my own eyes, the very great
   corruptions of the Council of Trent. Another, who is not very fond of
   ancient matters, but wholly bent upon rational Christianity, tells me,
   I need go no higher than the reformation; that Calvin and Cranmer were
   very great men; that Chillingworth and Locke ought always to lie upon
   my table; that I must get an entire set of those learned volumes wrote
   against popery in King James's reign; and also be well versed in all
   the discourses, which Mr. Boyle's, and Lady Moyer's lectures have
   produced; and then, says he, you will be a match for our greatest
   enemies, which are popish priests, and modern deists. My tutor is very
   liturgical; he desired me, of all things, to get all the collections,
   that I can, of the ancient liturgies, and all the authors that treat of
   such matters, who, says he, are very learned and very numerous. He has
   been many years making observations upon them, and is now clear, as to
   the time, when certain little particles got entrance into the
   liturgies, and others were by degrees dropped. He has a friend abroad
   in search of ancient mss. liturgies; for by the by, said he, at
   parting, I have some suspicion, that our sacrament of the Lord's Supper
   is essentially defective, for want of having a little water mixed with
   the wine. Another learned friend told me, that the Clementine
   Constitution is the book of books; and that all that lies loose, and
   scattered in the New Testament, stands there in its true order and
   form. And though he will not say, that Dr. Clarke, and Mr. Whiston, are
   in the right, yet it might be useful to me to read all the Arian and
   Socinian writers, provided I stood upon my guard, and did it with
   caution. The last person I consulted, advised me to get all the
   histories of the rise and progress of heresies, and of the lives and
   characters of heretics. These histories, he said, contract the matter,
   bring truth and error close in view; and I should find all that
   collected in a few pages, which would have cost me some years to get
   together. He also desired me to be well versed in all the casuistical
   writers, and chief schoolmen, for they debate matters to the bottom,
   dissect every virtue, and every vice, and show how near they may come
   together without touching. And this knowledge, he said, might be very
   useful, when I came to be a parish priest.

   [Ltrs-5-32] "Following the advice of all these counselors, as well as I
   could, I lighted my candle early in the morning, and put it out late at
   night. In this labor I had been sweating for some years, till Rusticus,
   at my first acquaintance with him, seeing my way of life, said to me,
   had you lived about seventeen hundred years ago, you had stood just in
   the same place, as I stand now. I cannot read, and therefore, says he,
   all these hundreds of thousands of doctrine and disputing books, which
   these seventeen hundred years have produced, stand not in my way; they
   are the same thing to me, as if they had never been. And had you lived
   at the time mentioned, you had just escaped them all, as I do now,
   because, though you are a very good reader, there were then none of
   them to be read. Could you therefore be content to be one of the
   primitive Christians, who were as good as any that have been since, you
   may spare all this labor. It is not easy for me, says Academicus, to
   tell you how much good I received from this simple instruction of
   honest Master Rusticus. What project was it, to be grasping after the
   knowledge of all the opinions, doctrines, disputes, heresies, schisms,
   which seventeen hundred years had brought forth, through all the extent
   of the Christian world! What project this, in order to be a divine,
   that is, in order to bear true witness to the power of Christ, as a
   deliverer from the evil of earthly flesh and blood, and death and hell,
   and a raiser of a new birth and life from above! For as this is the
   divine work of Christ, so he only is a true and able divine that can
   bear a faithful testimony to this divine work of Christ. How easy was
   it for me to have seen, that all this labyrinth of learned enquiry,
   into such a dark, thorny wilderness of notions, facts, and opinions,
   could signify no more to me now, to my own salvation, to my interest in
   Christ, and obtaining the Holy Spirit of God, than if I had lived
   before it had any beginning. But the blind appetite of learning, gave
   me no leisure to apprehend so plain a truth. Books of divinity indeed,
   I have not done with, but will esteem none to be such, but those that
   make known to my heart, the inward power and redemption of Jesus
   Christ. Nor will I seek for anything even from such books, but that
   which I ask of God in prayer, viz., how better to know, more to abhor,
   and resist the evil that is in my own nature, and how to obtain a
   supernatural birth of the divine life brought forth within me. All
   besides this is pushpin." {Way to Divine Knowledge.}

   God be with you.

   March 5, 1753.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter VI.

   In Answer to a Question.

   [Ltrs-6-1] You tell me, sir, that after a twenty years' zeal, and labor
   in matters of religion, it has turned to so little account, that you
   are forced, most earnestly to desire a speedy answer to this question,
   Where you shall go, or what you shall do, to be in the truth?

   [Ltrs-6-2] Let me first premise thus much. Every man in his fallen
   state, has all that in him, though in a state of death, and hiddenness,
   which was the living glory, perfection of the first created man. Just
   as the root of the lily, in the winter's cold, hath all that in it,
   though as in a state of death, which was the glory and beauty of the
   summer's flower. What is hidden in the root of the lily, lies no longer
   in its seeming death, than till the spring-sun calls forth its life.
   Now, one divine dispensation after another, is to do that same to the
   fallen soul, which the spring, and daily advancing sun does to the lily
   root; namely, to call it out of its state of death, and make something
   of its first glory come to life, and spring forth out of it. Hence it
   is that the kingdom of God (which was that to which Adam died) is like
   to treasure hid in a field; and again, the kingdom of God is within
   you. But this could not be true, unless all that glory, which Adam
   lost, was still preserved, as a seed, or shut-up root of life within
   him: and all this, through the mercy, and free grace of God, who
   foreseeing the fall of Adam, willed, that a seed of his first glory,
   should be preserved in him; declared, and made known to him, by a seed
   of the woman, which through the Word made flesh, should, in spite of
   death and hell, grow up to the fullness of the stature in Christ Jesus.

   [Ltrs-6-3] And as the kingdom of heaven, is every man's treasure, as
   surely within him, as his own soul, so that which hides, and covers it
   from us, is that awakened, bestial life, which is called Adam in us,
   and in which, the immortal soul, that was born for heaven, is wedded to
   the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
   and subject to the workings of that satanical nature, which our Lord
   calls the prince of this world. And thus it is, that every man comes
   into this world in a twofold state; Adam and Christ are both born in
   him. And if this was not the state of man, nothing within you, would,
   or could ask, as you have done, or have any anxiety after the truth.
   And your being either led from this true knowledge of your state, or
   having never been sensible of it, is the reason of your having made so
   many religious inquiries in vain, both from yourself, and other people.
   For nothing can tell you the truth, or establish you in a just and
   solid discernment of right from wrong, in doctrines, opinions, and
   practices of religion, but this home knowledge of yourself, namely,
   that Christ and Adam, are not only both of them essentially within you,
   but the whole of you; that nothing is life or salvation, but that,
   which is the life and growth of Christ in you, and that all that is
   done from the life, the power and natural capacity of the Adamical
   nature, is heathenish, is mere vanity and death, however gloriously set
   forth by the natural gifts of wit and learning.

   [Ltrs-6-4] Religion has no good in it, but as it is the revival, and
   quickening of that divine nature, which your first father had from God,
   and nothing can revive it, but that which first created it. God is no
   otherwise your God, but as he is the God of your life, manifested in
   it; and he can be no otherwise the God of your life, but as his Spirit
   is living within you. Satan is no other way knowable by you, or can
   have any other fellowship with you, but as his evil spirit works, and
   manifests itself along with the workings of your own spirit. "Resist
   the devil, and he will flee from you"; but he is nowhere to be
   resisted, but as a working spirit within you, therefore to resist the
   devil, is to turn from the evil thoughts, and motions that arise within
   you. "Turn to God, and he will turn to you": but God is an universal
   Spirit, which you cannot locally turn to, or from; therefore to turn to
   God, is to cleave to those good thoughts and motions which proceed from
   his Holy Spirit, dwelling and working in you. This is the God of your
   life, to whom you are to adhere, listen, and attend, and this is your
   worshipping him in spirit and truth. And that is the devil that goeth
   about as a roaring lion, who has no voice but that which he speaks
   within you. Therefore, my friend, be at home, and keep close to that
   which passes within you, for be it what it will, whether it be a good,
   in which you delight, or an evil, at which you grieve, you could have
   neither the one, nor the other, but because a holy God of light and
   love is essentially dwelling in you. Seek therefore for no other road,
   nor call anything the way to God, but solely that, which is {sic, his?}
   eternal, all-creating WORD, and SPIRIT worketh within you. For could
   anything else have been man's way to God, the WORD had not been made
   flesh.

   [Ltrs-6-5] The last words in your question, viz., to be in the truth,
   are well expressed, for to be in the truth, is the finished state of
   man returning to God, thus declared by Christ himself, "Ye shall know
   the truth, and the truth shall make you free"; free from the blindness
   and delusion of your own natural reason, and free from forms, doctrines
   and opinions, which others would impose upon you. To be in truth, is to
   be, where the first holy man was, when he came forth in the image and
   likeness of God. When he lost paradise, he lost the truth; and all that
   he felt, knew, saw, loved, and liked of the earthly, bestial world,
   into which he was fallen, was but mere separation from God, a veil upon
   his heart, and scales upon his eyes. Nothing of his first truth could
   be spoken of to him, even by God himself, but under the veil of earthly
   things, types, and shadows. The Law was given by Moses; but Moses had a
   veil upon his face, the Law was a veil, prophecy was a veil, Christ
   crucified was a veil, and all was a veil, till grace and truth came by
   Jesus Christ, in the POWER of his HOLY SPIRIT. Therefore to be in the
   truth, as it is in Jesus, is to be come from under the veil, to have
   passed through all those dispensations, which would never have begun,
   but that they might end in a Christ spiritually revealed, and
   essentially formed in the soul. So that now, in this last dispensation
   of God, which is the first truth itself restored, nothing is to be
   thought of, trusted to, or sought after, but God's immediate, continual
   working in the soul, by his Holy Spirit. This, sir, is he where you are
   to go, and the what you are to do, to be in the truth. For the truth as
   it is in Jesus, is nothing else but Christ come in the Spirit, and his
   coming in the Spirit, is nothing else but the first lost life of God,
   quickened, and revealed again in the soul. Everything short of this,
   has only the nature of outward type and figure, which in its best
   state, is only for a time. If therefore you look to anything but the
   Spirit, seek to any power, but that of the Spirit, expect Christ to be
   your savior, any other way, than as he is spiritually born in you, you
   go back from the grace and truth, which came by Jesus, and can at best
   be only a legal Jew, or a self- righteous Pharisee; there is not
   getting further than these states, but by being born of the Spirit,
   living by the Spirit, as his child, his instrument, and holy temple, in
   which he dwells, and works all his good pleasure. Drop this full
   adherence to, and dependence upon the Spirit, act as in your own
   sphere, be something of yourself, and through your own wisdom, and
   then, though all that you say, or do, is with the outward words of the
   spiritual gospel, and in the outward practices of the spiritual
   apostles, yet for all this, you are but there, where those were, who
   worshipped God with the blood of bulls and goats; for (N.B.) nothing
   but the Spirit of God can worship God in spirit and in truth.

   [Ltrs-6-6] But you will perhaps say, that you are still but where you
   were, because you know not how to find the continual guidance of the
   Holy Spirit. If you know how to find your own thoughts, you need not be
   at a loss to find the Spirit of God. For you have not a thought within
   you, but is either from the good of the Spirit, or from the evil of the
   flesh. Now the good and the evil that are within you, and always more
   or less sensible by turns, do each of them teach you the same work and
   presence of the Spirit of God. For the good, could not appear as good,
   nor the evil be felt as evil, but because the immediate working of the
   Spirit of God creates, or manifests this difference between them, and
   therefore be in what state you will, the power of God's Spirit within
   you, equally manifests itself to you; and to find the immediate,
   continual, essential working of the Spirit of God within you, you need
   only know what good, and evil are felt within you. For all the good
   that is in any thought or desire, is so much of God within you, and
   whilst you adhere to, and follow a good thought, you follow, or are led
   by the Spirit of God. And on the other hand all that is selfish and
   wicked in thought, or affection, is so much of the spirit of satan
   within you, which would not be known, or felt, as evil, but because it
   is contrary to the immediate, continual working of the Spirit of God
   within you. Turn therefore inwards, and all that is within you, will
   demonstrate to you, the presence, and power of God in your soul, and
   make you find, and feel it, with the same certainty, as you find and
   feel your own thoughts. And what is best of all, by thus doing, you
   will never be without a living sense of the immediate guidance and
   inspiration of the Holy Spirit, always equal to your dependence upon
   it, always leading you from strength to strength in your inward man,
   till all your knowledge of good and evil, is become nothing else, but a
   mere love of the one, and mere aversion to the other. For the one work
   of the Spirit of God, is to distinguish the good, and evil, that is
   within you, not as in notion, but by affection; and when you are wholly
   given up to this new-creating work of God, so as to stay your mind upon
   it, abide with it, and expect all from it. This, my friend, will be
   your returning to the rock, from whence you were hewn, your drinking at
   the fountain of living water, your walking with God, your living by
   faith, your putting on Christ, your continual hearing the WORD of God,
   your eating the bread that came down from heaven, your supping with
   Christ, and following the Lamb wherever he goeth.

   [Ltrs-6-7] For all these seeming different things, will be found in
   every man, according to his measure, who is wholly given up to, and
   depending upon the blessed work of God's Spirit in his soul.

   [Ltrs-6-8] But your mistake, and that of most Christians, lies in this;
   you would be good by some outward means, you would have methods,
   opinions, forms, and ordinances of religion, alter and raise your
   fallen nature, and create in you a new heart, and a new spirit, that is
   to say, you would be good in a way that is altogether impossible, for
   goodness cannot be brought into you from without, much less by anything
   that is creaturely, or the action of man; this is as impossible, as for
   the flesh to sanctify the spirit, or for things temporal, to give life
   to things that are eternal.

   [Ltrs-6-9] The image and likeness of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
   in every man, antecedent to every outward work, or action that can
   proceed from him: it is God thus within him, that is the sole cause
   that anything can be called godly, that is done, observed, or practiced
   by him. If it were not so, man would only have his being from God, but
   his goodness from himself.

   [Ltrs-6-10] All man's outward good works, are only like his outward
   good words; he is not good, because he is frequent in the use of them,
   they bring no goodness into him, nor are of any worth in themselves,
   but as a good, and godly spirit speaks forth itself in the sound of
   them. This is the case of every outward, creaturely thing, or work of
   man, be it of what kind it will, either hearing, praying, singing or
   preaching, or practicing any outward rules, and observances; they have
   only the goodness of the outward Jew, nay, are as vain, as sounding
   brass, and tinkling cymbals, unless they be solely the work, and fruits
   of the Spirit of God: for the divine nature, is that alone, which can
   be the power to any good work, either in man, or angel.

   [Ltrs-6-11] When a man, first finds himself stirred up with religious
   zeal, what does he generally do? He turns all his thoughts outwards, he
   runs after this, or that man, he is at the beck of every new opinion,
   and thinks only of finding the truth, by resting in this, or that
   method, or society of Christians. Could he find a man, that did not
   want to have him of his party, and opinion, that turned him from
   himself, and the teaching of man, to a God, not as historically read in
   books, or preached of in this, or that society, but to a God
   essentially living and working in every soul, him he might call a man
   of God; as leading him from himself to God, as saving him from many
   vain wanderings, from fruitless searchings into a Council of Trent, a
   Synod of Dort, and Augsberg Confession, an Assembly's catechism, or a
   Thirty- nine Articles. For had he an hundred articles, if they were
   anything else but a hundred calls to Christ come in the Spirit, to a
   God within him, as the only possible light, and teacher of his mind, it
   would be a hundred times better for him, to be without them. For all
   man's blindness and misery lies in this, that he has lost the knowledge
   of God, as essentially living within him, and by falling under the
   power of an earthly, bestial life, thinks only of God, as living in
   some other world, and so seeks only by notions, to set up an image of
   an absent God, instead of worshipping the God of life and power, in
   whom he lives, moves, and has his being. Whoever therefore teaches you
   to expect great things from this, or that sort of opinions, or calls
   you to anything as saving, and redeeming, but the manifestation of God
   in your own soul, through a birth of the holy nature of Christ within
   you is totally ignorant of the whole nature, both of the fall, and the
   redemption of man. For the first is nothing else, or less, than a death
   to the divine life, or Christlike nature, which lived in the first man;
   and the other, is nothing else, but Christ new-born, formed, and
   revealed again in man, as he was at the first. These two great truths
   are the most strongly asserted by Christ, saying, "If any man will be
   my disciple, let him deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow
   me." Let him "deny himself," is the fullest declaration, and highest
   proof, that he has lost his first divine and heavenly nature, that he
   is not that self, which came first from God, or he could not be called
   to deny it. Say, if you will, that he has not lost that first heavenly
   life in God, and then you must say, that our Lord calls him to deny,
   crucify, and renounce that holy, and Godlike self, which was the first
   gift of God to him.

   [Ltrs-6-12] To read whole libraries on these matters, is only to be
   bewildered in the strife of fictions, and contradictions about them.
   But to read this one single line of Christ, is to be led into the open,
   full truth of the whole nature, both of the fall, and redemption. And
   indeed, if we were but freed from the Babel of opinions, which have so
   long confounded the first truths of the gospels, it would be plain from
   every part of it, that nothing could be called the fall of man but his
   loss of the divine life, or nature, nor anything be called his
   redemption, or the real means of it, but solely that, which God is, and
   does in him. For what can be a good, or work good in man, but God, or
   the divine nature in him? All the divine truths, that ever came from
   God, speak only to the pearl of the divine nature, that is hidden in
   our earthly field of flesh and blood, because nothing else wants them,
   or has any capacity to receive them; that which is divine, can only
   receive the divine things from God. And thence it is, that unless a
   "man be born again from above, it is not possible for him to see, or
   enter into the kingdom of God," that is, the divine life must arise
   again, in the power of a new birth, or there is nothing in fallen man,
   that can partake of the kingdom of God. And the reason is, because "the
   kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost,"
   and therefore not possible to be anywhere, but where it proceeds from
   the Holy Ghost. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
   with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength." Now
   what is this God, that you are thus to love? Is it some abstract idea,
   that learned men have helped you to form of him? No such thing. This
   would be but a poor fiction of God, and a poor fiction of love. God is
   all good, the only good, and there is nothing good besides him,
   therefore to love God with all your heart, is to love all goodness, and
   to love nothing else but goodness, and then, and only then, do you love
   God with all your heart, and soul, and strength. But now, to what
   purpose could this precept of such a love be given to man, unless he
   essentially partook of the divine nature? For to be in heart, and soul,
   and spirit, all love of God, and yet have nothing of the nature of God
   within you, is surely too absurd for anyone to believe. So sure
   therefore as this precept came from truth itself, so sure is it, that
   every man (however loath to hear of anything but pleasures, and
   enjoyments in this vain shadow of a life) has yet a divine nature
   concealed within him, which, when suffered to hear the calls of God,
   will know the voice of its heavenly Father, and long to do his will on
   earth, as it is done in heaven.

   [Ltrs-6-13] The conclusion then, is this, if to love God with your
   whole heart, and soul, is to love all goodness, and nothing else but
   goodness; and if all that is done without this love, whether in
   religious duties, of common life, is but mere separation from God, then
   it must be the grossest blindness, to believe you can have any love of
   God, or goodness in any duties you perform, any further, or in any
   other degree, than as the eternal, Holy Spirit of God, lives and loves
   in you.

   [Ltrs-6-14] Again, to see the divinity of man's original, you need only
   read these words: "Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is
   perfect." For what could man have to do with the perfection of God, as
   the rule of his life, unless the truth and reality of the divine nature
   was in him? Could there be any reasonableness in this precept, or any
   fitness to call us to be good, as God is good, unless there was that in
   us, which is in God? Or to call us to the perfection of an heavenly
   Father, if we were not the real children of his heavenly nature? Might
   it not be as well, to bid the heavy stone to fly, as its flying father
   the eagle doth?

   [Ltrs-6-15] But this precept from the lip of truth, is another full
   proof, that by the fall, a death, or suppression is brought upon our
   first divine life, and also that it is yet in a state, capable of being
   revived again, in us. For if it was not in a state of death, or
   suppressed in us, there could be no need of calling us to live
   according to it; for every being naturally acts according to the life,
   that is manifested in it. Nor could we be called to be heavenly, but
   because the heavenly nature has its seed in our soul in a readiness to
   come to life in us.

   [Ltrs-6-16] Lastly, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self," is
   another full proof, that God is in us of a truth, and that the Holy
   Spirit hath as certainly, an essential birth within us, as the spirit
   of this world hath. For this precept might as well be given to a fox,
   as to a man, if man had not something quite supernatural in him. For
   mere nature, and natural creature, is nothing else, but mere self, and
   can work nothing but to, and for itself. And this, not through any
   corruption, or depravity of nature, but because it is nature's best
   state, and it can be nothing else, either in man, or beast.

   [Ltrs-6-17] "I say unto you, love your enemies, do good to them that
   hate you, pray for them that despitefully use and persecute you." Every
   word here is demonstration, that nothing but the new birth from above,
   can be a Christian. There is no other nature, or spirit that can
   breathe forth this universal love and benevolence, but that same, which
   laying aside its own glory, came down from heaven, to forgive, to love,
   to save, and die for a whole world of enemies and sinners.

   [Ltrs-6-18] This is the Spirit of Christ, that must as essentially live
   and breathe in you, as it did in him, or all exhortations, to do as he
   did, to walk as he walked, are but in vain. The natural man is in full
   separation from this holiness of life, and though he had more wisdom of
   words, more depth of literature, than was in Cicero, or Aristotle, yet
   would he have as much to die to, as the grossest publican, or vainest
   Pharisee, before he could be in Christ, a new creature. For the highest
   improved natural abilities, can as well ascend into heaven, or clothe
   flesh and blood with immortality, as make a man like-minded with Christ
   in any one divine virtue. And that for this one reason, because God,
   and divine goodness, are inseparable.

   [Ltrs-6-19] No precept of the gospel, supposes man to have any power to
   effect it, or calls you to any natural ability, or wisdom of your own
   to comply with it. Christ and his apostles called no man, to overcome
   the corruption and blindness of fallen nature, by learned cultivation
   of the mind. The wisdom of the learned world, was the same pitiable
   foolishness with them, as the grossest ignorance. By them, they only
   stand thus distinguished, the one brings forth a publican which is
   often converted to Christ, the other a Pharisee, that for the most
   part, condemns him to be crucified. They (Christ and his apostles)
   taught nothing but death, and denial to all self, and the impossibility
   of having any one divine temper, but through faith, and hope of a new
   nature, not "born of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
   will of man, but of God."

   [Ltrs-6-20] To speak of the operation of the Holy Spirit, as only an
   assistance, or an occasional assistance, is as short of the truth, as
   to say, that Christ shall only assist the resurrection, of our bodies.
   For not a spark of any divine virtue can arise up in us, but what must
   wholly and solely be called forth, by that same power, which alone can
   call our dead bodies, out of the dust and darkness of the grave.

   [Ltrs-6-21] If you turn to your own strength, to have Christian piety,
   and goodness; or are so deceived, as to think, that learning, or
   logical abilities, critical acuteness, skill in languages, church-
   systems, rules and orders, articles and opinions, are to do that for
   you, which the Spirit of Christ did, and only could do for the first
   Christians; your diligent reading the history of the gospel, will leave
   you as poor, and empty and dead to the divine life, as if you had been
   only a diligent reader of the history of all the religions in the
   world. But if all that you trust to, long after, and depend upon, is
   that Holy Spirit, which alone made the scripture-saints able to call
   Jesus Lord; if this be your one faith, and one hope, the divine life,
   which died in Adam, will find itself alive again in Christ Jesus. And
   be assured, that nothing but this new birth, can be the gospel
   Christian, because nothing else can possibly love, like, do, and be
   that, which Christ preached in his divine sermon on the mount. And be
   assured also, that when the Spirit of Christ, is the spirit that ruleth
   in you, there will be no hard sayings in the gospel; but all that the
   heavenly Christ taught in the flesh, will be as meat and drink to you,
   and you will have no joy, but in walking, as he walked, in saying,
   loving, and doing, that which he said, loved, and did. And indeed, how
   can it be otherwise? How can notions, doctrines, and opinions about
   Christ, what he was, and did, make you in him a new creature? Can
   anyone be made a Samson, or a Solomon, by being well versed in the
   history of what they were, said or did?

   [Ltrs-6-22] Ask then, my friend, no more, where you shall go, or what
   you shall do, to be in the truth; for you can have the truth, nowhere,
   but in Jesus, nor in him, any further, than as his whole nature, and
   Spirit is born within you.

   Farewell.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter VII.

   To a Person of Quality.

   Madam,

   [Ltrs-7-1] I had the honor of your Ladyship's letter, and no want of
   true regard for your Ladyship, or the subject, has been the occasion of
   my delaying this answer so long. I am in some hopes, that the person
   that wanted it, may, by this time, have found something better than it,
   by being left to God and himself, and that I have done more for him by
   my silence, than I should have done by my writing.

   [Ltrs-7-2] To be always tampering with physicians, upon every occasion,
   is the way to lose all natural soundness of health; and to be
   continually talking, and enquiring about the nature of distempers, and
   the powers of medicines, for the head, the heart, the spirits, and
   nerves, is the way to lose all true judgment, either of our own
   sickness or health.

   [Ltrs-7-3] It is much the same, with regard to our spiritual health and
   constitution, we do much hurt to it, by running after spiritual advice
   on every occasion, and wanting the help of some human prescription, for
   every fear, scruple, or notion, that starts up in our minds, and to
   weaken the true strength of our spiritual constitution, which if left
   to itself, would do all that we want to have done.

   [Ltrs-7-4] If it be asked, What this soundness of our spiritual
   constitution is? It may be answered that it is a state or habit of such
   humble, total resignation of ourselves to God, as by faith, and hope
   expects all from him alone. This is the health, and strength of our
   spiritual constitution, and nothing is health in the soul, but this
   state.

   [Ltrs-7-5] And if we left all our incidental, accidental, sickly
   notions, and imaginations that so frequently attack our minds, if we
   left them to be overcome, and done away by the strength of our
   spiritual constitution, (N.B.) we should never fail of success.

   [Ltrs-7-6] How this pious and worthy person came to think of leaving
   his parish, or what scruples occasioned his doubting, whether he should
   stay in it, I cannot guess, and therefore can say nothing to them. I
   should have thought, that such a change as he found in himself, his
   parish, and neighborhood, should have everything in it, that could
   render his situation comfortable to him.

   [Ltrs-7-7] The greatest danger that new converts are liable to,
   especially if they are young, arises from their conceiving something
   great of their conversion, and that great things are to follow from it.
   Hence they are taken up too much with themselves, and the supposed
   designs of God upon them. They enter into reasonings, and conjectures
   how they shall be, and do something extraordinary, and so lose that
   simplicity of heart, which should think of nothing but of dying to
   self, that the Spirit of God might have time and place to create, and
   form all that is wanting in their inward man.

   [Ltrs-7-8] There is nothing more plain and simple than the way of
   religion, if self is but kept out of it; and all the perplexities, and
   scruples which pious persons meet with, chiefly arise from some idea
   they have formed, of a progress they ought to make in order to be that,
   which self would be. But piety makes little progress till it has no
   schemes of its own, no thoughts or contrivances to be anything, but a
   naked penitent, left wholly, and solely in faith and hope to the divine
   goodness. Every contrivance for human help, from this, or that, be it
   what it will, is at best but dropping some degree, of that fullness of
   faith and hope, and dependence upon God, which only is, and only can be
   our way of finding him, to be the strength and God of our life.

   [Ltrs-7-9] Nothing but the life of God, opened by his Holy Spirit
   within us, can be the renewal of our souls, and we shall want this
   renewal no longer, than whilst we are seeking it in something, that is
   not God. The faith that ascribes all to God, and expects all from him,
   cannot be disappointed.

   [Ltrs-7-10] Nothing could hinder the centurion from having, that which
   he asked of Christ, because his heart could thus speak, "Lord I am not
   worthy, that thou shouldest come under my roof, speak the word only,
   and my servant shall be healed."

   [Ltrs-7-11] He that has this sense of himself, and this faith in God,
   is in the truth and perfection of religion: if we knew the goodness of
   this state, we should be always content with the simplicity of it, and
   let everything else come, and go, as it would; all is well and safe, so
   long as the heart rests all upon God alone. Your Ladyship says, this
   worthy person fears his zeal, and yet dreads the abatement of it. It
   would be better, not to indulge a thought about his own zeal, or to
   speak a word of it to any person. For if it is godly zeal, it is no
   more his than it is mine, nor comes any more from him, than it does
   from me; and therefore when he thinks, or speaks of it as his, or as
   something he would be glad to keep in its right state, it is giving way
   to delusion, both with regard to himself, and the nature of true zeal:
   for as the "wind bloweth where it listeth," so it is with him, who is
   driven by true zeal.

   [Ltrs-7-12] I do not wonder, that his audience is so much affected, and
   increased, since he has preached up the doctrine of regeneration
   amongst them. All other preaching passes away as a tale that is told,
   and indeed is nothing better, till it enters into the things within
   man, brings him to a sensibility of the state of his heart, and its
   want of God's Holy Spirit therein.

   [Ltrs-7-13] How far it may be right for him to comply with their
   request of visiting, reading, and expounding the scripture to them, I
   pretend not to say; but only thus much, that it seems to be right to be
   in no anxiety about it, or to put himself under any stated rules about
   it, but leave it to be done, as he finds himself inwardly stirred up to
   it, and able out of the abundance of his heart to perform it.

   [Ltrs-7-14] Expounding the scriptures, has a fine sound, but I should
   rather advise such persons, to read only in love, and simplicity of
   heart, such scriptures as need no expounder, but their own heart turned
   to God. Persons who are come to this inward conviction, that they must
   live, and die, under the power of satan, and of fallen nature, unless
   by a fullness of faith in Christ, they be born again from above, have
   nothing more to enquire about, where, or how Christ is to be found.

   [Ltrs-7-15] They have no other use to make of the scripture, but that
   of being refreshed, and delighted with such passages, as turn, and stir
   up the heart, to a fullness of faith, love, and resignation to the
   blessed guidance, and operation of the Holy Spirit of God.

   January 10, 1754.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter VIII.

   To the Same.

   Madam,

   [Ltrs-8-1] Mr. Wesley's letter did not at all disappoint me. I had no
   expectation of seeing a better, either with regard to the substance, or
   to the style, and manner of it. If I knew of any kind of answer, that
   would do him any real good, I should advise it. But to answer it for
   the good of anyone else, seems to be quite needless. It does not admit
   of a serious answer, because there is nothing substantial or properly
   argumentative in it. And to answer it in the way of ridicule, is what I
   cannot come into, being full as averse to make a mock of him in a
   religious garb, as to the doing the greatest bodily injury to his
   person. How far he has answered, or does answer any good ends of
   providence, or is an instrument in the hands of God, is a matter I
   meddle not with; only wishing, that every appearance of good, every
   stirring of zeal, under whatever form it appears, whether in knowledge,
   or ignorance, in wisdom, or weakness, may be directed, and blessed by
   God, to the best ends it is capable of.

   [Ltrs-8-2] As to myself, I seem to myself to have no other part to act,
   nor any call to anything else, in this hurry, and struggle of zeal
   against zeal, in such a variety of forms, but only, and fully to assert
   the true ground, and largely open all the reasons, of that one inward
   regeneration, which is equally the one thing needful to every sect, and
   the one thing alone that can make every sect, or method, or outward
   form, not hurtful to those that adhere to it.

   [Ltrs-8-3] For every outward form, however specious or promising, will
   only help us to be carnally minded, till it is in some degree known, to
   have no other, or better nature, than that of the shell, which helps us
   to the kernel.

   [Ltrs-8-4] The doctrines I have published, are in their best state with
   regard to the reader, as they stand in my books, and will be less
   useful to him, when they are drawn into controversy. For this reason, I
   can lend no help to that.

   [Ltrs-8-5] This may perhaps seem to your Ladyship, as if I had too
   great an opinion of what I had done. And I believe, such a free way of
   speaking sometimes in conversation of my own books, may have been
   suspected of smelling too much of self- esteem. But I can with truth
   assure you, madam, that when I speak of the fullness and clearness of
   my own writings, I feel no other sentiments of self-sufficiency, than
   when I speak of the goodness of my own eyes. Nor do I know how to
   consider the one, more than the other, to be any merit of my own; and
   therefore when any man, great or little, contemns, reproaches, or
   asperses me, or my books, as void of sense, truth, and light; I feel no
   more inward uneasiness, or think myself any more hurt, than if he had
   only told the world, that my eyes were miserably bad, and I could
   scarce see to read, even with the best spectacles. And so have no
   desire controversially to defend the one, more than the other, but
   contentedly leave them both, to be their own proof of what they are.

   [Ltrs-8-6] I was once a kind of oracle with Mr. Wesley. I never
   suspected anything bad of him, or ever discovered any kind, or degree
   of falseness, or hypocrisy in him.

   [Ltrs-8-7] But during all the time of his intimacy with me, I judged
   him to be much under the power of his own spirit, which seemed to have
   the predominancy in every good thing, or way, that his zeal carried him
   to.

   [Ltrs-8-8] It was owing to his unwillingness, or inability to give up
   his own spirit, that he was forced into that false, and rash censure
   which he published in print against the mystics: As enemies to good
   works, and even tending to atheism. A censure so false, and regardless
   of right and wrong, as hardly anything can exceed it; which is to be
   found in a preface of his book of hymns. But no more of this.

   February 16, l756.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter IX.

   To the Same.

   Madam,

   [Ltrs-9-1] The passage in the letter from a pious and very excellent
   clergyman, as you style him, calls for no regard, either from your
   Ladyship, or me. More insignificant words cannot well be put together:
   "I think," says he, "Mr. Law has gone half a bow shot too far." If I
   have shot so far beyond, or beside the truth, he should have shown
   where, and why, and how. Without this, his words are but a random shot
   at nothing. His reason for this censure, is still worse, viz., "because
   I have touched the heart-string of all systematical divinity." As
   grievous a charge, as if he had said, that I had shook the very
   foundation of every Babel of every country. For not a system of
   divinity, since systems were in being, whether popish, or Protestant,
   deserves a better name.

   [Ltrs-9-2] His next reason is, "because it should not be touched
   without skill from above."

   [Ltrs-9-3] If this gentleman ever preaches from the pulpit, concerning
   the ways of God, and the doctrines of redemption, without skill from
   above, all he says, will be a whole bow-shot beside the matter.

   [Ltrs-9-4] If, therefore, in touching this point, I have touched that,
   which ought not to be touched without skill from above, I have taken no
   bolder a step, than he does, every time he mounts the pulpit, to give
   forth the doctrines of Christ.

   [Ltrs-9-5] His third reason is this, "I choose in my present ignorance,
   as touching the necessity and virtue of an outward atonement, to bow
   down before the awful subject."

   [Ltrs-9-6] But in truth, he should have said, I choose to bow down
   before the awful heart string of all systematical divinity, which
   resolves all the atonement into an infinite wrath, and vengeance,
   raised in the holy deity itself, and which would not be appeased, or
   satisfied by anything else, but the sacrifice of an infinite Son of
   God. It is by reason of his attachment to this heart string, or rather
   his having so constantly preached according to it, that he cannot bear
   a demonstration of the most glorious truth, that either heaven or earth
   can proclaim, viz., that God from eternity to eternity, is mere,
   unchangeable, and ever-overflowing love; and that nothing but this
   infinity of never- ceasing, never- changing love, gave the birth, the
   life, the sufferings, the death, resurrection, and ascension of Christ,
   for the salvation of all mankind; because in the whole possible nature
   of things, nothing else but this whole process of a God made man, could
   have any ability to extinguish the hell, and wrath of a fallen nature,
   and give man a second birth of such a life from above, as could for
   ever and ever, have union and communion with the unbeginning,
   never-ending, never-changing Trinity of love.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter X.

   To Mr. J. T.

   My dear worthy Friend,

   [Ltrs-10-1] Whom I much love and esteem, your letter, though full of
   complaints about the state of your heart, was very much according to my
   mind, and gives me great hopes, that God will carry on the good work he
   has begun in you, and lead you by his Holy Spirit, through all those
   difficulties, under which you at present labor.

   [Ltrs-10-2] The desire that you have, to be better than you find
   yourself at present, is God's call begun to be heard within you, and
   will make itself to be more heard within you, if you give but way to
   it, and reverence it as such; humbly believing that he that calls,
   will, and only can, help you to pay right and full obedience to it.

   [Ltrs-10-3] As to the advertisement in the public paper, it deserved no
   regard from you, or anyone else. It must have come, either from a very
   ignorant and weak friend, or from a very insignificant enemy to the
   writings of J. B. But be it as it will, it was not an object of your
   attention, nor could be of any use to you.

   [Ltrs-10-4] But to come to your own state, you seem to yourself to be
   all infatuation and stupidity, because your head, and your heart are so
   contrary, the one delighting in heavenly notions, the other governed by
   earthly passions, and pursuits. It is happy for you, that you know and
   acknowledge this: for only through this truth, through the full and
   deep perception of it, can you have any entrance, or so much as the
   beginning of an entrance into the liberty of the children of God. God
   is in this respect dealing with you, as he does with those, whose
   darkness is to be changed into light. Which can never be done, till you
   fully know (1) the real badness of your own heart, and (2) your utter
   inability to deliver yourself from it, by any sense, power, or activity
   of your own mind.

   [Ltrs-10-5] And were you in a better state, as to your own thinking,
   the matter would be worse with you. For the badness in your heart,
   though you had no sensibility of it, would still be there, and would
   only be concealed, to your much greater hurt. For there it certainly
   is, whether it be seen and found, or not, and sooner or later, must
   show itself in its full deformity, or the old man will never die the
   death which is due to him, and must be undergone, before the new man in
   Christ can be formed in us.

   [Ltrs-10-6] All that you complain of in your heart is common to man, as
   man. There is no heart that is without it. And this is the one ground,
   why every man, as such, however different in temper, complexion, or
   natural endowments from others, has one and the same full reason, and
   absolute necessity, of being born again from above.

   [Ltrs-10-7] Flesh and blood, and the spirit of this world, govern every
   spring in the heart of the natural man. And therefore you can never
   enough adore that ray of divine light, which breaking in upon your
   darkness, has discovered this to be the state of your heart, and raised
   only those faint wishes that you feel to be delivered from it.

   [Ltrs-10-8] For faint as they are, they have their degree of goodness
   in them, and as certainly proceed solely from the goodness of God
   working in your soul, as the first dawning of the morning, is solely
   from, and wrought by the same sun, which helps us to the noonday light.
   Firmly, therefore, believe this, as a certain truth, that the present
   sensibility of your incapacity for goodness, is to be cherished as a
   heavenly seed of life, as the blessed work of God in your soul.

   [Ltrs-10-9] Could you like anything in your own heart, or so much as
   fancy any good to be in it, or believe that you had any power of your
   own to embrace and follow the truth, this comfortable opinion, so far
   as it goes, would be your turning away from God and all goodness, and
   building iron walls of separation betwixt God and your soul.

   [Ltrs-10-10] For conversion to God, only then begins to be in truth,
   and reality, when we see nothing that can give us the least degree of
   faith, of hope, of trust, or comfort in anything, that we are of
   ourselves.

   [Ltrs-10-11] To see vanity of vanities in all outward things, to loath
   and abhor certain sins, is indeed something, but yet as nothing, in
   comparison of seeing and believing the vanity of vanities within us,
   and ourselves as utterly unable to take one single step in true
   goodness, as to add one cubit to our stature.

   [Ltrs-10-12] Under this conviction, the gate of life is opened to us.
   And therefore it is, that all the preparatory parts of religion, all
   the various proceedings of God either over our inward, or outward
   state, setting up, and pulling down, giving, and taking away, light,
   and darkness, comfort, and distress, as independently of us, as he
   makes the rain to descend, and the winds to blow, are all of them for
   this only end, to bring us to this conviction, that all that can be
   called life, good, and happiness, is to come solely from God, and not
   the smallest spark of it from ourselves. When man was first created,
   all the good that he had in him was from God alone. N.B. This must be
   the state of man for ever. From the beginning of time through all
   eternity, the creature can have no goodness, but that which God creates
   in it.

   [Ltrs-10-13] Our first created goodness is lost, because our first
   father departed from a full, absolute dependence upon God. For a full,
   continual, unwavering dependence upon God, is that alone which keeps
   God in the creature, and the creature in God.

   [Ltrs-10-14] Our lost goodness can never come again, or be found in us,
   till by a power from Christ living in us, we are brought out of
   ourselves, and all selfish truths, into that full and blessed
   dependence upon God, in which our first father should have lived.

   [Ltrs-10-15] What room now, my dear friend, for complaint at the sight,
   sense, and feeling of your inability to make yourself better than you
   are? Did you want this sense, every part of your religion would only
   have the nature and vanity of idolatry. For you cannot come unto God,
   you cannot believe in him, you cannot worship him in spirit and truth,
   till he is regarded as the only giver, and you yourself as nothing else
   but the receiver of every heavenly good, that can possibly come to life
   in you.

   [Ltrs-10-16] Can it trouble you, that it was God that made you, and not
   you yourself? Yet this would be as unreasonable, as to be troubled that
   you cannot make heavenly affection, or divine powers to spring up, and
   abide in your soul.

   [Ltrs-10-17] God must for ever be God alone; heaven, and the heavenly
   nature are his, and must for ever and ever be received only from him,
   and for ever and ever be only preserved, by an entire dependence upon,
   and trust in him. Now as all the religion of fallen man, fallen from
   God into himself, and the spirit of this world, has no other end, but
   to bring us back to an entire dependence upon God, so we may justly
   say, blessed is that light, happy is that conviction, which brings us
   into a full and settled despair, of ever having the least good from
   ourselves.

   [Ltrs-10-18] Then we are truly brought, and laid at the gate of mercy:
   at which gate, no soul ever did, or can lay in vain.

   [Ltrs-10-19] A broken and contrite heart God will not despise. That is,
   God will not, God cannot pass by, overlook, or disregard it. But the
   heart is then only broken and contrite, when all its strong holds are
   broken down, all false coverings taken off, and it sees, with inwardly
   opened eyes, everything to be bad, false, and rotten, that does, or can
   proceed from it as its own.

   [Ltrs-10-20] But you will perhaps say, that your conviction is only an
   uneasy sensibility of your own state, and has not the goodness of a
   broken and contrite heart in it.

   [Ltrs-10-21] Let it be so, yet it is rightly in order to it, and it can
   only begin, as it begins at present in you. Your conviction is
   certainly not full and perfect; for if it was, you would not complain,
   or grieve at inability to help or mend yourself, but would patiently
   expect, and only look for help from God alone.

   [Ltrs-10-22] Know therefore your want of this, as of all other
   goodness. But know also at the same time, that it cannot be had through
   your own willing and running, but through God that showeth mercy; that
   is to say, through God who giveth us Jesus Christ. For Jesus Christ is
   the one only mercy of God to all the fallen world.

   [Ltrs-10-23] Now if all the mercy of God is only to be found in Christ
   Jesus, if he alone can save us from our sins; if he alone has power to
   heal all our infirmities, and restore original righteousness, what room
   for any other pains, labor, or enquiry, but where, and how Christ is to
   be found.

   [Ltrs-10-24] It matters not what our evils are, deadness, blindness,
   infatuation, hardness of heart, covetousness, wrath, pride, and
   ambition, our remedy is always one and the same, always at hand, always
   certain and infallible. Seven devils are as easily cast out by Christ
   as one. He came into the world, not to save from this, or that
   disorder, but to destroy all the power and works of the devil in man.

   [Ltrs-10-25] If you ask where, and how Christ is to be found? I answer,
   in your heart, and by your heart, and nowhere else, nor by anything
   else.

   [Ltrs-10-26] But you will perhaps say, it is your very heart that keeps
   you a stranger to Christ, and him to you, because your heart is all
   bad, as unholy as a den of thieves.

   [Ltrs-10-27] I answer, that the finding this to be the state of your
   heart, is the real finding of Christ in it.

   [Ltrs-10-28] For nothing else but Christ can reveal, and make manifest
   the sin and evil in you. And he that discovers, is the same Christ that
   takes away sin. So that, as soon as complaining guilt, sets itself
   before you, and will be seen, you may be assured, that Christ is in you
   of a truth.

   [Ltrs-10-29] For Christ must first come as a discoverer and reprover of
   sin. It is the infallible proof of his holy presence within you.

   [Ltrs-10-30] Hear him, reverence him, submit to him as a discoverer and
   reprover of sin. Own his power and presence in the feeling of your
   guilt, and then he that wounded, will heal, he that found out the sin,
   will take it away, and he who showed you your den of thieves, will turn
   it into a holy temple of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

   [Ltrs-10-31] And now, sir, you may see, that your doubt and enquiry of
   me, whether your will was really free, or not, was groundless.

   [Ltrs-10-32] You have no freedom, or power of will, to assume any holy
   temper, or take hold of such degrees of goodness, as you have a mind to
   have. For nothing is, or ever can be goodness in you, but the one life,
   light, and spirit of Christ revealed, formed, and begotten in your
   soul. Christ in us, is our only goodness, as Christ in us, is our hope
   of glory. But Christ in us is the pure free gift of God to us.

   [Ltrs-10-33] But you have a true and full freedom of will and choice,
   either to leave, and give up your helpless self to the operation of God
   on your soul, or to rely upon your own rational industry, and natural
   strength of mind. This is the truth of the freedom of your will, in
   your first setting out, which is a freedom that no man wants, or can
   want so long as he is in the body. And every unregenerate man has this
   freedom.

   [Ltrs-10-34] If therefore you have not that which you want to have of
   God, or are not that which you ought to be in Christ Jesus, it is not
   because you have no free power of leaving yourself in the hands, and
   under the operation of God, but because the same freedom of your will,
   seeks for help where it cannot be had, namely, in some strength and
   activity of your own faculties.

   [Ltrs-10-35] Of this freedom of will it is said, "According to thy
   faith, so be it done unto thee"; that is to say, according as thou
   leavest and trustest thyself to God, so will his operation be in thee.

   [Ltrs-10-36] This is the real, great magic power of the first turning
   of the will; of which it is truly said, that it always hath that which
   it willeth, and can have nothing else.

   [Ltrs-10-37] When this freedom of the will wholly leaves itself to God,
   saying, not mine, but thy will be done, then it hath that, which it
   willeth. The will of God is done in it. It is in God. It hath divine
   power. It worketh with God, and by God, and comes at length to be that
   faith which can remove mountains; and nothing is too hard for it.

   [Ltrs-10-38] And thus it is, that every unregenerate son of Adam hath
   life and death in his own choice, not by any natural power of taking
   which he will, but by a full freedom, either of leaving, and trusting
   himself to the redeeming operation of God, which is eternal life, or of
   acting according to his own will and power in flesh and blood, which is
   eternal death.

   [Ltrs-10-39] And now, my dear friend, let me tell you, that as here
   lies all the true and real freedom, which cannot be taken from you, so
   in the constant exercise of this freedom, that is, in a continual
   leaving yourself to, and depending upon the operation of God in your
   soul, lies all your road to heaven. No divine virtue can be had any
   other way.

   [Ltrs-10-40] All the excellency and power of faith, hope, love,
   patience, and resignation, which are the true and only graces of the
   spiritual life, have no other root or ground, but this free, full
   leaving of yourself to God, and are only so many different expressions
   of your willing nothing, seeking nothing, trusting to nothing, but the
   life-giving power of his holy presence in your soul.

   [Ltrs-10-41] To sum up all in a word. Wait patiently, trust humbly,
   depend only upon, seek solely to a God of light and love, of mercy and
   goodness, of glory and majesty, ever dwelling in the inmost depth and
   spirit of your soul. There you have all the secret, hidden, invisible
   upholder of all the creation, whose blessed operation will always be
   found by a humble, faithful, loving, calm, patient introversion of your
   heart to him, who has his hidden heaven within you, and which will open
   itself to you, as soon as your heart is left wholly to his eternal
   ever- speaking WORD, and ever-sanctifying Spirit within you.

   [Ltrs-10-42] Beware of all eagerness and activity of your own natural
   spirit and temper. Run not in any hasty ways of your own. Be patient
   under the sense of your own vanity and weakness; and patiently wait for
   God to do his own work, and in his own way. For you can go no faster,
   than a full dependence upon God can carry you.

   [Ltrs-10-43] You will perhaps say, Am I then to be idle, and do nothing
   towards the salvation of my soul? No, you must by no means be idle, but
   earnestly diligent, according to your measure, in all good works, which
   the law and the gospel direct you to, both with regard to your self and
   other people.

   [Ltrs-10-44] Outward good works to other people, may be justly
   considered as God's errand on which you are sent, and therefore to be
   done faithfully, according to the will, and in obedience to him that
   sent you.

   [Ltrs-10-45] But nothing that you do, or practice as a good to
   yourself, and other people, is in its proper state, grows from its
   right root, or reaches its true end, till you look for no willing, nor
   depend upon any doing that which is good, but by Christ, the wisdom and
   power of God, living in you. I caution you only against all eagerness
   and activity of your own spirit, so far as it leads you to seek, and
   trust to something that is not God, and Christ within you.

   [Ltrs-10-46] I recommend to you stillness, calmness, patience, not to
   make you lifeless, and indifferent about good works, or indeed with any
   regard to them, but solely with regard to your faith, that it may have
   its proper soil to grow in, and because all eagerness, restlessness,
   haste, and impatience, either with regard to God, or ourselves, are not
   only great hindrances, but real defects of our faith and dependence
   upon God.

   [Ltrs-10-47] Lastly, be courageous then, and full of hope, not by
   looking at any strength of your own, or fancying that you now know how
   to be wiser in yourself, than you have hitherto been; no, this will
   only help you to find more and more defects of weakness in yourself;
   but be courageous in faith, and hope, and dependence upon God. And be
   assured, that the one infallible way to all that is good, is never to
   be weary in waiting, trusting, and depending upon God manifested in
   Christ Jesus.

   I am your hearty Friend

   and Well-Wisher.

   March 20, 1756.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XI.

   To a Person burdened with inward and

   outward troubles.

   Worthy Sir,

   [Ltrs-11-1] My heart embraces you, with all the tenderness and
   affection of Christian love; and I earnestly beg of God, to make me a
   messenger of his peace to your soul.

   [Ltrs-11-2] You seem to apprehend, I may be much surprised at the
   account you have given of yourself; but I am neither surprised, nor
   offended at it; I neither condemn, nor lament your estate, but shall
   endeavor to show you, how soon it may be made a blessing and happiness
   to you. In order to which, I shall not enter into a consideration of
   the different kinds of trouble you have set forth at large. I think it
   better to lay before you the one true ground and root, from whence all
   the evil and disorders of human life have sprung. This will make it
   easy for you to see, what that is, which must, and only can, be the
   full remedy and relief for all of them, how different soever, either in
   kind, or degree.

   [Ltrs-11-3] The scripture has assured us, that God made man in his own
   image and likeness; a sufficient proof, that man, in his first state,
   as he came forth from God, must have been absolutely free from all
   vanity, want, or distress of any kind, from anything either within, or
   without him. It would be quite absurd and blasphemous, to suppose, that
   a creature beginning to exist in the image and likeness of God, should
   have vanity of life, or vexation of spirit: a Godlike perfection of
   nature, and a painful, distressed nature, stand in the utmost
   contrariety to one another.

   [Ltrs-11-4] Again, the scripture has assured us, that man that is born
   of a woman, hath but a short time to live, and is full of misery:
   therefore man now is not that creature that he was by his creation. The
   first divine and Godlike nature of Adam, which was to have been
   immortally holy in union with God, is lost; and instead of it, a poor
   mortal of earthly flesh and blood, born like a wild ass's colt, of a
   short life, and full of misery, is through a vain pilgrimage, to end in
   dust and ashes. Therefore, let every evil, whether inward, or outward,
   only teach you this truth, that man has infallibly lost his first
   divine life in God; and that no possible comfort, or deliverance is to
   be expected, but only in this one thing, that though man had lost his
   God, yet God is become man, that man may be again alive in God, as at
   the first. For all the misery and distress of human nature, whether of
   body or mind, is wholly owing to this one cause, that God is not in
   man, nor man in God, as the state of his nature requires: it is,
   because man has lost that first life of God in his soul, in and for
   which he was created. He lost this light, and spirit, and life of God,
   by turning his will, imagination, and desire, into a tasting and
   sensibility of the good and evil of this earthly bestial world.

   [Ltrs-11-5] Now here are two things raised up in man, instead of the
   life of God: first, self, or selfishness, brought forth by his choosing
   to have a wisdom of his own, contrary to the will and instruction of
   his creator. Secondly, an earthly, bestial, mortal life and body,
   brought forth by his eating that food, which was poison to his
   paradisaical nature. Both these must therefore be removed; that is, a
   man must first totally die to self, and all earthly desires, views, and
   intentions, before he can be again in God, as his nature and first
   creation requires.

   [Ltrs-11-6] But now if this be a certain and immutable truth, that man,
   so long as he is a selfish, earthly-minded creature, must be deprived
   of his true life, the life of God, the spirit of heaven in his soul;
   then how is the face of things changed! For then, what life is so much
   to be dreaded, as a life of worldly ease and prosperity? What a misery,
   nay what a curse, is there in everything that gratifies and nourishes
   our self- love, self-esteem, and self-seeking? On the other hand, what
   happiness is there in all inward and outward troubles and vexations,
   when they force us to feel and know the hell that is hidden within us,
   and the vanity of everything without us, when they turn all our self-
   love into self-abhorrence and force us to call upon God to save us from
   ourselves, to give us a new life, new light, and new spirit in Christ
   Jesus.

   [Ltrs-11-7] "O happy famine," might the poor prodigal have well said,
   "which, by reducing me to the necessity of asking to eat husks with
   swine, brought me to myself, and caused my return to my first happiness
   in my father's house."

   [Ltrs-11-8] Now, I will suppose your distressed state to be as you
   represent it; inwardly, darkness, heaviness, and confusion of thoughts
   and passions; outwardly, ill usage from friends, relations, and all the
   world; unable to strike up the least spark of light or comfort, by any
   thought or reasoning of your own.

   [Ltrs-11-9] O happy famine, which leaves you not so much as the husk of
   one human comfort to feed upon! For this is the time and place for all
   that good and life and salvation to happen to you, which happened to
   the prodigal son. Your way is as short, and your success as certain as
   his was: you have no more to do than he had; you need not call out for
   books, or methods of devotion; for, in your present state, much
   reading, and borrowed prayers, are not your best method: all that you
   are to offer to God, all that is to help you to find him to be your
   savior and redeemer, is best taught and expressed by the distressed
   state of your heart.

   [Ltrs-11-10] Only let your present and past distress make you feel and
   acknowledge this twofold great truth: first, that in and of yourself,
   you are nothing but darkness, vanity, and misery; secondly, that of
   yourself, you can no more help yourself to light and comfort, than you
   can create an angel. People at all times can seem to assent to these
   two truths; but then it is an assent that has no depth or reality, and
   so is of little or no use: but your condition has opened your heart for
   a deep and full conviction of these truths. Now give way, I beseech
   you, to this conviction, and hold these two truths, in the same degree
   of certainty as you know two and two to be four, and then you are with
   the prodigal come to yourself, and above HALF YOUR WORK IS DONE.

   [Ltrs-11-11] Being now in full possession of these two truths, feeling
   them in the same degree of certainty, as you feel your own existence,
   you are, under this sensibility, to give up yourself absolutely and
   entirely to God in Christ Jesus, as into the hands of infinite love;
   firmly believing this great and infallible truth, that God has no will
   towards you, but that of infinite love, and infinite desire to make you
   a partaker of his divine nature; and that it is as absolutely
   impossible for the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to refuse all that
   good and life and salvation which you want, as it is for you to take it
   by your own power.

   [Ltrs-11-12] O drink deep of this cup! for the precious water of
   eternal life is in it. Turn unto God with this faith; cast yourself
   into this abyss of love; and then you will be in that state the
   prodigal was in, when he said, "I will arise and go to my father, and
   will say unto him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
   thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son'"; and all that will
   be fulfilled in you, which is related of him.

   [Ltrs-11-13] Make this, therefore, the twofold exercise of your heart:
   now, bowing yourself down before God, in the deepest sense and
   acknowledgement of your own nothingness and vileness; then, looking up
   unto God in faith and love, consider him as always extending the arms
   of his mercy towards you, and full of an infinite desire to dwell in
   you, as he dwells in angels in heaven. Content yourself with this
   inward and simple exercise of your heart, for a while; and seek, or
   like nothing in any book, but that which nourishes and strengthens this
   state of your heart.

   [Ltrs-11-14] "Come unto me," says the holy Jesus, "all ye that labor,
   and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you." Here is more for you to
   lie upon, more light for your mind, more of unction for your heart,
   than in volumes of human instruction. Pick up the words of the holy
   Jesus, and beg of him to be the light and life of your soul: love the
   sound of his name; for Jesus is the love, the sweetness, the
   compassionate goodness, of the deity itself; which became man, that so
   men might have power to become the sons of God. Love and pity and wish
   well to every soul in the world; dwell in love, and then you dwell in
   God; hate nothing but the evil that stirs in your own heart.

   [Ltrs-11-15] Teach your heart this prayer, till your heart continually
   saith, though not with outward words: "O holy Jesus: meek lamb of God!
   Bread that came down from heaven! Light and life of all holy souls!
   help me to a true and living faith in thee. O do thou open thyself
   within me, with all thy holy nature, spirit, tempers, and inclinations,
   that I may be born again of thee, in thee a new creature, quickened and
   revived, led and governed, by thy Holy Spirit."

   [Ltrs-11-16] Prayer so practiced, becomes the life of the soul, and the
   true food of eternity. Keep in this state of application to God; and
   then you will infallibly find it to be the true way of rising out of
   the vanity of time, into the riches of eternity.

   [Ltrs-11-17] Do not expect, or look for the same degrees of sensible
   fervor. The matter lies not there. Nature will have its share; but the
   ups and downs of that are to be overlooked. Whilst your will- spirit is
   good, and set right, the changes of creaturely fervor lessen not your
   union with God. It is the abyss of the heart, an unfathomable depth of
   eternity within us, as much above sensible fervor, as heaven is above
   earth; it is this that works our way to God, and unites with heaven.
   This abyss of the heart, is the divine nature and power within us,
   which never calls upon God in vain; but whether helped or deserted by
   bodily fervor, penetrates through all outward nature, as easily and
   effectually as our thoughts can leave our bodies, and reach into the
   regions of eternity.

   [Ltrs-11-18] The poverty of our fallen nature, the depraved workings of
   flesh and blood, the corrupt tempers of our polluted birth in this
   world, do us no hurt, so long as the spirit of prayer works contrary to
   them, and longs for the first birth of the light and spirit of heaven.
   All our natural evil ceases to be our own evil, as soon as our will-
   spirit turns from it; it then changes its nature, loses all its poison
   and death, and only becomes our holy cross, on which we happily die
   from self and this world into the kingdom of heaven.

   [Ltrs-11-19] Would you have done with error, scruple, and delusion?
   Consider the deity to be the greatest love, the greatest meekness, the
   greatest sweetness, the eternal unchangeable will to be a good and
   blessing to every creature; and that all the misery, darkness, and
   death of fallen angels and fallen men, consist in their having lost
   their likeness to this divine nature. Consider yourself, and all the
   fallen world, as having nothing to seek or wish for, but by the spirit
   of prayer to draw into the life of your soul, rays and sparks of this
   divine, meek, loving, tender nature of God. Consider the holy Jesus as
   the gift of God to your soul, in spite of every inward or outward
   enemy. These three infallible truths, heartily embraced, and made the
   nourishment of your soul, shorten and secure the way to heaven, and
   leave no room for error, scruple or delusion

   [Ltrs-11-20] Expect no life, light, strength, or comfort, but from the
   Spirit of God, dwelling and manifesting his own goodness in your soul.
   The best of men, and the best of books, can only do you good, so far as
   they turn you from themselves, and every human thing, to seek, and
   have, and receive every kind of good from God alone; not a distant, or
   an absent God, but a God living, moving, and always working in the
   spirit and heart of your soul.

   [Ltrs-11-21] They never find God, who seek for him by reasoning and
   speculation; for since God is the highest spirit, and the highest life,
   nothing but a like spirit, and a like life, can unite with him, find or
   feel, or know anything of him. Hence it is, that faith, and hope, and
   love, turned towards God, are the only possible, and also infallible
   means of obtaining a true and living knowledge of him. And the reason
   is plain, it is because by these holy tempers, which are the workings
   of spirit and life within us, we seek the God of life where he is, we
   call upon him with his own voice, we draw near to him by his own
   Spirit; for nothing can breathe forth faith, and love, and hope to God,
   but that Spirit and life which is of God, and which therefore through
   flesh and blood thus presses towards him, and readily unites with him.

   [Ltrs-11-22] There is not a more infallible truth in the world than
   this, that neither reasoning nor learning can ever introduce a spark of
   heaven into our souls: but if this be so, then you have nothing to
   seek, nor anything to fear, from reason. Life and death are the things
   in question: they are neither of them the growth of reasoning or
   learning, but each of them is a state of the soul, and only thus
   differ, death is the want, and life the enjoyment of its highest good.
   Reason, therefore, and learning, have no power here; but only by their
   vain activity to keep the soul insensible of that life and death, one
   of which is always growing up in it, according as the will and desire
   of the heart worketh. Add reason to a vegetable, and you add nothing to
   its life or death. Its life and fruitfulness lieth in the soundness of
   its root, the goodness of the soil, and the riches it derives from air
   and light. Heaven and hell grow thus in the soul of every man: his
   heart is his root; if that is turned from all evil, it is then like the
   plant in a good soil; when it hungers and thirsts after the divine
   life, it then infallibly draws the light and Spirit of God into it,
   which are infinitely more ready and willing to live and fructify in the
   soul, than light and air to enter into the plant, that hungers after
   them. For the soul hath its breath, and being, and life, for no other
   end, but that the TRIUNE God may manifest the riches and powers of his
   own life in it.

   [Ltrs-11-23] Thus hunger is all, and in all worlds, everything lives in
   it, and by it; nothing else eats, or partakes of life; and everything
   eats according to its own hunger. Everything hungers after its own
   mother, that is, everything has a natural magnetic tendency to partake
   of that from which it had its being, and can only find its rest in that
   from whence it came. Dead as well as living things bear witness to this
   truth: the stones fall to the earth, the sparks fly upwards, for this
   only reason, because everything must tend towards that from whence it
   came.

   [Ltrs-11-24] Were not angels and the souls of men breathed forth from
   God, as so many real offsprings of the divine nature, it would be as
   impossible for them to have any desire of God, as for stones to go
   upwards, and the flame downwards. Thus you may see, and feel, that the
   spirit of prayer not only proves that you came from God, but is your
   certain way of returning to him.

   [Ltrs-11-25] When, therefore, it is the one ruling, never ceasing
   desire of our hearts, that God may be the beginning and end, the reason
   and motive, the rule and measure, of our doing, or not doing, from
   morning to night; then everywhere, whether speaking or silent, whether
   inwardly or outwardly employed, we are equally offered up to the
   eternal Spirit, have our life in him and from him, and are united to
   him, by that spirit of prayer, which is the comfort, the support, the
   strength and security of the soul, travelling by the help of God,
   through the vanity of time into the riches of eternity. For this spirit
   of prayer, let us willingly give up all that we inherit from our fallen
   father, to be all hunger and thirst after God; and to have no thought
   or care, but how to be wholly his devoted instruments; everywhere, and
   in everything, his adoring, joyful, and thankful servants. Have your
   eyes shut, and ears stopped to everything, that is not a step in that
   ladder that reaches from earth to heaven.

   [Ltrs-11-26] Reading is good, hearing is good, conversation and
   meditation are good; but then they are only good at times and
   occasions, in a certain degree; and must be used and governed, with
   such caution, as we eat and drink, and refresh ourselves, or they will
   bring forth in us the fruits of intemperance. But the spirit of prayer
   is for all times, and all occasions; it is a lamp that is to be always
   burning, a light to be ever shining; everything calls for it,
   everything is to be done in it, and governed by it; because it is, and
   means, and wills nothing else, but the whole totality of the soul, not
   doing this or that, but wholly, incessantly given up to God, to be
   where, and what, and how he pleases.

   [Ltrs-11-27] This state of absolute resignation, naked faith, and pure
   love of God, is the highest perfection, and most purified life of
   those, who are born again from above, and through the divine power
   become sons of God: and it is neither more nor less, than what our
   blessed redeemer has called, and qualified us to long and aspire after,
   in these words: "Thy kingdom come; thy will be done, on earth, as it is
   in heaven." It is to be sought for in the simplicity of a little child,
   without being captivated with any mysterious depths or heights of
   speculation; without nature, grace, or creature, but so far as it
   brings us nearer to God, forces us to forget and renounce everything
   for him; to do everything in him, with him, and for him; and to give
   every breathing, moving, stirring, intention, and desire of our heart,
   soul, spirit, and life to him.

   [Ltrs-11-28] Let every creature have your love. Love with its fruits of
   meekness, patience, and humility, is all that we can wish for to
   ourselves, and our fellow creatures; for this is to live in God, united
   to him, both for time and eternity.

   [Ltrs-11-29] To desire to communicate good to every creature, in the
   degree we can, and it is capable of receiving from us, is a divine
   temper; for thus God stands unchangeably disposed towards the whole
   creation: but let me add my request, as you value the peace which God
   has brought forth by his Holy Spirit in you, as you desire to be
   continually taught by an unction from above, that you would on no
   account enter into any dispute with anyone about the truths of
   salvation; but give them every help, but that of debating with them;
   for no man has fitness for the light of the gospel, till he finds an
   hunger and thirst, and want of something better, than that which he has
   and is by nature. Yet we ought not to check our inclinations to help
   others in every way we can. Only do what you do, as a work of God; and
   then, whatever may be the event, you will have reason to be content
   with the success that God gives it. "He that hath ears to hear, let him
   hear"; may be enough for you, as well as it was for our blessed Lord.

   [Ltrs-11-30] The next thing that belongs to us, and which is also
   Godlike, is a true unfeigned patience, and meekness, showing every kind
   of good will and tender affection towards those that turn a deaf ear to
   us; looking upon it to be full as contrary to God's method, and the
   good state of our own hearts, to dispute with anyone in contentious
   words, as to fight with him for the truths of salvation.

   [Ltrs-11-31] "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
   I will give you rest," saith our blessed Lord. He called none else,
   because no one else hath ears to hear, or a heart to receive the truths
   of redemption.

   [Ltrs-11-32] Every man is a vain disputer, till such time as something
   has disturbed his state, and awakened in him a sensibility of his own
   evil and miserable nature. We are all of us afraid both of inward and
   outward distress; and yet, till distress comes, our life is but a
   dream, and we have no awakened sensibility of our own true state.

   [Ltrs-11-33] We are apt to consider parts and abilities, as the proper
   qualifications for the reception of divine truths; and wonder that a
   man of a fine understanding should not immediately embrace just and
   solid doctrines: but the matter is quite otherwise. Had man kept
   possession of his first rich and glorious state, there had been no
   foundation for the gospel redemption; and the doctrine of the cross,
   must have appeared quite unreasonable to be pressed upon him: and
   therefore says our Lord, "To the poor the gospel is preached." It is
   solely to them, and none else: that is, to poor fallen man, that has
   lost all the true natural riches and greatness of his first divine
   life; to him is the gospel preached. But if a man knows and feels
   nothing of this poverty of his nature, he is not that person to whom
   the gospel belongs: it has no more suitableness to his state, than it
   had to man unfallen: and then the greater his parts and abilities are,
   the better is he qualified to show the folly of every doctrine of that
   salvation, of which he has no want.

   [Ltrs-11-34] Such a man, though he may be of an humane, ingenuous,
   generous and frank nature, of lively parts and much candor, is
   nevertheless entirely ignorant of the depth of the heart of man, and
   the necessities of human nature. As yet (though he knows it not) he is
   only at play and pastime, pleasing himself with supposed deep enquiries
   after strict truth, whilst he is only sporting himself with lively
   wandering images of this and that, just as they happen to start up in
   his mind. Could but he see himself in the state of the poor distressed
   prodigal son, and find that himself is the very person there recorded,
   he would then, but not till then, see the fitness of that redemption,
   which is offered him by the mercy of God in CHRIST JESUS. But such a
   one, alas! is rich; he is sound; light is in his own power, goodness is
   in his own possession: he feels no distress or darkness; but has a
   crucible of reason and judgment, that on every occasion separates gold
   from dross: and, therefore, he must be left to himself, to his own
   Elysium, till something more than argument and disputation awakens him
   out of these golden dreams.

   [Ltrs-11-35] Let us beware also of the religious Pharisee, who raves
   against spiritual religion, because it touches the very heart string of
   all systematical divinity, and shakes the very foundation of every
   BABEL in every country; for not a system of divinity, since systems
   were in being, whether popish or Protestant, deserves a better name.

   [Ltrs-11-36] All preachers of the true spiritual mystery of the gospel,
   of a birth, light and life from above, in and by JESUS CHRIST (which
   are the mystic writers of every age) ever were, and will be, treated by
   the reigning fashionable orthodoxy, as enemies to the outward gospel,
   and its services, just as the prophets of God (who were the mystic
   preachers of the Jewish dispensation) were by the then reigning
   orthodoxy, condemned and despised, for calling people to a spiritual
   meaning of the dead letter, to a holiness infinitely greater than that
   of their outward sacrifices, types, and ceremonies.

   [Ltrs-11-37] Whoever he is that has any situation of his own to defend,
   be it that of a celebrated preacher, a champion for received orthodoxy,
   a head, a leader, or follower of any sect, or party, or particular
   method; or that seems, both in his own eyes, and in the eyes of others,
   to have made himself significant in any kind of religious distinction;
   every such person, sooner or later, will find, that he has much of that
   very same to give up, which hindered the zealous, and eminently
   religious Pharisees from converting to CHRIST, in the spirit of a
   little child.

   [Ltrs-11-38] Nor doth it help the matter, that such an one abounds with
   piety and excellency; for St. Paul was governed by a spirit of great
   piety, great excellency, and zeal for God. He says of himself, that
   when he was persecuting the disciples of Christ, he "lived in all good
   conscience, as touching the Law blameless, and according to the
   straitest sect of the Jewish religion": for the Pharisees, though many
   of them had all that hypocrisy and rottenness which Christ laid to
   their charge, yet as a sect, they were an order of most confessed and
   resplendent sanctity; and yet the more earnest and upright they were in
   this kind of zeal for goodness, the more earnestly they opposed and
   condemned the heavenly mystery of a new life from CHRIST, as appears
   from St. Paul.

   [Ltrs-11-39] This sect of the Pharisees did not cease with the Jewish
   church; it only lost its old name; it is still in being, and springs
   now in the same manner from the gospel, as it did then from the Law: it
   has the same place, lives the same life, does the same work, minds the
   same things, has the same goodness at heart, has the same religious
   honor, and claims to piety, in the Christian, as it had in the Jewish
   church; and as much mistakes the depths of the mystery of the gospel,
   as that sect mistook the mystery signified by the letter of the Law and
   the prophets.

   [Ltrs-11-40] It would be easy to show in several instances, how the
   leaven of that sect works amongst us, just as it did amongst them.
   "Have any of the rulers believed on him?" was the orthodox question of
   the ancient Pharisees. Now we Christians readily and willingly condemn
   the weakness and folly of that question; and yet who does not see,
   that, for the most part, both priest and people, in every Christian
   country, live and govern themselves by the folly and weakness of the
   very same spirit which put that question: for when God, as he has
   always done from the beginning of the world, raises up private and
   illiterate persons, full of light and wisdom from above, so as to be
   able to discover all the workings of the mystery of iniquity, and to
   open the ground, and truth, and absolute necessity of such an inward
   spirit and life of CHRIST revealed in us, as time, carnal wisdom, and
   worldly policy have departed from; when all this is done, by the
   weakest instruments of God, in such a simplicity and fullness of
   demonstration, as may be justly deemed a miracle; do not clergy and
   laity get rid of it all, though ever so unanswerable, merely by the
   strength of the Pharisees' good old question, saying with them, "Have
   any of the rulers believed and taught these things? Hath the church in
   council or convocation? Hath Calvin, Luther, Zwinglius, or any of our
   renowned system-makers, ever taught or asserted these matters? "

   [Ltrs-11-41] But hear what our blessed Lord saith, of the place, the
   power, and origin of truth: he refers us not to the current doctrines
   of the times, or to the systems of men, but to his own name, his own
   nature, his own divinity hidden in us: "My sheep," says he, "hear my
   voice." Here the whole matter is decisively determined, both where
   truth is, and who they are that can have any knowledge of it.

   [Ltrs-11-42] HEAVENLY truth is nowhere spoken but by the voice of
   CHRIST, nor heard but by the power of CHRIST living in the hearer. As
   he is the eternal WORD of GOD, that speaks forth all the wisdom, and
   wonders of GOD; so he alone is the Word, that speaks forth all the
   life, wisdom, and goodness, that is or can be in any creature; it can
   have none but what it has in him and from him: this is the one
   unchangeable boundary of truth, goodness, and every perfection of men
   on earth, or angels in heaven.

   [Ltrs-11-43] Literary learning, from the beginning to the end of time,
   will have no more of heavenly wisdom, nor any less of worldly
   foolishness in it, at one time than at another; its nature is one and
   the same through all ages; what it was in the Jew and the heathen, that
   same it is in the Christian. Its name, as well as nature, is
   unalterable, viz., foolishness with God.

   [Ltrs-11-44] I shall add no more, but the two or three following words.

   [Ltrs-11-45] I. Receive every inward and outward trouble, every
   disappointment, pain, uneasiness, temptation, darkness, and desolation,
   with both thy hands, as a true opportunity and blessed occasion of
   dying to self, and entering into a fuller fellowship with thy
   self-denying, suffering savior.

   [Ltrs-11-46] II. Look at no inward or outward trouble in any other
   view; reject every other thought about it; and then every kind of trial
   and distress will become the blessed day of thy prosperity.

   [Ltrs-11-47] III. Be afraid of seeking or finding comfort in anything,
   but God alone: for that which gives thee comfort, takes so much of thy
   heart from God. "Quid est cor purum? cui ex toto, et pure sufficit
   solus Deus, cui nihil sapit, quod nihil delectat, nisi Deus." That is,
   what constitutes a pure heart? One to which God alone is totally, and
   purely sufficient; to which nothing relishes, or gives delight, but God
   alone.

   [Ltrs-11-48] IV. That state is best, which exerciseth the highest faith
   in, and fullest resignation to God.

   [Ltrs-11-49] V. What is it you want and seek, but that God may be all
   in all in you? But how can this be, unless all creaturely good and evil
   become as nothing in you, or to you?

   [Ltrs-11-50] "Oh anima mea, abstrahe te ab omnibus. Quid tibi cum
   mutabilibus creaturis? Solum sponsum tuum, qui omnium est author
   creaturarum, expectans, hoc age, ut cor tuum ille liberum et expeditum
   semper inveniat, quoties illi ad ipsum venire placuerit." That is, O my
   soul! abstract thyself from everything. What hast thou to do with
   changeable creatures? Waiting, and expecting thy bridegroom, who is the
   author of all creatures, let it be thy sole concern, that he may find
   thy heart free and disengaged, as often as it shall please him to visit
   thee.

   [Ltrs-11-51] Be assured of this, that sooner or later, we must be
   brought to this conviction, that everything in ourselves by nature is
   evil, and must be entirely given up; and that nothing that is
   creaturely, can make us better than we are by nature. Happy, therefore,
   and blessed are all those inward or outward troubles, that hasten this
   conviction in us; that with the whole strength of our souls, we may be
   driven to seek ALL from and in GOD, without the least thought, hope, or
   contrivance after any other relief: then it is, that we are made truly
   partakers of the cross of CHRIST; and from the bottom of our hearts
   shall be enabled to say, with St. Paul, "God forbid that I should glory
   in anything, save the cross of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: by which I am
   crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to me."

   [Ltrs-11-52] Give up yourself to God without reserve. This implies such
   a state or habit of heart, as does nothing of itself, from its own
   reason, will or choice, but stands always in faith, hope, and absolute
   dependence upon being led by the Spirit of God into everything that is
   according to his will; seeking nothing by designing, reasoning, and
   reflection, how you shall best promote the honor of God, but in
   singleness of heart, meeting everything that every day brings forth, as
   something that comes from GOD, and is to be received, and gone through
   by you, in such an heavenly use of it, as you would suppose the HOLY
   JESUS would have done, in such occurrences. This is an attainable
   degree of perfection; and by having CHRIST and his Spirit always in
   your eye, and nothing else, you will never be left to yourself, nor
   without the full guidance of GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XII.

   To Mr. T. L.

   My dearly beloved Friend,

   [Ltrs-12-1] I begin, as I did my last, with assuring you, that I love
   to hear from you.

   [Ltrs-12-2] I am in some concern about the activity of your religious
   spirit, which I have often cautioned you against. You have seen, and as
   I think deeply apprehended, the true ground, on which man's redemption
   stands. This ground has been shown you, not only from the plain letter
   of scripture, but confirmed by the whole frame of nature.

   [Ltrs-12-3] Everything in heaven and earth, everything that you
   inwardly or outwardly feel, or know of your own soul, and body, are all
   shown to bear infallible witness to these two fundamental truths of the
   gospel: that our first father died to his first life in God; and that
   nothing in the whole nature of things, can be our redemption, but the
   first life of God, born again of God in the soul. You have had the
   fullest proof, that man was created in this high perfection of life.
   You have had the fullest proof, that Adam had no other way of dying to
   heaven, or losing his first state in God, but by the working of his
   will; and that every son of Adam, is to this day, only that which his
   faith, or the working of his will, or the desire of his heart (for they
   are all the same thing) maketh him to be. Jesus Christ is the divine
   nature, which must be alive again in man. But the life of the deity can
   only arise by a birth in us, by the hunger and faith and desire of the
   heart, or the working of the will turned to it; and this is the faith
   in Christ that does all.

   [Ltrs-12-4] To what purpose therefore, is so much anxious enquiry about
   this or that? Why this running after everyone, to hear the history of
   himself, and the secrets of his own fancied experience?

   [Ltrs-12-5] If you know a man to be a fatalist, do you not enough know,
   that he cannot explain the mysteries of the gospel, all which have a
   quite contrary ground.

   [Ltrs-12-6] If a man has no notion, or belief of the fall of man can he
   tell you either the nature, or the necessity of Christian redemption?
   What room could there be for the divine philanthropy, if it could be
   supposed, that man and the world had not a better state, and life from
   him at first, than they have now?

   [Ltrs-12-7] If a man denies the necessity of the new birth from above,
   will you believe that this proceeds from an intimate familiarity with
   Christ, teaching him in private, the disbelief of that which he taught
   publicly when on earth? What folly to tell you, that you are only in a
   legal state, unless he could prove to you, that you have no aversion to
   wickedness, nor abstain from any sin, but so far as the fear and dread
   of punishment keep you from it. For this is the truth of the legal
   state; but when sin is disliked, and the commandments kept through a
   love of God, and a desire of divine goodness, there is the man in
   Christ a new creature, no longer under the yoke of the Law, but living
   in the freedom, and Spirit of God.

   [Ltrs-12-8] If a man tells you that Jesus is not God, surely it is time
   to have no fellowship with him. If he tells you, you are not to pray to
   God, but to Jesus, who is only a creature, is not this telling you,
   that it is unlawful for us to pray, as Jesus taught his disciples? And
   if it was wrong to pray to God, the Old and New Testament are, from the
   beginning to the end, full of false religion? Or will he say, that
   though under the Old Testament men might rightly pray to the deity, yet
   we, by being Christians, have lost this privilege of relation to, and
   dependence upon God? But surely, I need not expose the extravagancy of
   these things, nor exhort you to be weary of such entertainment.

   [Ltrs-12-9] You tell me, that you cannot help thinking with Mr. S.
   "that all partial systems of salvation, are greatly derogatory to the
   goodness of God:" but that you would say this to very few, but myself.
   But dear soul, why should you say this to me? I have without any
   scruple, openly declared to all the world, that from eternity to
   eternity, nothing can come from God but mere infinite love. In how many
   ways have I proved, and asserted, that there neither is, nor can be any
   wrath, or partiality in God, but that every creature must have all that
   happiness, which the infinite love and power of God can help it to. Can
   I, or any creature, possibly say more of an impartiality in God? And is
   it not quite unreasonable, to ask more about it, or to carry it
   further? You say "the seeming impossibility of the Spirit and light of
   God, arising up again in any creature, that has extinguished it, is,
   you presume, the strongest argument that can be offered, in support of
   everlasting misery." And therefore you say, "you have chosen, with
   submission, to examine the force of this principal argument, which runs
   through the APPEAL, and my other writings." But, my dear friend, how
   came you to say this? For this is so far from being the principal, or
   any argument that runs through my Appeal, and other books, that there
   is not one single word, in all the Appeal, nor any other of my books,
   that touches upon this matter, till you come to the last book, viz.,
   The Way to Divine Knowledge; and even in that book, the impossibility
   is so far from being asserted, that it is there affirmed, that this
   impossibility is not proved, nor ever likely to be so. Will you
   therefore charge me with proving a thing, that I show cannot be proved?
   It is my capital doctrine, that God is all love, and merely a will to
   all goodness; that he must eternally will that to the creature, which
   he willed at its creation.

   [Ltrs-12-10] But, my dear soul, debate not such matters as these,
   either with me, or anyone else. Stop your ears to all that you hear
   about them, and turn from everyone that will lead you into them. The
   perplexity that you make to yourself in such matters, is death to the
   divine life within you, is a great abuse of God's goodness towards you,
   and is a likely way for you to lose the peace and joy of that divine
   light, which has so largely opened itself within you.

   [Ltrs-12-11] Mr. G. and Mr. S. both of them (as they say) come out of
   the depths of hell, full of a new risen divine light within them. The
   first makes me a greater blasphemer of God, than the devils are, (N.B.)
   because I say, God has no other nature, or will towards every creature,
   but love and goodness.

   [Ltrs-12-12] The other calls me blind, and ignorant, because I have not
   a self-evident knowledge of the salvation of devils. Now were you to
   find out a third, laying claim to the same certainty of divine light,
   as these two do, you might perhaps have them both condemned by one who
   had a self- evident knowledge of absolute election, and reprobation,
   and who knew with as great certainty, that God damns some eternally to
   make his power to be known, as Mr. S. knows Christ to be only a
   creature, and that prayer is not to be made to God, but solely to this
   creature.

   [Ltrs-12-13] Dear L. son of my love, I do not know that ever I wasted
   my spirits in writing, or thinking in the manner of this letter before,
   and trust I never shall again. But love towards you, and a hearty zeal
   for your true growth in the spiritual life, has compelled me into this
   wrangle.

   [Ltrs-12-14] Put away all needless curiosity in divine matters, and
   look upon everything to be so, but that which helps you to die to
   yourself, that the Spirit and life of Christ may be formed, and
   revealed in you.

   [Ltrs-12-15] As for the purification of all human nature, either in
   this world, or some after ages, I fully believe it. And as to that of
   angels, if it is possible, I am glad of it, and also sure enough, that
   it will then come to pass.

   Dear Soul,

   Adieu.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XIII.

   To the same.

   My Dear Friend,

   [Ltrs-13-1] I thank you for the favor of yours. In the two extracts,
   you have sent, the writer says twice, he cannot adopt the dark side of
   my system. If what I have wrote may be called a system, it has put a
   full end to all that was dark, and partial, in every other system. It
   makes all the universe both of nature and grace, to be an edifice of
   love, kept up and governed by love. For I allow of no other God but
   love, who from eternity to eternity, can have no other will towards the
   creature, but to communicate good; and that no creature can have any
   misery, from which infinite goodness can deliver. Where then is the
   dark side? Must I assert God to be more than infinitely good?

   Dear Soul,

   Adieu.

   June 9, 1752.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XIV.

   To the same.

   My dear L.,

   [Ltrs-14-1] I cannot tell you how much I love you. But that which of
   all things I have most at heart, with regard to you, is the real
   progress of your soul in the divine life. Heaven seems to be awakened
   in you. It is a tender plant. It requires stillness, meekness, and the
   unity of the heart, totally given up to the unknown workings of the
   Spirit of God, which will do all its work in the calm soul, that has no
   hunger or desire, but to escape out of the mire of its earthly life,
   into its lost union and life in God.

   [Ltrs-14-2] I mention this, out of a fear of your giving into an
   eagerness into many things, which though seemingly innocent, yet divide
   and weaken the workings of the divine life within you. For a
   multiplicity of wills, is the one only evil, disease, and misery, both
   of our souls and bodies. That which can make the soul to have only one
   will, and one love, is the universal tincture, both for soul and body.
   And nothing else is it. That alone can take the fall, or curse out of
   the body, which can take it out of the soul. For the curse through all
   nature, and creature, is but one and the same thing, viz., the absence
   of the heavenly power. Heaven is dead in gold, just as it is dead in
   man; and its heavenly tincture can only be made alive, in the same
   manner, and from the same power, as in the inward man is born again of
   the water, and Spirit from above.

   [Ltrs-14-3] Our outward man must be tormented, crucified, mortified in
   the fire of our own flesh and blood; and then it is as the gross gold
   in the crucible heated by earthly fire. But as no fiery torments of our
   own flesh and blood, can glorify our inward man, and set him in his
   first angelic state, so no outward fire can torment gold into its first
   heavenly state. Our Lord said to the crucified thief, Today shalt thou
   be with me in paradise.

   [Ltrs-14-4] Now no one is a divine magus, till he is thus qualified to
   say to his subject, Today shalt thou be with me in paradise. If he
   himself is not in paradise, he can do no paradisaical work. But, my
   friend, let not what I here say, put you upon disputing this point with
   anyone, for I say it for quite a contrary end, to show you the vanity
   of all such discourse.

   My dear Soul,

   Adieu.

   Oct. 16, 1752.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XV.

   To the same.

   My dear L.,

   [Ltrs-15-1] I heartily thank you for your last. Talk no more of
   obtruding upon me with your letter. Everything that comes from you is
   welcome. I have no need to write anything to you, for you know all that
   I have to say. You stand upon the same ground, that I do. And you have
   nothing to do, but to be steadfast and unmoveable in that light, which
   God has vouchsafed to you.

   [Ltrs-15-2] But, my friend, take notice of this, no truths, however
   solid and well grounded, help you to any divine life, but so far as
   they are taught, nourished, and strengthened by an unction from above;
   and that nothing more dries, and extinguishes this heavenly unction,
   than a talkative, reasoning temper, that is always catching at every
   opportunity of hearing, or telling some religious matters.

   [Ltrs-15-3] You have found enough, to prove to you, that all must be
   found in God, manifested in the life of your soul. And I must say
   again, shut your eyes, and stop your ears, to all religious tales.

   My dear Soul,

   Adieu.

   Feb. 12, 1753.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XVI.

   To the same.

   My dear L.,

   [Ltrs-16-1] You have communicated to me several letters, that you have
   written to your friends, and I much approve of the spirit in which you
   have written them. Only I must repeat, what I have often said, have a
   care of too much eagerness to set other people right, lest it lead you
   too far from home, or too much exhaust that breath, which is to keep up
   the strength of your own inward life. I believe you understand me.

   [Ltrs-16-2] You want a remedy, to prevent the growth of suicide, and
   madness. They are not to be remedied by an new way of setting forth the
   folly, and extravagancy of them. When the fruit is evil, there is no
   remedy, but in putting the root of the tree in a better state.

   [Ltrs-16-3] Pride, is the father and mother of suicide and madness.
   Would you have a share in removing these evils, you must not cast about
   for high speculations, there is but one step to be taken, and that is,
   to show the necessity of dying to pride, and seeking for salvation only
   in humility. JESUS CHRIST is the only peace, and rest, and satisfaction
   of human life. This is absolute, and admits of no exception. St. John
   the Baptist was the true preparer of the way to CHRIST; if you think of
   any other way, it is labor lost. This point is absolutely determined
   where CHRIST says, "They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear
   them. If they believe not Moses, nor the prophets, neither will they be
   persuaded though one arose from the dead."

   [Ltrs-16-4] Miracles and demonstrations, you see, are in vain, till
   Moses, and the prophets are believed.

   [Ltrs-16-5] Now Moses is sin, made known by the Law, and the prophets,
   are faith and hope in God. And these two things must have their state,
   and work in the soul, before it can have any benefit from CHRIST and
   his miracles. If you would therefore give some check to the growth of
   suicide and madness, it cannot be by attacking them in themselves, or
   speaking to the unreasonableness of their particular nature, this is as
   useless, as a miracle to him, that heareth neither Moses, nor the
   prophets.

   [Ltrs-16-6] Now as Moses and the prophets were of necessity, before the
   coming of CHRIST, so it must be in every human soul.

   [Ltrs-16-7] And this proves the truth, of what has been so often
   asserted, of the importance of apprehending the fall of man, in its
   true and full depth. For to hear Moses and the prophets is in reality
   only this, viz., man become truly sensible of his impure, and fallen
   nature, and looking up to God to be delivered from it. Then, whether he
   has, or has not, ever seen the Bible, he is a true believer of Moses
   and the prophets, is that lost sheep, that is sure of being found, that
   weary and heavy laden, that must find rest and refreshment in CHRIST.

   [Ltrs-16-8] It matters not therefore, my friend, what you are upon,
   whether you would save a man from deism, debauchery, or suicide, you
   must begin in the same place, from one and the same ground, and this as
   unavoidably, as every fruit must have its beginning from the root, and
   from the root in its right state.

   [Ltrs-16-9] The amiableness of any virtue, or the horrid nature of any
   vice, whilst only considered as in themselves, are but as pictures set
   before our eyes, and have no other effect upon us. And this is the
   unprofitableness of all moral instructions, whether heathen, or
   Christian.

   [Ltrs-16-10] If you can help a man to seek, and find, and know himself,
   and his real relation to God; to know that he has neither inward, nor
   outward evil, but because he has lost his true state, and place in God;
   and that therefore nothing can be his peace and happiness, but his
   first divine life, or nature quickened again in him, then you have done
   all that you can for him, whatever his malady is. But enough of this.

   Dear Soul,

   Adieu.

   Aug. 4, 1753.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XVII.

   To the same.

   My dear L.,

   [Ltrs-17-1] You have a scruple about the wondrous lives of the fathers
   in the deserts, because in such contrariety to his character, who went
   about doing good. But if you only consider what you have said of them
   yourself, that the reading of their lives, at "once struck you with the
   deepest devotion, and made you think what a noviciate you were in the
   love of God," you would have reason enough to place them amongst the
   faithful, and true disciples of him, who went about doing good. For
   what greater good, than to do that to others, for so many ages, which
   they have done for you? They are not written to raise an emulation in
   you, to copy after them; nor is there any reason to think, that their
   story is not much exaggerated. But be that as it will, it is certain,
   they were the salt of the world for that time, and that the good
   providence of God blessed his church with them.

   [Ltrs-17-2] They are not for you to read, but as it were en passant, or
   for a little change of air, and their particularity of life no more
   concerns you, than that of John the Baptist.

   [Ltrs-17-3] God's last dispensation to the world, is the opening the
   ground, and mystery of all things, to which every blindness, and
   vanity, and strife of human life must, sooner or later, be forced to
   give up itself.

   [Ltrs-17-4] The children of this dispensation have no occasion to look
   backwards. It is like learning your A B C, when you are called and
   qualified to read.

   [Ltrs-17-5] Be not too fond of abstemiousness, nor too much attached to
   a milk diet; let nothing be a reason for your doing, or not doing
   anything of this kind, but the health and strength of your body. As
   soon as you are able to bear a stronger diet, I would have you by all
   means to use it. There is no more harm in getting strength from good
   food, than from sound sleep. And this kind of diet, is only to be used
   as a remedy for a time.

   Dear Soul,

   Adieu.

   Feb. 9, 1754.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XVIII.

   To the same.

   My dear friend,

   [Ltrs-18-1] The variety of trials, you have lately met with, are but a
   specimen of what you are to expect, in some form or other, so long as
   you breathe the air of this fallen world. The longer we are without
   them, the more our need of them is increased. And they never give great
   smart, but where something is to be torn off, that sticks too close to
   us. One reflection upon these sacred words, "My kingdom is not of this
   world: The Son of Man hath not where to lay his head," are sufficient
   to take not only the sting out of every cross, that can here befall us,
   but even to make us afraid, and ashamed of being pleased with anything,
   that has the name of worldly honor, and prosperity.

   [Ltrs-18-2] You have no reason to wonder at anything you see, or hear,
   of the partiality, selfishness, envy, and enmity, that so often breaks
   out between brothers and sisters of the same blood. For if blood-
   relations, considered as such, could have any true goodness, or
   unselfish regard to one another, we should not be under the necessity
   of being born again from above.

   [Ltrs-18-3] Will it do you any good to tell you, that thus says my
   heart, without speaking a word. "Let nothing live in me, but the
   redeeming power of my holy Jesus, nothing pray in me but thy Holy
   Spirit." This is my ship, in which, I would be always at sea. All that
   I seek, or mean, either for myself, or others, by every height and
   depth of divine knowledge, given us by God in his illuminated Behmen,
   is only for this end, that we may be more willing, and glad to become
   such little children, as our Lord has told us, are the only heirs of
   the kingdom of God.

   [Ltrs-18-4] The piercing critic may, and naturally will grow in pride,
   as fast as his skill in words discovers itself. And every kind of
   knowledge, that shows the scholar, the orator, the disputer, the
   commentator, the historian, his own powers, and abilities, are the same
   temptation to him, that Eve had from the serpent; and he will get no
   more good by the love and relish of such knowledge, than she got by her
   love of the tree, that was so desirable to make one wise.

   [Ltrs-18-5] But he whose eyes are opened, to see into this mystery of
   all things, sees nothing but death to himself, and to everything, that
   he had called, or delighted in as his own. This is the bold depth of
   his knowledge. And if you would know its aspiring height, it consists
   in learning to know, that which the angels and twenty-four elders about
   the throne of God, knew, when they cast down their crowns, before him
   that sat on the throne, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almighty,
   thou art worthy to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou hast
   created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created. It
   is to know that the triune majesty of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are
   the threefold power, life, glory, and perfection of every creature,
   that sings praises to God, in heaven and in earth. This is the proud
   knowledge of those, who are let into the holy of holies, opened by the
   Spirit of God in his chosen instrument, Behmen. Which goes no deeper,
   than to see the nothingness of man, ascends no higher, than to know
   that God is all; which begets nothing in man, but that which was
   begotten in Paul, when he cried out, "God forbid, that I should glory
   in anything, but the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ."
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XIX.

   To the same.

   My dear Friend,

   [Ltrs-19-1] Your strictures upon messieurs of the foundery, the
   tabernacles, are very just. These gentlemen seem to have no other
   bottom to stand upon, but that of zeal. I hope God will direct it for
   them, that more good may come from it, than the world is willing to
   believe. But I say no more of them. I would advise you not to enter
   into disputes with them, nor any others, in defense of those
   principles, which are the very life and heart of the Law, the prophets,
   and the gospel. No one begins to object against them, but on the
   account of something that is personal, either with regard to himself,
   or the author of them, or because they are contrary to his views and
   situation in the world. He who could free himself from these
   prejudices, would want no one to persuade him the truth of them.

   [Ltrs-19-2] Mr. J. W. is an ingenious man; and the reason why his
   letter to me, is such a juvenile composition of emptiness, and
   pertness, as is below the character of any man, who had been serious in
   religion but half a month, is because, it was not ability, but
   necessity, that put his pen into his hand. He had condemned my books,
   preached much against them, and to make all sure, forbid his people the
   use of them. And for a cover to all this, he promised from time to time
   to write against them. Therefore an answer was to be made at all
   adventures. What you happen to hear of Mr. J. W. concerning me, or my
   books, let it die with you. Wish him God speed in everything that is
   good. But this you may easily know, that he, and the pope, have the
   same reasons, and are under the same necessity of condemning and
   anathematizing the mystery revealed by God, in J. B.

   Adieu.

   Sept., 1756.

   [Ltrs-19-3] P.S. I have no objection to your learning the French
   language, but think you much in the right, in intending to proceed very
   leisurely in it, and as it were by the by. To learn, and love the
   language of the internal speaker, is more than to have the tongues of
   men and angels.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XX.

   To the same.

   My dear Friend,

   [Ltrs-20-1] I was much concerned at the account you sent me, of the
   state of your health, and think it very advisable, to seek out for
   help. But there is the difficulty where to find it. All is so very
   superficial in the art of physic, and from so poor a ground, that one
   has little to like in one physician more than in another, but his
   personal tempers and behavior. Air, and gentle exercise much pursued,
   must be greatly beneficial to you. If your physician be for your
   purpose, he will not load you with shop-medicines, nor ought you to
   submit to anyone that does. Nothing can assist you, but some simple
   regimen, that gradually lessens the hectic in your blood.

   [Ltrs-20-2] My dear brother pilgrim, be of good comfort, our road of
   life is such, that weakness can help us on as fast as strength. Use
   outward medicines, as if you used them not. The universal is within
   you, and whether you find it in a sickly, or a healthy body, is but a
   small matter.

   [Ltrs-20-3] Daily, hourly, thankful resignation to God in e verything,
   is the best regimen, you can enter into, both for soul and body. Every
   good wish attends my dear fellow-traveller out of time, into eternity.

   Farewell.

   Oct. 10, 1756.

   LETTER XXI.

   To G. W.

   [Ltrs-21-1] The large account you have given of yourself, is very
   affecting, and I hope God will turn all the variety of your past
   distress, into means of a future solid peace, and rest in his divine
   love.

   [Ltrs-21-2] To be weary and heavy laden, is to have the highest fitness
   to receive that rest, that CHRIST alone can give. These are the persons
   that he called to him, when he was upon earth. They who are content
   with themselves, are in the utmost danger of never knowing that
   happiness, for which they were created.

   [Ltrs-21-3] For a while, consider yourself in such solitude, as if
   there was only God and you in the world, free from every thought, but
   that of desiring to be wholly and solely his, and looking wholly to his
   goodness, to be delivered out of the misery of your fallen state.

   [Ltrs-21-4] Stand firmly in this faith, that God and the kingdom of
   heaven, are certainly within you, and within you for this only reason,
   that they may become your salvation. As all therefore is within, so let
   all your care be turned inwards, in loving, adoring, and praying to
   this GOD and CHRIST within you.

   [Ltrs-21-5] Be not too eager about much reading. Nor read anything, but
   that which nourishes, strengthens, and establishes this faith in you,
   of an inward savior, who is the life of your soul. To grow up in this
   faith, is taking the best means, of attaining to the best knowledge in
   all divine matters.

   [Ltrs-21-6] Cast away all reflections about yourself, the world, or
   your past life. And let all be swallowed up, or lost in this joyful
   thought, that you have found the messiah, the savior of the world, not
   in books, not in history, but in the birth, and bottom of your own
   soul. Give yourself up to this birth of heaven within you, expect all
   from it, let it be the humble, faithful, longing desire of your heart,
   and desire no knowledge, but that which is born of it, and proceeds
   from it. Stand only in this thirst of knowledge, and then all that you
   know will be spirit and life.

   With a Heart full of good Wishes to you,

   I am,

   Yours,

   May 8, 1750.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XXII.

   To the same.

   My dear Friend,

   [Ltrs-22-1] I know not myself, how to write to the most illuminated
   person upon earth, for advice, or instruction. And the more dark, and
   distressed my state should be, the more I should be averse to seek
   counsel of any creature; not from an opinion of any sufficiency in
   myself, but from a fullness of conviction, that I run away from relief,
   and deprive myself of the true light, and comfort, by not seeking, and
   depending upon God ALONE for it.

   [Ltrs-22-2] All my writings have no other end, but to communicate this
   conviction to my readers, and consequently to teach them to have done
   with me, as soon as I have convinced them, that GOD and CHRIST and the
   kingdom of heaven are only to be found by man, in his own heart, and
   only capable of being found there, by his own love of them, faith in
   them, and absolute dependence upon them.

   [Ltrs-22-3] What room, therefore, for calling out for help and
   direction, when once it is known, that all consists in an implicit
   blind faith, in purity of love, and total resignation to the Spirit of
   GOD? For where can these be exercised, but in the states and trials
   through which human life must pass.

   [Ltrs-22-4] And to acquiesce in God, when things are inwardly, and
   outwardly easy with us, but to cast about for help from something that
   is not God, when distress and darkness come upon us, is the error of
   errors, and the greatest hindrance to our true union with GOD in CHRIST
   JESUS.

   I am with much Truth and Sincerity,

   Your affectionate Friend.

   Sept. 22, 1754
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XXIII.

   To the same.

   My dear Friend,

   [Ltrs-23-1] The charge of Spinozism brought against me by Dr.
   Warburton, has all the folly and weakness that can well be imagined.
   For as Spinozism, is nothing else but a gross confounding of God and
   nature, making them to be only one and the same thing, so the full
   absurdity, and absolute impossibility of it, can only be fundamentally
   proved, by that doctrine which can go to the bottom of the matter, and
   demonstrate the essential, eternal, and absolute distinction, between
   God and nature; a thing done over and over, from page to page in those
   books, from which the doctor has extracted Spinozism, just with as much
   acuteness, as if he had spied rank Warburtonianism, in my letter to the
   Right Reverend the Bishop of London.

   [Ltrs-23-2] Now although the difference between God and nature, has
   always been supposed, and believed, yet the true ground of such
   distinction, or the why, the how, and in what, they are essentially
   different, and must be so to all eternity, was to be found in no books,
   till the goodness of God, in a way not less than that of miracle, made
   a poor illiterate man, in the simplicity of a child, to open and relate
   the deep mysterious ground of all things; in which is shown the birth
   and beginning of nature, or the first workings of the inconceivable
   God, opening and manifesting his hidden, triune deity, in an outward
   state of glory, in the splendor of united fire, light, and spirit, all
   kindled, and distinguished, all united and beatified, by the hidden,
   invisible, inconceivable, supernatural Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
   working all the glories in heaven, and every kind of life, and blessing
   on earth, by visible, and invisible fire, light, and spirit.

   [Ltrs-23-3] This is the wonderful gift of God to these last distracted
   ages of the world; and as every purpose of God must stand, and sooner
   or later produce all that, which God intended by it; so the more the
   wise and the learned in all churches, reject this counsel of God, the
   more they will promote its success over themselves, and only help it,
   to come forth with greater strength, and glory to God, by being owned,
   and proclaimed by the mouths of babes, and sucklings.

   [Ltrs-23-4] Babel hath always had men for its builders; but the kingdom
   of God ever was, and ever will be made up of little children.

   Farewell.

   April 10, 1757.

   [Ltrs-23-5] P.S. I have read the pamphlet you sent on Divinity Studies.
   It may be said to be much better, than most of the kind in this and the
   last century, and infinitely beyond Mr. Wesley's Babylonish Address to
   the Clergy; but yet so wrong, as to be worse than no advice at all. We
   seem to be further from the gospel, in point of spirit, than in
   distance of time. What shall I say? Babel is not a city, it is the
   whole Christian world. As to all these directors of divinity-students,
   no more folly need be laid to their charge, than is done by our Lord in
   these words, "Without me ye can do nothing; as my Father sent me, so
   send I you; the Holy Spirit shall guide you into all truth." To all
   which the apostle subscribeth in these words, "Who hath made us able
   ministers, not of the letter, but of the spirit."

   [Ltrs-23-6] Now, put these words of Christ and his apostles, at the
   beginning and end of Mr. Wesley's Address, and then you will see that
   almost all that is betwixt them, is empty babble, fitter for an old
   grammarian, that was grown blear-eyed in mending dictionaries, than for
   one who had tasted the powers of the world to come, and had found the
   truth as it is in Jesus.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XXIV.

   To Mr. T. L.

   My dear L.,

   [Ltrs-24-1] Tamper with no physicians, but content yourself, to have
   that share of health, which a regular and good life can help you to.
   Reflect not upon your predominant complexion, or how long it will be,
   before you get from under its power. St. Paul wanted to be delivered
   from his thorn in the flesh. He had all he prayed for, though the thorn
   might continue, when God said to him, "My grace is sufficient for
   thee"; this was better to him, than if his thorn had been taken from
   him. This enabled him to say, "I will glory in my infirmities; for when
   I am weak, then I am strong." You believe, that if it was not for
   earnest and continual prayers, your turn to melancholy would get the
   better of you. You cannot believe this too much, for nothing else can
   preserve you, from being led away by every other evil temper. But let
   resignation to God, be the predominant part of your spirit of prayer;
   it is not so much ardent desires, as humble resignation to be as God
   pleases, that keeps the heart in the highest union with him. Faith and
   hope and love get their best strength, and work their highest work,
   when resignation is the salt wherewith they are seasoned.

   [Ltrs-24-2] You think, if you were to live an hundred years in an
   abstracted contemplation, some property of nature, would still be
   occasionally breaking forth in you. What occasion had you, my friend,
   to make this complaint about such a contemplation?

   [Ltrs-24-3] You have no business with it, nor any reason to expect it
   should do anything for you. Had you changed your words, and said, I
   believe if I were for a hundred years to be wholly trusting in, and
   depending upon God, to do that for me, which he has promised to do for
   all that trust in him, it would not be done: Had you expressed your
   complaint in these words, you would have seen, that neither faith, nor
   hope, nor love, nor resignation, would have allowed you to make it.
   Look at yourself, at the power of time, or anything that this or that
   complexion does, and then you may be afraid of everything; but look at
   God, as him that is to do all for you, and in you, and then you need be
   afraid of nothing. A thorn, or no thorn, bad or good blood, with all
   its effects, lose all their difference, as soon as you know, that you
   are not your own, nor left to yourself, nor where to seek a physician,
   that will not leave you unhealed.

   [Ltrs-24-4] We know that all things must work together for good, to
   them that love God. Now what signifies what the things are, if we are
   to have the same good from them, be they what they will? Let complexion
   show itself, let the dead ashes of old sins, seem to be ready to come
   to life again, what is all this, but helping us to be more alive unto
   God? Flesh will be flesh as long as we live, but every state of the
   flesh may help us to grow in the Spirit. Therefore rejoice evermore, in
   everything give thanks, and call nothing but this, abstracted
   contemplation.

   Farewell.
     __________________________________________________________________

Letter XXV.

   To a Clergyman of Westmoreland.

   Reverend Sir,

   [Ltrs-25-1] Concerning the following texts, God hardened the heart of
   pharaoh; "He hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
   hardeneth"; "Good and evil are from the Lord"; "I create light, and I
   create darkness"; you ask, how these things can be consistently
   affirmed of a God, all love and goodness to his creatures?

   [Ltrs-25-2] I would ask you also, is there any difficulty of admitting
   the truth of this scripture, "In God we live, and move, and have our
   being"? does this clash with the idea of a God all love and goodness to
   the creatures? Now take all the contrary things that are said of God,
   with relation to that which passes between God and man, and they all
   imply no more, affirm no more, than the single foregoing text, namely,
   that in every state of the life of man, be it what it will, either
   under a sense and enjoyment of good, or the power and pain of evil, it
   is all owing to this divine, original, essential relation between God
   and man, or because in him we live, and move, and have our being. For
   man, thus come from God, must through the whole course, or endless ages
   of his life, neither know, nor find, nor feel anything of good or evil,
   life or death, happiness or misery, but solely because of that, which
   God is in him, and to him, and because of that, which he is in God, and
   hath from him, by his original birth or creation.

   [Ltrs-25-3] The earthly animals, whose birth is only in and from this
   world, can have no evil of sin, or misery in their state, from God; and
   that only for this one reason, because they are not born of God, or
   partakers of the divine nature. Therefore God's creating evil in man,
   is the same thing, as if it were said, the divine birth in man, is that
   which creates his evil, because he could have no sin of a wrathful,
   proud, hardened heart, these things could neither exist in him, or be
   known by him, but because he came into being by a divine birth. Angels
   could not be diabolical spirits of darkness, fiery dragons of wrath,
   fury, malice, vengeance, envy, hatred, but because they were all born
   of God, to live and move and have their being in him. This has created
   all the evil of every kind, that they can feel or know in their whole
   state.

   [Ltrs-25-4] All the difficulty of reconciling such contrary things as
   are said of God, that he willeth only life and good, and yet that evil
   and death, are said to come from him, arises from our considering the
   operations of God, in a creaturely manner, or as we should understand
   the same contrary things, if they were affirmed of any creature.
   Whereas the operation of God, in its whole kind and nature, is as
   different from anything that can be done by creatures, as the work and
   manner of creation, is different, in power, nature, and manner, from
   that which creatures can do to one another. For (N.B.) the operation of
   God is never in or with the creature in any other manner, or doing any
   other thing, but that which it was and did in the creation of them.
   This, and this alone is the working of the deity in heaven and on
   earth; nothing comes from him, or is done by him through all the
   eternity of his creatures, but that essential manifestation of himself
   in them, which began the glory and perfection of their first existence.
   Now from this one, single, immutable operation of God, that he can be
   nothing else in, or towards the creature, but that same love and
   goodness, that he was to it, at its creation, it necessarily follows,
   that to the creature that turns from him, God can be nothing else to
   it, but the cause of all its evil and miserable state. Hence is that of
   the apostle, that "sin cometh by the Law, because where there is no
   Law, there is no transgression." Now God, or the divine nature in man,
   is the one great Law of God in man, from which, all that is good and
   all that is evil in him, hath its whole state and nature. His life can
   have no holiness or goodness in it, but as the divine nature within
   him, is the law by which he lives. He can commit no other sin, nor feel
   any kind of hurt or evil from it, but what comes from resisting, or
   rebelling against that of God, which is in him; and therefore the good
   and evil of man, are equally from God. And yet this could not be, but
   because of this ground, viz., that God is unchangeable love and
   goodness, and has only one will and work of love and goodness towards
   the creature. Just as the Law could not make sin, or evil, but because
   it has no sin or evil in itself, but is immutably righteous, holy, and
   good, and has only one will and one work towards man, whether he
   receives good or evil by it. Therefore the righteous, holy Law, that is
   so, because it never changes its good will, and work towards man, can
   truly say of itself these two contrary things, I create good, and I
   create evil, without the least contradiction. In the like truth, and
   from the same ground, it must be said, that happiness and misery, life
   and death, tenderness and hardness of heart, are from God, or because
   God is that which he is, in and to the birth and life of man.

   [Ltrs-25-5] This is the one true key to the state of man before his
   fall, to his state after his fall, and to the whole nature of his
   redemption. All which three states, are in a few words of our savior,
   set forth in the clearest and strongest degree of light. "I am the true
   vine, ye are the branches. He that abideth in me, and I in him,
   bringeth forth much fruit." This was man's first created state of glory
   and perfection, it was a living and abiding in God, such a birth and
   communion of life with him, and from him, as the branch hath in and
   from the vine.

   [Ltrs-25-6] The nature of man's fallen state, and whence he has all the
   evil that is in it, is set forth in the following words, "If a man
   abide not in me" (the true vine) "he is cast forth as a branch, and is
   withered, and men gather them, and they are cast into the fire and
   burned." This comprehends the whole of man's fallen state, namely, a
   being broken off from the life of God, and therefore become such a
   poor, withered, helpless creature, as may have all that done to him, as
   a firebrand of hell and devils, which men may do to a broken off,
   withered branch of the vine. And his state is as different from that of
   his creation, as a withered branch, smoking and burning in the fire, is
   different from its first state of life and growth in the rich spirit of
   the vine. Again, the whole of man's redeemed state, is in the following
   words, "I am the bread of life, that came down from heaven; He that
   eateth this bread shall live for ever; Whoso eateth my flesh and
   drinketh my blood, hath eternal life, dwelleth in me, and I in him."

   [Ltrs-25-7] This is our whole redemption, it consists in nothing else,
   but having the full life of God, or birth of Christ begotten, and born
   in us again. And thus do these three states of man fully show, that our
   first perfection, our miserable fall, and blessed redemption, have all
   that they have in them, whether of glory, or misery, merely and solely
   because God alone is all that is good, and can be nothing else but good
   towards the creature; and that neither angel, nor man can be happy or
   miserable, but because it either hath, or hath not, this one God of
   goodness essentially living and operating in it.

   [Ltrs-25-8] What a number of things called religion, are here cut off
   at once? since nothing is life, happiness, and glory, but the one
   essential operation of the triune God of love, and goodness within us;
   nothing is death, evil, or misery, but the departure, or turning from
   this essential God of our lives, to something that we would have from
   ourselves, or the creatures that are about us. And how greatly is he
   deluded, who living among the throng of religious schemes, thinks this,
   or that, or anything in nature, can be his atonement, his
   reconciliation, and union with God, but the spirit, the body, and the
   blood of Christ forming themselves into a new creature within him.
   Then, and then only is he that first man that God created, in whom
   alone he can be well pleased. But till then, he is that man, whom the
   cherub's two-edged flaming sword will not suffer to enter into
   paradise. How is it now, that we are to regain that first birth of
   Christ? Why just in the same way, as Adam had it at first. What did he
   then do? How did he help forward God's creating power? Now creating
   again, or restoring a first life in God, is just the same thing, and
   the same sole work of God, as creating us at first; and therefore we
   can have no more share of power in the one, than in the other. Nothing
   lies upon us as creatures fallen from God, or is required of us with
   regard to our growth in God, but not to resist that, which God is doing
   towards a new creation of us.

   [Ltrs-25-9] That which God is doing towards the new creation of us, had
   its beginning before the foundation of the world. "In Christ Jesus,"
   saith St. Paul, "we were chosen before the foundation of the world";
   the same as saying, that God out of his great mercy, had chosen to
   preserve a seed of the WORD and SPIRIT of God in fallen man, which
   through the mediation of a God incarnate, should revive into that
   fullness of stature in Christ Jesus, in which Adam was at first
   created. And all this work of God towards a new creation, is by that
   same essential operation of God in us, which at first created us in his
   image and likeness. And therefore nothing belongs to man in it, but
   only to yield himself up to it, and not resist it.

   [Ltrs-25-10] Now who is it, that may be said to resist it? It is
   everyone who does not deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow
   Christ. For everything but this, is that flesh that warreth against the
   spirit. The whole life of the natural man, resisteth all that essential
   operation of God, which would create us again in Christ Jesus. Further,
   every religious man resisteth it, in and by and through the whole
   course of his religion, who takes anything to be the truth of piety,
   the truth of devotion, the truth of religious worship, but faith, and
   hope, and trust, and dependence upon that alone, which the all-
   creating WORD, and all-sanctifying SPIRIT of God, inwardly,
   essentially, and vitally worketh in his soul.

   [Ltrs-25-11] Would you know, how you are to understand this essential
   operation of the triune holy deity in our souls, and why nothing else
   is, or can be that grace or help of God, which bringeth salvation, take
   this earthly similitude of the matter.

   [Ltrs-25-12] The light and air of this world, are universal powers,
   that are essential to the life of all the creatures of this world. They
   are essential, because nothing sees, till the light has brought forth a
   birth of itself in the essence of the creature, which birth of light
   can last no longer, than it is essentially united with the operation of
   that universal light which brought it forth: Air is also essential to
   the life of the creature, because nothing lives, till a birth of the
   air is born in it, nor any longer, than its own in-born air, is in
   essential union with that universal air, and operation of air, that
   first brought it forth. Now from this essential, unalterable relation
   between light and air, and seeing, living creatures, it plainly
   follows, that darkness and death, may be ascribed to them, as well as
   seeing and life.

   [Ltrs-25-13] Thus, if light and air could say anything of themselves in
   outward words, of that which they are, and do to all animals; if the
   light was to say, It is I that make seeing and blind eyes; if the air
   was to say, I create life, and I create death; could there be any
   difficulty of understanding, or allowing the truth of these words? Or
   could they be true in any other sense, but because where light is not,
   there is the cause of darkness, and where air is not, there is the
   cause of death. And so in the strictest truth of the words, seeing and
   blind eyes are from the light; living and dead bodies are from the air.
   Because darkness could not be, but because light does not shine in it,
   nor the body be dead, but because the breathing of the air is not in
   it.

   [Ltrs-25-14] It is thus, with the essential operation of the triune
   holy God, in the life of all divine and godly creatures, whether men or
   angels. The light and Holy Spirit of God, are universal powers, and
   essential to the birth of a godly life in the creature; which
   creaturely birth of a divine life, can begin no sooner, than the WORD
   and SPIRIT of God bring forth a birth of themselves in the creature,
   nor subsist any longer, than it is united with, and under the continual
   operation of that Word and Spirit, which brought it forth. Hence it is
   truly said, that spiritual life, and spiritual death, spiritual good
   and spiritual evil happiness and misery are from God, and that for this
   one reason, because there is no good, but in God, nor any other
   operation of God in, and to the creature, but that of heavenly life,
   light, love, and goodness.

   [Ltrs-25-15] When man, created in the image and likeness of God, to be
   an habitation and manifestation of the triune God of goodness, had by
   the perverseness of a false will, turned from his holy state of life in
   God, and so was dead to the blessed union, and essential operation of
   God in his soul, yet the goodness of God towards man, altered not, but
   stood in the same good will towards man as at the first, and willed,
   and could will nothing else towards the whole human nature, but that
   every individual of it, might be saved from that state of death and
   misery in an earthly nature, into which they were fallen.

   [Ltrs-25-16] Hence, that is, from this unchangeable love of God towards
   man, which could no more cease, than God could cease, came forth that
   wonderful scene of providence, of such a variety of means, and
   dispensations, of visions, voices, and messages from heaven, of law, of
   prophecies, of promises and threatenings, all adapted to the different
   states, conditions, and ages of the fallen world, for no other end, but
   by every art of divine wisdom, and contrivance of love, to break off
   man from his earthly delusion, and beget in him a sense of his lost
   glory, and so make him capable of finding again that blessed essential
   operation of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in his soul, which was the
   essential glory of his first creation.

   [Ltrs-25-17] Now, as in this scene of a divine and redeeming
   providence, God had to do with a poor, blind, earthly creature, that
   had lost all sense of heavenly things, as they are in themselves, so
   the wisdom of God, must often, as it were, humanize itself, and
   condescend to speak of himself after the manner of men. He must speak
   of his eyes, his ears, his hands, his nose, because the earthly
   creature, the mere natural man, could no otherwise be brought into any
   sense of that, which God was to him.

   [Ltrs-25-18] But now all this process of divine providence, was only
   for the sake of something higher; the mystery of God in man, and man in
   God, still lay hid, and was no more opened, than the mystery of a
   redeeming Christ, was opened in the type of a paschal lamb.

   [Ltrs-25-19] Pentecost alone was that, which took away all veils, and
   showed the kingdom of God, as it was in itself, and set man again under
   the immediate, essential operation of God, which first gave birth to a
   holy Adam in paradise. Types and shadows ended, because the substance
   of them was found. The cloven tongues of fire had put an end to them,
   by opening the divine eyes, which Adam had closed up, unstopping the
   spiritual ears, that he had filled with clay, and making his dumb sons
   to speak with new tongues.

   [Ltrs-25-20] And what did they say? They said all old things were gone,
   that a new heaven and a new earth were coming forth, that God himself
   was manifested in the flesh of men, who were now all taught of God. And
   what were they taught? That same which Adam was taught by his first
   created life in God, namely, that the immediate, essential operation of
   Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, was henceforth the birthright of all that
   were become true disciples of Christ. Thus ended the old creation, and
   the fall of man, in a God manifested in the flesh, dying in and for the
   world, and coming again in spirit, to be the life and light of all the
   sons of Adam.

   [Ltrs-25-21] Look now at all God's dispensations to the day of
   Pentecost, in this true point of view, as so many schools of different
   discipline and education of the natural man, till by a birth from
   above, he could bear the language of heaven, and be taught of God, and
   then you will sufficiently see the childish folly of those gray-headed
   doctors, who forgetting that the last times are come, when God will be
   known only as a spirit, worshipped only in spirit, because everything
   else is but shadow, and not the truth, yet set up themselves as
   masters, or rabbis of new schools of their own, which can only keep up
   that doting learning, and wisdom of words, which compelled the learned
   Jews, for the sake of God, and goodness, for the sake of Law and
   prophecy to crucify the Christ of God, as a Beelzebub, and blasphemer.

   [Ltrs-25-22] This old logic and criticism of scribes and Pharisees, is
   that which robs disputing Christians of the truth as it is in Jesus,
   and instead of the true bread that came down from heaven, feeds their
   unregenerate hearts with the dry husks of that, which can be got from
   text set against text in the outward letter. Nay so wise are these
   verbal proficients, as to think the gospel must be false, and the Bible
   itself only fit to be burned, if all that, is not to be ascribed to
   God, as true of him, as he is in himself, which in condescension to the
   poor, ignorant, fallen, earthly creature, he speaks of his eyes, his
   ears, his hands, his turning his back, and turning his face, his coming
   down, and going up, his fiery wrath, his destroying fury, everlasting
   vengeance. Whereas all these things are said, not because of that,
   which God is in himself, in his holy, supernatural being, but because
   of that, which man is, in the blindness of his fallen state, so
   ignorant of God, so averse to godliness, as only capable for a time, to
   be instructed by the impressions of such language: That is, till the
   threatenings of the Law, and the word of prophecy have done their work,
   and that day star ariseth in the heart, which knoweth, and teacheth,
   that CREATOR, REDEEMER, and LOVE, are the one true unchangeable, triune
   God, that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which from everlasting to
   everlasting have only one will, and one work of heavenly life, light,
   and love in, and towards the creature. And as true as this is, so true
   is it also, that from the first to the last man, no one was, or ever
   will be any further from this essential operation of the holy deity in
   his soul, but so far as he hath withdrawn himself from it. "God
   hardened the heart of pharaoh"; this saith neither more nor less, than
   that pharaoh had withdrawn his heart from God. When God saith to Moses,
   "I will harden his heart, that he will not let the people go"; it hath
   no other meaning, than to give to Moses that same full assurance of
   pharaoh's state, which he gave to Jeremiah at another time. "Thou
   shalt" (saith God) "speak all these words to them," (N.B.) "but they
   will not hearken to thee, thou shalt call unto them, but they will not
   answer thee." Jer. vii.27. God helped pharaoh to his hardened heart,
   just as he helped Adam not to be afraid of eating of the evil tree, by
   assuring him, that certain death was hid in it. But Adam's turning from
   God, to hear the voice and instruction of his own reason and
   imagination, and the suggestions of a satanical serpent, was that which
   created in him a new hardened heart, bold enough to eat of the
   forbidden tree. Now here, sir, I would have you observe, that this rise
   of the first sin, full demonstrates how the matter unalterably stands
   between God and every sinner, to the end of the world; there cannot be
   the smallest variation, either on the side of God, or on the side of
   the sinner. The whole nature of God, his one unalterable will and work,
   stands in the same full opposition and contrariety to every work, of
   sin in every man, as it did to Adam's first transgression. Nothing new
   will ever be in any sin, it has but one way of coming into the world,
   it must always be born out of self and satan, as the first was. And
   that which God did to prevent the first sin, saying to Adam, Eat not,
   that same miraculous voice of love, keeps saying, and saying to every
   son of Adam, Sin not.

   [Ltrs-25-23] Yet so wise in the ways of God, are some
   divinity-students, as to teach and preach, that the whole world,
   through its thousands of years, has been bringing forth its millions of
   myriads of sinners all round the globe, who as soon as they have done
   with the vanity and misery of this world, are to be roaring in the
   hottest fire of an eternal hell. For what? Why, because they have been
   just as wicked, as the decrees of God required and forced them to be.
   And also through every age of the world, there hath always been a
   little number of righteous, who were to go to heaven, which number had
   no littleness in it, but because God would not suffer it to be greater.

   [Ltrs-25-24] Can a charge like this be brought against satan? Nay, doth
   it not even free satan from all the evil that is charged upon him, and
   make him, though going about as a roaring lion, to be as insignificant
   a tool in the work of sin, as the preacher is in the work of godliness,
   though with ever so loud a voice, he beseeches the reprobate to be
   reconciled to God, or with tears in his eyes, exhorts the elect not to
   depart from him?

   [Ltrs-25-25] You once, I remember, said to me, that you thought I over
   did the matter, in my censure upon learning. Let learning therefore
   speak for itself. Let its own works praise it. What has it done? What
   has brought forth a multiplicity of churches, but that very same
   acuteness of learning, which asserts and proves there is but one?
   Whence comes transubstantiation, election, reprobation, justification
   of several sorts, necessity and insignificancy of works, Socinianism,
   Arianism, but from that knowledge of history, and critical skill in
   words, which is the glory of the learned world.

   [Ltrs-25-26] "Without me ye can do nothing," saith Christ. "That which
   a man soweth, that shall he reap," saith the apostle. Truths like
   these, of which the scripture is full, would keep all believers in the
   true church, attentive to the one thing needful, had not a learning
   falsely so called, filled all eyes with the dust of darkness.

   [Ltrs-25-27] Now, sir, be as sober as you will about the use and power
   of learning, logic, and eloquence, in the doctrines of salvation;
   condemn the bad use that heretics, schismatics, Arians and Socinians
   have made of them; yet let me whisper this truth into your ear, that
   you will never be delivered from the delusion and cheat of your own
   learning, till by a light of life risen up within you, you come to see,
   and know, that you want no more learning, to change you from a sinner
   into a saint, than Mary Magdalen did.

   [Ltrs-25-28] God said to Abraham, "Walk before me, and be thou
   perfect." This was the Hebrew school, in which the Father of the
   faithful, was to learn to be perfect. But here now comes the scholar-
   critic, and finds, that matters stand not thus now, because the
   glorious light of the gospel (he says) has discovered that all lies in
   an election and reprobation, and that salvation and damnation come from
   nothing else, the apostle expressly saying, "It is not of him that
   willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy." What
   a learned strife has there been about the meaning of these words? And
   yet they mean not one jot more or less, than when the apostle saith,
   "The natural man knoweth not the things of the spirit, neither can he
   know them." All that is in the one text, is in the other; and both of
   them say only this one great and good truth, namely, that the creature
   can have no divine life, light, goodness, and happiness, but from that,
   which the holy triune God is, and operates by a birth of his holy
   nature in it.

   Farewell.

   FINIS.
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
