     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: De Contemptu Mundi
      Creator(s): Eucherius of Lyons, St.
   CCEL Subjects: All; Classic; Early
      LC Call no: BR60.A6
     LC Subjects:

                  Christianity

                  Early Christian Literature. Fathers of the Church, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

                 EUCHERIUS OF LYONS, On Contempt for the World

  (1654 Vaughan translation)

THE SAINT PACHOMIUS ORTHODOX LIBRARY

   This document is in the public domain. Copying it is encouraged.

DE CONTEMPTU MUNDI,

  by St. Eucherius of Lyons

   translated by Henry Vaughan the Silurist
     __________________________________________________________________

Prefatory Material
     __________________________________________________________________

   [Editor's Note: Eucherius of Lyons is one of the great neglected
   spiritual writers of Western Orthodoxy. His ascetic mysticism is very
   much in the Eastern tradition; if there were a "Latin Philokalia",
   Eucherius would doubtless have a place in it. At the same time, his
   proverbs and apothegms, some of which may be found near the end of the
   present work, speak directly to people living in the world as much as
   to monks.

   For some reason, Eucherius is hard to find in English. It is remarkable
   but apparently true that the only unabridged English translation of any
   of his spiritual writings is the work you are about to read, here
   reissued with slightly modernized spelling and punctuation but
   otherwise just as it first appeared in 1654. Happily, by way of
   compensation, it is a very remarkable English version. The work of the
   brilliant Cavalier poet and mystical visionary Henry Vaughan the
   Silurist, "The World Contemned" was the first part of a spiritual
   anthology called "Flores Solitudinis", which Vaughan had hoped would
   trigger a monastic revival in the Church of England. Though that hope
   went unfulfilled in Vaughan's lifetime, his translation lives on to
   inspire modern English-speakers to a life of angelic holiness.

   The St. Pachomius Library will be issuing original modern translations
   of Eucherius' other works as they are completed. -- N. Redington]
     __________________________________________________________________

THE WORLD CONTEMNED,

  IN A

  Parenetical Epistle written by
  the Reverend Father

  EUCHERIUS,

    Bishop of Lyons, to his Kinsman

  VALERIANUS.

    Translated into English by Henry VAUGHAN, Silurist.

   "Love not the World, neither the things that are in the world. If any
   man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. . . They are
   of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth
   them."

   1 John 2:15 and 4:5.

   "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated
   you. . . If ye were of the world, the world would love his own, but
   because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
   world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said
   unto you, the Servant is not greater than the Lord: if they have
   persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they have kept my
   saying, they will keep yours also."

   John 18:15, 19, and 20.

   Originally printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Princes Armes, St.
   Paul's

   Churchyard, London, anno Domini 1654.
     __________________________________________________________________

  ADVERTISEMENT [Translator's Introduction]

   Heribert Ros-weyd published this piece at Antwerp, 1621. It is
   mentioned by Gennadius, cap. 63. -De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis-; and
   Erasmus -- long before Ros-weyd's edition -- writ some Notes upon it.
   The author Eucherius was a Roman senator, but being converted to the
   faith he left the Senate, and lived in a poor cell by the river
   Druentium, where his wife Galla died. His two daughters, Consortia and
   Tullia, having learnt Christ, continued both in the virgin-life, -et
   signorum gloria claruerunt-. He sate Bishop in the chair of Lyons -- as
   I find him placed by Helvicus -- in the year of our Lord 443. Some will
   have him a century lower, but that difference weakens not the certainty
   of it. The piece itself -- in the original -- is most elaborate and
   judicious, and breathes that -togatam elegantiam- which in most of the
   Roman senators was not more acquired than natural.

   What this Valerian was [to whom the epistle was addressed] -- more then
   our author's kinsman, by whose pen his name lives -- is not certainly
   known. Some will have him to be Priscus Valerianus, the prefect, or
   deputy of France, mentioned by Sidonius Apollinaris: others are willing
   to let him pass for that Valerian whose Homilies now extant were
   published by Sirmondus. But as it is not determinable, so is it not
   material. This we may safely conclude: that he was a very eminent noble
   personage, and one that followed too much after temporal pomp, and the
   powers of this world; though neither of them could lend him so much
   light, as would keep him from obscurity. To bring down these top
   branches, Eucherius lays the axe to the root of the tree, by shewing
   him the vanity, and the iniquity of riches and honours, the two grand
   inticements of popular spirits. And this he doth with such powerful and
   clear reasons, that to virtuous and peaceful minds he hath rendered
   them not only contemptible, but odious. Much more might have been
   spoken against them, but -- seeing the age we live in hath made all his
   arguments demonstrations -- he hath in my judgement spoken enough. --
   H.V.S.
     __________________________________________________________________

  EUCHERIUS TO HIS KINSMEN VALERIANUS:

   THEY are happily linked in the bond of blood who are held together in
   the bond of love. And for this gift - which is descended to us from the
   father of lights, - both you and myself may greatly rejoice: whom love
   as well as kindred hath united, and those two fair obligations have
   betrothed in one entire affection. One of them we took from the fathers
   of the flesh, and the other from our private dispositions. This double
   tie by which - love bounding us on the one side, and blood on the
   other, - we are mutually knit together, hath enforced me to enlarge
   myself in this Epistle with some excess more then usual: that I might
   commend unto your consideration the cause of your own soul, and assert
   the work of our profession to be that supreme beatitude which is only
   true, and capable of those things which are eternal.

   And indeed your own pious propension is not repugnant of holy living,
   who already by a forward felicity of manners have in some points
   prevented, and met with many things which are taught unto us by sacred
   learning: so that by the means of provident and discrete Nature, you
   seem unto me to have seized upon many duties of religion; as the
   concessions and indulgencies of our good God towards you, whose gift it
   is, that the divine wisdom should partly find in you, and partly confer
   upon you the riches of His kingdom.

   But although -- by the hands of your father and father-in-law -- you
   have been already advanced and seated upon the highest pinacles of
   temporal honours, and are still adorned and surrounded with illustrious
   titles descending from them both; yet I desire, and long to find in
   you, a thirst of greater and far higher honours, and shall now call you
   not to earthly, but to heavenly honours, not to the dignity and
   splendor of one short age, but to the solid and enduring glories of
   eternity: for the only true and indelible glory is, to be glorified in
   eternity.

   I shall therefore speak unto you, not the wisdom of this world, but
   that secret and hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world unto
   our glory. I shall speak with much care and affection towards you, and
   with very little respect and animadversion of myself; for I have in
   this attempt considered more what I wish to see practised in you, than
   what I am able to do in myself.

   The first duty of man ordained and brought forth into this world for
   that end, -- my most dear Valerian! -- is to know his creator, and
   being known, to confess Him, and to resign or give up his life -- which
   is the wonderful and peculiar gift of God, -- to the service and
   worship of the Giver; for what he received by God's free donation, may
   be employed in true devotion, and what was conferred upon him in the
   state of wrath and unworthiness, may by an obedient resignation make
   him precious and beloved. For of this saving opinion are we; that as it
   is most certain, that we came forth first from God, so should we
   believe it, and press on still towards Him: whereupon we shall
   conclude, that he only rightly and divinely apprehends the purpose of
   God in making man who understands it thus, that God Himself made us for
   Himself.

   It is then our best course to bestow our greatest care upon the soul;
   so shall that which is the first and highest in dignity be not the
   lowest and last in consideration. Amongst us Christians, let that which
   is the first in order be the first cared for; let salvation, which is
   the chiefest profit, be our chiefest employment. Let the safeguard and
   the defense of this take up all our forces; let it be not only our
   chiefest, but our sole delight. As it surpasseth all other things in
   excellency, so let it in our care and consideration.

   Our supreme duty is that which we owe to God, and the next appertains
   to the soul. And yet these two are such loving correlates, that though
   every one of the is a duty of supreme consequence, and such as by no
   means we may presume to neglect or omit, yet cannot we possibly perform
   any one of them without the other. So that whosoever will serve God
   doth at the same time provide for his own soul; and he that is careful
   for his own soul doth at the same time serve God. So that the state of
   these two sovereign duties in man, is by a certain compendious
   dependency and co-intention rendered very easy, while the faithful
   performance of the one is a perfect consumation of both: for by the
   unspeakable tenderness and mercy of God, the good we do to our own
   souls is the most acceptable service and sacrifice that we can offer
   unto Him.

   Much physical curiosity, much care and many strict observations are
   bestowed upon the body; much pain it undergoes in hope of health; and
   deserves the soul no medicine? If it be but fit and necessary, that
   diverse helps and means of healing are sought for the body, for the
   recovering only of a temporal and transitory health, is it not unjust
   that the soul should be excluded, and be suffered to languish and
   putrify with deadly and spiritual diseases? Shall the soul only be a
   stranger to those proper and precious remedies ordained for it by the
   Physician? Yea, rather, if so many things are provided for the body,
   let the provision for the soul be far more abundant: for if it was
   truly said by some, that this fleshy frame is the servant, and the soul
   the mistress, then will it be very undecent and injurious, that the
   better part should require the better attendance? For with constant and
   intentive diligence should we look on that side where the greater
   dignity and our most precious treasure is laid up.

   It is not agreeable to reason, and it takes from the honour of our
   employment, that we should subject it to the unworthier party. The
   flesh being always inclined to viciousness draws us back to the Earth,
   as to its proper center and original: but the soul being descended from
   the Father of lights, is like the sparks of fire still flying upwards.
   The soul is the image of God in us, and the precious pledge of his
   future munificence. Let us employ all our innate forces and all
   outwards auxiliaries for the preservation of this: if we manage and
   defend it faithfully, we take care for and protect the entrusted pledge
   and purchased possession of God.

   What convenience can we have to build, unless we do first of all lay
   the foundation? But to him that designed a superstructure of true
   blessings, the fundamental must be salvation. And if he hath not laid
   that foundation, upon what can the consequences he hopes for be
   builded? How shall he be filled with the increase of those
   remunerations and after-blessings, that wants the first-fruits, and
   denies the rewarder? What portion can he have in joys of eternity that
   will be wanting to his own salvation? How can he live the life of the
   blessed, that will not rise from death? Or what will it benefit him to
   heap up temporal provision, and the materials of this world, when he
   hath stored up nothing for the comfort of his soul? Or as our Lord
   JESUS CHRIST hath said, "What is a man profited, if he gains the whole
   world, and lose his own soul?" [Matthew 16:26]

   There can therefore be no cause for sparing and laying up, where it is
   manifest that the soul is already lost; where salvation is forfeited,
   what gain or profit can he hope for? Or wherein shall the true treasure
   be laid up, or wherewith shall he receive it, when the soule's precious
   vessel, and the storehouse of eternal joys, is utterly ruined and
   broken? Let us therefore while we have time labour for true riches, and
   make earnest haste to that holy and heavenly commerce, which is worth
   our looking and longing after.

   Eternal life may be obtained in a very few days: which days, though
   they should be blest with an inoffensive and untainted holiness of
   life, yet because they are but few are to be lightly esteem'd of: for
   nothing can be rich in value, which is but short in duration: nor can
   that procure any long or durable joys, whose time of existence or abode
   is narrow and transient. The short accomodations of this life have but
   short effects. It seems therefore but just unto me, that to the joys of
   this present life, -- if it hath any -- we should prefer the true and
   indubitable joys of that which is everlasting. For the felicity we
   enjoy here is at best but temporal, but the other is eternal; and the
   fruition of a transitory, uncertain happiness is but a frailty and
   accident; but the possession of inviolable and never ending joys is
   triumph and security.

   It is clear then, that the eternal life is most blessed; for what other
   thing can be named, or thought upon, that is more happy than
   everlasting life? As for this present short life, it is so very short,
   that it is withal most miserable. It is pressed and assaulted on every
   side with surrounding, inevitable sorrows; it is distressed with many
   evil defects, and tossed to and fro with secret and penal accidents.
   For what is there in all the whole world that is so uncertain, so
   various, and so replenished with troubles, as the course of this life?
   which is full of labour, full of anguish, fraught with cares, and made
   ominous with dangers; which is distracted with violent and sudden
   mutations, made unpleasant with bodily distempers, afflicted with
   thoughtfulness, and lies naked to all the whirlwinds of time and
   chance? What benefit then, yea, what reason have you to turn aside and
   run away with [= from] eternal joys, that you may pursue and follow
   after temporal miseries!

   Do not you see, my dear Valerian, how every one that is provident --
   even in this life -- doth with plenty of all necessaries furnish that
   cottage or field, where he knows he shall reside? and where he abides
   but for a short time, his provision is accordingly; where he intends a
   longer stay, he provides likewise a greater supply? Unto us also who in
   this present world -- being straightened on every side -- have but a
   very short time, are eternal ages reserv'd in the world which is to
   come; if so be that we competently provide for an eternal state, and
   seek only what is sufficient for the present, not perversely bestowing
   the greatest care upon the shortest and smallest portion of time, and
   the smallest care on the time of greatest and endless extent.

   And indeed I know not which should soonest or most effectually incite
   us to a pious care of life eternal, either the blessings which are
   promised us in that state of glory, or the miseries which we feel in
   this present life. Those from above most lovingly invite and call upon
   us; these below most rudely and importunately would expell hence.
   Seeing therefore that the continual evils of this life would bring us
   hence into a better, if we will not be induced by the good, let us then
   be compelled by the evil. Both the good and the bad agree to incite us
   to the best, and though at difference amongst themselves, yet both
   consent to make us happy. For while the one invites us, and the other
   compells us, both are solicitous for our good.

   If some eminent and powerful prince, having adopted you for his son and
   co-partner, should forthwith send for you by his ambassador; you would
   -- I believe -- break through all difficulties, and the wearisome
   extent of sea and land, that you might appear before him, and have your
   adoption ratified. God Almighty, the Maker and the Lord of Heaven and
   Earth, and all that is in them, calls you to this adoption, and offers
   unto you (if you will receive it) that dear style "a son", by which He
   calls His Only Begotten, and your glorious Redeemer. And will you not
   be inflamed and ravished with His divine love? will you not make haste,
   and begin your journey towards Heaven, lest swift destruction come upon
   you, and the honours offered you be frustrated by a sad and sudden
   death?

   And to obtain this adoption, you shall not need to pass through the
   unfrequented and dangerous solitudes of the Earth, or to commit your
   self to the wide and perillous sea: when you will, this adoption is
   within your reach, and lodgeth with you. And shall this blessing,
   because it is as easy in the getting as it is great in the consequence,
   find you therefore backward or unwilling to attain it? How hard a
   matter to the lukewarm and the dissembler will the making sure of this
   adoption prove? for as to the faithful and obedient it is most easy, so
   to the hypocrite and the rebellious, it is most difficult.

   Certainly, it is the love of life that hath enslaved us so much to a
   delectation and dotage upon temporal things. Therefore do I now advise
   you, who are a lover of life, to love it more. It is the right way of
   persuading, when we do it for no other end but to obtain that from you,
   which of your own accord you desire to grant us. Now for this life
   which you love am I an ambassador: and intreat that this life which you
   love in its transient and momentary state, you would also love in the
   eternal. But how or in what manner you may be said to love this present
   life, unless you desire to have it made most excellent, perfect, and
   eternally permanent, I cannot see; for that which hath the power to
   please you when it is but short and uncertain, wil please you much more
   when it is made eternal and immutable: and that which you dearly love
   and value, though you have it but for a time, will be much more dear
   and precious to you, when you shall enjoy it without end. It is
   therefore but fit, that the temporal life should look still towards the
   eternal, that through the one, you may pass into the other. You must
   not rob your self of the benefits of the life to come, by a crooked and
   perverse use of the present. This life must not oppose itself to the
   damage and hurt of the future: for it were very absurd and unnatural,
   that the love of life should cause the destruction and then death of
   life.

   Therefore whither you judge this temporal life worthy of your love, or
   your content; my present argument will be every way very reasonable.

   [An excellent dilemma! -Vaughan, tr.]

   For if you contemn it, your reason to do so is that you may obtain a
   better: and if you love it, you must so much the more love that life
   which is eternal.

   But I rather desire, that you would esteem of it as you have found it;
   and judge it to be -- as it is indeed -- full of bitterness and
   trouble, a race of tedious and various vexations; and that you would
   utterly forsake and renounce both it, and its occupations. Cut off at
   last that wearisome and endless chain of secular employments, that one
   and the same slavery, though in several negotiations. Break in sunder
   those cords of vain cares, in whose successive knots you are always
   entangled, and bound up, and in every one of which your travail is
   renewed and begun again. Let this rope of sands, this coherency of vain
   causes, be taken away: in which -- as long as men live -- the tumult of
   affairs (being still lengthen'd by an intervening succession of fresh
   cares) is never ended, but runs on with a fretting and consuming
   solicitousness, which makes this present life, that is already of
   itself short and miserable enough, far more short and more miserable.
   Which also -- according to the success or crossness of affairs -- lets
   in divers times vain and sinful rejoicings, bitter sorrows, anxious
   wishes, and suspicious fears.

   Let us last of all cast off all those things which make this life in
   respect of their employment but very short, but in respect of cares and
   sorrows very long. Let us reject and resolutely contemn this uncertain
   world, and the more uncertain manners of it, wherein the peasant as
   well as the prince is seldom safe, where things that lie low are
   trodden upon, and the high and lofty totter and decline. Choose for
   yourself what worldly estate you please: there is no rest either in the
   mean, or the mighty. Both conditions have their miseries, and their
   misfortunes. The private and obscure is subject to disdain, the public
   and splendid unto envy.

   Two prime things I suppose there are, which strongly enchain and keep
   men bound in secular negotiations; and having bewitch'd their
   understanding, retain them still in that dotage; the pleasure of riches
   and the dignity of honours. The former of which ought not to be called
   pleasure, but poverty; and the latter is not dignity, but vanity. These
   two -- being join'd in one subtile league -- set upon man, and with
   alternate, ensnaring knots disturb and entangle his goings. These --
   besides the vain desires which are peculiar to themselves -- infuse
   into the mind of man other deadly and pestiferous lustings, which are
   their consequents; and with a certain pleasing enticement solicit and
   overcome the hearts of mankind.

   As for riches -- that I may speak first of them -- what is there, I
   pray, or what can there be more pernicious? They are seldom gotten
   without injustice; by such an administrator are they gathered, and by
   such a steward they must be kept; for covetousness is the root of all
   evils. And there is indeed a very great familiarity betwixt these two,
   riches and vices [-divitiae et vitia-] in their names, as well as in
   their nature. And are they not also very frequently matter of disgrace,
   and an evil report? Upon which consideration it was said by one, that
   riches were tokens of injuries.

   [-- Every rich man is either a tyrant himself, or the son of a tyrant.
   -Henry Vaughan, tr.-- ]

   In the possession of corrupt persons they publish to the world their
   bribery and unrighteousness, and elsewhere, they allure the eyes, and
   incite the spirits of seditious men to rebellion, and in the custody of
   such they bear witness of the sufferings, and the murther of innocent
   persons, and the plundering of their goods.

   But grant that these disasters should not happen, can we have any
   certainty, whither these things that make themselves wings, will fly
   away after our decease? "He layeth up treasure" -- saith the Psalmist
   -- "and knoweth not for whom he gathers it."

   But suppose that you should have an heir after your own heart, doth he
   not oftentimes destroy and scatter what the father hath gathered? doth
   not an ill-bred son, or our ill choice of a son-in-law, prove the
   frequent ruin of all our labours and substance in this life? What
   pleasure can there be in such riches, whose collection is sin and
   sorrow, and our transmission, or bequeathing of them, anxious and
   uncertain?

   Whither then at last will this wild and devious affection of men carry
   them? You know how to love accidental and external goods, but cannot
   love your own self. That which you so much long for is abroad, and
   without you; you place your affection upon a foreigner, upon an enemy.
   Return, or retire rather into yourself, and be you dearer and nearer to
   your own heart then those things which you call yours. Certainly if
   some wise man, and skilful in the affairs of this world, should
   converse and come to be intimate with you, it would better please you,
   that he should affect your person, than affect your goods; and you
   would choose, that he should rather love you for your self, than for
   your riches; you would have him to be faithful unto man, not to his
   money. What you would have another to perform towards you, that do for
   yourself, who ought to be the most faithful to your self. Our selves,
   our selves we should love, not those things which we phantastically
   call ours. And let this suffice to have been spoken against riches.

   As for the honours of this world -- to speak generally, and without
   exception, for I shall not descend to particulars -- what dignity can
   you justly attribute to those things which the base man, and the bad,
   as well as the noble and good, promiscuously obtain, and all of them by
   corruption and ambition? The same honour is not conferred upon men of
   the same merits, and dignity makes not a difference betwixt the worthy
   and the unworthy, but confounds them. So that which should be a
   character of deserts, by advancing the good above the bad, doth
   unjustly make them equal; and after a most strange manner there is in
   no state of life less difference made betwixt the worst men and the
   best, than in that state which you term honourable. Is it not then a
   greater honour to be without that honour, and to be esteemed of
   according to our genuine worth, and sincere carriage, than according to
   the false gloss of promiscuous, deceiving honours?

   And these very things -- - how big soever they look - -- what fleeting
   and frail appearances are they? We have seen of late men eminently
   honourable, seated upon the very spires and top of dignity, whose
   incredible treasures purchased them a great part of the world; their
   success exceeded their own desires, and their prodigious fortunes
   amazed their very wishes: but these I speak of were private
   prosperities. Kings themselves with all their height and
   imperiousnesse, with all their triumphs and glory, shined but for a
   time. Their clothings were of wrought gold, their diadems sparkled with
   the various flames and differing relucencies of precious stones; their
   palaces were thronged with princely attendants, their roofs adorned
   with gilded beams, their will was a law, and their words were the rules
   and coercive bounds of mankind. But who is he, that by a temporal
   felicity can lift his head above the stage of human chances? Behold
   now, how the vast sway and circumference of these mighty is no where to
   be found! Their riches and precious things too are all gone, and [so
   too] they themselves: the possessors and masters of these royal
   treasures! Most late [i.e. recent] and most famous kingdoms -- even
   amongst us -- are now become a certain fable. All those things which
   sometimes were reputed here to be very great are now become none at
   all.

   Nothing I think, nay I am sure, of all these riches, honours, powers
   went along with them from hence: all they took with them was the
   precious substance of their faith and piety. These only -- when they
   were deprived of all other attendants -- waited on them, and like
   faithful, inseperable companions, travelled with them out of this
   world. With this provision are they now fed; with these riches, and
   with these honours are they adorned. In these they rest, and this
   goodness is now their greatness.

   Wherefore, if we be taken at all with honours and riches, let us be
   taken with true and durable ones. Every good man exchangeth these
   earthly dignities for those which are celestial, and earthen treasures
   for the heavenly. He lays up treasure there, where a most exact and
   unconfused difference is made betwixt the good and the bad; where that
   which is once gotten shall be for ever enjoyed; where all things may be
   obtained, and where nothing can be lost.

   But seeing we are fallen into a discourse of the frailty of temporal
   things, let us not forget the frail condition of this short life. What
   is it, I beseech you, what is it? Men see nothing more frequently then
   death, and mind nothing more seldom. Mankind is by a swift mortality
   quickly driven into the West, or setting point of life, and all
   posterity by the unalterable law of succeeding ages and generations
   follow after. Our fathers went hence before us; we shall go next, and
   our children must after. As streams of water falling from on high, the
   one still following the other, do in successive circles break and
   terminate at the banks; so the appointed times and successions of men
   are cut off at the boundary of death. This consideration should take up
   our thoughts both night and day; this memorial of our frail condition
   should keep us still awake. Let us always think the time of our
   departure to be at hand; for the day of death, the further we put it
   off, comes the faster, and is by so much the nearer to us. Let us
   suspect it to be near, because we know not how far! Let us, as the
   Scripture saith, "Make plain our ways before us". [Isaiah 28:25]

   If we make this the business of our thoughts, and meditate still upon
   it, we shall not be frighted with the fear of death. Blessed and happy
   are all you who have already reconciled yourselves unto Christ! No
   great fear of death can disturb them, who desire to be dissolved that
   they may be with Christ; who in the silence of their own bosoms,
   quietly, and long since prepared for it, expect the last day of their
   pilgrimage here. They care not much how soon they end this temporal
   life, that pass from it into life eternal.

   Let not the populacy and throng of loose livers or hypocritical
   time-pleasers persuade us to a neglect of life, neither be you induced
   by the errors of the many to cast away your particular salvation. What
   will the multitude in that day of God's judgement avail us, when every
   private person shall be sentenced, where the examinations of works, and
   every man's particular actions, not the example of the common people,
   shall absolve him? Stop your ears, and shut your eyes against such
   damnable precedents that invite you destruction. It is better to sow in
   tears, and to plant eternal life with the few, then to lose it with the
   multitude. Let not therefore the number of sinful men weaken your
   diligence of not sinning; for the madness of those that sin against
   their own souls can be no authority unto us. I beseech you look always
   upon the vices of others as their shame, not your example.

   If it be your pleasure to look for examples, seek them rather from that
   party, which though the least, yet if considered as it is a distinct
   body, is numerous enough. Seek them -- I say -- from that party,
   wherein you shall find those ranged, who wisely understood wherefore
   they were born, and accordingly, while they lived, did the business of
   life; who eminent for good works, and excelling in virtue, pruned and
   dressed the present life, and planted the future. Nor are our examples
   -- though of this rare kind -- only copious, but great withal, and most
   illustrious.

   For what worldly nobility, what honours, what dignity, what wisdom,
   what eloquence, or learning have not betaken themselves to this
   heavenly warfare? What sovereignty now hath not with all humility
   submitted to this easy yoke of Christ? And certainly it is a madness
   beyond error and ignorance for any to dissemble in the cause of their
   salvation. I could -- but that I will not be tedious to you -- out of
   an innumerable company produce many by name, and shew you what eminent
   and famous men in their times have forsaken this world, and embraced
   the most strict rule of Christian religion. And some of these --
   because I may not omit all, -- I shall cursorily introduce.

   Clement the Roman, of the stock of the Caesars, and the ancient lineage
   of the senators; a person fraught with science, and most skilful in the
   liberal arts, betook himself to this path of the just; and so uprightly
   did he walk therein, that he was elected to the episcopal dignity of
   Rome.

   Gregory of Pontus, a minister of holy things, famous at first for his
   humane learning and eloquence, became afterwards most eminent by those
   divine graces conferr'd upon him. For -- as the faith of ecclesiastical
   History testifies, -- amongst other miraculous signs of his effectual
   devotion, he removed a mountain by prayer, and dried up a deep lake.

   Gregory Nazianzen, another holy father, given also at first to
   philosophy and humane literature, declined at last those worldly
   rudiments, and embraced the true and heavenly philosophy: to whose
   industry also we owe no meaner a person than Basil the Great; for being
   his intimate acquaintance and fellow-student in secular sciences, he
   entered one day into his auditory, where Basilius was then a reader of
   rhetorick, and leading him by the hand out of the School, dissuaded him
   from that employment with this gentle reproof: "Leave this vanity, and
   study thy salvation." And shortly after both of them came to be
   faithful stewards in the house of God, and have left us in the Church
   most useful and pregnant monuments of their Christian learning.

   Paulinus Bishop of Nola, the great ornament and light of France, a
   person of princely revenues, powerful eloquence, and most accomplished
   learning, so highly approved of this our profession that choosing for
   himself "the better part", he divided all his princely inheritance
   amongst the poor, and afterward filled most part of the world with his
   elegant and pious writings.

   Hilarius of late, and Petronius now in Italy, both of them out of the
   fulness of honours and power, betook themselves to this course; the one
   entring into the religion, the other into the priesthood.

   [Hilarius about this time -- which was 435 years after Christ -- did
   lead a monastical life; but upon the death of Honoratius, he was
   elected his successor in the Bishoprick of Orleans, in which dignity he
   continued not long, for being addicted to solitariness, he resigned it,
   and returned into the wildernesse. -- Vaughan, tr.]

   And when shall I have done with this great "cloud of witnesses", if I
   should bring into the field all those eloquent contenders for the
   faith, Firmianus, Minutius, Cyprian, Hilary, Chrysostom and Ambrose?
   These I believe spoke to themselves in the same words which another of
   our profession -- St. Augustine -- used as a spur to drive himself out
   of the secular life to this blessed and heavenly vocation. They said, I
   believe, "What is this? The unlearned get up, and lay hold upon the
   kingdom of heaven, and we with our learning, behold where we wallow in
   flesh and blood." This surely they said, and upon this consideration
   they also rose up, and tooke the kingdom of Heaven by force.

   Having now in part produced these reverend witnesses, whose zeal for
   the Christian faith hath exceeded most of their successors, though they
   also were bred up in secular rudiments, persuasive eloquence, and the
   pomp and fulnesses of honours, I shall descend unto kings themselves,
   and to that head of the world, the Roman Empire. And here I think it
   not necessary that those royal religious ancients of the old world
   should be mentioned at all. Some of their posterity, and the most
   renowned in our sacred Chronicles I shall make use of; as David for
   piety, Josiah for faith, and Ezechias for humility. The later times
   also have been fruitfull in this kind, nor is this our age altogether
   barren of pious princes, who draw near to the knowledge of the only
   true and immortal King, and with most contrite and submissive hearts
   acknowledge and adore the Lord of Lords. The Court, as well as the
   cloister, hath yielded saints, of both sexes. And these in my opinion
   are more worthy your imitation than the mad and giddy commonality; for
   the examples of these, carry with them in the world to come salvation,
   and in the present world, authority.

   You see also how the days and the years, and all the bright ornaments
   and luminaries of Heaven, do with an unwearied duty execute the
   commands and decrees of their Creatour; and in a constant, irremissive
   tenor continue obedient to his ordinances. And shall we -- for whose
   use these lights were created, and set in the firmament,-- seeing we
   know our Master's will, and are not ignorant of His commandments, stop
   our ears against them? And to these vast members of the universe it was
   but once told what they should observe unto the end of the world; but
   unto us line upon line, precept upon precept, and whole volumes of
   God's commandments are every day repeated. Add to this, that man -- for
   this also is in his power -- should learn to submit himself to the will
   of his Creator, and to be obedient to His ordinances; for by paying his
   whole duty unto God, he gives withal a good example unto men.

   But if there be any that will not return unto their Maker and be
   healed, can they therefore escape the arm of their Lord, in whose hand
   are the spirits of all flesh? Whither will they fly, that would avoid
   the presence of God? What covert can hide them from that eye which is
   everywhere, and sees all things? Let them hear thee, holy David, let
   them hear thee:

   PSALM 139

     Whither shall I go from Thy presence, Or whither shall I flee from
     Thy Spirit? If I ascend into Heaven, Thou art there: If I make my
     bed in Hell, behold Thou art there. If I take the wings of the
     morning, And dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea; Even there
     shall Thy hand lead me, And Thy right hand shall hold me. If I say,
     "Surely the darkness shall cover me," Even the night shall be light
     about Thee. Yea the darkness hideth not from Thee, But the night
     shineth as the day: The darkness and the light are both alike to
     Thee.

   Therefore -- willing or unwilling -- though they should absent
   themselves from the Lord of all the world by their wills, yet shall
   they never be able to get their persons out of His jurisdiction and
   supreme right. They are absent from Him indeed in their love and
   affections: but He is present with them in His prerogative and anger.
   So then being runagates they are shut up, and -- which is a most
   impious madness -- they live without any consideration or regard of
   God, but within His power. And if these being earthly masters, when
   their servants run away from them, with a furious and hasty search
   pursue after them; or if they renounce their service, prosecute them
   for it, and become the asserters of their own right over them; why will
   they not themselves render unto their Master which is in Heaven His
   most just right? Why will they not stay in his Family, and freely offer
   themselves unto His service, and be as impartial judges in the cause of
   God as in their own?

   Why with so much dotage do we fix our eyes upon the deceitful looks of
   temporal things? Why do we rest ourselves upon those thorns only which
   we see beneath us? Is it the eye alone that we live by? Is there
   nothing useful about us but that wanderer? We live also by the ear, and
   at that inlet wee receive the glad tidings of salvation, which fills us
   with earnest groans for our glorious liberty and the consummation of
   the promises. Whatsoever is promised, whatsoever is preached unto us,
   let us wait for it with intentive wishes and most eager desires. That
   faithful one, the blessed Author of those promises, assures us
   frequently of his fidelity and performance; let us covet earnestly his
   best promises.

   But notwithstanding this which hath been spoken, if a sober and
   virtuous use were made of the eye, we might by that very faculty be
   drawn to a certain sacred longing after immortality, and the powers of
   the world to come, if that admiration which by contemplating the rare
   frame of the world we are usually filled with were returned upon the
   glorious Creator of it, by our praises and benediction of Him. Or if we
   would meditate what a copious active and boundless light shall fill our
   eyes in the state of immortality, seeing so fair a luminary is allowed
   us in the state of corruption: or what transcendant beauty shall be
   given to all things in that eternal world, seeing this transitory one
   is so full of majesty and freshness. There can be no excuse for us, if
   we solicit the faculties of these members to abuse and perverseness.
   Let them rather be commodiously applied to both lifes, and so minister
   to the use of the temporal as not to cast off their duty to the
   eternal.

   But if pleasure and love delight us, and provoke our senses, there is
   in Christian religion, a love of infinite comfort, and such delights as
   are not nauseous and offensive after fruition. There is in it, that
   which not only admits of a most vehement and overflowing love, but
   ought also to be so beloved; namely, God, blessed for evermore, the
   only beautiful, delightful, immortal and supreme good, Whom you may
   boldly and intimately love as well as piously; if in the room of your
   former earthly affections you entertain heavenly and holy desires. If
   you were ever taken with the magnificence and dignity of another
   person, there is nothing more magnificent than God. If with anything
   that might conduce to your honour and glory, there is nothing more
   glorious then Him. If with the splendour and excellency of pompous
   shows, there is nothing more bright, nothing more excellent. If with
   fairness and pleasing objects, there is nothing more beautiful. If with
   verity and righteousness, there is nothing more just, nothing more
   true. If with liberality, there is nothing more bountiful. If with
   incorruption and simplicity, there is nothing more sincere, nothing
   more pure than that supreme goodness.

   Are you troubled that your treasure and store is not proportionable to
   your mind? The Earth and the fulness thereof are under His lock. Do you
   love anything that is trusty and firm? There is nothing more friendly,
   nothing more faithful than Him. Do you love any thing that is
   beneficial? There is no greater benefactor. Are you delighted with the
   gravity or gentleness of any object? There is nothing more terrible
   than his Almightiness, nothing more mild then His goodness. Do you love
   refreshments in a low estate, and a merry heart in a plentiful? Joy in
   prosperity and comforts in adversity are both the dispensations of His
   hand. Wherefore it stands with all reason, that you should love the
   giver more than His gifts, and Him from whom you have all these things,
   more than the things themselves. Riches, honours, and all things else,
   whose present lustre attracts and possesseth your heart, are not only
   with Him, but are now also had from Him.

   Recollect your dispersed and hitherto ill-placed affections, employ
   them wholly in the divine service. Let this dissolute love and
   compliance with worldly desires become chaste piety, and wait upon
   sacred affairs. Call home your tedious and runagate thoughts, which
   opinion and custom have sadly distracted; and having suppressed old
   errors, direct your love to his proper object, bestow it wholly upon
   your Maker. For all that you can love now is His, His alone, and none
   else. For of such infiniteness is He, that those who do not love Him
   deal most injuriously: because they cannot love anything, but what is
   His.

   But I would have an impartial judgement to consider, whether it be just
   for him to love the work, and hate the workman; and having cast by, and
   deserted the Creator of all things, to run and seize upon His creatures
   every where, and without any difference, according to his perverse and
   insatiable lust. Whereas it behooved him rather to invite God to be
   gratious and loving to him, by his very affections to His works, if
   piously laid out. And now man gives himself over to the lusts and
   service of his own detestable figments, and most unnaturally becomes a
   lover of the art, and neglects the artificer, adores the creature, and
   despiseth the Creator.

   And what have we spoken all this while of those innumerable delights
   which are with Him? or of the infinite and ravishing sweetness of His
   ineffable goodness? the sacred and inexhaustible treasure of His love?
   or when will it be that they shall be able to express or conceive the
   dignity and fullness of any one attribute that is in Him? To love Him
   then is not only delightful, but needful: for not to love Him, Whom
   even then when we love, we cannot possibly requite, is impious; and not
   to return Him such acknowledgements as we are able, Whom if we would,
   we can never recompence, is most unjust: "for what shall we render unto
   the Lord for all His benefits towards us?" What shall we render unto
   Him for this one benefit, that He hath given salvation to man by faith,
   and ordained that to be most easy in the fact, by which He restored
   hope to the subjected world, and eternal life unto lost man?

   And that I may now descend unto those things which were sometimes out
   of His covenant, I mean the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles, do
   you think that these were made subject to the Roman power, and that the
   dispersed multitude of mankind were incorporated -- as it were -- into
   one body under one head, for any other end, but that -- as medicines
   taken in at the mouth are diffused into all parts of the body -- so the
   faith by this means might with more ease be planted and penetrated into
   the most remote parts of the world. Otherwise by reason of different
   powers, customs, and languages, it had met with fresh and numerous
   oppositions, and the passage of the Gospel had been much more
   difficult. Blessed Paul himself describing his course in planting the
   faith amongst this very people, writes in his Epistle to the Romans,
   "That from Hierusalem and round about to Illyricum he had fully
   preached the Gospel of Christ". And how long -- without this
   preparation for the fulness of time -- might this have been in doing,
   amongst nations either innumerable for multitude, or barbarous for
   immanity [inhumanity]?

   Hence it is that the whole earth now from the rising of the sun unto
   the going down thereof, from the farthest North, and the frozen sea,
   breaks forth into singing, and rings with the glorious name of Jesus
   Christ. Hence it is, that all parts of the world flock and run together
   to the Word of Life. The Thracian is for the faith, the African for the
   faith; the Syrian for the faith, and the Spaniard hath received the
   faith. A great argument of the divine clemency may be gathered out of
   this, that under Augustus Caesar, when the Roman power was in the
   height and acme, then the almighty God came down upon the earth and
   assumed flesh. Therefore that I may now make use of those things, which
   you are also versed in, it may be clearly proved -- if any skilled in
   your Histories would assert the truth -- that from the first foundation
   of the Roman Empire -- which is now one thousand one hundred and eighty
   five years ago [This letter was written in the year of our Lord 435. --
   Vaughan, tr.] -- whatever additions and growth it gathered either in
   the reign of their first kings, or afterwards under the administrations
   of consuls, all was permitted by the only wise, and almighty God, to
   prepare the world against the coming of Christ, and to make way for the
   propagation of the faith.

   But I return thither, from whence I have digressed. "Love not the
   world" -- saith St. John -- "neither the things that are in the world";
   for all those things with delusive and ensnaring shews captivate our
   sight, and will not suffer us to look upwards. Let not that faculty of
   the eye which was ordained for light be applied to darkness; being
   created for the use of life, let it not admit the causes of death.
   "Fleshly lusts" -- as it is divinely spoken by the Apostle -- "war
   against the soul," and all their accoutrements are for the ruin and
   destruction of it. A vigilant guard do they keep, when they are once
   permitted to make head[way], and after the manner of foreign and expert
   enemies, with those forces they take from us, they politckly strengthen
   and increase their own.

   Thus hitherto have I discoursed of those splendid allurements, which
   are the chiefest and most taking baits of this subtile world, I mean
   riches and honours. And with such earnestness have I argued against
   them, as if those blandishments had still some force. But what beauty
   soever they had, when cast over heretofore with some pleasing
   adumbrations, it is now quite worn away, and all that paint and
   cousenage [fraud] is fallen off. The world hath now scarce the art to
   deceive. Those powerful and bewitching looks of things, beautiful
   sometimes even to deception, are now withered and almost loathsome. In
   former times it laboured to seduce us with its most solid and
   magnificent glories, and it could not. Now it turns cheat, and would
   entice us with toys, and slight wares, but it cannot. Real riches it
   never had, and now it is so poor that it wants counterfeits. It neither
   hath delectable things for the present, nor durable for the future;
   unless wee agree to deceive ourselves the world in a manner cannot
   deceive us.

   But why delay I my stronger arguments? I affirm then that the forces of
   this world are dispersed and overthrown, seeing the world itself is now
   drawing towards its dissolution, and pants with its last gasps, and
   dying inhalations. How much more grievous and bitter will you think
   this assertion, that for certain it cannot last very long? What should
   I trouble my self to tell you that all the utensils and moveables of it
   are decayed and wasted? And no marvel that it is driven into these
   defects, and a consumption of its ancient strength, when now grown old
   and weary it stoops with weakness, and is ready to fall under the
   burthen of so many ages.

   These latter years and decrepitness of Time are fraught with evils and
   calamities, as old age is with diseases. Our forefathers saw, and we
   still see in these last days the plagues of famine, pestilence, war,
   destruction, and terrors. All these are so many acute fits and
   convulsions of the dying world. Hence it is that such frequent signs
   are seen in the firmament, excessive eclipses, and faintings of the
   brightest luminaries, which is a shaking of the powers of heaven:
   sudden and astonishing earthquakes under our feet, alterations of times
   and governments, with the monstrous fruitfulness of living creatures;
   all which are the prodigies, or fatal symptoms of time going indeed
   still on, but fainting, and ready to expire. Nor is this confirmed by
   weak assertions only, but by sacred authority and the apostolical
   oracles: for there it is written, that "upon us the ends of the world
   are come" [1 Cor. 10:11], which divine truth, seeing it hath been
   spoken so long ago, what is it that we linger for, or what can we
   expect?

   That day, not only ours, but the last that the present world shall ever
   see, calls earnestly for our preparation. Every hour tells us of the
   coming on of that inevitable hour of our death, seeing a double danger
   of two final dissolutions threatens every one in particular and all the
   world in general. Wretched man that I am! the mortality of this whole
   frame lies heavily upon my thoughts, as if my own were not burdensome
   enough. Wherefore is it that we flatter ourselves against these sure
   fears? There is no place left for deviation. A most certain decree is
   past against us: on the one side is written every man's private
   dissolution, and on the other the public and universal.

   How much more miserable then is the condition of those men -- I will
   not say, in these outgoings, or last walks of time, but in these decays
   of the world's goodly things -- who neither can enjoy ought that is
   pleasant at the present, nor lay up for themselves any hope of true
   joys hereafter. They miss the fruition of this short life, and can have
   no hope of the everlasting: they abuse these temporal blessings, and
   shall never be admitted to use the eternal. Their substance here is
   very little, but their hope there is none at all. A most wretched and
   deplorable condition! unless they make a virtue of this desperate
   necessity, and hold on the only sovereign remedy of bettering their
   estate, by submitting in time to the wholesome rules of heavenly and
   saving reason. Especially because the goodliest things of this present
   time are such rags and fragments, that he that loseth the whole fraught
   [freight], and true treasure of that one precious life which is to
   come, may be justly said to lose both.

   It remains then, that we direct and fix all the powers of our minds
   upon the hope of the life to come. Which hope -- that you may more
   fully and clearly apprehend it -- I shall manifest unto you, under a
   type or example taken from temporal things. If so man should offer unto
   another five pieces of silver this day, but promise him five hundred
   pieces of gold if he would stay till the next morning, and put him to
   his choice, whether he would have the silver at present, or the gold
   upon the day following, is there any doubt to be made, but he would
   choose the greater sum, though with a little delay? Go you and do the
   like: compare the crumbs and perishing pittance in this short life with
   the glorious and enduring rewards of the eternal: and when you have
   done, choose not the least and the worst, when you may have the
   greatest and the best.

   The short fruition of a little is not so beneficial, as the expectation
   of plenty. But seeing that all the frail goods of this world are not
   onely seen of us, but also possessed by us, it is most manifest that
   hope cannot belong unto this world, in which we both see and enjoy
   those things we delight in: for hope that is seen is not hope; for what
   a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for [it]? [Rom 8:24] Therefore,
   however hope may be abased, and misapplied to temporal things, it is
   most certain that it was given to man and ordained for things that are
   eternal; otherwise it cannot be called hope, unless something be hoped
   for, which as yet-- or for the present life -- is not had. Therefore
   the substance of our hope in the world to come is more evident and
   manifest, then our hope of substance in the present.

   Consider those objects which are the clearest and most visible; when we
   would best discern them, we put them not into our eyes, because they
   are better seen and judged of at a distance. It is just so in the case
   of present things and the future: for the present -- as if put into our
   eyes -- are not rightly and undeceivably seen of us; but the future,
   because conveniently distant, are most clearly discerned.

   Nor is this trust and confidence wee have of our future happinesse
   built upon weak or uncertain authors, but upon our Lord and Master
   Jesus Christ, that almighty and faithful witness, Who hath promised
   unto the just, a kingdom without end, and the ample rewards of a
   blessed eternity; Who also by the ineffable sacrament of His humanity,
   being both God and Man, reconciled Man unto God, and by the mighty and
   hiden mystery of His passion, absolved the world from sin. For which
   cause He was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
   angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed upon in the world, and
   received into glory. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and
   given Him a name which is above every name: that at the name of JESUS
   every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and
   things under the Earth. And that every tongue should confess that the
   Lord JESUS is in glory, both God and King before all ages. [Phil.
   2:9-10]

   Casting off then the vain and absurd precepts of philosophy, wherein
   you busy yourself to no purpose, embrace at last the true and saving
   knowledge of Christ. You shall find even in that employment enough for
   your eloquence and wit, and will quickly discern how far these precepts
   of piety and truth surpass the conceits and delirations of
   philosophers. For in those rules which they give, what is there but
   adulerate virtue and false wisdom? and what in ours but perfect
   righteousness and sincere truth? Whereupon I shall justly conclude,
   that they indeed usurp the name of philosophy, but the substance and
   life of it is with us.

   For what manner of rules to live by could they give, who were ignorant
   of the first cause, and the fountain of life? For not knowing God, and
   deviating in their first principles from the author and the wellspring
   of justice, they necessarily erred in the rest. Hence it happened, that
   the end of all their studies was vanity and dissension. And if any
   amongst them chanced to hit some more honest tenets, these presently
   ministered matter of pride and superstitiousness, so that their very
   virtue was not free from vice. It is evident then that these are they,
   whose knowledge is earthy, "the disputers of this world", "the blind
   guides," who never saw true justice, nor true wisedom. Can any one of
   that School of Aristippus be a teacher of the truth, who in their
   doctrine and conversation differ not from swine and unclean beasts,
   seeing they place true happiness in fleshly lusts? "whose God is their
   belly, and whose glory is in their shame." Can he be a master of
   sobriety and virtue, in whose School the riotous, the obscene, and the
   adulterer are philosophers? But leaving these blind leaders, I shall
   come again to speak of those things which were the first motives of my
   writing to you.

   I advise you then, and I beseech you, to cast off all their axioms or
   general maxims collected out of their wild and irregular disputations,
   wherein I have known you much delighted; and to employ those excellent
   abilities bestowed upon you, in the study of Holy Scripture, and the
   wholesome instructions of Christian philosophers. There shall you be
   fed with infallible wisdom. There -- to incite you to the faith -- you
   shall hear the church speaking to you, though not in these very words,
   yet to this purpose: "He that believes not the word of God, understands
   it not." There you shall hear this frequent admonition: "Fear God,
   because He is your Master, honour Him because He is your Father."

   There it shall be told you, that the most acceptable sacrifice to God
   are justice and mercy. There you shall be taught that, if you love your
   neighbor as yourself, you must necessarily love your neighbor; for you
   can never do yourself a greater courtesy, than by doing good to
   another. There you shall be taught that there can be no worldly cause
   so great, as to make the death of a man legal or needful. There you
   shall hear this precept against unlawfull desires: "Resist lust as a
   most bitter enemy, that useth to glory in the disgrace of those bodies
   he overcommeth." There it will be told you of covetousness that "it is
   better not to wish for things you want, than to have all that you
   wish." There you shall hear that he that is angry when he is provoked
   is never -not- angry but when -not- provoked. There it will be told you
   of your enemies, "Love them that hate you, for all men love those that
   love them." There you shall hear, that he lays up his treasure
   safeliest who gives it to the poor, for that cannot be lost who gives
   it to the poor, for that cannot be lost which is lent to the Lord.

   There it will be told you, that the fruit of holy marriage is chastity.
   There you shall hear, that the troubles of this world happen as well to
   the just as the unjust. There it will be told you that it is a more
   dangerous sicknesse to have the mind infected with the vices then the
   body with diseases. There to shew you the way of peace and gentleness
   you shall hear that amongst impatient men, their likeness of manners is
   the cause of their discord. There to keep you from following the bad
   example of others, it will be told you that "the wise man gains by the
   fool, as well as by the prudent; the one shewes him what to imitate,
   the other what to eschew."

   There also you shall hear all these following precepts: That the
   ignorance of many things is better than their knowledge, and that
   therefore the goodness or mercy of God is as great in His hidden will,
   as in His revealed. That you should God thanks as well for adversity as
   for prosperity; and confess in prosperity that you have not deserved
   it. That there is no such thing as Fate, and for this let the heathens
   examine their own laws, which punish none but willfull and
   premeditating offenders.

   There to keep you stable in faith it will be told you that "he that
   will be faithful, must not be suspicious; for we never suspect, but
   what wee slowly believe." There also you shall hear that Christians
   when they give any attention to the noise and enticements of their
   passions fall headlong from Heaven unto Earth. It will be also told you
   there that seeing the wicked do sometimes receive good things in this
   world, and the just are afflicted by the unrighteous, those that
   believe not the final judgement of God after this life, do -- as far as
   it lies in them -- make God unjust, and far be this from your thoughts.
   There it will be told you about your private affairs, that what you
   would have hidden from men, you should never do, what from God, ye
   should never think. There you shall hear this rebuke of deceivers: "It
   is lesser damage to be deceived, than to deceive." Lastly you should
   hear this reproof of self-conceit, or a fond opinion of our own worth:
   "Fly vanity, and so much the more viciousness, but vanity is oftentimes
   a bubble that swims up the face of Virtue." These few rules, as a tast
   and invitation, I have -- out of many more -- inserted here for your
   own use.

   But if you will turn you eyes towards the sacred Oracles, and come
   yourself to be a searcher of those heavenly treasures, I know not that
   which will most ravish you, the casket, or the jewel, the language or
   the matter. For the Book of God, while it shines and glitters with
   glorious irradiations within, doth after the manner of most precious
   gems, drive the beholder's eyes into a strong and restless admiration
   of its most rich and inscrutable brightness. But let not the weaknesse
   of your eyes make you shun this divine light, but warm your soul at the
   beams of it, and learn to feed your inward man with this mystical and
   healthful food.

   I doubt not but -- by the powerful working of our merciful God upon
   your heart -- I shall shortly find you an unfeigned lover of this true
   philosophy, and a resolute opposer of the false; renouncing also all
   worldly oblectations [delights], and earnestly coveting the true and
   eternal. For it is a point of great impiety and imprudence, seeing God
   wrought so many marvelous things for the salvation of man, that he
   should do nothing for himself: and seeing that in all His wonderful
   works He had a most special regard for our good, we ourselves should
   especially neglect it. Now the right way to care for our souls, is to
   yield ourselves to the love and the service of God: for true happiness
   is obtained by contemning the false felicities of this world, and by a
   wise abdication of all earthly delights, that we may become the chaste
   and faithful lovers of the heavenly. Wherefore henceforth let all your
   words and actions be done either to the glory of God, or for God's
   sake. Get Innocence for your companion, and she is so faithful, that
   she will be also your defendress. It is a worthy enterprise to follow
   after Virtue, and to perform something while we live, for the example
   and the good of others: nor is it to be doubted but the mind, by a
   virtuous course of life, will quickly free itself from those
   intanglements and deviations it hath been formerly accustomed to. That
   great Physician to whose cure and care we offer ourselves, will daily
   strengthen and perfect our recovery.

   And what estimation or value -- when in this state -- can you lay upon
   those glorious remunerations that will be laid up for you against the
   day of recompence? You see that God, even in this life, hath mercifully
   distributed unto all -- without any difference -- His most pleasant and
   useful light. The pious and the impious are both allowed the same sun;
   all the creatures obediently submit themselves to their service: and
   the whole Earth with the fullness thereof is the indifferent possession
   of the just and unjust. Seeing then that he hath given such excellent
   things unto the impious, how much more glorious are those things which
   He reserves for the pious? He that is so great in His free gifts, how
   excellent will He be in His rewards? He that is so royal in His daily
   bounty, and ordinary magnificence; how transcendent will He be in His
   remunerations and requitals? Ineffable and beyond all conception are
   those things which God hath prepared for those that love Him; and that
   they are so is most certain: for it is altogether incomprehensible, and
   passeth the understanding of His most chosen vessels to tell how great
   His reward shall be unto the just, who hath given so much to the
   unthankful and the unbelieving.

   Take up your eyes from the Earth and look about you, my most dear
   Valerian; spread forth your sails, and hasten from this stormy sea of
   secular negotiations, into the calm and secure harbour of Christian
   religion. This is the only haven into which which we all drive from the
   raging surges of this malicious world. This is our shelter from the
   loud and persecuting whirlwinds of Time. Here is our sure station and
   certain rest; here a large and silent recesse, secluded from the world,
   opens and offers itself unto us. Here a pleasant, serene tranquility
   shines upon us. Hither, when you are come, your weather-beaten vessel
   -- after all your fruitless toils -- shall at last find rest, and
   securely ride at anchor of the Cross.

   But it is time now that I should make an end. Let then -- I beseech you
   -- the truth and the force of heavenly doctrine epitomised here by me
   be approved of and used by you to the glory of God and your own good.
   These are all my precepts at present: pardon the length, and
   acknowledge my love.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The St. Pachomius Orthodox Library, Leavetaking of Pascha 1995.

   O Lord, remember Thy servants Henry the translator and Thomas his
   brother, and the scribes Richard, Paul, Michael, Deborah, Mark, Tony,
   Mary, and Noel.

    THE END, AND TO GOD BE THE GLORY!
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Psalms

   [1]139

   Isaiah

   [2]28:25

   Matthew

   [3]16:26

   John

   [4]18:15   [5]18:19   [6]18:20

   Romans

   [7]8:24

   1 Corinthians

   [8]10:11

   Philippians

   [9]2:9-10

   1 John

   [10]2:15   [11]4:5
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=0#iii-p51.1
   2. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=25#iii-p36.1
   3. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#iii-p10.1
   4. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=15#ii.ii-p4.1
   5. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=19#ii.ii-p4.1
   6. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=20#ii.ii-p4.1
   7. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iii-p70.1
   8. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iii-p66.1
   9. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii-p72.1
  10. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#ii.ii-p2.1
  11. file:///ccel/e/eucherius/contempt/cache/contempt.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=5#ii.ii-p2.2
