     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Deity of Christ
      Creator(s):
     Print Basis: Frank Bartleman, Los Angeles, 1926
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All
     __________________________________________________________________

                              The Deity of Christ

What Think Ye of Christ?

Is He God or Man?

  BY FRANK BARTLEMAN

    Price 50c; $4.00 Per Dozen

    Order of F. BARTLEMAN

  5606 Isleta Drive, Los Angeles, Calif.

                              The Deity of Christ

What Think Ye of Christ?

Is He God or Man?

  BY FRANK BARTLEMAN

    Price 50c; $4.00 Per Dozen

    Order of F. BARTLEMAN

  5606 Isleta Drive, Los Angeles, Calif.
     __________________________________________________________________

  INTRODUCTION

   This little volume has been prayerfully collected and written to meet
   the oncoming, terrible onslaught against, and the denial of the
   absolute Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ, in these last, evil days of
   apostasy from the true and living faith.

   It might be truthfully titled forty volumes in one, for it is the
   condensed testimony and teaching of a vast number of the very best
   Christian scholars, dating from the early church fathers down to the
   present day, on this most important and vital subject of our Christian
   faith. In fact it contains the very essence of Christian belief
   concerning the doctrine of the Godhead, both from a theological and a
   Scriptural standpoint.

   It is a book especially to be recommended as of helpful value to
   scholars, and in fact to all who desire a clearer- understanding of
   this most sacred and profound subject. May the faith of many be built
   up, strengthened, and restored through its perusal, is the sincere
   prayer of its author and compiler.

  FRANK BARTLEMAN

    Los Angeles, California

    March, 1926
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER I

   In attempting to write on this lofty and sacred subject we are well
   aware of the danger of "fools rushing in where angels fear to tread."
   Some one has truly said, "In mysteries men soon lose their way." Men
   become confounded when they seek to fathom the being of God.

   By the help of God we will "let the lid stay on the Ark," - (1 Sam'l
   6:19), not seeking personally to pry into things unlawful. In fact the
   major part of our task will consist of quoting what others far more
   able have had to say upon this subject. We trust the reader may derive
   as much profit from this study as the writer has. If so he will feel
   justified in having written.

   If there are any people on earth who ought to welcome such information
   it is the Pentecostal people, for whom we more especially write. We are
   free from party spirit. The fact is many of us are becoming Higher
   Critics, and downright Modernists, on this subject. We are in grave
   danger of lining up with the Antichrist in the Apostasy. Anything that
   opposes or rejects a full Scriptural revelation of Jesus Christ must be
   antichrist. Because some have gone "beyond the things which are
   written," ( I Cor. 4 :6, II John 9, R. V.), is no excuse for us to be
   frightened back and deny our Lord. Let our sympathies be placed on the
   side of right always. God will hold us accountable for this failure.
   Many have denied today truths once held through fear of being numbered
   "among the transgressors." "Art thou also of Galilee?" This is ever the
   devil's master stroke. He will push a people over the precipice,
   frightening the others back too far, one extreme always producing
   another. Jesus is thus again "crucified between two thieves." Let us
   come up to the help of the Lord. Both are robbing Him of the glory due
   Him. The one by unscriptural extremes, the other through cowardly
   denial of their Lord. Though one extreme may hold the other in
   subjection for the time.

   Men are naturally creatures of extremes, on all subjects. And the truth
   is most generally found about the middle, in between. It is also hard
   to be shown anything in the heat of battle. There is the smoke of
   conflict in our eyes. It is hard for a sectarian to believe that anyone
   can really be free from selfish, party spirit. But we want the balanced
   truth, free from preference or prejudice. Extremes divide. They can
   only hope to meet in the middle, in Christ. The Sun sometimes appears
   oblong at the time of rising, through refraction of its rays. But it is
   the Sun nevertheless. So truth regarding a subject does not always
   appear clearly in the beginning.

   We have this treasure "in earthen vessels." Crude ore is not gold
   bullion. It is easier to burn a man at the stake than to answer his
   arguments. Ignorance and prejudice are the greatest enemies of truth.

   We need far more than a Sunday School or Kindergarten revelation of
   Jesus today to enable us to triumph over the Antichrist, the Beast and
   the False Prophet. "Unto a full grown man, unto the measure of the
   stature of the fulness of Christ." - Eph.4:13 "A spirit of wisdom and
   revelation in the knowledge of Him." - Eph. 1:17. Any true Christian
   must rejoice in the discovery of all revelation that tends to bring
   their Lord more powerfully and fully before their vision. We only know
   God by revelation.

   It has been often said, and truly, that men are willing to make Christ
   "a little more than man, but a little less than God." But this can
   never be. He is either creature or Creator. If creature, we may not
   worship him. All great truths of the Bible run through the whole Book.
   They are never dependent or founded on some isolated Scripture.

   Our first study will be that of the subject of the Godhead. This we
   will consider both from the standpoint of theology and Scripture.
   Tradition is so binding upon the consciences of most believers that the
   matter needs to be clarified for simple minds as far as possible.

   As Christians we are called, according to the tenets of our faith, to
   walk a path between two extremes of unorthodox opinion. That is,
   between the idea of God as a mere. Monad, or a oneness as a single
   human individual is one, and the pagan idea of "gods many," or that of
   three separate Gods. This latter is known as Tritheism. The fact is, as
   generally accepted by all orthodox believers, God is neither one as man
   is One, nor three, as men are three. The truth lies between these two
   conceptions. God is a trinity of being, a three-one God, a tri-part
   Being. The Germans call it' the "dreieinigkeit" (threeoneness).

   We might as well admit a most patent fact to begin with, that the
   Godhead has no human analogy. To this all scholars agree. The human
   mind can never "by searching find out God." Men are seeking on all
   sides to understand and explain the being of God through human
   reasoning and analogy. This cannot be done. God is not "such an one as
   we." - ( Psa. 50:21.) "God is Spirit."

   The declaration of the doctrine of the Swiss and German Protestants
   (Zwingle and Luther), reads as follows: - "We believe that this same
   God, one in essence and in nature, is threefold in person, that is to
   say, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as was declared in the Nicene
   Council, and as all the Christian church professes." While the word for
   God in Genesis is plural, yet this certainly cannot denote three Go1ds,
   for the very genius of the Christian faith lies in the fact of there
   being but one true God, one Supreme Being, one "first cause." "Hear, O
   Israel; the Lord our God is one Lord." - Deut. 6:4. There have been
   none added since. God has no beginning. Eternity knows neither
   beginning nor end. Only time and finite nature begins and ends. This
   one true God is tripartite in nature and manifestation. He ever existed
   as Father, Son (Logos, the Word, more properly expressed), and Holy
   Ghost. There are three eternal distinctions in the Substance of God.
   But, "these three are one." - 1 John 5:7. The Logos and the Son are
   one.

   Wm. Smith, L.L.D., in his Bible Dict., a book all scholars are familiar
   with as a text-book, states on this subject: - "The plural form of
   Jehovah ( Gen. 1:26), has given rise to much discussion. The fanciful
   idea that it referred to the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead hardly
   finds now a supporter among scholars. It is either what grammarians
   call the plural of majesty (pluralis excellentiae'), or it denotes the
   fulness of divine strength, the sum of the powers displayed by God."
   The old Swedish monarchs titled themselves in the plural as
   individuals, after this idea. The late Kaiser of Germany signed himself
   "Wir, Wilhelm, von Gottes Gnaden," - (We, William, by the grace of
   God). However, this does not in any sense affect the truth of the
   Godhead.

   Dr. Scofield writes: - "The Supreme Being is One but, in some sense not
   fully revealed in the O. T., is a unity in plurality. This is shown by
   the plural name, Elohim, by the use of the plural pronoun in the
   interrelation of Deity as evidenced in Gen. 1:26, etc. That this
   plurality is really a Trinity is intimated in the three primary names
   of Deity. God, in His own triune Person, no human being in the flesh
   has seen. But God, veiled in angelic form, and especially as incarnate
   in Jesus Christ, has been seen by men."

   No orthodox Christian or scholar has ever believed in three Gods, or in
   three separate Supreme Beings. That there can be but one Supreme Being,
   one first cause, is a fact attested to by all Christian scholarship in
   all the world, in all ages. God is one, and the Word of God is one.
   That the Jehovah of the O. T., is the' Jesus of the N. T., is also
   attested to by all orthodox scholars, such as Dr. Scofleld, Dr. Torrey,
   Adam Clarke, etc. And this really goes without saying, for the Logos
   (Word), is God's "thought and expression," in the very meaning of the
   term. The thought and expression in the O. T. and the N. T. are one and
   the same, the revelation cumulative. It is all the Word of God, the
   thought and expression of the one God. "In the beginning was the Word,
   the Word was with God, and God was the Word" (Greek). - John 1:1.
   German and Spanish translations read the same. God was never a
   non-entity, a mere blank, without thought or expression. His "thought
   and expression" (Logos) are a part of His very self, of His Being,
   begotten of Him. Just as my thought and expression are inseparable from
   myself.

   Dr. Adam Clarke, the "Prince of Commentators," has the following to
   say: - "In all transactions between God and man, mentioned in the
   sacred writings, we see one uniform agency.

   The Great Mediator in all, and through all, God ever coming to man by
   him, and man having access to God through him. This was, is, and ever
   will be the economy of grace." "There is one mediator between God and
   men, himself man, Christ Jesus." ( I Tim. 2:5) "The lamb slain from the
   foundation of the world." Rev. 13:8. Provision has been made for every
   possible contingency before it could arrive.

   Clarke comments on the following Scriptures: - Gen. 12:7 "The Lord
   appeared unto Abraham." This was probably by the great Angel of the
   Covenant, Jesus the Christ.

   Gen. 12:8, - "And called upon the name of the Lord." Abram was taught
   even in those early times to approach God through a Mediator; and that'
   Mediator, since manifested in the flesh, was known by the name of
   Jehovah.

   Gen. 16:7-10 - "The angel of the Lord." This was Jesus Christ who in a
   body suited to the dignity of his nature frequently appeared to the
   patriarchs. Also Gen 18:22. Of God the father, no man hath at any time
   seen His shape ( Deut. 4:12-16), nor has He ever limited Himself to any
   definite personal appearance.

   Gen. 22:11 - "The angel of the Lord." The Lord Jesus, who called
   himself Jehovah ( Vs. 15, 16). "Swore by Himself," Jehovah (Jesus). -
   Heb. 6:13-18.

   Gen. 32:24 - "There wrestled a man with him" This was the doubtless the
   Lord Jesus Christ, who among the patriarchs, assumed that human form,
   which in the fullness of time he really took of a woman. (This was only
   a form at this time, possibly vaporous or gaseous, compact to
   visibility which could be dissipated in an instant. I have given the
   sense of the comment on this point, to save space.) He could produce
   the effect on Jacob's body to appear a real man wrestling with him.
   Jacob's wrestling was also spiritual. V. 30, "I have seen God face to
   face," - the Lord-Jesus Christ. (Of course we know the human nature and
   body of Jesus did not exist until formed and produced in the womb of
   Mary. Otherwise his conception, incarnation and birth would necessarily
   have been a farce.)

   Gen. 35:13 - "God went up from him," visibly. This was no doubt the
   future Savior, the Angel of the Covenant.

   Gen. 48:16 - "The angel which redeemed me from all evil." The
   Messenger, the Redeemer. We have full proof that this was no created
   angel, but the Messenger of the Divine Counsel, the Lord Jesus Christ.
   (The word angel means messenger' also. Not necessarily of the order of
   created angels Rev. 2:1.)

   Ex. 4:2 - "The angel of the Lord." Not a created angel certainly, for
   he is called Jehovah ( V. 4, etc.), and has the most expressive
   attributes of the Godhead applied to him ( V. 14, etc) Yet he is an
   angel, a messenger, in whom was the name of God ( Chap. 23:21), and in
   whom dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead bodily ( Col. 2:9), and who,
   in all these primitive times, was the messenger of the covenant - Mal.
   3:1. And who was this but Jesus the Leader, Redeemer and Savior of
   Mankind?" - Dr Adam Clarke. The Jehovah of the O. T. is proven to be
   the Jesus of the N. T. He is the Word or Memra, later made flesh, and
   dwelt among us.

   The Chaldee Paraphrasts, the most ancient Jewish writers extant, use
   the word Memra, which signifies the Word, in those places where Moses
   puts the name Jehovah. These writers ascribe to Memra (the Word), all
   the attributes of Deity. They say it was Memra, or the Word, which
   created the world, appeared to Moses on Mt. Sinai and gave him the Law,
   speaking to him face to face. Which brought Israel out of Egypt,
   marching before the people, and wrought all the miracles recorded in
   the Book of Exodus. The same Memra at Bethel, appeared unto Abraham in
   the plain of Mamre, and was seen of Jacob to whom Jacob made his vow,
   and acknowledged him as God. - Gen. 28:20." - Alexander Cruden.

   It is said of Augustine that one day walking by the seaside deeply
   engrossed in thought and meditation over the mystery of the Godhead, he
   observed a little child dipping the water out of the sea into a shallow
   hole he had just formed in the sand. Upon being asked why he did this
   he replied that he intended to put the sea into that hole. The
   conviction came powerfully upon Augustine that he was attempting
   precisely as impossible a thing in seeking to comprehend and explain
   mystery of the Three in One.

   Some one has truthfully said "The infinite truth of the Godhead lies
   far beyond the boundaries of logic, which deals only with finite truths
   and categories." But the revelation of it is in the face of Jesus
   Christ," according to the Word. - 2 Cor. 4:6. The Logos (Word), the
   pre-existent Christ, is one with God. "In the beginning was the Word."
   - John 1:1. It was already there. God exists from eternity, throughout
   all eternity. "From everlasting to everlasting thou art God." - Psa.
   90:2. No orthodox scholar ever taught that the Logos or Word had a
   beginning in eternity. In fact eternity knows no beginning. "In the
   beginning" predicates a starting point to reason from. Or it simply
   states the fact that "in the beginning" the Word was already there. The
   Logos is without beginning or end. In fact He is "the Alpha and the
   Omega the beginning and the end." - Rev. 18:17. A beginning without
   beginning "And God was the Word." - John 1:1.

   Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is in His Deity of necessity as uncreated
   as God Himself. Were it otherwise He could not be Deity. Deity is
   uncreated, without beginning or ending. Deity is one inseparable of
   necessity in life and attributes. Hence all scholars declare that God
   the Son has the same attributes as God the Father, differing in office
   only, as Son, neither existing before the other.

   Alexander Cruden in his Concordance gives to the Son of God the
   following titles in the Word which accredit him with the attributes of
   God. "Ancient of Days, Creator, Emmanuel, Eternal Life, Everlasting
   Father, Father of Eternity, First and Last God, Most High, Jah,
   Jehovah, Living God, Strong God, Mighty God, etc., etc.," In fact if
   Jesus were not absolute Deity we would have no right to worship him. He
   must be God. "Worship God." = Rev. 19:10. Cruden also says: "The Son of
   God is equal and consubstantial with the Father. He is, the express
   image of the Father, as our words are of our thoughts. - John 1:3; Heb.
   1:3; 11:3.

   Jesus Christ is not a created being, not a creature, but Creator. "All
   things were made by him." - John 1:3. To declare him less than absolute
   Deity is to make him a creature. To say he is divine, but not Deity,
   means nothing. A long tailed coat and a piece of parchment, or a roll
   of sermons, makes a modern divine.' Divinity is Deity or it is nothing.
   "God the Father, God the Son, and Got the Holy Ghost," are equally God.
   All this orthodox scholars have always taught.

   A difficulty has been raised over the term "begotten," as applied to
   the Son. But all scholars' agree that the Son, or Logos, could not have
   had a beginning in eternity. He could not be "co-eternal with the
   Father," and have a beginning. From standpoint of manifestation as the
   Son, and as to his human nature, He had a beginning, from the womb of
   Mary. But in His Deity he was uncreated, as all scholars teach and
   declare. Many do not seem to realize they have an Eternal Lord, in the
   person of Jesus Christ. He is more than a Sunday School or Kindergarten
   Christ, more than a mere human sacrifice, yes, more than a Son even. He
   is both the Son of God, and God, according to all orthodox theologians.
   He is both the pre-existent Logos, which "was God," and the Son of God.

   The Logos proceeded, or came forth, from God. - John 8:42. "The only
   begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared
   him" - John 1:18. This has reference to his coming into the world. The
   Son, and the Logos, the Word, are one. He was the Logos, (thought and
   expression of God, in the bosom of the Father, before he was manifested
   as the Son, of God. In His Deity He was always in heaven, omnipresent.

   Tertullian wrote, A. D. 200: - "The Word (Logos) was sent from the
   Father into the Virgin, and was born of her, both Man and God, the Son
   of God, and called Jesus Christ.

   Theologians have sometimes applied the term begotten' the pre-existent
   Christ, or the Logos, as though He were begotten from eternity, or
   eternally begotten, but this they have never implied as a beginning of
   existence. They all claim the Logos is eternal. The Word is begotten,
   as my thought and expression are begotten of me. They are a very part
   of myself. No less, and of as long duration. This is what theologians
   mean by the Logos, or Son, being eternally begotten,' or "from an
   eternity begotten of the Father." Some claim a continuous begetting.

   In Acts 13:33, Paul refers the Scripture, "Thou art my son; this day
   have I begotten thee," to the resurrection of Christ. - ( Psa. 2:7).
   "This day," in time. There is no time in eternity. ( Heb. 5:5.) Read
   Rev. 1:5, Rom. 1:4, Heb. 1:5,6. - Compare Luke 2:13, 14, John 1:14, in
   parenthesis. John 1:18; 3:16-18, I John 4:9, John 17:18, Luke 1:35,
   "begotten." - Rotherham. Gal. 4:4. In Rev. 1:5, Heb. 1:6, the word is
   properly born,' not begotten. The Logos was sent into the world through
   the incarnation, as a Son, clothed in humanity. Heb. 1:2, I John 4:14,
   John 1:1 John 3:16. "A child is born, a son is given," - Isa. 9:6, as
   every child is born, and son given. Though in this case Jesus was
   Deity, the Logos. Only his humanity was "begotten" in the womb of Mary.
   "And God was the Word (Logos)." - John 1:1.

   The Word (Logos) was sent into the womb of Mary and "became flesh."
   (the only begotten from the Father. - John 1:14), The Incarnation took
   place. A Son was manifest in Bethlehem's stable. The pre-existent Word
   abode forever. The Son revealed the Fatherhood. God was never known as
   Father until the advent of the Son into the world. The Jews never knew
   Him as such.

   Jesus and the Logos are one and the same. Leon Tucker has said: "The
   Word of God and the Son of God are eternal and inseparable." "Therefore
   also that holy thing which shall be begotten' of thee shall be called
   the Son of God." - Luke 1:35, - Rotherham. "Thou shalt call his name
   Jesus." - Matt. 1:21, 1 John 4:15. "God sent forth his Son, born of a
   woman." Gal. 4:4. "Hath in these last days spoken unto us in the Son."
   - Heb. 1:1-2. The "Word of the Lord" (Logos) came to the prophets.
   "There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and
   the Holy Ghost: and these three are one." - 1 John 5:7.

   Dr. Adam Clarke, the "Prince of Commentators," co-worker with John
   Wesley, has written the following interesting matter on this subject:
   "They have taken away my Eternal Lord, and I know not where they have
   laid him.

   "I believe in the Holy Trinity; in three persons in the Godhead, of
   which none is before or after another. I believe Jehovah, Jesus, the
   holy Ghost, to be one infinite eternal Godhead, subsisting ineffably in
   Three Persons; I believe Jesus Christ to be, as to his divine nature,
   as unoriginated and eternal as Jehovah Himself; and, with the Holy
   Ghost, to be one infinite Godhead, neither Person being created,
   begotten, nor proceeding, more than another. As to its essence, but,
   one Trinity, in an infinite, eternal and inseparable unity; and this
   triune God is the Object of my faith, my adoration, and my confidence.
   But I believe not in an eternal sonship or generation of the Divine
   nature of Jesus Christ. Here, I have long stood; here I now stand; and
   here I trust to stand in the hour of death, in the day of judgment; and
   to all eternity. (One can readily judge how strong were Clarke's
   convictions on this point.)

   "The doctrine of the eternal Sonship of Christ is absolutely
   irreconciliable to reason, and contrary to itself. Eternity is that
   which has had no beginning, nor stands in reference to time; Son
   supposes time, generation, and father; and time also antecedent to such
   generation. Therefore the conjunction of these two terms; Son and
   eternity, is absolutely impossible, as they imply essentially different
   and opposite ideas. (Poetry and human sentiment notwithstanding.)

   His human nature is derived from the blessed Virgin Mary through the
   creative energy of the Holy Ghost; but His Divine Nature because God,
   infinite and eternal, is uncreated, underived and unbegotten; which,
   were it otherwise, He could not be God in any proper sense of the word;
   but as He is God, the doctrine of the eternal Sonship must be false." -
   Adam Clarke.

   Clarke admits a three-fold personality, or three persons, in the being
   of God from eternity, but rejects the idea of Sonship before the advent
   of Jesus in the flesh. Before that He was the Word or Logos ( John
   1:1-14), the idea of sonship being transferred back to the Logos. A
   multitude of spiritual leaders of the church today agree with Clarke.
   Critics in referring to this particular view of Adam Clarke have been
   content to pass it over with the simple observation that "this opinion
   has not been generally accepted." The Logos and the Son are one.

   The Son is evidently in no sense inferior to the Father in His Deity,
   except in office. Deity is Deity. He was "equal with the Father." -
   Phil. 2:6, but "emptied himself," becoming inferior only in his
   humanity, through the Incarnation. Nothing has ever been added to or
   taken from God. Deity is self-existent, uncreated. Are not then the
   theological expressions "begotten from eternity," or "eternally
   begotten," as applied to Christ, mere technical human terms, their
   meaning in this connection understood only by scholars? They agree that
   these are not intended to postulate a beginning for God the Son, nor
   any increase, or inferiority in Deity. The Son of God was "begotten",
   humanly speaking, in the womb of Mary. - John 3:16. Before this He
   existed eternally as the Logos. He is both "God the Son," and the Son
   of God.

   W. H. Bennett, a well-known English writer, has said: - He (Christ)
   became (in the Incarnation), what He before was not, but He did not
   cease to be what He was, - (very God)." All orthodox scholars declare
   the Christ to be not only the Son of God, but "very God." "Very God and
   very man.'' In fact they declare Him to be as much to God as God the
   Father is superior in office only. This is an accepted tenent of
   orthodox theology. All scholars admit there is no human analogy
   whererwith to express or define the matter of the Godhead. They admit
   that the Logos or Word is without beginning, even as the Father; and
   that the Word of God and the Son of God are one. The real, scriptural,
   mystery of the Godhead lies in the Incarnation. God manifest in the
   flesh." - 1 Tim. 3:16.

   The well known theological expression, found in the so-called
   Athanasian Creed, "Neither confounding the Persons nor dividing the
   Substance (Essence)," we consider a safe proposition. Granted that the
   Substance or Essence of the Godhead cannot be divided or separated, it
   becomes impossible to make three separate Persons or Supreme Beings out
   of the proposition. Hence we are saved from Tritheism, the postulation
   of three Gods; to which Trinitarianism is admitted by scholars to come
   dangerously near. As the whole-question hinges on the use of the word
   "Persons," it might prove helpful to look more carefully into the
   meaning of this much argued term, as used and purposed originally in
   this connection.

   In Nelson's Encyclopedia we read: - "It is generally conceded that the
   Christians of the second, and even of the third century, were far from
   having a clearly understood and recognized doctrine on this high
   subject (the Trinity). At the council of Nice, A. D. 325, they began to
   formulate a creed on this order. But the doctrine of a Trinity of
   Persons was not fully complete till the addition of the Filioque clause
   in the Western Church of the 6th Century, which led to the separation
   of the Greek church from the Latin. A declaration of the nature of the
   Trinity was finally draw up to meet certain heretical declarations
   regarding the same matter."

   Philip Schaff, D. D, L.L. D., writes: - "God is one in three persons or
   hypostases (subsistences - used by Greek theologians to denote each of
   the three subdivisions of the Godhead; Latin personae,' from whence
   comes our modern term persons applied to the Godhead), each expressing
   the whole fullness of the Godhead. - ( Col. 2:9, 10.)

   "The term persona is taken neither in the old sense of a mere
   personation or form of manifestation (face, mask), nor in the modern
   sense of an independent, separate being or individual, but in a sense
   which lies between these two conceptions, and thus avoids Sabellianism
   on the one hand, and Tri-theism on the other.

   "In modern philosophical usage the term person means separate and
   distinct rational individual. But the tri-personality of God is not a
   numerical or essential trinity of three beings (like Abraham, Isaac and
   Jacob), for this would be tritheism; nor is it, on the other hand
   merely a three-fold aspect and mode of manifestation, in the Sabellian
   or Sweden-borgian sense, but it is a real objective and eternal, though
   ineffable distinction in the one Divine being, with a corresponding
   three-fold revelation of this being in the works of creation,
   redemption and sanctification.

   "In the Trinity there is no priority or posteriority of time,
   superiority or inferiority of rank, but the three persons are coeternal
   and coequal."

   In the Dictionary of the. Apostolic Church, by Jas. Hastings, D. D., we
   read: - "The technical terms by which the christian church has
   expressed the faith that it derived from the Scriptures were not
   invented for a considerable time after the Apostolic period. Thus no
   one would expect to find the terms Trinity and Person in the N. T. The
   word "Trinity" referred to God, was first used by Theophilus of
   Antioch, A. D., 180. But it was not then an accepted technical term.
   Theophilus did not use the word "Trinity" in the technical sense in
   which it was even later used. The words which we render "Person" are of
   a still later date, and at first exhibited a remarkable fluidity of
   signification, being at one time used to denote what is common to the
   Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the Divine "Substance," and at another time
   to distinguish between them.

   "The student must necessarily be always on his guard against the
   supposition that "Person' means individual', as when we say that three
   men are three persons. These technical expressions are but methods of
   denoting the teaching found in the N. T. that there are distinctions in
   the Godhead, and that while God is "One" yet he is not a mere Monad.
   These technical terms are not found in the Apostolic or sub-apostolic
   writings.

   "It must be remembered that human language is limited and unable to
   express fully the divine mysteries, so that just as the technical
   terms, "Trinity," "Person," may be misused in the interest of
   Tritheism, so subordination (of Son and Spirit) may be misused in the
   interest of Arianism (a supreme God and two inferior deities)."

   J. Munro Gibson, M. A.: D. D., writes: "The word Trinity" does not
   occur in the scripture, nor is there anything to be found there
   corresponding to those complicated formulas by which theologians have
   tried to define the relations of Father, Son and Holy Ghost. If
   theologians had only followed, the Scriptures in this respect, how many
   bitter controversies might have been spared, and how many needless
   difficulties and perplexities would have been avoided."

   Dr. Scofield, in his Reference Bible, write as follows: "The name of
   God (El, Elah, Elohim) suggests certain attributes of Deity, as
   strength, etc., rather than His essential being. God subsists in a
   personality which is three-fold, indicated by relationship as Father
   and Son: by a mode of being as Spirit: and by the different parts taken
   by the Godhead in manifestation and in the work of redemption - Spirit,
   Father, Son." A tri-personality.

   "Calvin did not enforce the Athanasian Creed, and did not use the words
   Trinity and Person in the confession drawn up by himself and others at
   Geneva." - Encyclopedia Britt.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II

   Pastor Andrew Fraser of Chicago has written: "It is in the writings of
   Theophilus, bishop of Antioch, toward the close of the second century,
   that the term "Trinity" occurs for the first time, though other writers
   ascribe the coining of the term to Tertullian. In this case the pen was
   mightier than the sword, judging by the degree of strife its use has
   occasioned.

   The Athanasian Creed in its definition of the trinity is such as to
   cause some minds to sacrifice the Trinity to the Unity, while others
   sacrifice the Unity to the Trinity, and thus lead the mind into a
   doctrine of three gods, or tritheism. The one God exists as the Father,
   the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and in some inexplicable manner the three
   interpenetrate each other and form but one being.

   "We are fully aware of the custom obtaining among the Hebrews of using
   the plural term where we would generally use the singular. But since we
   believe in the presidency of the Holy Spirit in the task of revealing
   God to men, it is not difficult to believe that the use of the plural
   "Elohim" has behind it inscrutable wisdom looking toward a future
   unfolding of the truth regarding the Trinity.

   "It is most unfortunate that in a discussion of so important a
   character we should find ourselves obliged to use words which fail to
   express adequately the ideas; and words which the Scriptures themselves
   do not employ. We are confronted with such a difficulty in the use of
   the word "Persons." Since the Scripture themselves nowhere use the
   word, the Athanasian Creed in its attempt to suppress the Sabellian
   heresy went somewhat beyond the simplicity of the Bible by the
   introduction of the term. When we remember that there is no case
   exactly parallel to the relationship of the Trinity, then we
   understand, that necessity has not yet coined the proper word.

   "We cannot separate the Father, Son and Holy Ghost into three distinct
   personalities as we do in the case of three human beings. We must
   beware of ascribing to the tri-unity of the Godhead human form and
   human characteristics or attributes. Would "Subsistences" prove any
   more satisfactory for this idea? By subsistence or substance we mean
   "essential nature." Subsistences are not separations, yet they would
   admit of distinctions in a Being who is purely spiritual.

   If we were to affirm a separate and distinct Divine Intelligence
   operating in each of the three "Persons" of the Godhead then we would
   have three Gods. We know that divine nature is one. For the sake of
   executing the Redemptive plan, the subsistences or substance resolved
   itself into a tri-personal Being in the forms of Father, Son and Holy
   Ghost Communion with God is not with one solitary monotheistic.

   Editor R. E. McAllister has written: "We readily admit that when we
   express ourselves by saying "Three Persons in the Godhead" we are using
   terms not scripturally correct. Everything in the Godhead is prompted
   and executed by one personality. God is not a unit as a human being is
   one, neither is He three as three human beings are three. The
   three-fold relationship of Father, Son and Spirit is the prominent
   feature of the N. T. This relationship is vital and essentially
   necessary to a right understanding of the atonement and mediation of
   Jesus Christ.

   "God has not seen fit to explain to reason the mode of His existence in
   detail as a basis for doctrinal discussion. We are met with an
   insurmountable difficulty when we undertake a philosophical explanation
   of Infinite Being in the form of finite thought and physical
   comparison. That there are three identities in relation in the mode of
   God's existence, Scripturally termed Father, Son and Spirit, no one
   would deny, but that these three identities can be properly called
   distinct personalities in the absolute sense of the word we question.

   "The terms "Person" and "Persons" are never used in Scripture with
   reference to God. Heb. 1:3, R. V. - "Substance." God is infinite and
   eternal. Earthly limitations forbid a comparison of God's likeness that
   would be explanatory. Infinite being is characterized by attributes
   such as Omniscience, Omnipotence and Omnipresence. Deut. 6:4, "Hear O
   Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord," is a compound unity. Man was
   made in the intellectual and moral likeness of God without reference to
   corporeal form. Col. 3:10, Eph. 4:23, 24. It is as inconsistent to take
   a stand for one Person in the Godhead as it is to take a stand that
   there are three Persons. God is essentially One and manifestly Three."

   Editor E. N. Bell wrote as follows: "No well informed intelligent
   Christian holds that there are three material bodies in the Godhead.
   Thousands of simple, unlearned saints think of God as a great big,
   mighty man sitting on a material throne in heaven, but mature and
   properly informed Christians know that this is error. Even that of
   Jesus which was corporeal was not Deity, but human. While the Father
   and the Spirit each have a distinct identity of their own, yet apart
   from the body of Jesus neither has a corporeal or material body. Jesus
   is the only person in the Godhead who has such a body, - a spiritual
   body.

   "There are no other three in all the universe so related as Father, Son
   and Holy Spirit. There is no use to look among men for a complete
   analogy. They could not exist separated in essence, and could not exist
   independently of each other without being three gods. As seen by the
   human eye or mind they appear as distinct persons, yet behind the
   screen on the eternal side they are united in one nature, one essence
   one life, one existence.

   "God is a being who is not limited by the confines of a single
   personality. That Father, Son and Holy Ghost are distinct, is an
   unquestionable fact, but that they are separate as individuals are in
   the natural, or that they are in any sense independent of one another,
   is not at all true. Herein lies the mystery. God is not corporeal, nor
   material, but spiritual in His nature or being. The Spirit has no fixed
   form or may be manifested under any form or symbol which it pleases God
   to manifest. The nature of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit is one,
   their essence is one, their being is one, their essence is one, their
   being is one, their existence is one. Each is uncreated and eternal,
   each is Deity, each is God, yet not three Deities, not three Gods."

   From "Binney's Compend," used as a text-book in most theological
   schools, we gather the following: "The Trinity is indeed a mystery, and
   must necessarily remain so to us. Its incomprehensibility, however,
   proves nothing but that we are finite beings, and not God. The Sun is
   three in one. Round orb, light, heat. Man is three in one. Soul,
   rational mind, body. Three persons in the Godhead, though distinct, are
   separate. The Son and the Spirit proceed from the Father, yet they are
   of the same duration. The same attributes and acts, in the Scriptures,
   are ascribed to each of them without distinction. (Then follows a list
   of Scriptures, are ascribed to each of them without distinction. (Then
   follows a list of Scriptures proving this assertion.) In a word, all
   divine operations are attributed to the three. - 1 Cor. 12:6, Col.
   3:11."

   Augustine taught that "the Father and the Son are the one principle of
   the Being of the Spirit." - John 10:30, 1 Tim. 3:16.

   Dr. Isaac Barrow defines the subject of the Godhead as follows: "The
   sacred Trinity may be considered either as it is in itself wrapt up in
   inexplicable folds of mystery, or as it hath discovered itself
   operating in wonderful methods of grace towards us. As it is in itself
   it is an object too bright and dazzling for our weak eye to fasten
   upon, an abyss too deep for our short reason to fathom.

   "There is one Divine nature or Essence, incomprehensibly united, and
   ineffably distinguished, a communication without any deprivation or
   diminution in the communication, an eternal generation, and an eternal
   procession, without any division or multiplication of essence." Deity
   is neither increased nor diminished. Nothing has ever been added to or
   taken from Deity.

   The Nicene Creed, A. D. 325 reads as follows: "The only begotten Son of
   God, of one substance with the Father. But those who say: There was a
   time when he was not; or the Son of God is created; they are condemned
   by the holy catholic and apostolic church."

   The Athanasian Creed reads: "We worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity
   in unity; neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance.
   The Godhood of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Ghost is all one,
   the glory equal, the majesty co-eternal. Such as the Father is, such is
   the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father eternal; the Son
   eternal; and the Holy Ghost eternal. And yet they are not three but one
   eternal. So likewise the Father is Almighty; the Son is Almighty; and
   the Holy Ghost Almighty. And yet they are not three Almighties, but one
   Almighty. The Father is God; the Son is God; and the Holy Ghost is God.
   And yet they are not three Gods; but one God. And in this Trinity none
   is afore, or after another; none is greater or less than another, but
   co-eternal and co-equal.

   "Our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, is God and man. Perfect God and
   perfect man. Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead." From the
   Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, the early church doctrine of the Trinity
   is principally formed.

   Agreement of Bonn, 1875: "In the Godhead there is only one beginning,
   one cause, by which all that is in the Godhead is produced." ("I and
   the Father are one." - John 10:30.)

   The Confession of the Greek Patriarch, Gennadius to Mahomet II, read as
   follows: "We believe that there are in the one God three peculiarities,
   and these three peculiarities we call the three subsistences. We
   believe that out of the nature of God. spring the Word and the Spirit,
   as from the fire the light and the heat. These three, the Mind, the
   Word, and the Spirit, are one God, as in the one soul of man there is
   the mind, the rational word, and the rational will, and yet these three
   are as to essence one soul." This was the faith of the Greek church at
   this date. 1453, A. D.

   From the Catechism of the Greek Church, Moscow, 1839, we gather the
   following: "The Son of God begotten of the Father expresses that
   personal property by which he is distinguished from the Father and the
   Holy Ghost. None should think that there ever was a time when he was
   not." Jesus, the Word, was "in the bosom of the Father," His "thought
   and expression" (Logos), from all eternity.

   "Light of lights" explains the incomprehensible generation of the Son
   of God from the Father. Both the light we see and the Sun axe of one
   indivisible nature. "Very God of very God." The Son of God is called
   God in the same proper sense as God the Father. - 1 John 5:20. (There
   is no increase in Deity in this so-called "generation.")

   "Jesus suffered and died not in his Godhead, but in his manhood. The
   Son of God is omnipresent. In his Godhead he ever was and is in heaven.
   He is omnipresent, on earth and in heaven. He became visible in his
   humanity. He was always in heaven and on earth. His humanity had a
   beginning.

   "How does Jesus sit at the right hand of God the Father? This must be
   understood spiritually. Jesus Christ has one and the same majesty and
   glory with God the Father. God's special presence is manifested in
   heaven to blessed spirits; also in the church a spiritual presence in
   various manifestations, gifts, etc. But "God is Spirit," omnipresent.

   "How does Scripture ascribe to God bodily parts, as heart, Eyes, ears,
   hands, if God is a Spirit? Holy Scripture suits itself to the common
   language of men; but we are to understand such expressions in a higher
   and spiritual sense.

   "The Son of God was made man, without ceasing to be God. The "Word was
   made flesh." - John 1:14. One Person, God and man together, a God-man."
   - Greek Catechism.

   I. M. Haldeman, D. D., Pastor of the First Baptist Church, New York
   City: "God, the one being, is expressed in three persons. No one person
   is God without the other two. The Father can neither be seen nor felt;
   the Spirit can never be seen, but is felt; while the Son can be both
   seen and felt. The Son of God is the revelation of both the Father and
   the Spirit, therefore the embodiment of the fulness of God. - Col. 2:9,
   2 Cor. 3:17. Father, Son and Holy Spirit constitute one being and one
   God.

   "God is ever essentially the same. The being of the Father would not be
   complete without the being of the Son. The Son of God is the outgoing
   and forthputting of the essence and energy of the Father. "Whose goings
   forth have been from of old, from everlasting." - Micah 5:2. He never
   in all eternity was unbegotten. He is the uncaused Son of God, and God
   the Son.

   "From all eternity He has been a common part of the being and substance
   of God. Since this his true His mother could not conceive His
   personality. Therefore that which was conceived by his mother was not a
   personality, but an impersonal nature. "That holy thing which shall be
   born of thee shall be called the Son, of God. - Luke 1:35. "Wherefore
   also that which is to be begotten' " - Luke 1:35, Rotherham
   Translation. "A body hast Thou prepared for me." - Heb. 10:5 (His human
   nature was begotten" in the womb of the Virgin.) His body (the
   expression of his created human nature) was united to His unchanged
   personality. While the Holy Ghost came upon the virgin, and the power
   of the Highest overshadowed her, it was the Son (Logos) who, laying
   aside his "form" of God and uniting this divinely wrought (begotten of
   God) human nature to himself, entered the world through the gateway of
   a woman's life and became the concentrated expression of the unit work
   of Godhead and the final and determining factor in his own
   incarnation," - Phil. 2:7. The resurrection of Christ does not touch
   His essential and eternal relation to the Father. It is the coming
   forth of the Son from the grave in the humanity, which, with the Father
   and the Spirit, He had created for Himself.

   "When it is said he is the "first born of every creature (creation),"
   the qualification is used in the sense not of essence or origin, but in
   the sense of heirship. - Heb. 1:2. He is the "beginning" of the
   creation of God." He was the first to rise from the dead. As such He is
   the "second Adam," the last Adam, the head and beginning of the new
   race potentially in Him, the new creation of God. ("The primal source
   of all creatures." - Col. 1:15, - A. S. Worrel.)

   "Only God can atone to God. God as God cannot die. He must have a human
   nature. God must become incarnate. As sons of God we are subject to an
   dependent on him as that one of whom alone of all the sons of God it
   can be said, 'Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou
   hadst formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to
   everlasting, Thou art God" - Psa. 90:2. - I. M. Haldeman. "And God was
   the Word.) - John 1:1. "God was manifest in the flesh." - 1 Tim. 3:16.

   "The final goal of Greek philosophy was only reached when the great
   thinkers of the early christian church, who had been trained in the
   schools of Alexandria and Athens, used its modes of thought in their
   analysis of the christian idea of God. The result was the evolution of
   the doctrine of the Trinity." Ency. Britt.

   Pastor J. T. Boddy has written the following convictions, which would
   seem to be very applicable at this time: "All must concede that it is
   impossible for the finite to comprehend or define the Infinite, and
   that whatever measure of knowledge of God and the great mystery of
   godliness procurable in this life, it must reach us by revelation
   through the Word, and not through reason. We have become too
   metaphysical. Our salvation does not depend on our correct conceptions
   of the Godhead, but upon our personal relation to Him through Jesus
   Christ.

   "Many very incompetent persons mentally and spiritually, have
   irreverently "rushed in where angels fear to tread," and have
   undertaken to analyze, define and even dissect God, and then
   presumptuously held up before Him their human analysis, in sacrilegious
   attitude. This is largely due to a lack of true veneration and
   reverence for divine and sacred things. And this is frequently done by
   so over-emphasizing a truth that we warp it out of its true relation to
   the other truths, and thereby weaken the whole."

   From Binney's Compend we gather the following instructive Bible study
   on the subject: "Jesus Christ is verily and truly man. Jesus Christ is
   the very unoriginated God. - John 1:1; 20:28, Acts 20:28, Rom. 9:5 (the
   Spanish translation reads, "Who is God over all things, blessed
   forever"), Col. 2:9, Phil. 2:6, 1 Tim. 3:16, Titus 2:10, Heb. 1:8, 1
   John 5:20.

   "His eternity is proven by the following Scriptures: Isa. 9:6, Micah
   5:2, John 1:1; John 8:58, Col. 1:17, Heb. 7:3; 13:8; Rev. 1:8. His
   divine titles are given, a few of which are Alpha and Omega. - Rev.
   1:8; 21:6; 22:13. Emmanuel, - Matt. 1:23. First and last, - Rev. 1:17.
   Everlasting Father, Isa. 9:6. Mighty God, Isa. 9:6. King of kings and
   Lord of lords, - 1 Tim. 6:15. Lord of Glory, - 1 Cor. 2:8. Prince of
   Life, Acts 3:15. And many other titles and passages. He is proven
   Omnipresent, Omniscient, and Omnipotent, by many Scriptures

   "Substantial divinity and real humanity are combined in the person of
   Jesus Christ. As man he weeps over the grave of Lazarus. As God, He
   raises him from the dead. As man he himself suffers and dies. But as
   God He is able to raise His own body from the dead. - John 10:18. As
   those two natures are united in him, he has of course a double mode of
   speaking of himself.

   "Jesus manifestly claims supreme divinity where he says to Philip, "he
   that hath seen me hath seen the Father" - John 14:9. Jesus was the
   human personation of the invisible God. Philip sees the Father only as
   he sees him in the Son. - John 1:18. In his mediatorial office, being
   sent, he was inferior to the Father who sent him. - John 14:28. He
   refers not to his nature but to his office, - "the Father is greater
   than I." In view of Christ's many claims to be God, he is either God,
   or not a good man. They who begin by denying Christ's supreme Deity
   logically end by assailing his moral integrity. - Mark 10:18. In Mark
   13:32, the ignorance does not disprove his Divinity: It may have been a
   part of his humiliation in His mediatorial office. The union of two
   whole and perfect natures, divinity and humanity, qualify Jesus Christ
   to be the mediator. That is, perfectly to represent God to sinful man,
   and fallen man to God, and to provide, through his shed blood, and the
   agency of-the Holy Spirit, for a reconciliation between them. - 1 Tim.
   2:5, - Notes from Binney's Compend.

   Iraneaus, a disciple of Polycarp, who was a disciple of St. John,
   wrote: "God was to become man, and in Christ he became man. Christ must
   be God; for if not, the devil would have had a natural claim on him,
   and he would have been no more exempt from death than the other
   children of Adam; he must be man if his blood were indeed to redeem us.
   In the God-man God has drawn man up to himself. The Logos is the voice
   of God, with which the Father speaks in the revelation to mankind."
   Jesus was a "cross" between God and man. God "crossed" himself with
   humanity. "God was manifest in the flesh." - 1 Tim. 3:16.

   The Editor of the Sunday School Times writes: "John introduces Christ
   to us as the Word. The Greek word logos, translated word,' had two
   meanings. It signified the intelligence or the reason. Our word logic
   is derived from it in this sense. It also signified speech. Both these
   meanings are included when John calls Christ the Word. He is the inward
   Word of God, because He exists from all eternity in the bosom of the
   Father, as much one with Him as reason is one with the reasoning mind.
   Nothing is so close to man as his own thought. So nothing is so close
   to God as His own, eternal Word. It is within Him, it is one with Him,
   and it is divine, like Him. Christ is also God's outward Word. He
   expresses and explains and reveals to the world what God is."

   Alexander Cruden writes in his "Concordance of the Scriptures": The
   eternal Son of God in his divine nature is equal with the Father; but
   in his human nature subordinate and inferior to the Father. Both
   natures are united in the person of Christ. The Word, the eternal Son
   of God, is equal and consubstantial with the Father, being the express
   image of the Father, as our word, are of our thoughts." - Heb. 1:3.

   On Isa. 9:6, Cruden says: "His name shall be called Wonderful, the
   Mighty God, that is, He is wonderful, he is the mighty God."

   Tertullian wrote, A. D. 200: "There is but one God and no other besides
   the maker of the world, who produced the universe out of nothing, by
   his Word sent forth first of all. This by the patriarchs, was always
   heard in the prophets ( 1 Peter 1:10-12), at last was sent down, from
   the Spirit and power of God the Father, into the Virgin Mary, was made
   flesh in her womb, and born of her, lived (appeared) as Jesus Christ,
   etc."

   Origen, wrote, A. D., 230: "Emptying himself he (Jesus Christ) became
   man incarnate, while he was yet God and though made man, remained God
   as he was before." the true Son of the true Father.'

   Gregorious wrote, A. D. 270: "One Lord (Jesus Christ), the mighty Word,
   the wisdom which comprehends the constitution of all things, and the
   power which produces all creation, the true Son of the true Father."

   Fourth Ecumenical Council, A. D. 451: Established Creed of Chalcedon -
   Christological. The Incarnation: "The God-man is not a mere indwelling
   of God in man, but an actual and abiding union of the two in one
   personal life. The Logos assumed, not a human person (else we would
   have two persons a divine and a human), but human nature which is
   common to us all; and hence he redeemed, not a particular man but all
   men as partakers of the same natur

   "Christ is not a double being with two persons. He is person, both
   divine and human. The divine will ever remain divine, and the human
   ever human, and yet the two have continually one common life. It is a
   permanent state, resulting from the incarnation. The two natures
   constitute but one personal life and yet remain distinct

   "The self-consciousness of Christ is never divided. The divine nature
   is the seat of self consciousness and pervades and animates the human.
   The one divine human person of Christ wrought miracles by virtue of his
   divine nature, and suffered through his human nature. "The superhuman
   effect and infinite merit must be ascribed to his divinity. His
   humanity alone made him capable of temptation, suffering, and death.
   Christ's human nature had no independent personality of its own besides
   the divine. The divine nature is the root and basis of his personality.

   "His human personality was completed and perfected by being so
   incorporated with the pre-existent Logos personality as to find in it
   alone its full self consciousness, and to be permeated and controlled
   by it in every stage of' its development. The human nature of Christ
   did not exist at all before the act of the incarnation. The Son of God
   was crucified and buried, yet he suffered not in his Godhead, but in
   weakness of human nature." So Jesus took on him humanity, not a single
   human individuality. The human was blended, "crossed,' with the divine.
   Jesus was "perfect God and perfect man." As such he was capable of the
   fulness of Divine felicity and blessedness, and yet of the sum total of
   human wretchedness and suffering. He was "made sin for us, who knew no
   sin." - 2 Cor. 5:21.

   Weymouth Translation, N. T., foot-note on Matt. 1:21: "The full
   significance of the name "Jesus" is seen in the original "Yeho-shua,"
   which means "Jehovah the Savior," and not merely Savior."

   Scofield Reference Bible, foot notes " Matt. 1:21 "Jesus, Greek form of
   Hebrew Je-hoshua, meaning Savior. Josh. 1:1: Joshua - Je-hoshua

   "The central theme of the Bible is Christ. It is this manifestation of
   Jesus Christ, his person as "God manifest in the flesh," has
   sacrificial death and his resurrection, which constitute the Gospel.
   Unto this all preceding Scripture leads, from this all following
   Scripture proceeds. Man was made in the image and likeness of God. This
   image is found, chiefly in man's tri-unity, and in his moral nature.
   Jehovah is distinctly the redemption name of Deity. Jehovah is the
   self-existent One who reveals Himself.

   "Christ is seen in his person as Son of God, and very God. Those
   Scriptures which attribute to God bodily parts are metaphorical. Jesus
   was the Mighty God. Jesus the Logos was the expression or utterance of
   the Person and thought of Deity in his incarnation. Christ applied to
   himself the Jehovistic "I Am." He claimed to be the Adonai (Lord) of
   the O. T. Eternal life is the life of God revealed in Jesus Christ, who
   is God.

   "The Memorial Name of God: "The primary meaning of the name Jehovah
   (English - Lord) is "the self-existent One." Literally (as in Ex. 3:14)
   He that is who He is, therefore the eternal I Am. But Havah, from
   whence Jehovah, or Yahwe, is formed, signifies also "to become," that
   is to become known, thus, pointing to a continuous and increasing
   self-revelation. Combining these meanings of Havah we arrive at the
   meaning of the name Jehovah. He is "the self-existent One who reveals
   Himself. Jehovah Elohim clearly indicates a special relation of Deity,
   in His Jehovah character, to man, and all Scripture emphasizes this
   Jehovah is distinctly the redemption name of Deity. When sin entered
   and redemption became necessary, it was Jehovah Elohim who sought the
   erring ones, and clothed them with coats of skins." The first distinct
   revelation of Himself by His name Jehovah was in connection with the
   redemption of the covenant people out of Egypt. Christ Himself affirmed
   his deity. He applied to Himself the Jehovistic "I Am."

   "The Greek term Logos (Word) means a thought or concept, and the
   expression or utterance of that thought. Christ is from eternity, but
   especially in his incarnation, the utterance or expression of the
   Person and thought of Deity. The "mystery of God" is Christ, as
   incarnating the fulness of the Godhead. The life is called "eternal"
   because it was from the eternity which is past unto the eternity which
   is to come - it is the life of God revealed in Jesus Christ, who is God

   1 Cor. 15:24, 15:28; "The Son will deliver up the kingdom to "God, even
   the Father" that "God" (i. e., the triune God, Father, Son and Holy
   Spirit), "my be all in all." The eternal throne is that "of God, and of
   the' Lamb." - Rev. 22:1." - Scofield Ref. Bible

   "The Angel of the Covenant, Jesus Christ, appeared many times in the
   Old Dispensation, and received worship, as God. "Behold, I send an
   angel (messenger) before thee ... provoke him not . . . . for My Name
   is in him." - Ex. 3:20-22. Israel worshipped this angel all the way to
   the promised land." - Eusebia. This was evidently the Angel of the
   covenant, Jesus Christ; according to Adam Clarke and others.

   The Syriac Version gives the following curious rendering of John 1:18,
   "No man hath ever seen God; the only begotten God, he who is in the
   bosom of the Father, he hath declared him." Even the title of this
   ancient and valuable translation reads as follows: "The New Testament;
   or, the Book of the Holy Gospel of our Lord and our God, Jesus the
   Messiah."

   Dr. Philip Schaff writes, on John 20:28: "This is the strongest
   Apostolic confession of faith in the Lordship and divinity of Christ.
   "Thomas answered and said unto him (Jesus), "My Lord and my God."
   Thomas could not have uttered a profanity unrebuked by the Lord. He was
   an honest inquirer for the truth, not an unbeliever. He embraced with,
   joy the proof.

   "It was by a true, divine instinct that the early theologians made
   Christ Himself, in his divine human personality, the center of their
   creeds." - Schaff.

   Ignatius said: "Be ye deaf, therefore, when any man speaketh to you
   apart from Jesus Christ." The doctrine of one God undermines the
   heathen systems of worship at one stroke. When the heathen ask the name
   of the christians' God the missionaries invariably and rightly tell
   them Jesus. 1 John 5:20, "This is the true God, and eternal life." -
   (Jesus.) "Little children, keep yourselves from idols (false ideas of
   God)." - 20th Century Trans. - 1 John 5:21

   Wm. Smith. LL. D., in his Bible Diet., writes as follows: "Throughout
   the Hebrew Scriptures two chief names are used for the one true divine
   being - Elohim, commonly translated God in our Version, and Jehovah,
   translated Lord. Jehovah denotes specifically the one true God, whose
   people the Jews were, and who made them the guardians of His truth. The
   name is never applied to a false god, nor to any other being, except
   One, the Angel Jehovah, who is thereby marked as one with God, and who
   appears again in the New Covenant as "God manifest in the flesh."

   "The Jews' abstained from pronouncing this name, for fear of its
   irreverent use. "The Name", (Shema), is substituted by the Rabbis for
   the unutterable word. They also call it "the name of four letters"
   (JHVH), "the great and terrible name," "the peculiar name," "the
   separate name." In reading the Scriptures they substituted for it
   Adonai (Lord). The substitution of the word is most unhappy. The mind
   has constantly to guard against a confusion with its lower uses. The
   key to the meaning of the name is unquestionably given in God's
   revelation of Himself to Moses by the phrase, "I am that I am," in
   connection with the statement that He was now first revealed by His
   name Jehovah. - Ex. 3:14; Ex. 6:3, ( (John 8:58)). Jehovah expresses
   the essential, eternal, unchangeable Being of Jehovah. It is also a
   practical revelation of God, in His essential, unchangeable relation to
   His chosen people, the basis of His covenant. He was about, for the
   first time, fully to reveal that aspect of His character which the name
   implied - Jehovah." The name Jehovah had been known from the beginning.
   - Gen 2

   Rev. Leon Tucker, prominent Baptist preacher and writer, in his book
   "Is Jesus Christ Creature or Creator?" writes the following: "Apart
   from the Scriptures we can know nothing of Jesus Christ. Apart from
   Jesus Christ we can know nothing of the Scriptures. The Word of God and
   the Son of God are eternal and inseparable, therefore to the child of
   God the Scriptures are imperative. The battle continues with ever
   increasing hate and hostility. The personal attributes of the Son of
   God are not only little understood, but much misunderstood. The means
   of the revelation of God is Christ. He is not only the conveyor of that
   revelation, but is the revelation itself.

   "Scripture declares He was in the world from all time, existed before
   all time, and will be when time is no more. The Eternal Christ is the
   theme of the Scriptures. It takes a whole Bible to give us a whole
   Christ. Christ is from Eternity to Eternity in His character. Henry
   Ward Beecher in writing the Life of Christ said, "How can I finish the
   Life of Christ? a life which never began, and will never end." "But
   thou, Bethlehem-Ephratah ... out of thee shall one come forth unto me,
   that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth are from of old, from
   everlasting (the days of eternity)." - Micah 5:2

   "The Son was in the "bosom of the Father" because never unborn. Jesus
   Christ came from the "bosom of the Father." He was God manifest in the
   flesh, but nevertheless God of all flesh, and before all flesh. He was
   not manifestation of God in the flesh, but was. "God manifest in the
   flesh." He was before all things. - Col. 1:17. Isaiah refers to Him as
   "Father of Eternity." - Isa. 9:6. - Heb. Eternal life is "in the Son."
   - 1 John 5:11, John 17:3. Natural life, spiritual life, and eternal
   life all come front Him. All the attributes of God are His and He is
   God.

   "He pre-existed as God. - John 1:1. He was predicated as God - Isa.
   9:6. He professed to be God. - John 5:18. He was proclaimed God. - 1
   Tim. 3:16. He was promoted as God. - Heb. 1:8, 9. He was petitioned as
   God. - 1 Cor. 1:2. His perfections are God's. - John 8:53[sic], John
   8.58[sic], 10:15, 28; John 20:28. Matt. 18:20, Heb. 7:26. He created. -
   Col. 1:15, 17. He is "Providence," - Heb. 1:3.

   "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, today, and forever." - Heb. 13:8.
   Human reason has always failed at the Christ. But the fact remains.
   Divine revelation can never sink to human reason, and human reason can
   never rise to divine revelation. The Bible says He is a Creator. - Col
   1:15-20. The Bible says He is God. He is no less than the Creator of
   all things, whether they be atoms or angels, persons or planets. The
   Seraphim at the presence of His glory, covered their faces. - Isa.
   6:1-8. John 12:39-41.

   "In the beginning God," ( Gen 1:1), and Christ is the beginning. He is
   before all time. He is the Alpha of all things. There was some one
   before there was anything. He was the One. Angels both faithful and
   fallen know Him if men do not. He is Lord of All. No, Jesus Christ is
   not a creature, He is the Creator. Whether in Creation or Redemption,
   Jesus Christ is the Absolute and all perfect expression of God. He is
   all of God and God is all of Christ. Let us speak out in these days of
   doubt and declension. The Christology of the Book is better than the
   philosophy of all books. Christ is "All and in all." - Leon Tucker

   John Bunyan: "His (Jesus') attributes, though apart laid down in the
   Word of God, that we, being weak, might the better conceive of his
   eternal power and Godhead; yet in him they are without division, one
   glorious and eternal being. The Godhead is but one, yet in the Godhead
   there are three. These three are called the Father, the Son, and the
   Holy Spirit; each of which is really, naturally and eternally God; yet
   there is but one God. To each the Scripture applieth, and that truly,
   the whole nature of Dei

   "Adam heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the midst of the
   garden; which voice John will have to be one of the three, calling that
   which Moses here saith is the voice, the Word of God: "In the beginning
   was the Word," the voice which Adam heard walking in the midst of the
   garden. This "Word was with God," - "Word was God." - John 1:1,2.

   "Now the godly in former ages have called these three, in the Godhead,
   Persons or Subsistences; the which though I condemn not yet choose
   rather to abide by Scripture phrase. Thou must take heed when thou
   readest that there is in the Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
   that thou do not imagine about them, according to thine own carnal and
   foolish fancy, and foolishly imagine about it. You find not one of the
   prophets propounding an argument to prove it; but asserting it, they
   let it lie, for faith to take it up and embrace it. The Godhead then,
   though it can admit of a Trinity, yet it admitteth not of inferiority
   in that Trinity; if otherwise then there must be less or more, and so
   either plurality of gods, or something that is not God."

   The infidel Renan "declared: ", Thou Man of Galilee, Thou hast
   conquered; and henceforth no man shall be able to distinguish between
   thee and God. Banner of our contradictions! Thou wilt be the sign
   around which there will be fought the fiercest battles." And it is so.

   Napoleon, on the Island of St. Helena, in exile, said: "Alexander,
   Caesar, Charlemange and I have founded great empires; but upon what did
   these creations depend? Upon force. Jesus has founded his empire upon
   love, and to this very day millions would die for him. No one else is
   like Him. Jesus Christ was more than a man. I have inspired multitudes
   with such devotion that they would have died for me. But to do this it
   was necessary that I should be visibly present, with the electric
   influence of my looks, of my words, of my voice. Christ alone has
   succeeded in so raising the mind of man toward the unseen that it
   becomes insensible to the barriers of time and space. Across a chasm of
   1800 years Jesus Christ makes a demand which is, above all others,
   difficult to satisfy. He demands it unconditionally, and forthwith his
   demand is granted. Time, the great destroyer, is powerless to
   extinguish the sacred flame. This it is which strikes me most."

   Some one has written of Napoleon: "Moved alternately by admiration,
   jealousy, and remorse at Jesus Christ, Napoleon unhesitatingly and in
   all sincerity denominated him "the man-God." He marveled at the power
   of the symbol of the Cross to change mens' lives. The thing that
   aroused his jealousy, admiration and remorse, was the fact that while
   he had led the world's greatest armies to the slaughter and miserably
   failed either to retain a kingdom or the adherence of his followers,
   Jesus Christ had given his own life and secured an eternal kingdom, and
   the lasting admiration and fidelity of a world of true believers.
   Napoleon began by desiring to be a god. He ended by being hated and
   execrated by all."

   Editor E. N. Bell wrote as follows on Isa. 9:6: "Jesus was and is the
   Everlasting Father in the sense that he is the father of eternity, but
   not the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The idea is that Jesus existed
   before all time, though in the flesh he appeared in time; also that he
   originated or created all things. Isa. 9:6 does not discuss or refer to
   the Father in the N. T. sense. He is the father also of the "new
   creation," even as the "first Adam" was of the old."

   Wm. H.' Bennett, an English writer says: "The Everlasting Father," Isa.
   9:6, "The Father of the Everlasting Age, the One from whom spring the
   glory and blessedness of God's new creation."

   Adam Clarke, speaking of the name for Jesus in the O. T., writes: "This
   is the famous tetragrammaton, or name of four letters, which we write
   Jehovah. The letters are JHVH. The Jews never pronounce it; and the
   true pronunciation is utterly unknown. This name the Jews never attempt
   to pronounce. When they meet with it in the Bible they read Adonai for
   it. To a man they all declare that no man can pronounce it; and that
   the true pronunciation has been lost; and that God alone knows its true
   interpretation and pronunciation." It is evidently a mouthful for the
   Jews. It is "Jesus

   Dr. Chas. H. Spurgeon, the great London preacher, wrote on 1 Timothy
   3:16: "Was it a man that was manifest in the flesh? Assuredly not, for
   every man is manifest in the flesh. This could not be called a mystery.
   Was it an angel? What angel was ever manifest in the flesh? And if it
   were would it be a mystery for him to be seen of angels? Could it have
   been the devil? If so, be has been: "received up into glory," which,
   let us hope is not the case. Now, if it was neither of these three that
   was "manifest in the flesh," then it must have been God."

   Declaration of Evangelical Association of the World: "Christ is supreme
   in God's revelation to Man. Christ declared of himself: "He that seeth
   me seeth the Father also." He was the brightness of the Father's glory,
   and the express image of his person. Christ revealed the Fatherhood of
   God, of God, as well as the Saviorhood of man. There is no higher
   revelation of God than we have in Jesus Christ. "God was in Christ
   reconciling the world unto himself," and the historical and
   experimental fact is a unique, and an unmatched revelation of God in
   the creation and redemption of man, the correct interpretation of God's
   eternal purpose with man. Christ is the supreme revealer of God in
   human redemption.

   Wyckliffe: "Our faith will not fail for it is founded on Jesus alone,
   our Master and our God. The mediator must needs be a man; but every
   man, being indebted to God for everything that he is able to do this
   man must needs have infinite merit, and be at the same time God."

   Jacob Boehme, A. D. 1624. "The way to oneness is to sink into the
   knowledge of the great and holy name of God, Jehovah or Jesus, as the
   living Word, that gives life to all things. In the only beloved Son,
   God is revealed."

   Hannah Whitall Smith: "The God who created us is the God who saves us.
   Not another God, for there is none beside Him, but the very God, our
   Creator himself. Some are apt to think of our Creator and our Savior as
   two Gods, with interests which are not identical. But we are told as
   plainly as words can tell it, that the Creator is also the Savior, and
   there is none beside."

   Chas. G. Finney, the Great Revivalist: "Only the Holy Ghost can reveal
   Christ as God so that the believing soul will be fast established in
   this truth and the fact become a sanctifying power in the heart."

   Pastor Paul, of Berlin, in a Book recently written, declares: "The
   Antichrist is about to set himself up as a man-God, and in keeping with
   this assumption his chief attack will be to overthrow the fact that
   Jesus Christ is God." Antichrist will set himself forth in the temple
   of God as God. "He that opposeth and exalteth himself against all that
   is called God, so that he sitteth in the temple of God, setting himself
   forth as God." - 2 Thessalonians 2:4. Then let us set Jesus Christ
   forth in our temple as the true God. Anti-christ is "against Christ."
   "This is the true God, and eternal life," - Jesus, - 1 John 5:20.
   "Little children, keep yourselves from idols (false ideas of God)." - 1
   John 5:21, - 20th Century Trans. Antichrist is subtly and surely paving
   the way for the complete denial of the Deity of Christ. It will become
   harder and more unpopular continually to preach this truth. God grant
   that our sympathies may be found on the right side, that we may not be
   found finally aiding the Antichrist. Any tendency or spirit to deny the
   full claims of Jesus Christ is necessarily antichrist, and in line with
   the Apostasy. The spirit of Antichrist rises up against and opposes the
   revelation of Jesus Christ, as God. It is a persecuting spirit, the
   "Mother Harlot" spirit. Just' in the measure that men reject and oppose
   this full revelation of Christ they still possess the spirit of
   Antichrist, inherited through the "fall," enmity with God.

   Testimony of Suzuki Yasukei, a Japanese convert in Japan: "I am a man
   of 78 years of age and getting very old. I have been a member of
   Japanese old Buddhist temple for over 60 years, and I have learned many
   Korans, and I can pray like priests for the dead people and instruct
   others how they can go to a place where people live on water lily
   flowers all the time. That is what we call "Gokuraku," a place of easy
   retirement. I thought it was the true way and no other way to go to
   that fine place, so I worshipped Buddha every morning, beating drum and
   burning incense, repeating the same each year without knowing peace in
   my heart. I thought, I can go to that place in this way. But this year
   in May I heard that a Christian tent meeting was going on at Kitagata
   Yochien waki, where people were finding real joy and peace through Yaso
   (Jesus Christ). I went to the tent, and found the true God and Savior.
   Although I wasted my whole life, thank God he has saved me even now
   before I die. He has become my personal Redeemer.

   "A few days ago I saw a wonderful dream or vision. It was so real to me
   I will tell you all about it. I awakened early: and was meditating on
   God when I saw something with my eyes. As I looked up I saw a beautiful
   country and many people shouting hallelujah, as I heard in the mission,
   and I wanted to go there so much. Then at this time two priests -came
   in to talk to me from the sidewalk and asked me. "Do you forsake us?
   Where are you going now? Come on with us to the temple." But I said to
   them, You are dirty, wicked deceitful priests. You misled me, you
   fooled me, you cheated me; get out of my way. I hollered out like,
   that. Again Yaso (Jesus) appeared in a cloud, and took me on that same
   cloud to that beautiful, country which I had seen a few moments before.
   Oh, it was so beautiful! I never saw such a beautiful place since I was
   born. Jesus himself said to me, "You were honest, so I will give you a
   key to the treasure house of this country." At this time I really found
   out the true God and Savior, Jesus Christ. I heard many people say,
   Kami (God), Yaso (Jesus), Miseire (Holy Spirit); I thought they were
   all different gods. But God is united with Yaso (Jesus) on the throne
   of God." - From "The Toyo No Koe," Japan. This old Japanese saint's
   photo was printed with the article.

   Sadhu Sundar Singh: "Sadhu Sundar Singh is known as the St. Paul of
   India. His life and experience have been apparently parallel to those
   of Apostolic days. He has visited the Orient, the Isle of Ceylon,
   European countries and, also the U. S. In a book written by a well
   known writer, the following is what Sundar Singh has to say on the
   subject of' the Trinity: "At one time I was a good deal perplexed about
   the doctrine of the Trinity. I had thought of three separate persons,
   sitting as it were on three thrones, but it was all made plain to me in
   a vision. I entered into an ecstasy into the third heaven. I was told,
   it was the same to which St. Paul was caught up. And there I saw Christ
   in a glorious body sitting on a throne. Whenever I go there it is the
   same. Christ is always in the center, a figure ineffable and
   indescribable, His face shining like the Sun, but in no way dazzling,
   and so sweet that without any difficulty I can gaze at it - always
   smiling a glorious, loving smile.

   "The first time I entered heaven I looked around and I asked; "But
   where is God?" And they told me, "God is not to be seen here any more
   than on earth, for God is Infinite. But there is Christ, He is God. He
   is the image of the invisible God, and it is only in Him that we can
   see God, in Heaven as on earth." And streaming out from Christ I saw,
   as it were, waves shining and peace giving, and going through and among
   the saints and angels, and everywhere bringing refreshment, just as in
   hot weather water refreshes trees; and this I understood to be the Holy
   Spirit."

   Some one has beautifully and truly written the following: "The central
   theme of the Word of God is Jesus Christ. In Genesis He is the Creator,
   in Exodus He is the Passover Lamb, in Leviticus He is the Offering, in
   Numbers He is represented in type, in Deuteronomy He fills the reviews,
   in Joshua He is the Captain of the Lord's Host, in Judges He is the
   Righteous Judge, in Ruth He is the Husband, in Samuel He is the Prophet
   of the prophets, in Kings and Chronicles He is the King of kings and
   Lord of lords, in Ezra He is the Restorer of His people, in Nehemiah He
   is the Protector of His people, in Esther He is the Preserver of His
   people, in Job He is the Redeemer that liveth, in Psalms He is the
   Shepherd King-Messiah, in Proverbs He is the Wise Man, in Ecclesiastes
   He is the only One under the sun in whom there is no vanity, in Songs
   of Solomon He is the Bridegroom-Lover. The major and minor or the
   pre-exilic, exilic, and post-exilic prophets especially portray in
   minute and comprehensive detail the exact events that cluster around
   the two advents of Christ. In Matthew He is the King-Messiah, in Mark
   He is the Servant-Messiah, in Luke He, is the Man-Messiah, and in John
   He is the God-Messiah. The historic, epistolary and apocalyptic letters
   all reveal the one personage. - Jesus Christ."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III.

   J. Merle D'Aubigne, author of "History of the Reformation," wrote in
   the middle of the 19th century: "What is Jesus Christ if He be not God
   in history? Is not this great truth, that God has appeared in human
   nature, in reality the keystone of the arch? History records a birth of
   God, and yet God has no part in history. Jesus Christ is the true God
   of man's history. God appeared among men, and as man, to save that
   which was lost. In Jesus of Nazareth dwelt all the fulness of the
   Godhead bodily."

   Martin Luther declared: "Christ is the one, sole, and true God ( 1 John
   5:20). When you have Him for your God, you have no other gods." He also
   declared, "Thy repentance and thy works may deceive thee, but Christ,
   thy God, wilt not deceive thee." To Pope Leo, Luther wrote, "Christ who
   is God and man. Christ who has never sinned, and whose holiness is
   immaculate. Christ the Almighty and Everlasting."

   Melancthon, Luther's co-laborer, "quoted often Homer, Plato, Cicero,
   Pliny and others, for he was a great scholar, but Christ ever remained
   his Master and his God." - D'Aubigne.

   Zwingle declared: "Christ, who is very God, and very man. Since it was
   the eternal God who died for us, his passion is therefore an eternal
   sacrifice. - Acts 20:28. Proceeding from the Father, he (Christ) is
   God, and consequently present in every place. According to his human
   nature, he was absent from heaven while be was upon the earth, and
   quitted the earth when he ascended into heaven; but, according to his
   divine nature, he remained in heaven when he came down thence (the
   Logos), and did not abandon the earth, when he returned thither."

   Staupitz, the spiritual father of Luther, said: "We cannot understand
   God outside of Jesus Christ. In Him, the Lord has said, you will find
   what I am, and what I require. Nowhere else, neither in heaven nor in
   earth, will you discover it."

   Dr. Albert Eby, Wilshire Presby. Church Pastor, writes: "The only
   perfect man in all history or experience was God Himself, manifest in
   the flesh. He is also revealed as the indwelling Holy Spirit."

   Wm. Conant, in his Magazine, "Salvation," some years ago wrote the
   following: "It is the grand theological error of separating the Father
   and the Son, as two in this sacrifice (the atonement), in the suffering
   of it and the love in it, that has perverted the doctrine to an
   impossibility for the moral mind, and has been answerable for the
   defection of millions of souls from the Gospel of Christ. An
   intelligent Scriptural correction of this error in the theology of the
   church must be the means of arresting the present already stupendous
   apostasy."

   Wm. H. Bennett, a well known English writer, in his book, "The Person
   of the Lord Jesus Christ," has written as follows: "The Lord Jesus
   Christ was when on earth, and is now in heaven, absolutely, both God
   and man. He is truly God. He is truly man. From His incarnation and
   birth He was, He is, and He ever will be both God and man.

   "In Isa. 6, we read that the prophet saw. One seated upon a throne,
   high and lifted up, before Whom seraphim covered themselves. That this
   was the very One who afterwards trod the earth in humiliation, is
   declared by the Apostle John. - John 12:41, Isa. 7:14; Isa. 9:6.
   "Jehovah our Righteousness." - Jer. 23:6. "In the beginning was the
   Word, the Word was with God, and the Word was God." - John 1:1. The
   beginning of which John speaks is a beginning that is beginningless,
   not the beginning of creation ( Gen. 1:1). The "Word was." Essential
   being was His. "Before Abraham was I Am." - John 8:58. He is revelation
   of God. - John 1:18.

   "The Lord Jesus is spoken of chiefly as the Son of God, But this
   expression denotes nothing less than oneness, with the Father, and
   possession of all the attributes of Godhead." I and the Father are
   one.". -_ John 10:30, - Greek. "The Jews. answered him "For a good work
   we stone thee not, but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a
   man, makest thyself God." - John 10:33. They had understood that he
   applied to himself that title by which Jehovah was revealed to Moses -
   ( Ex. 3). "Before Abraham was I am" - John 8:58. The Jews understood
   his meaning. - John 1:36 (He was the Logos, the Word that "was God." -
   John 1:1, "equal with God." John 5:18, Phil. 2:6.)

   "St. Paul is declaring that in the Son there dwells all the fullness of
   absolute Godhead, they were no mere rays of Divine glory which gilded
   Him, lighting up His Person for a season and with a splendor not His
   own, but He was, and is, absolute and perfect God." The Son of God is
   the exact and full expression of what God is, which He could not be if
   He were not Himself God.

   "In Rev. 1, Christ is associated with the eternal God as the equal
   source of grace and peace; in Rev. 5, He is equally with Him who sits
   on the throne, the object of universal worship; in Rev. 22, He is seen
   as sharing with God the throne of the new creation. In Rev. 22:13, He
   describes Himself by the words which in Rev. 1:8 are the utterance of
   the Lord God. "I am the Alpha and the Omega." While in that same verse,
   as well as in Rev. 1:17, He declares Himself to be "the First and the
   Last." This prerogative is three times claimed for the Lord Jehovah, in
   Isa. 41:4; Isa. 44:6; Isa. 48:12, and in like manner three times in
   Revelation, 1:17; 2:8; 22:13. It is the expression of absolute Godhead,
   "I am the First and the Last, and beside Me there is no god" ( Isa.
   44:6). He is from eternity to eternity, so that there is no room for
   any other.

   "Godhead in all its fulness, and manhood in all its perfectness, are
   united in the Christ of God. He appeared to Ezekiel by the river Chebar
   with "the likeness as the appearance of a man" ( Ezek. 1:1, 26), as He
   had previously manifested Himself to Moses in the bush, and to Isaiah
   in the temple. But when He came into the world to dwell for a season,
   He took on "flesh." Phil. 2:5-11, - "made himself of no reputation" is
   what is meant by "emptying himself." He had not and could not empty
   Himself of His Godhead. He became what He before was not; but He had
   not ceased to be what He was. He divested Himself of all outward
   expressions of Divine glory. He abased Himself.

   "In all revelations of God it was by the Son that He revealed Himself.
   - John 1:18. Gen. 1:1:2, - one of these was the Lord. Gen. 16:7; 32:24,
   Ex. 3:2, Joshua 5:15. These were all appearances of the Angel of
   Jehovah (Jesus Christ), in a form suitable to the occasion. It is true
   that Daniel had a glorious vision of "one like unto the Son of Man" (a
   son of man.' - R. V.), receiving the kingdom from "The Ancient of
   Days," but he is careful to tell us that it was a dream and visions of
   his head upon his bed." - Dan. 7:13, 14.

   " Heb. 1:2, He is declared to be the Son, but in v. 8, He is addressed
   as God. Heb. 1:10 ( Ps. 102:25), He is addressed as Jehovah. Bishop
   Beveridge says, "If Jesus were God only, and not man, He could not
   suffer anything whereby to satisfy Divine justice; if man only and not
   God, He could not satisfy even though He suffered. If man only, His
   satisfaction could not be sufficient for God; if God only, it would not
   be suitable for man. And therefore to be capable of suffering for man,
   and able to satisfy God, Himself must be both God and man." He was "the
   Man that is My fellow." - Zech. 13:7. ( John 10:30.)

   The deeper our sense of the true glory and fulness of our Lord, the
   deeper will be our confidence in Him, and the truer will be our
   confidence in Him, and the truer will be our reverence in speaking of
   Him." - W. H. Bennett.

   Dr. A. C. Dixon, speaking of Sir Oliver Lodge said "But I want to know,
   does this man believe in Jesus Christ as the eternal God, who made the
   world and the ether; and the atoms, and everything else that was made.
   And does he bow his knee and worship Him? If he does not, he is on the
   other side - against God.

   "You don't need anybody if you will just take "Jesus only." And what we
   need is not to consult with spirits, but trust the Holy Spirit of God,
   looking up into the face of Jesus and worship Him, and love Him, and
   serve Him, and "Jesus only" will make us triumphant over sin, and
   sorrow, and death, and hell. Jesus only is what we need." - Christian
   Alliance Weekly.

   Editor Stanley Frodsham: "Every Bible student knows that since no man
   hath seen God (the Father) at any time, that the Lord Jehovah who
   manifested Himself to prophet and patriarch so often in olden times,
   was none other than the only begotten Son, our Lord and Savior Jesus
   Christ, who is the one, according to John, who has declared or made the
   Father known (John 1:18).

   Pastor Harry Morse writes: "Today I see a Christ that is high over all,
   with all power in heaven and earth, Matt. 28:18; and with a name that
   is above every name. - Phil. 2:9. People are trying to strip our Lord
   of His divinity, and also one is about to come in his own name." - John
   5:43. This being will be the Antichrist. - 1 John 2:18."

   God calls Himself Israel's Savior, - "For I am the Lord thy God, the
   Holy One of Israel, thy Savior. - Isa. 43:3. "I, even I, am the Lord;
   and beside me there is no savior." - Isa. 43:11. "A just God and a
   savior; there is none beside me." - Isa. 45:21. "For this is good and
   acceptable in the sight of God our Savior." - I Tim. 2:3. "According to
   the commandment of God our Savior." - Titus 1:3. "That they may adorn
   the doctrine of God our Savior." - Titus 2:10. "Looking for the blessed
   hope and appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus
   Christ." - Titus 2:13 R. V. "But when the kindness of God our Savior."
   - Titus 3:4. "To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and greatness,
   might and authority, both now, and to all ages." - Jude 25 (Greek).

   Shepherd: Compare Isa. 40:10, 11, with John 10:11, I Peter 5:4. Rock: "
   II Sam. 22:47, Ps. 62:2; 78:35. "They drank of that spiritual Rock that
   followed them; and that Rock was Christ." - 1 Cor. 10:4. Some think the
   children of Israel got their water continually from this Rock in the
   desert. King: "And the Lord shall be king over all the earth; in that
   day shall the Lord be one, and his name one." - I Cor. 2:8. "Until the
   appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which in its own times he shall
   show who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord
   of lords." - I Tim. 6:14, 15, R.V. "And he hath on his vesture and on
   his thigh a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords." - Rev.
   19:16. The I AM: " Ex. 3:14 6:3; John 8:58 . The First and Last: Isa.
   41:4; 43:10, 44:6; Isa. 48:12, Rev. 1:17; Rev. 22:13."

   Pastor D. W Kerr: "There are some things of which the written word of
   God speaks, which are, and always will be, too deep and high for us to
   understand. He has not told us how He can be a Father without
   beginning, nor how He can. Have a Son without beginning; nor how there
   can be a Holy Ghost without beginning. In other words, the Bible does
   not tell us how there can be a Father, a Son, and a Holy Ghost, who
   always was, is now, and ever shall be, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. The
   Veil is the flesh of Christ. - Heb. 10:20, It in the "Word made flesh."
   On the one side, God. On the other side man, the God-man."

   Justin Martyr, beheaded at Rome, A. D., 167, wrote: That ye might also
   know God, who came from above and became man among men. And who is
   again to return, when they who pierced Him shall see and bewail Him."

   Clemens Alexandrinus, a friend of Iraneaus (who suffered martyrdom A.
   D., 202), says: "Believe, O man, in Him who is both man and God;
   believe, O man, in Him who suffered death, and yet is adored as the
   living God."

   Thomas Chatterton, an English poet, wrote: "A humble form the Godhead
   wore, the pains of poverty He bore, to gaudy pomp unknown. Tho' in a
   human walk He trod, still was the Man Almighty God, in glory all His
   own."

   Thomas B. Macauly, English historian, writes: "It was before Deity
   embodied in human form, walking among men, that the prejudices of the
   synagogue and the doubts of the academy, the faces of the victors and
   the swords of thirsty legions were humbled in the dust."

   Frances B. Willard, American Temperance reformer, said in her last
   words: "I am safe with Him. I have always believed in Christ. He is the
   incarnate God."

   Chas. H. Spurgeon wrote: "In heaven, in earth, in hell, all knees bend
   before Him, and every tongue confesses that He (Christ) is God."

   "Be a valiant soldier, routing every sin. Sing His praise, sing His
   praise. Christ the great Jehovah, will be sure to win. Sing His praise,
   sing His praise." - I. O. Brown.

   "Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast, save in the death of Christ, my
   God. All the vain things that charm me most, I sacrifice them to His
   blood." - Isaac Watts.

   Dictionary of Apostolic Church, by Jas. Hastings, D. D.: "The
   revelation of the Son is the revelation of the, Father. - 1 John 1:2.
   "Neither doth any know the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever
   the Son willeth to reveal him." - Matt. 11:27. The Holy Ghost is in one
   breath called by St. Paul the "Spirit of God," and "the Spirit of
   Christ." - Rom. 8:9, Titus 3:4-6, Eph. 4:4. "I am in the Father, and
   the Father in me." - John 14:10."

   People who imagine they could view God's unveiled presence and live do
   not know God. - Deut. 4:12-16. It is said by those who work among them
   that both Jews and Moslems believe that christians worship three gods
   (are idolators). Would it not be better to preach to them "God manifest
   in the flesh," in the person of Jesus Christ?

   "The voice of one that crieth, Prepare ye in the wilderness the way of
   the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God. O thou
   that tellest good tidings to Zion; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold
   your God." - , Isa. 40:3, 9; "The voice of one crying in the
   wilderness, Make ye ready the way of the Lord. Make His paths
   straight." - Matt. 3:3.

   Ancient Jacobite copies of the N. T. read: "For God himself, in his
   grace, tasted death for all men." - Heb. 2:9. "To feed the church of
   God, which He purchased with His own blood." - Acts 20:28.

   A certain writer has added the following on the subject of the Godhead:
   "God's one great being is a spiritual Being, and not angelic nor human,
   but He is just like Himself, and nothing can be compared with Him -
   Isa. 4:13, 18, 25. "Seven spirits of God" are the complete spiritual
   essence or subsistence of that one great Spiritual Being, just like the
   seven churches make a perfect spiritual body of Christ. These seven
   spirits of God are attributed to Jesus Christ ( Rev. 1:4; 3:1; 4:5).
   "This proves our Lord to be the very God of the "seven spirits" in his
   Deity. God has "one face." - Rev. 22:4, 2 Cor. 4:6."

   "Christ is Jehovah of Glory." - Ps. 24:7, 10; I Cor. 2:8; , J5: 21.
   Jehovah our Righteousness. - Jer. 23:5, 6, I Cor. 1:30. Jehovah's
   Fellow and Equal. - Zech. 13:7, Phil. 2:6. Jehovah a Stone of
   Stumbling. - Isa. 8:13, 14, I Peter 2:8. Jehovah as the Mighty God. -
   Ps. 50:1, Isa. 9:6, Rev. 1:8. Jehovah as the true God. - "The Lord is
   the true God, and an everlasting king (king of eternity)" - Jer. 10:10,
   1 John 5:20. Jehovah as Creator. Isa. 40:28, John 3:3, Col 1:16.
   Jehovah raises Himself from the dead: John 2:19-2; 10:13. Jehovah is
   Eternal: Isa. 9:6, Micah 5:2, John 1:1, Col 1:17. Jehovah as Husband:
   Isa: 54:5; 62:5, Eph. 5:25-32, Rev.21:2, 9.

   Jesus Christ is the Jehovah-God of the O. T. Scholars have agreed in
   giving to the Son of God, Jesus Christ, our Lord the following names,
   titles, and character: "God. - John 1:1, Matt. 1:23, Isa. 40:3. God
   whose throne is forever and ever. - Heb. 1:8. The Mighty God. - Isa.
   9:6. The Everlasting God. - Isa. 40:28. The true God. - 1 John 5:20. My
   Lord and God. - John 20:28: God my Savior. - Luke 1:47. God over all. -
   Rom. 9:5. The God of the whole earth. - Isa; 54:5. God manifest in the
   flesh. - I Tim. 3:16. Our God and Savior. - II Peter 1:1. Our great God
   and Savior Jesus Christ. Titus 2:13, R. V.

   "Where Jesus is called Jehovah: " Isa. 4:3, 10; 6:3, John 12:41, Zech.
   14:5, Hosea 12:4, 5, Gen. 32:24, Ps. 24:8, Jer. 23:6. Other Scriptures
   applied to Christ: Rev. 1:8, Col 1:16, Heb. 1:3, etc. All these
   Scriptures have been applied to Jesus Christ by the best scholars and
   translators we have in the land, outside the Pentecostal Movement.

   Another writer pens the following: Christ is God. To deny that Christ
   is God robs him of all his glory. He is both God and man. It is this
   veil, or mystery, that has hidden Jehovah from His people, the Jews. -
   John 1:11, II Cor. 3:14-18. God is veiled in Jesus Christ. "Hear, O
   Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord." - Deut. 6:4. The personal,
   visible form of God was Jesus Christ, and today the Christ with us and
   in us is "that Spirit" (the Holy Spirit) - II Cor. 3:17. "And it shall
   be said in that day Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him and he
   will save us, this is the Lord (Jehovah); we have waited for him; we
   will be glad and rejoice in his salvation." - Isa. 25:6-9.

   The Jews declared that they knew God the Father. But Jesus alone can
   reveal the Father. The Mohammedans claim to know God the Father. But
   they look upon Jesus' sacrificial death with unspeakable hatred. Jesus
   Christ is the Mighty God. "He that overcometh shall inherit all things;
   and I will be his God, and he shall be my son." - Rev. 21:7, Isa. 9:6.
   It is the "veil of flesh" assumed by the Mighty God that causes men to
   stumble. - II Cor. 5:16.

   A Missionary in India, M. F. Clemenger, recently wrote a brother in
   Orebro, Sweden: "One comes in touch with individuals who tell us that
   they believe on Jesus and know that they are saved. Others tell us that
   they believe that Jesus is the true and living God. Some tell us that
   they do not know who the living God is; he may be Allah, or Jesus, or
   some one else. We tell them, "Jesus is the true and living God. He
   alone has given his life for you." One asked, "If I accept Jesus, am I
   not to take the name of any other gods?" We told him, "Jesus is the
   only true God, and he will not give his glory to another." Some say,
   "The Mohammedans say that Allah is God, you say that Jesus Christ is
   God, and we say others. How are we to know who is God?" (Did not the
   missionary do right in telling them that Jesus Christ was God?)

   Still another writer adds: "In Ex. 3:13, 14, we read that Moses asked
   God His name, and God, speaking from the burning bush answered, "I AM
   THAT I AM. Thus shalt thou say unto the Children of Israel, I AM hath
   sent me unto you." Our Lord Jesus Christ is the I AM. - John 8:58. No
   wonder Jews wanted to stone him. They understood him to claim that name
   for himself. They did not realize that the same I AM who spoke to Moses
   out of the burning bush, and descended before Moses in the cloud ( Ex.
   34:5), proclaiming his name, was standing in their midst in the form of
   a man. There was a terrible splendor about that name that inspired awe
   and fear. The Jews in times past, as the orthodox Jews do still,
   reverence that name so much that they do not dare to pronounce it, but
   substitute in its place "Adonai." Moses admonished the Children of
   Israel to fear this glorious and fearful name. - Deut. 28:58, Ex.
   23:21.

   " John 4:26, - "I am, who am speaking unto thee." John 6:20, - "I am;
   fear not." John 8:28, - "then shall ye know that I am." John 18:5, -
   "Jesus says to them, I am." John 8:28 John 8:24, 28, - "If ye believe
   not that I am, ye will die in your sins." "Then ye shall know that I
   am." These are the literal Greek renderings of the above passages. "I
   am, the bread of life." "I am, the light of the world." I am, the
   door." I am, the good shepherd." I am, he resurrection and the life."
   "I am, the Alpha and the Omega, which is, and which was, and which is
   to come." "I am, the bright and morning star." - John 6:35, John 9:5;
   10:7, 11, John 15:1, Rev. 1:8; Rev. 22:16, In fact, He is everything we
   need. - Col. 2:9, 10.

   Pentecostal Herald: As God made the "first Adam" the father of all
   living, He made Christ the "second Adam," to all who come to him for
   eternal life. The first Adam's children all die. But the second Adams
   children are children of an Eternal Father. Christ is an "Everlasting
   Father" - Isa. 9:6.

   Dr. Joseph G. Kennedy, in "Pentecostal Herald": "Did not Jesus Christ
   do for man in the New Dispensation what Jehovah did for them in the
   Old? We cannot escape the conclusion that Jehovah and Jesus Christ are
   one and the same person. The disciples in their writings ascribed the
   Jehovah attributes to Jesus Christ.

   "Eternal Existence: Gen. 21:33, Rev. 1:18. Creation: Gen. 2:4, John
   1:1-3. Omniscience: Ps. 139:1-4, John 2:24, 25. Unchangeableness: Mal.
   3:6, Rev. 1:18. Universal Triumph: Ps. 92:9, I Cor. 15:25. Universal
   Dominion: Zech. 14:9, Rev. 1:18. Universal Supremacy: Ps. 89:6-9, Phil.
   2:9. Universal Worship: Ps. 22:27, Phil. 2:10.

   "Savior: Isa. 43:11, Luke 19:10. Life: Deut. 30:20, John 1:4. Light:
   Ps. 27:1; John 9:5. Truth: Ps 31:5; John 14:6. Forgiver of Sins: Ps.
   103:2, 3, Luke 7:47-50, Matt. 9:2-6: Lord of Sabbath: Ex. 20:10, Matt.
   12:8. Judge of World: Ps. 98:9, John 5:22, Matt. 16:27. Received
   Worship: Ps. 99:5, John 9:38, Matt. 28:9, 17, Rev. 5:6-14.

   "When Jehovah was revealing the particulars concerning the Messiah
   which was to come, He must of necessity speak of Him in the third
   person, though it was Himself that was to be incarnated into human
   nature, for this indeed was to be a new creation as a God-man,
   mediator, and sacrifice for sin. Men were saved in O. T. times, as in
   our day, by faith in God through the Mediator between God and man,
   knowing little or nothing perhaps of the real meaning of the atonement,
   yet trusting in the Mediator." - Pentecostal Heral

   Missionary R. E. Bass, writes from China: "It would be no mystery if we
   knew there were simply three separate persons operating in unity and
   with one thought (in the Godhead). Jesus Christ is the image of "the
   invisible God." - Col. 1 ;15 I Tim. 1:17; We need to believe and honor
   Jesus Christ today for what He really is, "the Mighty God," "the true
   God," "the only wise God." "The Lord, the God of the spirits of the
   prophets, sent his angel" - Rev. 22:6 I Peter 1:11. "I, Jesus, have
   sent mine angel." - Rev,.22:16. "To sum up all things in Christ." -
   Eph. 1:10, R. V. "In Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
   bodily." - Col. 2:9. We are to look for the true God and the Father
   nowhere else but in Jesus Christ. So after all it was God (manifest in
   the flesh) who laid down His life for us. "Which things angels desire
   to look into." - I Peter 1:12. (A mystery they cannot understand. The
   incarnation of Deity.)

   Elder D. Vervalin, in Pentecostal Herald: There is but one Holy Spirit;
   not one Holy Spirit in the Father, another Holy Spirit in the Holy
   Spirit, and another Holy Spirit in the Son. There is one body and one
   Spirit. - Eph. 4:4. In Rom. 8:9, the Spirit of God that dwells in us is
   called the Spirit of Christ.

   "There is one God in his trinity. God is a name for Him in his trinity.
   Father is the name for God as to His essential character: the One who
   is always unseen and who causes all action and plans all things.

   "The Holy Spirit is the name for God as the worker, or doer; the one
   who acts and performs. There is not a verb in the Bible referring to
   God's action, but is asserting such action as the Holy Spirit action.

   "The special name given to the Holy Spirit to designate the action of
   giving birth is the "Spirit of Christ." To those who have been born
   again and have the Spirit of Christ, God gives this same Holy Spirit to
   personally operate man by filling man's spirit and body with the Holy
   Spirit, direct personal action of man, for purpose of service, first
   and primarily to God in worship, and secondarily the service toward
   men.

   Jesus never said He would send us another Spirit, but another Advocate.
   John 14:16 and I John 2:1.

   "The Son is the name of God when He manifests Himself to any of His
   creatures, taking a form that will enable His creatures to comprehend
   him. Everything made and brought to sight is by the Son. "All things
   were made by Him." - John 1:3, Col. 1:16-17, Heb. 1:2, etc.

   "Man himself is made in the image of God and is in his trinity; spirit,
   soul, body. Man does not have three spirits in himself, one in his
   spirit, one in his soul, and one in his body, but has one spirit only.

   "So is God in whose image we are made. The Father is not the Son, nor
   is the Holy Spirit the Son - though the three are one; even as man's
   spirit is not his body nor his soul his body, though the three: spirit,
   soul, and body make one man.

   "The water that gushes out into a living spring may have come from a
   greater reservoir and may run for a long way through an underground
   channel, but it is not a different water from that in the reservoir or
   in the channel.

   "The water in the ever unseen reservoir is the Father. The water ever
   in action and running in the channel is the Holy Spirit. The water
   coming in view in the spring to refresh the weary is the Son: It is
   JESUS, the Water of Life."

   J. Munro Gibson, M. A.; D. D., in his book "Christianity according to
   Christ," published m London, England, 1888: "The Fullness of God in
   Christ," -

   "The name of God is that by which He has made Himself known to us,
   specially in the course of revelation; above all, the two great names
   of "Jehovah" in the Old Testament and "Jesus" in the New

   As to the name of "Jesus," while the sweetness has never been crushed
   out of it, as it has out of the rich and precious Old Testament name
   yet it has not been so closely identified with the Divine Being as it
   ought to have been. In their zeal for personal distinctions in the Holy
   Trinity, theologians have been too often tempted to forget such
   passages as these - "No man cometh unto the Father but by Me," "I and
   my Father are One," "I am the Truth." etc.; and so they have attempted
   to unfold a knowledge of God apart from His Son Christ Jesus; that is
   to say, a knowledge of God apart from that Name by which He has made
   Himself known to us.

   "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." Consider, then, that in
   order to meet this reasonable appeal (for, if He be our Father, why
   should He not show Himself to us?) it is necessary that there should be
   some visible form; and if some visible form, it needs little
   consideration to decide which it is likely to be. "He that hath seen
   Me, hath seen the Father."

   The Man Christ Jesus is the face of God to us. By looking at Him we
   become acquainted with our Father in heaven; not otherwise; "No man
   cometh unto the Father but by Me."

   Here, in the face of Jesus Christ, is "the knowledge of the glory of.
   God." There is no other possible facility for knowing God. Even at the
   best and fullest our knowledge will remain but partial and inadequate.
   It will be far from absolute knowledg

   So the whole knowledge of the Father is provided in Christ. We are
   "complete in Him." From all this it follows that those who would know
   God must seek Him in Christ

   First, it is not the absolute essence of Deity that we are to seek; it
   is His face, what of Him is turned to us, so that we can see and
   recognize Him. Hence the prominence given to "the Name of God."

   The word "Trinity" does not occur in Scripture, nor is there anything
   to be found there corresponding to those complicated formulas by which
   (notably in the so-called Athanasian Creed) theologians have tried to
   define the relations of Father, Son and Holy Ghost. If theologians had
   only followed the Scriptures in this respect, how many bitter
   controversies might have been spared, and how many needless
   difficulties and perplexities would have been avoided.

   "I am the Life," says the Lord Jesus, claiming thus the special
   prerogative of the Holy Spirit. What Christian minister has not again
   and again been consulted by good people, who were in some perplexity as
   to which of the Three Persons of the Trinity they should address
   themselves to. Some have, even been afraid they might pray too much to
   one Person and thus create jealousy between them.

   "There is no knowledge of the Spirit apart from the knowledge of
   Christ. In fact, so complete is the identification that the Lord speaks
   of the Spirit's coming as His own. - John 14.

   The presence of Jesus was to be withdrawn in one sense, but restored in
   another: it was to be withdrawn in an inferior degree, to be restored
   in a far better way;. it was to be withdrawn after the flesh and
   restored in the Spirit; it was to be withdrawn as a human presence and
   restored as a Divine presence; it was to be withdrawn as a local
   presence, and restored as omnipresence; it was to be withdrawn as an
   occasional and temporary presence, and restored as a perpetually
   abiding presence; all of which is implied in the transition from the
   preposition with to the preposition in.

   "No man can say Jesus is Lord, but in the Holy Spirit." We must find a
   point of vital contact with the Spirit of God, and this is found only
   in His Son Jesus Christ.

   Again and again Jesus speaks of the coming of the Spirit as equivalent
   to His own coming again to continue the work that He had begun on
   earth. It was His Spirit that He was speaking of. He ascended to His
   Father and ours, and His Spirit came to guide the disciples into all
   truth.

   The Bible is not responsible for the formula so generally used of
   "Three in and One, and One in Three." While God may be said to be Three
   as well as One, it is certainly never meant that He is or can be Three
   and One in the same sense.

   The Father is presented to our thoughts as God invisible, inaccessible;
   the Son, as God manifest; the Spirit, as God working. Though the Word
   is eternal, the Incarnate Word had, a beginning; and though the Spirit
   is eternal, the indwelling Spirit dates from Pentecost. The Eternal
   Spirit came as the Spirit of the Son. The Incarnation prepared the way
   for the Indwelling; the Indwelling crowned the Incarnation by rendering
   it practically universal and perpetual.

   The Incarnate Word and the Indwelling Spirit have almost lost their
   connection among Christians. "The Comforter," "the Paraclete," is
   always understood of the Spirit; and it seems rarely to suggest itself
   to the minds of Christians that the Lord "Jesus" has equal claim to the
   title.

   He who came before as the Spirit of God is now come as the Spirit of
   the Lord Jesus. His coming is, to all intents and purposes, the coming
   of the Lord Jesus Himself." "I will not leave you comfortless, I will
   come to you." "God manifested in the flesh," was "justified in the
   Spirit." The "only begotten Son," by His atoning death took away the
   sin of the world, and gave His Holy Spirit.

   "At that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and ye in Me, and I
   in you." - John 14:20. The Saints of old did not have this knowledge.
   Nor did the disciples of Christ reach it in the days of His flesh. They
   had as yet no experience of being in Him, and He in them.

   The Father, Son and Holy Ghost are all in Jesus Christ. "I am the Way,
   the Truth and the Life." Father, Son and Holy Ghost are all here, each
   found in Him, so that our thoughts are not to leave Christ when they
   pass to the Father or to the Holy Spirit. Christ is all - in Him
   dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

   Now this is manifestly the way in which we are intended to realize to
   ourselves the truth about God as Father, as Son, as Holy Spirit - not
   by wandering away into the infinite, but sitting at the feet of Jesus
   and looking up into His face.

   The reason why some get into difficulty and perplexity is their
   perverse determination - notwithstanding all the directions and
   cautions the Master has given - to seek a separate knowledge of the
   Father, Son and Holy Spirit. They wish to know God the Father, Son and
   Holy Spirit. They wish to Know God the Father, and in order to find
   Him, they look away from Christ, instead of at Him. They gaze into the
   infinite unknown instead of looking at the face of Jesus. And when they
   think of the Spirit, again they must have this as a separate region of
   theological lore.

   So again they look away from the face of Jesus to find somewhere else
   God the Holy Spirit. If they would have what they are vainly seeking,
   they would have three Gods instead of one, as practically many
   Christians have, for they actually have great difficulty sometimes as
   to which of the three to go to.

   It is very easy to show how utterly needless all this perplexity is,
   and how thoroughly unscriptural are all these notions out of which it
   grows. There is only one Person, to whom any one can go, and, that
   Person is Christ. We should go to Him always, under all circumstances,
   with our prayers, with our tears, with our longings, with our doubts,
   with our difficulties, with our troubles, with our innumerable wants.

   When we say "Our Father," we must look to Christ, for He plainly tells
   us that we cannot reach the Father but by Him. Christ Himself says, as
   plainly as tongue can express it, that it's impossible to know the
   Father apart from Him. "No man, cometh unto the Father but by Me." And
   when even after that plain statement the still puzzled disciple says,
   "Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us," what can the Master do
   but repeat the same truth in still more emphatic terms, "He that hath
   seen Me hath seen the Father." Do you not know Me yet? Who can suppose
   that Philip retained his perplexity after so clear an answer? Why
   should any one be perplexed now?

   Christ is the only way, and those who turn away from Him set their
   faces to the outer darkness. The same considerations apply to those who
   perplex and confuse themselves by trying to have a knowledge of the
   Spirit apart from their knowledge of Christ. Our Savior claims, Himself
   to be the Life, as well as the Truth.

   He speaks of the giving of "another Comforter," but, when He comes He
   will not speak of Himself, but "He shall take of the things of Mine and
   show it unto you". So complete is their identification that the Lord
   speaks of His coming as His own coming: "I will not leave you
   comfortless; I will come to you." "At that day ye shall know that I am
   in the Father, and ye in Me, and I in you."

   "I am in the Father" - there is the doctrine of the Father. "Ye in Me"
   - there is the doctrine of the Son. "I in you" - there is the doctrine
   of the Spirit. If we think of the Father, there is Christ - "I am in
   the Father, and the Father in Me." If we think of the Son, union to
   Christ is the practical thought - "ye in Me." If we think of the Holy
   Spirit, the practical thought is Christ in us - "I in you."

   It comes to this, that practically Christ is all in all. "I am the Way,
   the Truth and the Life." It is "I am" all the way through. The divine
   name is all in Christ. "Hear, O Israel ! The Lord our God is one Lord."
   The unsearchable God has made Himself known to us as Father, Son and
   Holy Spirit. But all that there is for us in the Father - all that
   there is for us in the Son - all that there is for us in the Holy
   Spirit - is manifest in Christ.

   He is all and in all. All praise and glory to Christ the Son - the only
   Revealer of the Father - the only Fountain of the Spirit. Let our
   prayers always be to Him, whether we are looking at the Father as
   revealed in Him, or whether we are looking at Him, as the source whence
   flow the streams of the Spirit's life.

   Whether we are thinking of the invisible God quite out of our reach, or
   the invisible Spirit proceeding from Him and entering into us, the eye
   of faith is ever directed to Him who is for us the face of God. "God,
   who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our
   hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
   face of Jesus Christ."

   Light shining out of darkness suggests the Father; shining in our
   hearts suggests the Spirit; shining reflected from the face of Jesus
   Christ - there is the Son. There is only one face to look at - only one
   direction for the eye to take. All is simple as when one speaks to a
   friend." - J. Munro Gibson.

   Mrs. J. Penn-Lewis: "Now for a moment pass on to Acts 2, and read it in
   the light of John 14:20; for, as we have seen, it is the Lord's
   foreshadowing of what would occur to the disciples inwardly when the
   Holy Ghost came down, and filled the house where they were sitting. The
   disciples knew as the Spirit of God came, that Christ was God in very
   truth, that the Man they had seen go up into heaven had reached the
   unseen Father, and was, as He had said, "In the Father" - one with Him.
   Very God of very God."

   Carl M. Nichelsen, in Pentecostal Evangel": "God allows no man to
   become familiar' with Him. Some are daring enough to attempt to put God
   under their mental microscope in order to determine the make-up of His
   character, and, measure the mighty Jehovah by their intellectual tape
   lines, and other human standards. At the very sight of the Almighty,
   the breath of man would instantly leave him. God must be known some
   other way, by revelation to man's inner consciousness. Although God has
   outwardly manifested Himself at times, His Deity was always veiled.
   Even in the case of the outer manifestation of God, through Jesus
   Christ, to Saul on the way to Damascus, the sight blinded him and
   struck him to the ground."

   Sunday School Times, July 30, 1921: "Look unto me and be ye saved." -
   Isa. 45:18-24. Compare v. 22, with John 1:29. The Jehovah of the Old
   Covenant is the Jesus of the New. The two are one. The Jews' Jehovah is
   the world's Savior."

   Some one has written the following facts on the Memorial Name: "Elohim
   in its first occurrence connects it, with creation, and gives it its
   essential meaning as the Creator. Elohim is God, the living God, the
   power of creation. ( John 1:3, Col. 1:15-17, Rev. 3:14; 4:11.) He first
   assumes a creature form, though spiritual in nature ( Gen. 12:7;
   32:24-30, Isa. 6:1-5), afterwards the human form, for the purpose of
   redeeming mankind. ( John 1:14, Heb. 2:9, 14, 16, 17, Phil. 2:7, Rom.
   8:3.) That Elohim, in His creature form spiritually, who appeared to
   the patriarchs and prophets, is the same who appeared in a human form
   1900 years ago to Israel, can be clearly seen by the following
   Scriptures: Gen. 17:1-3, Ex. 6:2, 3, with John 8;56-58, Isa. 6:1-8,
   with John 12:41-45.

   "Jehovah: "While Elohim is God as the Creator of all things, Jehovah is
   the same God in covenant relation to those whom He has created, Jehovah
   means the Eternal, the Immutable One; He who was, and is, and is to
   come. - Gen. 21:33. He is especially, therefore, the God of Israel; and
   the God of those who are redeemed, and are thus now "in Christ."

   "The Jehovah Titles: "Jehovah-Jireh. - Gen. 22:14. Jehova-Ropheka. -
   Ex. 15:26. Jehovah-Nissi. - Ex. 17:15. Jehovah-Mekaddishkem - Ex.
   31:13. Jehovah-Shalom - Judges 6:24, Jehovah-Zabaoth. - I Sam'l 1:3,
   etc. Jehovah-Zidkenu. - Jer. 23:6. Jehovah-Shammah. - Ezek. 48:25.
   Jehovah Elyon. - Ps. 7:17. Jehovah-Roi. - Ps. 23:1. Jah is Jehovah in a
   special sense and relation. Jehovah as having become our salvation - Ps
   68:4, ( Ex 15:2).

   "Which of these names and titles, with their meanings, do we not find
   incorporated in the Name of Jesus, The Psalmist declared, "Thou East
   magnified thy Word above all thy name." - Ps. 138:2. "In the beginning
   was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. And the
   Word became flesh." John 1:1,14. "His name shall be called Jesus." -
   Matt. 1:21-23. And He has been given "a name which is above every name"
   - Eph. 1:21-23, Phil. 2:9.

   "When Jacob wrestled with the angel he sought to obtain the secret
   name, but was prohibited. - Gen. 32:29. When Moses sought to obtain the
   secret name, all that he received from the angel in the burning bush
   was, "I am that I am." - Ex. 3:14. The Children of Israel were led by
   the Angel of the Lord, and Jehovah said, "Beware of him; for my name is
   in him." - Ex. 23:21. To Manoah, the Jehovah Angel replied, "Why askest
   thou after my name, seeing it is secret (Wonderful)." - Judges 13:8.
   The prophet Isaiah declared, "His name shall be called Wonderful" -
   Isa. 9:6. From these Scriptures it can be clearly seen that Jehovah had
   a name to be revealed which was to be above all His names. - Matt.
   1:20. 21.

   "When the Angel appeared to the Virgin in Nazareth, it was there that
   he finished his journey over the hills of time and deposited that
   "secret name" in the bosom of her who was "highly favored" of God. -
   Matt. 1:20; 21, Luke 1:26-31, "His name shall be called JESUS." All the
   titles that Jehovah ever bore are comprehended in this one name, JESUS.
   The name of "Jesus" bears in it all that God's other names ever bore.
   All the attributes of God, as revealed by His names, are found in
   Jesus. - Rev. 1:8, Ex. 6:3. "For in Him dwelleth all the fullness of
   the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in Him." - Col. 2:9, 10, Col.
   1:17. In the Book of Acts the whole battle raged around "the Name."
   "and hast not denied my name." - Rev. 3:8.

   "God is one. None apart from Him, none equal with Him; none beside Him;
   none formed after Him; none like Him, and none with Him. Jesus Christ
   is the manifestation of that one God in the flesh."

   Sunday School Times, "Thou art not yet 50 years old, and hast thou seen
   Abraham? Jesus said unto them, Before Abraham was I am." - John 8:57,
   58. Jesus was claiming that He existed in the eternity of the past. He
   was claiming for Himself one of the O. T. titles of Jehovah. It was as
   though He had said that it was Himself that was spoken of by Moses in
   Ex. 3:14. "I Am" describes Jehovah as the ever existent One, "who was,
   and is, and is to come." ("Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today,
   and forever." - Heb. 13:8.) Jesus was He. "He is before all things, and
   in Him all things consist." - Col. 1:17..

   Another writer has said: "They (most christians) do not have the full
   apostolic vision of Jesus Christ as Lord or Jehovah. "All" the fullness
   of the Godhead is in Jesus Christ. - Col. 2:9. Don't be afraid the
   Father and the Holy Ghost will be left out. "He that hath seen me hath
   seen the Father." - John 14:7-10; 10:30, 38; 12:44, 45; 17:10. "He that
   confesseth the Son hath the Father also." - I John 2:23, 24, R. V.;
   4:15.

   "It is unreasonable when magnifying Jesus as Lord to stop and mystify
   the readers on the Greek mysteries about the Trinity. Few after years
   of study know much more about it than when they began. I never knew of
   any one being saved by a study of the Trinity, but exalting Jesus
   Christ as the mighty Lord, able to save to the uttermost, will do it.

   "No man can come to God except through Christ, and he that has the
   Christ or Son, "hath the Father also." They are inseparable. You can't
   get Christ without getting the Father also, even if you want to. God
   gives Himself only in the Son. Also whoever gets Christ in His fulness
   gets the Holy Ghost also. "In that day (Pentecost) ye shall know that I
   am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you." - John 14:20, 23.

   "There was a mysterious angel called the angel of the Lord, that went
   before the camp of Israel which was none other than Christ the Lord -
   Jehovah in Angelic form. - Ex. 3:2-14; 14:9; 23:20, 21, ( Isa. 42:8),
   Acts 2:36, Phil. 2:9-11, I Cor. 15:47, I Cor. 3:17. So the whole
   Godhead in all its fulness is in Jesus.

   "The apostles started the church out right with the vision of Jesus as
   "the Lord from heaven." "God is Spirit." - John 4:24. "Now the Lord is
   that Spirit" - II Cor. 3:17." E. N. B..

   "Bishop Hippolytus, born in the latter part of the second century, a
   disciple of Iraneaus: "Let us believe then, according to the tradition
   of the apostles, that God the Word came down from Heaven, and entered
   the holy Virgin Mary. The Father is one whose Word is present with Him,
   by whom He made all things. Whom also the Father sent forth in later
   times for the salvation of men. He now coming forth into the world, was
   manifested as God in a body.

   "Thus then, though demonstrated as God, He does not refuse the
   condition proper to Him as man. He who as God has a sleepless nature,
   slumbers on a pillow. In agony He sweats blood, and is strengthened by
   an angel, who Himself strengthens those who believe on Him. He who is
   inseparable from the Father, cries to the Father and commends to Him
   His spirit; and bowing His head He gives up the ghost, who said "I have
   power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it again." - John
   19:18. And because He was not overmastered by death, as being Himself
   life, He said thus: "I lay it down of myself." He who raises the dead
   is wrapped in linen and laid in a sepulchre, and on the third day is
   raised again by the Father, though Himself the resurrection and the
   life. For all these things He has finished for us; who for our sakes
   was made as we are, except sin. This is the God who for our sakes
   became man; to whom also the Father hath put all things in subjection.

   E. N. Bell, in "The Truth about the Godhead": "It was no use for Philip
   to ask any other revelation of the Father. The Father is seen by seeing
   Jesus. He that has seen Jesus has seen all of the Father that the
   Father intends now to reveal. No true Trinitarian can logically deny
   the Deity of Jesus as the Son of God. To do so is to make him a mere
   created being like ourselves. Those who should worship such a created
   being would be pure idolators. God forbids us worshipping anything less
   than Himself. We cannot worship Jesus unless He is truly God. The
   Arians believed that Jesus was a little less than God, yet higher than
   the noblest angel, and still worshipped Him.

   "The Scriptures clearly teach that He is God. - Isa. 9:6, "Mighty God."
   Heb. 1:8, "Thy throne, O God is forever and ever." John 20:28, "My Lord
   and My God," - ( Rom. 9:5), It is an unspeakable joy to ascribe unto
   the Son all the attributes of Deity. We need not expect as finite
   beings to understand fully the mysteries in the Being of the Infinite
   God. No intelligent Trinitarian believes there are three material or
   corporeal bodies in the Godhead. Jesus is the only one in the Godhead
   who has a material and glorified body. The Latin word (persona) from
   which we get our word person has absolutely nothing in it even
   suggesting a material body.

   "These three persons (of the Godhead) are not three gods. Because they
   coexist, in one divine essence, in one divine nature, they constitute
   one God, and His name is one. We have not gods many and lords many, as
   the heathen. We all believe that our Lord Jesus Christ is truly God. If
   Jesus is God at all, as we all believe He is of course He is the true
   God, not a false God. We love and adore Jesus as our Lord and our God.
   He is the only way to the Father, the way of Life. "Whosoever denieth
   the Son, the same hath not the Father; but he that acknowledgeth the
   Son, hath the Father also," - John 2:23." - E. N. Bell. Now if this
   latter statement be true, and it is the Word, then how foolish to talk
   about denying the Father. We have both the Father and the Son.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV

   W. Graham Scroggie, in "Sunday School Times," Col. 1:15-17, - God the
   Father is eternally hidden and unknowable, - Col. 1:15, Ex. 33:20,
   Matt. 11:27, John 1:18; 6:46. I Tim. 1:17; 6:15, 16, - No man by
   searching can find out God. Direct and immediate knowledge of Him is
   impossible. He is the "invisible" and, therefore, the unknowable God.

   In Christ the invisible God is fully and finally revealed. In Christ
   God becomes visible and all things else become intelligible. "He that
   hath seen me hath seen the Father." - John 14:9. Heb. 1:3, - The Son is
   "the effulgence of God's glory, and the very image of His substance."
   He is the manifestation of the divine attributes, and the embodiment of
   the divine essence. In Him the glory of God is radiated, and His
   character reflected. He makes visible the "invisible." The essentially
   invisible Father has in the Son an eternal organ of self-manifestation.
   ("God is Spirit.")

   The incarnation of Christ was not the beginning of His "exegesis" of
   "the invisible God." That began away back in the remoteness of
   eternity. Christ is God, without beginning, supreme, and transcendent.
   This was His own consciousness in incarnate life. There would be no
   need for God to be revealed if there were no intelligences (creatures)
   outside of the Godhead to behold Him; and speculatively one may say
   that, but for such intelligences, Christ would never have become "the
   image of the invisible God." - (and become man.)

   If Christ be not God He cannot be either Creator or Redeemer. Christ is
   not merely like God, but is God, and therefore pre-existent and
   uncreated, absolute in His eternity. - Phil. 2:6. Christ is the
   originator of all things. "In him were all things created." - Col.
   1:16, 17. All things were created by Christ and for Him. Christ is the
   controller of all things. "In him all things consist." Christ is as
   certainly at work in nature and in history as in His church. Back of
   both is the divine Thinker, the infinite Wisdom, the almighty Power,
   who is the Son of God and our Redeemer, in Whom all things have their
   center of unity, who appoints to everything its place, who determines
   the relation of things to one another, and who combines all into an
   ordered whole so that this universe is a cosmos and not a chaos.

   Christ is the perfecter of all things. Not only is He the Origin, and
   the Head, but also the Goal of the whole universe; the creative Cause,
   the continuous Cause, and the consummating Cause of all things. The
   world advances towards the fulfilment of its destiny in God through
   Christ. The time is sure when all things shall be summed up in Him. -
   Eph. 1:10.

   By Christ the Father's purpose passes into actuality and attains its
   end. He who is the Agent of creation is also its Aim, the
   Starting-point is also the Goal, the Alpha is also the Omega, the First
   is also the Last; that which proceeded from Christ and is sustained by
   Him also converges toward Him. The Creator and Redeemer is the
   Perfecter of all things. We should ever endeavor to see in one view the
   eternal Christ, and the historical Christ, the Creator and the
   Redeemer, not two persons but one. - Edinburg, Scotland.

   Rev. C. H. Pridgeon has written: "The word "person" is inadequate when
   referring to the Godhead: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Augustine,
   Calvin, and others express their regret at having to use so imperfect
   and misleading a word; but it was the best known word they had or we
   have. The words "subsistence" or "hypostasis," are more accurate, but
   are too little understood. There are three such subsistences or
   hypostases in the Godhead and the Three make One. There is but one
   tree, not three. God the Father is the root, the Hidden God: God the
   Son is the part of the tree above the ground, He is the Manifest God:
   and the Holy Spirit is the Life that flows from one into the other and
   then outward. Again, God the Father may be compared to a great
   Love-Fire, which eternally begets the Son, who is the Light: and the
   Holy Spirit is the heat and chemical rays that proceed from both.

   "In man desire generates images and thoughts. In God such generations
   are eternal realities. In His Deity the Son of God is uncreated: in His
   humanity He was created.

   "Then cometh the end, when He shall have delivered up the kingdom to
   God, even the Father; . . . And when all things shall be subdued unto
   Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that put all
   things under Him, that God may be all in all." - I Cor. 15:24-28; The
   reign of Christ, as Son of Man and Redeemer, comes to an end when His
   work of redemption is completed at the end of the ages. Then all things
   are subject to Him and He hands over all to the Father and He Himself
   has no more redeeming work to do as Son of Man, but in that capacity
   becomes subject to the Father. It might be well to notice that although
   the Son of Man becomes subject to the Father, the Scripture does not
   say that the Father becomes "all in all," but "God (becomes) may be all
   in all," that is, the whole Godhead becomes "all in all." Christ as
   Redeemer and Son of Man becomes subject; but as Son of God He part of
   the Godhead that becomes all and in all. The Son will hand over the
   perfected kingdom to the Father, and God (Father, Son, and. Holy Ghost)
   will be "all in all."

   S. A. Jamison, in "Bridegroom's Messenger: "In this age of modernistic
   teaching, especially when Jesus Christ is robbed of His Deity, it is
   very essential for the christian to have a clear idea of the Trinity.
   In the Godhead the three persons are the same in substance, of one and
   the same indivisible essence. This divine essence as a whole exists
   eternally as Father, and as Son, and as the Holy Ghost. Each person
   possesses the whole essence. The Son is eternally begotten by the
   Father. The Son is not from the Father, but in the Father, and the
   Father in the Son. The Spirit proceedeth from the Father and the Son.
   Christ has existed from eternity as the coequal Son of the Father,
   possessing the same self-existent essence with the Father and the Holy
   Ghost."

   "Some one has said that we should read the Bible only from one
   standpoint, to know the Lord Jesus Christ; and if one studies the Bible
   for any other purpose he will not understand it. The Bible begins with
   Jesus ( Gen. 3:15), and ends with Him. In fact it is a revelation of
   Jesus Christ. The revelation of "God in Christ" - II Cor. 5:19. Christ
   is not only the central figure of the Bible, but the "First and the
   Last." - Rev. 1:8; 22:13, Isa. 41:4; 43:10.

   H. L. Hastings, Editor of "The Christian," once wrote the following:
   "In those old days, when men whose kingdom was "of this world," and
   whose servants were therefore willing to fight, had assumed authority
   over the flock of God, and had established organizations in which
   politics was more potent than piety, and where faith, instead of coming
   by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, was settled by the
   decisions of councils and the decrees of despots; when men disputed
   about things they did not understand, and persecuted people who chanced
   to know more or less than they did, etc."

   From the Encyclopedia Brittanica, on "The Council of Nicae, 325 A. D.,
   we read: "Ecumenical Councils were called and controlled by the State,
   the Emperor. The expenses were largely paid, the delegates appointed,
   by the Emperor. Emperor Constantine appointed the time and place for
   the Council of Nicae, summoned the episcopate, paid part of the expense
   out of the public purse, nominated the committee in charge of the order
   of business, used his influence to bring about the adoption of the
   creed, and punished those who refused to subscribe. This council was no
   more an organ of ecclesiastical self-government than were the synods of
   Rome and Arles. It was rather a means whereby the church was ruled by
   secular power. The final goal of Greek philosophy was only reached when
   the great thinkers of the early christian church, who had been trained
   in the schools of Alexandria and Athens, used its modes of thought in
   their analysis of the christian idea of God. The result was the
   evolution of the doctrine of the Trinity."

   The fact is the Emperor Constantine only submitted to christian baptism
   on his death bed. He was afraid of forfeiting salvation before this, on
   account of his sins, which he had no desire to relinquish.

   Some one has reflected as follows on this subject: "Why did not the
   saints in the second and third centuries cling to the great names of
   their Lord (in the Word), and find in Him all the mysteries connected
   with the Godhead? But instead of doing this some began to preach from
   the philosophy of Rome, Egypt, and Babylon, by which they tried to
   explain the Godhead. Hence Sabellianism, Arianism, and Athanasianism,
   the outcome of which was, and is today, a furious battle among God's
   people. Oh that we would endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in
   the bond of peace, and at once throw all these isms into the garbage
   can, clinging to the prophetic and apostolic teaching, magnifying the
   Father in the person and name of the Son, by the power and the love of
   the Holy Spirit, seeing and preaching the fullness of the Godhead in
   the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the Scripture." And I say, Amen ! !
   !

   St. Bernard: "When I name Christ Jesus I set before myself a Man meek
   and lowly of heart, conspicuous by all moral dignity and holiness, and
   One who is at the same time God Almighty, to heal me by His example,
   and to strengthen me by His aid."

   St. Chrysostom: "Christ is not valued at all unless He is valued above
   all. When thou hearest of Christ, do not think Him God only, or man
   only, but both together."

   The following beautiful poem, author unknown, we give in prose, to
   economize space: "Our Lord Jesus Christ." - "Thou art Alpha and Omega,
   Living Word, of men the Light. Son of God, the Well Beloved, Source of
   Heaven's great delight. Everlasting Father, Dayspring, Smitten Rock,
   Foundation Sure. Thou art laid elect and precious, as the Cornerstone
   secure.

   "Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Israel's Sceptre rising strong. Branch of
   David, Root of Jesse, Great Messiah promised long. Son of Man,
   Jehovah's Servant, Glory of the Chosen Race. Faithful Witness, Prophet,
   Shepherd, Thou host Thy law enlarged through Grace.

   "Man of Sorrows, Galilean, Nazarene, despised, oppressed. Bread of
   Life, with body broken, open Door to peace and rest. O Immanuel, the
   Holy, God, indeed, with us Thou art. Jesus, Savior, great Redeemer,
   Bleeding Lamb with broken heart.

   "First Born from the dead, we hail thee, Resurrection and the Life.
   Heir of all things, Thou hast conquered, through the grim and awful
   strife. Thou the Church's Head, all glorious, art the Lord our
   Righteousness. Wonderful, we laud, adore Thee, Mighty God, thy name we
   bless.

   "Vine supporting many branches, Lily of the Valley fair. Chiefest One
   among Ten Thousand, Sharon's Rose of beauty rare. Altogether Lovely,
   Bridegroom, Faithful, True, our Advocate. Bishop of our Souls, so
   tender, evermore our High-Priest great."

   Rev. A. C. Dixon, D. D.: "A child shall be born, a son shall be given,
   and he shall be called the Wonderful, the Counsellor, the Mighty God,
   the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." - ( Isa. 9:6.) The birth
   Jesus was therefore the incarnation of Deity. When we think of God we
   are apt to think of Him in human form. God revealed Himself to Joshua
   and others in human form.

   "Jesus was the Son of Man; not a Son of Man. The blood of the whole
   race was in His veins. There is a universality in the character of
   Christ which you find in no other man. There is nothing of nationality
   in Him. There is nothing peculiar to any particular age of the world in
   Him. His was a heart pulsating with the blood of the human race.

   "Jesus taught that He was God. "He that hath seen me hath seen the
   Father." - John 14:9John 14:9, "He that seeth me seeth Him that sent
   me." - John 12:45. His mission was to manifest God in His own person.
   "God was manifest in the flesh." - I Tim. 3:16. Jesus taught the
   impossibility of knowing God the Father except through Himself. "No man
   knoweth the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
   reveal Him" - Matt. 11:27. He claims identity of divine nature with the
   Father. "I and my (the) Father are one." - John 10:30. He calmly claims
   attributes which none but God can possess. He declares that He is
   eternal. "Before Abraham was, I am." - John 8:58. He claims to be
   omnipresent as to place and time. "Where two or three are gathered
   together in my name, there am I in the midst of them" - Matt. 18:20.
   "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." - Matt.
   28:20.

   "Jesus taught that He was God, and John crowns Him Creator of the
   universe. - John 1:3. "This is the true God (Christ) and eternal life."
   - I John 5:20. Paul's Christ "who is over all God blessed forever," (
   Rom. 9:5), is the true Christ. Jesus Christ was either deceived,
   madman, a bad man, or God. He was either God or the worst of men. We
   have just seen that He claimed the attributes of Deity. "Why callest
   thou me good, there is none good, but one, that is God." - Mark 10:17,
   18. To say that I am good is equal to saying that I am God. All admit
   that He is good; and if good, He is God. Christ was more than man, and
   as I see Him standing out distinct from and above all others, I cannot
   resist the impulse to fall at His feet and say with Thomas, "My Lord
   and my God." - A. C. Dixon.

   Another writer has said: "It is strange that people would look beyond
   the Lord Jesus Christ in an attempt to find the unknown God. The
   fountain proper comes forth from the unseen fountain head, and yet
   never ceases to be a part of it. The fountain proper is merely the
   fountain head in action. Therefore Jesus could say, "I and my (the)
   Father are one." He could be called at the same time "the Only begotten
   of the Father," and the very God Himself. "Emmanu-El." - Matt. 1:23.
   Jude 24:25, I John 5:20. Jesus represents the entire person of God. He
   is all I need." - ( I Cor. 1:30.)

   "We should never attempt to explain the mystery of God's person by mere
   human wisdom. The Lord Jesus Christ was the complete solution to the
   mystery of God's person. "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father."
   Is not our Lord great enough to fill our vision? Is He not sufficiently
   full of mystery to invite all of our thoughts and meditations to
   Himself? Let us hail Him as Thomas did, "My Lord and my God." "Of whom
   we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull
   of hearing." - Heb. 5:11. "Unto the measure of the stature of the
   fulness of Christ." - Eph. 4:13. (We can never be disappointed in Him.
   - Eph. 1:10; 3:17-19.)

   Prof. Frederick S. Jewell, Ph. D.: "Amid whatever changes of arts,
   letters, institutions and empires, one figure continues supreme in
   history. It is that of the man John baptized, whom Pilate crucified;
   who built no capital, led no army, wrote no wrote no volume; who seemed
   yet to the principal persons of his time to have fitly closed a
   restless yet an obscure life in ignoble death; but who named Himself,
   and who now is named in all the written languages of mankind, the Son
   of God and God Almighty."

   Neander: "The God who dwells in a light inaccessible into which the
   human spirit cannot penetrate must descend to humanity, bringing
   Himself into the limits of Man's own finiteness in order to be truly
   known by him. Not until the incarnate manifestation of Deity through
   Christ, could the God afar off draw near mankind. For the first time,
   through this image of the Divine in human nature, was the idea of God
   enabled to enter in a vital and substantial way, into the thought and
   consciousness of the human race.

   Zachary Eddy, D. D.: Let us not think of Christ as a man created by
   divine power, and then taken into intimate union with God - not as God
   and man morally - but as GOD-MAN, the true holy of holies wherein God
   personally dwells, and will dwell henceforth, even forever. There is
   the Well-Spring of life for a dead world; there is the light of men,
   the Son of truth and wisdom; there, is the image of the invisible God,
   and the brightness of His glory; there, is the Lord God our Redeemer,
   the Holy One of Israel, the Savior. Yes, we adore Thee, Son of the
   Virgin, Son of God. Seeing Thee we see the Father. We worship Thee, in
   whom God is become man and man is taken into God.

   "Messenger of the Kingdom": "Alpha and Omega are A to Z of the Greek
   language. Jesus said, "I am Alpha and Omega." He expressed Himself
   actually to be the whole written Word. The biggest and greatest
   revelation of the Eternal God and His mysterious, majestic person is
   the good old Bible. The God which we find in the sacred pages of the
   Bible is the true God. Since Jesus is our written and spiritual Bible,
   and the true God is found in the Bible, then it remains for us to look
   in the person and name and the sayings of our blessed Lord to find and
   know and worship the true God. The central theme of the Word of God is
   "God in Christ Jesus." Therefore, we see our blessed Alpha and Omega in
   Genesis, and all the way through to the Book of Revelation."

   "The Pentecostal Evangel": "The name Lord or Jehovah is pre-eminently
   God's redemption name. It is used in Bible passages which specifically
   refer to the redeeming and saving work that God does for fallen, sinful
   man. Jehovah God, our Redeemer God, in His marvelous covenant relations
   with us, is the Eternal Christ, slain from the foundation of the world,
   whose outpoured life is the grace of God, working omnipotently in our
   behalf."

   Dr. Wm. L. Pettingill, Pres't of Phila. Bible School: "All christians
   will one day be fundamentalists. That day will be when we get to
   heaven. Only those who believe in Christ as God, in His virgin birth,
   and in his resurrection - an irreducible minimum of christian faith -
   will go to heaven. Those who deny this will be lost and go to hell."
   This would surely be a bad line-up for Pentecostal people.

   Dr. Campbell Morgan says: "When Jesus told the young ruler there was
   "none good but one - God," He meant to declare that He Himself was God.
   - Matt. 19:17.

   Rev. Elijah Hedding, in a Sermon preached before the Annual Meth.
   Conf., at Bath, Maine, in 1822, made the following statements, with a
   host of ample Scripture reference to prove his assertions. We have only
   room for the statements. " John 1:1, 2, - Of the word it is here
   affirmed He is God. Jesus Christ is the Supreme God. Father and Son are
   one and the same Being. Christ is the true God, and Eternal Life.
   Christ is God over all. Jesus Christ is the Lord God of the holy
   Prophets. Jesus is Jehovah. Christ is the One Eternal Supreme Being.
   Christ is the Immutable Being. Christ Omniscient Being. Christ is the
   Omnipresent Being. Christ is the Almighty Being. Christ is the proper
   Object of worship. Christ is the Creator of all things. God and the
   Word are the same Being." This was the belief and teaching of Early
   Methodism.

   James Speirs, London, England: "All christians believe that Jesus is
   the Son of God, the Lamb of God, an Advocate with God, and a Mediator
   between God and Man. But the higher truths in relation to His Divinity
   are entirely overlooked. The Sonship of Jesus is admitted. He is
   regarded as the Lamb of God. But not as God Himself. The confession
   that Jesus is God is merely verbal; the feeling that He is a being
   inferior and subordinate is inrooted. The Jehovah God of the O. T. is
   the Jesus Christ of the N. T. Jesus is God Himself, Creator and
   Sustainer of the world that came in flesh and dwelt in it a while.
   Jehovah and Jesus are one." ( Luke 13:34, 35, Ps. 91:14.)

   Some one has written: "The apostles saw Jesus as God and manifest in
   the flesh, as the One by whom and for whom all things were created, and
   as the new Sinless Head of the whole human race; and they saw aright.
   In the present awful apostasy the time seems to be right to call for a
   world-wide and final answer to a challenge like that given by Elijah to
   the people of Israel on Mt. Camel long ago. That challenge takes this
   form, "If Jesus Christ be God, follow Him."

   L. T. Townsend: "If John believed that Jesus Christ was united to
   Deity, in such manner as to be God's real Personality, he could have
   expressed himself in no other way so briefly, so directly, so clearly
   and so well as to say, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
   with God, and the Word was God." - John 1:1. Rev. 3:1; 15:3; 17:4.

   "It must be clear to all that Jesus Christ, in John's Christology is
   the God whose glory Isaiah saw in the vision, when it filled the temple
   and shook its foundations - Isa. 6:1-5, John 12:41. He is Alpha and
   Omega. - Rev. 22:13. The true God. - I John 5:20.

   Jesus in the Scriptures is called God, or by a name implying it, no
   less than 15 times. Seventy-seven times He is called Lord; ten times
   are the same things spoken of Him as God; and 52 times He is presented
   as an object of worship. 15 as possessing eternal life; in 17 as Judge
   of the world; in 20 as the bestower of rewards; and in 24 as the
   executor of the punishment of the wicked.

   The Jews clearly understood Him to teach that He was God. It was for
   this claim that they attempted to kill Him. This to them was blasphemy,
   and it was blasphemy unless He possessed and could wield all the
   attributes of Jehovah. When we mass all these facts must we not say
   that Jesus felt beyond a doubt that there was in Him an essential
   substance which in no respect differs from Deity?"

   "The Wonderful Word": "Jesus Christ is no less than the God-man, and
   the one in whom all the fullness of the Godhead dwells. He is the
   greatest Person in the universe. There is no place high enough, for he
   fills all things. Human language does not contain words sufficient to
   tell of His worth. Words utterly break fail and break down in attempt
   to give Him honor, Who is above all, over all, and in all. Vowels,
   consonants and dipthongs cannot unite the framing words that speak of
   His matchless glory. "Christ is the Fact of facts, the Bible's Theme.
   He is the God, all Light from Him doth gleam. He is the Man of men,
   beyond all dream. He is the God of love, all love Divine. He's All! The
   Visibility of God."

   "The Incarnation is called "the mystery of godliness." As the Cherubim
   bent in reverent perplexity over the Ark of the Covenant, so do we
   devoutly ponder this fundamental truth. The angels desire to look into
   it. - I Peter 1:12.

   Adam Clarke, on I Cor. 15:27, 28: "He is excepted," i.e., the Father;
   who hath put all things under him, the Son. This observation seems to
   be introduced by the apostle to show, that he does not mean that the
   Divine Nature shall be subject to the human nature. Christ, as Messiah,
   and Mediator between God and Man, must be considered inferior to the
   Father; and his human nature, however dignified in consequence of its
   union with the Divine Nature, must be inferior to God. The whole of
   this verse should be read in a parenthesis.

   "The Son also himself shall be subject." Then the administration of the
   kingdom of grace is finally closed; when there shall be no longer any
   state of probation; and consequently no longer need a distinction
   between the kingdom of grace, and the kingdom of glory; then the Son,
   as being man, shall cease to exercise any distinct dominion; and God be
   all in all; there remaining no longer any distinction in the persons of
   the glorious Trinity, as acting any distinct or separate parts in
   either the kingdom of grace, or the kingdom of glory; and so the one
   infinite essence shall appear undivided and eternal." - Clarke.

   Bishop Lightfoot, on Phil. 2:6: "The form of God" means the "essential
   attributes of God."

   Rev. L..W.: Gosnell, Assis. Dean, Moody Bible Inst., quoting B. B.
   Warfield, says: "The form of God' is the sum of the characteristics
   which make the being we call God, specifically God, rather than some
   other being, - an angel, say, or a man. When our Lord is said to be in
   the form of God,' therefore, He is declared, in the most express manner
   possible to be all that God is, to possess the whole fulness of
   attributes which make God God."

   Bob Shuler: "As to Christ, He was and is either God, or He was and is a
   liar, for He said He was God."

   "The Redeemed Hebrew": "Does not Dr. Isaac Lesser translate Isa. 9:6,
   as follows, "Counsellor of the Mighty God, of the Everlasting Father,"
   etc.? Lesser renders it so, but he had an object in so doing. It was
   his intention to distinctly obliterate the most powerful
   pre-designation of the coming Messiah. In the first place, Lesser does
   not believe in the Messiah, and in the second place, it was his wish
   that no one should apply this passage to a Messiah in whom he himself
   did not believe. The Yiddish translation, and all English, Greek, and
   other translations give it that the Messiah was to be "The Mighty God,
   the Everlasting Father," etc. Dr. Torrey, in a sermon on "The Deity of
   Christ," at The Bible Institute, Los Angeles, some years ago, condemned
   this translation of Dr. Lesser's on Isa. 9:6.

   "The Friend of Russia: "The titles given to Jehovah in the Word of God
   clearly set forth who and what He is in Himself, His character, nature
   and eternal Godhead, and also, what He was to His ancient people the
   chosen race of Israel. But these titles also have a direct application
   to Christ. Nothing is more clearly taught in the Word of God, than that
   the Jehovah of the O. T. is the Christ of the N. T., and the Christ of
   the N. T. is the Jehovah of the O. T. The: O. T. titles of Jehovah
   assert and proclaim the Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is God."

   Another well known preacher, at one time head of the Christian
   Missionary Alliance has recently called attention to the fact that
   Jehovah, the "I Am," the Logos, the Lord Jesus Christ, was the past,
   present and future of' God. Hence all of God. He was the form God took
   to reveal Himself to man, so we could know Him. This preacher expressed
   his conviction that this Jehovah-Jesus is the only God we will ever
   see.

   What a contrast are these expressions to that of a recent teacher in
   our midst who writes as follows: "Our Christianity has become a Jesus
   religion, and it is no wonder that strange and fantastic creeds have
   grown out of It." He declares we are all orphans because of this fact.
   Possibly forgetting that Jesus Himself said, "I will not leave you
   "orphans"; I will come unto you." - John 14:18. "He that hath seen me
   hath seen the Father." - John 14:7-9. "I and the Father are one." -
   John 10:30. Some have foolishly asked the question, "Is Jesus then his
   own Father?", thinking thus to dispose of these sublime declarations.
   The whole trouble with our treatment of this subject is the fact that
   we have tried to reduce the Godhead to human analogy, reasoning humanly
   of the nature of the Deity of Christ and the relationship of the
   Godhead.

   Millions of the devoted dupes of Rome hail "the man of sin" as "our
   Lord God the Pope." Should christians refuse equal homage to our Lord
   Jesus Christ? The Antichrist will soon set himself forth in the temple
   "as God." - I John 5:20. Antichrist is "against Christ." It is Christ
   or Antichrist. Which one shall be God? If Christ, then follow Him. One
   or the other must be God.

   Too many christians, like Philip, are still looking for the Father
   apart from Christ. They are still begging to be shown the Father.
   "Doest thou not know me, Philip? "He that hath see me hath seen the
   Father." - John 14:9. When the Father gave His Son He gave Himself
   also. We have no Father apart from Jesus. Tradition would have us
   running up and down stairs in the Ark, trying to find God. But Jesus is
   the Ark. We are safe in Him. Though there are three stories, there was
   only one Ark. "That we might know him that is true; and we are in him
   that is true, in His Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God, and eternal
   life." - I John 5:20. Dr. Torrey, with most capable Bible students,
   applies this Scripture to Jesus. Jesus is the very unoriginated God. -
   John 1:1; 20:28, Acts 20:28, Rom. 9:5, Col. 2:9, Phil 2:6, I Tim. 3:16,
   Titus 2:10, Heb. 1:8.

   "Unto a dispensation of the fullness of times, to sum up all things in
   Christ." - Eph. 1:10. "Take heed lest there shall be any one that
   maketh spoil of you through his philosophy and vain deceit, after the
   tradition of men, and not after Christ, for in Him dwelleth all the
   fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in Him." - Col.
   2:8-10. All we can know of the Sun is what reaches our earth. So all we
   can know of God is what is revealed to us, or reaches us, through and
   in Jesus Christ.

   "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give
   unto you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him
   (Christ)." - Eph. 1:17. "Searching what time or what manner of time the
   Spirit of Christ which was in them (the prophets) did point unto." - I
   Peter 1:11. "That they may know the mystery of God, Christ, in whom are
   all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden." - Col. 2:2, 3. "To
   give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
   Jesus Christ." - II Cor. 4:6.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V

   For there are three that bear record in heaven: the Father, the Word,
   and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one." - I John 5:7. (The
   Spirit, water and the blood "agree in one," are "to the point." - Greek
   - I John 5:8.) "The Lord God hath sent me, and His spirit. Thus saith
   the Lord, thy redeemer, the Holy one of Israel. - Isa. 48:16, 17. God's
   Spirit is not separate from Himself. Some one has said: "God the Father
   is that manifestation of God who is on the throne of the universe. God
   the Holy Ghost is that manifestation of the same Spirit everywhere
   present. Jesus Christ is that manifestation of the same Spirit who
   takes on a visible appearance." Man was made in the image of God,
   spirit, soul, and body.

   The theme of the O. T. is one God. "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is
   one Lord." - Deut. 6:4.

   Saul was addressing the Jehovah of his fathers, on the way to Damascus.
   "Who are Thou, Lord?" He did not know that God was "manifest in the
   flesh." Hear the Lord's own testimony and answer: "I am Jesus." - Acts
   9:4, 5. That knocked Saul out. "In that day shall the Lord be one, and
   His name one." - Zech. 14-5, 9. To the Jews Jesus said: "Except ye
   believe that I am, ye shall die in your sins." - John 8:24. The whole
   purpose of God in the O. T. was to inculcate the idea of one God. This
   the Jews, after the Babylonian Captivity, which they suffered for their
   idolatry, never got away from. The "mystery of godliness," is the
   Incarnation. "God in Christ."

   Those who deny that Jesus Christ is God, the absolute Deity, Deity the
   alone revelation and manifestation of the Father, are in line for the
   great Apostasy. Antichrist is battering at the walls of the church for
   a breach in the absolute Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ. If God can be
   known apart from Jesus Christ, or as a separate Person or Being from
   Jesus Christ, then we are bound to throw down the walls and embrace
   these anti-christian forces in one universal Fatherhood of God. And
   there must be two Gods, or Jesus Christ is not God. But Jesus Christ is
   God. There is no other saving manifestation of God. - Acts 4:12.

   Spiritualists, Theosophists, Christian Scientists, etc., claim a
   knowledge of God outside of Christ. "Ye know neither me nor my Father.
   If ye knew me ye would know my Father also." - John 8:19. "Neither
   knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
   will reveal Him." - Matt. 11:27. Jesus is the full and only revelation
   of God to man.

   The more we come to know Jesus in the Spirit the fuller revelation we
   receive of His Deity. "No man can say Jesus is Lord but by the Holy
   Ghost." - I Cor. 12:3. At first we see Him as our Mediator, our
   Sacrifice and Intercessor. Later we come to realize His absolute Deity,
   Godhead, oneness with the Father in essential being. Not simply oneness
   in accord. That is but a human proposition. He is both the Son of God,
   and God. - Luke 1:35, " Christ is the visible representation of the
   invisible God," - Col. 1:15-19, Weymouth. "For it is in Christ that the
   fullness of God's nature dwells embodied, and in Him ye are made
   complete." - Col. 2:9, 10, Weymouth. He is the "primal source" of all
   creatures." - Col 1:15, Worrell. Eph. 1:10, 17.

   Draw a circle. Jesus is both our center and circumference. The simple
   minded cannot possibly go astray when they make Jesus everything. It is
   all in Jesus. Does He not satisfy us fully? If so, why seek another God
   beside Him? Outside of that circle we line up with Christian
   Scientists, Spiritualists, Theosophists, and every other anti-christian
   spirit.

   Jesus is the first and last letter, the Alpha and Omega, from Genesis
   to Revelation. - Rev. 1:8, 17. Jesus is Emmanu-El, - Matt. 1:23. God
   incarnate is the mystery that confounds the false systems of religion.
   He is "all and in all." - Eph. 1:23, Col 3:11, Zech. 14:5-9.

   We cannot find God outside of the Word. Jesus is the Word. Matt. 19:17;
   Mark 2:7-10; 4:41, Luke 5:21; 7:49; 8:25, John 6:64; 10:33; 12:45;
   18:6, I Cor. 10:4; 9, Jas. 5:4 , 7, II Thess. 1:7-10, Rev. 1:12-17;
   22:12, 13, Job 19:25-27, Ps. 50:1-7, Isa. 40:9, 10; 35:4; 59:15-20;
   66:15, Dan. 7:13, 14.

   "The Lord is my shepherd." - Ps. 23:1. "I am the good shepherd." - John
   10:11. "He maketh me to lie down in green pastures." - Ps. 23:2. "Come
   unto me . . . I will give you rest." - Matt. 11:28. "He leadeth me in
   the paths of righteous." - Ps. 23:3 ( Jer. 23:6). "But of Him are ye in
   Christ Jesus, who was made unto us righteousness." - I Cor. 1:30.

   The power is in Jesus' name. Study Book of Acts and Epistles on this
   point. Matt. 10:22, Mark 16:17, Luke 24:47, Acts 4:12; 15:14, etc.,
   Eph. 1:21, Phil, 2:9, 10, Col. 3:17, I Peter 4:14, III John 7, Rev.
   3:8, Heb. 13:15, Jas. 2:7 ( Lev. 24:11), I Chron. 13:6, Deut. 28:58,
   Ex. 23:20, 21.

   The subject of the Trinity is kaleidoscopic. The "persons" of the
   Godhead are like a dissolving view. One fades into another in true
   vision so perfectly and naturally that we cannot separate them. Yet God
   is not a mere Monad. The idea of God embraces Father, Son and Holy
   Spirit, a compound Personality. God showed me this figure in spiritual
   vision, all unsought for. It was repeated several times, at intervals
   of days, Father, Son and Holy Ghost continually resolved themselves
   into one, as in a dissolving view. I could not separate them. There was
   one God, one Substance. Nor could I tell one from the other.

   All antichrist religions teach that Jesus was not absolute Deity. We
   could wish that the formers of the Nicean and Athanasian Creed had
   preserved the clear and powerful Apostolic vision of "God in Christ"
   that the early church possessed, instead of substituting "Greek
   Mysteries." The church had already fallen, the Roman Emperor
   Constantine himself calling the Nicean Council, presiding over its
   deliberations and punishing those daring to reject its decisions. This
   is a fact of history. He was a shrewd diplomat and politician. It is
   far better to "let the lid stay on the Ark" (Jesus is the Ark), than to
   delve into Greek mysteries. - ( I Sam'l 6:19, Col. 2:9, 10.) God has
   gathered Himself up, concentrated Himself, visualized Himself in the
   person of Christ, that we might be able to approach and to know Him. -
   I John 5:20.

   As men we understand man. We have no understanding of the animal
   kingdom. They have not our nature. Much less could we understand God
   except He had taken on Him our nature. God is God. Like Himself only.
   No other like Him. In the God-man, Jesus Christ, we understand Him. We
   do not even understand angels. Jesus is the "form" of God. - Phil. 2:6.
   The "form" is His nature, attributes and character. "God is Spirit."
   Jesus is the alone revelation of God. The Father refers us to Jesus.
   The Holy Ghost shines the light upon Jesus. He takes of the things of
   Christ and shows them to us. - John 16:12-14. The triune God is
   incarnate in Jesus. "For Christ is the very incarnation of the
   invisible God." - Col. 1:15, 20th Century Trans., Col. 2:9, 10. Jesus
   reveals the Father. John 14:6-11, 20; 10:30, Matt. 11:27. The Holy
   Ghost is the Spirit of the Father and the Son. - John 16:14. The
   Fatherhood, the Sonship, and the Eternal Spirit, are all manifest in
   Jesus Christ. He is the "eternal life." He is "the Spirit." - II Cor.
   3:17, 18 (R. V.) There are three eternal distinctions in the Substance
   of God, but one Substance. The triune God, through the Incarnation, is
   united in humanity, for the salvation of man. - John 16:14Heb. 2:16.
   "God manifest in the' flesh." The only revelation of God in the O. T.
   or the N. T. is Jesus Christ. He is the Theme of the Bible. Jesus is
   the "Word of God."

   I once thought that Jesus loved the world, but that God hated us. Now I
   know that "God so loved the world." - John 3:16. It was God's love that
   saved us. As a child I feared my father. He did not seem to love me.
   But mother was tender, and loved me. She became my mediator with my
   father when he was angry at me. Just so I thought of the heavenly
   Father until I got a revelation of the real meaning of John 3:16. I
   found that God loved me. Jesus is the revelation of that love. They are
   one in love and sacrifice, offering for our salvation.

   "The Son quickeneth whom he will." John 5:21. "The Father hath give all
   judgment unto the Son." - John 5:22. "That all may honor the Son even
   as they honor the Father." - John 5:23 (Greek). "The Father gave to the
   Son also to have life in himself." - John 5:26. "I (Jesus) will raise
   him up at the last day." - John 6:40, 44, 54. "I have power to lay down
   my life - and to take it again." - John 10:18. "I give unto them
   eternal life." - John 10:28. I am the resurrection and the life." -
   John 11:25, I Cor. 15:45. The Father raises Jesus from the dead. - Rom
   6:4. The Spirit raises Jesus from the dead. - Rom 8:11. Jesus raises
   himself from the dead. - John 10:17, 18.

   Father and Son are one in a much deeper sense than mere agreement in
   action. They are inherently one in essential being. This is a much
   deeper oneness than that of husband and wife, or of even Christ and the
   church, which is His "body." "These three are one." - I John 5:7, "the
   only born God." V. L. "an only begotten God.- Rotherham. - John 10:17,
   18.

   The "Word" returns to the "bosom of the Father." - John 1:18; 16:28. It
   carries with it the glorified humanity of Jesus Christ, the incarnation
   "bodily." He is the "temple of God." He dwells in the glory, and the
   glory dwells in Him. - I Tim 6:16. "And the city hath no need of the
   sun, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the lamp thereof is the
   Lamb." - Rev. 21:23. The Lamb is the lamp that the light of God shines
   through. The light is softened for our approach in Jesus Christ. He is
   both the sheep-fold and the Shepherd, the High Priest and the offering.
   As High Priest He offers Himself. He is both God and the Son of God.
   How this can all be reason may never explain, but the Word of God
   declares it. His reward is with Him. - Rev. 22:12. He shall feed His
   flock like a shepherd. - Isa. 40:9-11, John 10. This is Jesus Christ
   the Rewarder, and Good Shepherd. It is impossible to exalt Him too
   highly. The one God is so constituted and contained in the Lord Jesus
   Christ as to absolutely prohibit any other God. The world must accept
   Jesus Christ as their God. The world is being rapidly prepared to
   accept the Antichrist as God. The apostasy of the church is paving the
   way for this by denying the Deity of Jesus Christ. Which side shall we
   be found on? "If another shall come in his own name, him ye will
   receive." - John 5:43.

   Thank God we have an unqualified Christ. He is neither qualified as to
   His Being or His power. He has "all power." - Matt 28:18. He is "the
   Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End: the First and the Last."
   There is none before nor after Him. He is "the Mighty God." - Isa. 9:6.
   He is "all and in all." We may well fear any teaching or people who
   show a tendency to minimize or deny either the power or Personality of
   Jesus Christ."

   "Who is the image of the invisible God." - Col. 1:15. "Now unto the
   king eternal, incorruptible, invisible." - I Tim. 1:17; Isa. 9:66:16.
   "Thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name." - Ps. 138:2. Jesus
   is the Word - "For in Him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to
   dwell." - Col. 1:19, Scofield. Jesus is "all the fulness," and "fills
   all." - Eph. 1:23, John 1:16. We know Christ "after the flesh" no
   more." - II Cor. 5:16. No man knows anything of the "form" or nature,
   character or attributes of God except in Jesus Christ. Who is it the
   world is rejecting, and always has rejected? Jesus.

   "That in the ages to come He might show the exceeding riches of His
   grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus." - Eph. 2:7. Throughout
   the countless ages of eternity we shall not be able to fathom fully the
   lengths and breadths and depths and heights of God in Christ. - Eph.
   3:18. Do we need a revelation of God outside of Christ? Then we must
   seek for another plan of salvation. But we are "complete in Him." "God
   is Spirit." He is Omnipresent, everywhere. We cannot see Spirit. We are
   creatures, created beings, not as God - Deut. 4:12-16. Jesus is the
   visible of the invisible. We shall surely not be disappointed in seeing
   God in Him. Jesus Christ is the plan of salvation." He is the
   revelation of the Father, the channel of the Holy Ghost, "God manifest
   in the flesh," the fulness of the Godhead bodily." Those who are
   expecting to know and see God apart from Jesus Christ stand in grave
   danger of being disappointed in Him. They do not know Christ fully.
   "These three are one." Jesus is the one to fill our vision. He will do
   it completely. The Holy Ghost reveals not Himself, but Christ. He is
   the Spirit of the glorified Christ. He is a great light, reflected on
   Christ. - John 16:14. "I am in the Father and the Father in me." - John
   14:11. "For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God" -
   Col. 3:3.Who is it the world must meet some day in judgment? Jesus.
   John 5:22, Rom. 14:10.

   Adam heard God in the "wind of the day" (margin). - Gen 3:8. "The wind
   bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the voice thereof ." - John
   3:8. Jesus was the Word. Job cries, "I know that my redeemer liveth,
   and that he shall stand up at the last upon the earth. In my flesh
   shall I see God." - Job 19:25, 26. Jesus Christ is "God our Savior." -
   Titus 1:3. Only God can reveal God. - I Cor. 2:11.

   God "tabernacled" in Jesus Christ. The Word that "was God,"
   "tabernacled among us." - John 1:14. "God created man in His own
   image." - Gen 1:27. One image. Peter would have also built three
   tabernacles. There is one tabernacle, Jesus Christ. See "Jesus only."
   John 2:19-21. Jesus was the "express image" of the "invisible God." -
   Heb. 1:3, Col. 1:15.

   Adam was the father of the race naturally. Jesus became the Father of
   the race spiritually, the "second Adam." He is the revelation of the
   Father. God becomes our Father in Christ. The Sonship reveals the
   Fatherhood. And we become sons thereby. Deity has no father. Jesus is
   absolute Deity for Deity is His real Personality. Only His human nature
   was "begotten" in the womb of Mary. - Luke 1:35, Rotherham. God is
   spoken of in Heb. 12:9, as "the father of spirits." Adam got his spirit
   direct from God. But Jesus' real Personality was God.

   The "life which was with the Father" Was manifested in Jesus Christ. -
   I John 1:2. He is the "eternal life." - I John 5:20. He has "life in
   Himself." - John 5:26. Through revelation of Jesus Christ." - Gal.
   1:12. "Of Him are ye in Christ Jesus." - I Cor. 1:30. The treasures of
   wisdom and knowledge are hidden in Christ." - Col. 2:3. The mystery of
   His will is purposed in Christ." - Eph. 1:19. The "finished work of
   Calvary" and the "Godhead" question simply resolve themselves into
   salvation and the manifestation of God in Jesus Christ alone.

   The disciples understood God aright. All there is for us of God is
   found in Jesus. This does not deny the Father. The Book of Acts gives
   us the position in which they held Jesus, and the power they realized
   in His name. That was the secret of their ministry and success. They
   knew Jesus as "the Mighty God," the fact the Antichrist and the
   Apostasy deny. All there is for us of God is in that Name - Jesus. The
   disciples rejoiced to be counted worthy to "suffer dishonor for the
   Name." - Acts 5:41, I Peter 4:14, 16.

   When we really know Jesus as "the Mighty God" we may also "do
   exploits." - Dan. 11:32. We must know God in Christ, through the
   Eternal Spirit. We must know Jesus as "both Lord and Christ," and the
   power in His Name. - Acts 2:36. "He is Lord of all." - Acts 10:36. "The
   Lord is the Spirit." - II Cor. 3:17. In Acts 16:6, 7, R. V., the Holy
   Ghost and Spirit of Christ are used interchangeably. See Acts 5:3, 4,
   9. "the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ." - Phil. 1:19. The Word
   and Person who utters it are not separated. My thought and speech are
   essentially myself. Jesus was Himself "the beginning and the ending." -
   Rev. 1:8, 17. The beginning of all God's self-revelation is found in
   Christ. He is both the Alpha and the Omega. "Jehovah" (Jesus) signifies
   the God that was, is, and will be. "Jesus Christ the same yesterday,
   and today, and forever." - Heb. 13:8.

   In His humanity, union with man, Jesus was distinct from and inferior
   to the Father, and must of necessity speak of Himself as such. Mary
   would have touched His humanity. He spoke to her as a man. - John
   20:17. He was to be revealed to them in His Deity. The disciples had
   only known Him heretofore as a man. In Mexico the Roman Catholics
   worship three Gods, in separate, corporeal forms. They have a picture
   of this idea, which they worship. But if Christ is "all and in all" why
   do we look for more than all?

   In Rev 5, a lamb takes the book. But Jesus is not a literal lamb. This
   is figurative speech. Dan. 7:1, 13, - This is a vision, not a literal
   scene. "The worlds were framed by the word of God." - Heb. 11:3. This
   Word was Jesus. The Word did all the speaking in the revelation of God.
   The Word in heaven testifies to the Son on earth. The Word is
   omnipresent, and eternal. - I John 5:7. The Bible speaks of three in
   one, but never of one in three. Jesus is "at the right hand of God,"
   spiritually, the place of power. - Matt. 26:64. He is "in God." - Col.
   3:3. "God is Spirit." And the Father God is in Christ, "all the fulness
   of the Godhead," and we are "complete in Him." - Col. 2:9, 10. He is
   all there is of God for us. Do we really know Jesus? He is "all and in
   all."

   The Jesus returned to His disciples as "another Comforter." - John
   14:16, 18. He was the same Christ, but no longer "in the flesh." They
   were to know Him now in a higher sense. Jesus has been with them, but
   He is to be in them. "In that day ye shall know that I am in my Father
   and ye in me, and I in you" - John 14:20, 26, 16:12-14. This was on the
   day of Pentecost when the "other Comforter" came. "Christ in you the
   hope of glory" - Col. 1:27. He is the Eternal Spirit, the eternal
   life." "The Spirit was not yet given because Jesus was not yet
   glorified." - John John 7:39. Jesus had been with the disciples and was
   about to leave them. Their hearts were sad. What would they do without
   Him? They did not want another. Hence His words, "I will not leave you
   orphans (Greek), I will come unto you," be a Father to you. - John
   14:18. He was going away that He might come closer, be in them, through
   the Holy Ghost, forever. "And lo I am with you alway, even unto the end
   of the world. - Matt. 28:20. They are to know Jesus "after the flesh"
   no more. - II Cor. 5:16.

   Jesus does not simply represent God. He is God. We do not say that He
   is the Father. But He is the manifestation and the revelation of the
   Father to us. The Father is in Him, for us. It is impossible to make
   too much of the Lord Jesus Christ. He is everything to us, and all we
   need. The Son of God is the Father's "fellow," human form. - Zech.
   13:7. The dispensation of the Father is in the Son. He dispenses
   Himself to us in the Son. Jesus taught us to pray, "Our Father." "He
   that confesseth the Son hath the Father also." - I John 2:23. "He that
   abideth in the teaching, the same hath both the Father and the Son." -
   II John 9. "I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no one cometh
   unto the Father, but by me." - John 14:6. "I am the resurrection and
   the life." - John 11:25. "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
   Himself." - II Cor. 5:19. "Even as God also in Christ forgave you." -
   Eph 4:32. "That ye may know the mystery of God, Christ." - Col. 2:2.
   "God was manifest in the flesh." - I Tim. 3:16. No one can have the Son
   without the Father. And no one can have the Father without the Son.

   I have never felt, when preaching that Jesus is God, that the Father
   was in any sense neglected, denied, or displeased. In fact, I have
   always felt that He was mightily pleased. I have never been conscious
   of denying Him. I have often asked Him to help me to exalt Jesus more.
   I am so weak and unable, either in understanding or example, to do so.
   But I have never been so blessed in my soul as when doing so. And the
   Holy Ghost always wonderfully helps me. In fact I had never heard until
   the last few years, since the Apostasy has set in, that it was possible
   to exalt Jesus Christ too highly. We did not use to think that way
   about it.

   I confess I am becoming more and more afraid at the possibility of
   throwing my sympathy on the wrong side, my influence in the wrong
   direction, against Christ. I cannot afford in any sense or degree to
   sympathize, take sides with, or aid the Antichrist. I am afraid of the
   spirit of apostasy. The Pentecostal people stand at the parting of the
   ways on this question. Will they also help prepare the way for the
   Antichrist? It is a solemn issue. It is Christ or Antichrist. Are we
   going to gradually surrender our Lord to the enemy to be crucified,
   also? We declare in all seriousness many are already doing so.

   The spirit of Antichrist (against Christ), the apostasy, is gradually,
   subtly, but surely, creeping over the Pentecostal people. Of this we
   have abundant evidence. It is going to become harder and harder to
   preach the absolute Deity of Christ. This is a terrible thing. Many of
   our people are already fast becoming Higher Critics, along many lines,
   denying the Deity of Christ, and the inspiration of the whole Bible.
   The apostasy has struck the Pentecostal Movement. Have we any reason to
   believe that we shall be spared this more than others? History repeats
   itself. We are the same as others, only more privileged. We have more
   to answer for.

   This is not a mere matter of "old issue" or "new issue," so-called. If
   we fail to confess and preach the absolute Deity of Christ we are
   yielding to the Antichrist. No matter how many may have overshot the
   mark, God has a controversy with His people. Dare we through fear of
   being "numbered among transgressors" deny our Eternal Lord? The devil
   is shutting many a mouth through fear today. As the Sun frequently
   appears oblong at its rising, through refraction of its rays, because
   of abnormal, unfavorable, atmospheric conditions, so with the present
   issue. The truth is hindered and distorted by our human misconceptions,
   wounded in the house of its friends.

   Jesus Christ being robbed of His Deity today. That is the real issue.
   No matter what others may have done, how they may have abused the
   truth, through ignorance, etc., will we deny our Lord? It is better to
   even overexalt Him, if such a thing were possible, through honest
   ignorance, than to deny Him. God will accept the one, where the heart
   motive is pure, through misunderstanding, but reject the other. It is
   not a human issue. Our wrestling is not "with flesh and blood." "Lord,
   what shall this man do? What is that to thee; follow thou me." We shall
   answer each for himself in the matter.

   God will not reveal Himself to "party spirit." We must be cleansed from
   this evil also. He cannot reveal Himself to men in carnal conflict.
   Jesus is again "crucified between two thieves," between two selfish
   "party" extremes. Both are robbing Him. We need a fuller, clearer
   revelation of the Deity of Christ. We must have God's issue, the
   balanced truth, without fear or favor, ignorance or prejudice. Extremes
   can only hope to meet in Christ, in the middle.

   Philip Schaff, D. D.; LL. D., has said: "The divisions of Christendom
   will be overruled at last for a deeper and richer harmony, of which
   Christ is the key-note. In Him and by Him all problems of theology and
   history will be solved.

   In the best case a human creed is only an approximate and relatively
   correct exposition of revealed truth, and may be improved by the
   progressive knowledge of the Church, while the Bible remains perfect
   and infallible. Any higher view of the authority of Creeds is
   unprotestant and essentially Romanizing."

   Let us pray God that this may soon be realized. Some one has said,
   "Believers hate each other more for the things they disagree upon, than
   they love one another for the things in which they do agree." This is a
   sad situation. The reformers in Luther's and Zwingle's day, when the
   Protestants of Germany and Switzerland came together to see if they
   could come to any possible agreement, and thus be enabled to stand
   together against their common foe, the terrible Roman hierarchy, were
   surprised to find how many things they really did agree upon. If we
   would seek today to see how many things we are agreed upon, rather than
   to see how many we can disagree upon, and thus separate, scatter and
   divide our strength and the "body," we might really be surprised and
   joyed at our findings.

   We confess to a very limited capacity for handling such a profound
   subject, and crave the charity and leniency of all in their judgment of
   this contribution. Jesus said of Mary, "She hath done what she could."
   - ( Mark 14:6-8.) We have given, for the most part, the testimony of
   others in the matter. We wish to claim authority over no man's
   conscience. May the Lord be merciful to us all, further illuminating
   our minds and understanding in the knowledge of Him. We "know in part"
   only, at the best. - I Cor. 13:9. In humility let us together seek His
   face for further grace and favor. And wherein we may have erred may we
   be forgiven.

   "All hail the power of Jesus' Name, let angels prostrate fall;
   Bring forth the royal diadem, and crown Him Lord of all."
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI

   DOUBTLESS the reader will expect to find something at least in this
   book on the "Baptismal Formula" question. With Paul, we have never felt
   that were sent to baptize, but "to preach the Gospel." We have never
   personally baptized anyone in our ministry. We believe the vital point
   is for converts to understand clearly the plan of salvation, and to
   give a clear witness to the world that they have accepted, taken upon
   them the name of, and been discipled to, the Lord Jesus Christ. But we
   will give the arguments on the subject for consideration. Possibly we
   are in as much danger of becoming formulists as we are of becoming
   formalists.

   In "The Truth about the Godhead," published by the General Council,
   Assemblies of God, by E. N. Bell, we read "Those early christians did
   not hold slavishly to the words in Matt. 28:19, as a fixed law, as they
   would have done had they understood Jesus to prescribe an unvarying
   formula, a law. If they (the saints of today) held Matt. 28:19 was all
   right, but not the only form; if they merely held that other forms were
   acceptable, and did not purposely and wilfully oppose mention of the
   Father and the Holy Ghost, then they would be in respectable, scholarly
   company, for Hastings Dictionary of the Bible says at top of page 241,
   Vol. I, "That in the Apostolic Age there was no fixed formula is shown
   not only by the difference between Matthew and Acts, but by the
   difference between one passage in Acts and others in Acts itself, and
   also by traces of other differences (variations) in the Epistles.

   "The shorter forms (Acts) have been sometimes used in the Pentecostal
   Movement from the beginning without any opposition to Matt. 28:19, and
   without having any special doctrinal reason for using the shorter
   forms. So long as this was the custom no issue was raised. Either way
   was regarded as acceptable." - E. N. Bell, for General Council. This we
   know to be true. Some very prominent leaders, now in the Council,
   baptized in the name of the Lord "Jesus Christ."

   In the Encyclopedia Brittanica we read: "Name stands for personality in
   the N. T. The likeness of the baptismal ceremony with Christ's death
   and resurrection insured a real union with Him of the believer,
   according to Paul. The Apostolic age supplied this identification, and
   the normal mode of baptism during it seems to have been, "Into Christ
   Jesus, etc." As a rule the repentant underwent baptism in the name of
   Christ Jesus, and washed away their sins before hands were laid upon
   them unto the reception of the Spirit.

   "Eusebius Pamphili, in nearly a score of citations, substitutes the
   words "in My Name," for the words "baptizing them into the name of the
   Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." The first Gospel
   (Matt.) thus falls into line with the rest of the N. T." - Ency. Britt.

   We have simply quoted what we find in history. There are many other
   statements to the same effect, proving conclusively that "baptism in
   Jesus' name" was at least extensively practiced in the first centuries
   of the church. We cannot change Church History.

   In the enlarged Nicene Creed, Constantinople Council, A. D., 381, we
   read "We acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins," ( Acts
   2:38, Luke24:47).

   In the Greek Church Catechism, A. D., 1829, we read "What is required
   of him that seeks to be baptized? - Ans. - Repentance and faith: for
   which cause, also before baptism they recite the Creed, "Repent and be
   baptized everyone of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission
   of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." - ( Acts
   2:38.)

   Rev. Geo. Candel, Toledo, Ohio, in 1907 wrote: "Now if any rule of
   faith and practice could be formulated from these examples (of baptism
   in Acts) it might be this: that baptism into the name of Jesus should
   be urged as a fitting fruit of repentance, and as a condition of
   receiving forgiveness and the gift of the Spirit, to Jews or to other
   people who have indulged in any special hatred of Jesus or opposition
   to Him as the divine Savior. Consenting to this requirement, in such a
   case, would be necessary to a thorough repentance." (In that case,
   would not most people need to be baptized that way today, for growing
   spirit of antichrist is sweeping all ranks, both religious and
   secular.) The Gentiles at Cornelius' household were also baptized "in
   the name of Jesus Christ." - R. V., Acts 10:48.

   Dr. R. A. Torrey, in his book entitled "What the Bible Teaches," has
   written as follows: "In a normal state of the church every believer
   would have the baptism with the Holy Spirit as in the church at
   Corinth. - I Cor. 12:13. In such a normal state of the church the
   baptism with the Holy Spirit would be received immediately upon
   repentance and baptism into the name of Jesus Christ for the remission
   of sins - Acts 2:38." Whatever the writer meant by this it stands thus
   written.

   "Baptized into what name?" This question was asked of the editor of the
   Sunday School Times by a Sunday School Union Worker. The Sunday School
   Times has a list of over one hundred thousand subscribers and enters
   the homes of almost that many members of different churches all over
   the Union. We give the Editor's reply: "The name of Jesus carries with
   it all the power of the triune God, for "in Him dwelleth all the
   fullness of the Godhead bodily" ( Col. 2:9). His disciples' request
   that He show them the Father brought from Jesus the startlingly
   definite reply: "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John
   14:9). When John in the Revelation prophesied, They shall see His face;
   and His name shall be on their foreheads' ( Rev. 22:4), that name and
   that face revealed God in all His fullness, and doubtless are the name
   and face of Jesus, when we shall see Him as He is.'

   It may well be, therefore, that the disciples in baptizing in the name
   of Jesus were carrying out the commission of Matt. 28:19. In both cases
   there is one God and one Name. Some Christians who have felt that the
   spiritual reality was not in the form of baptism that they received
   have had the ordinance performed again and received rich blessing
   through it. Certainly either form is a true baptism if the reality is
   back of the ceremony. Yet there seems no reason for urging a second
   ceremony on the ground of this difference in the formula." - Sunday
   School Times.

   Another writer, not Pentecostal, has said: While the matter is
   expressed in detail in Matt. 28:19, yet in Jesus "dwelleth all the
   fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in Him. - Col. 2:9,
   10. In Jesus was the Father's name or character, and the fulness of the
   Spirit. Therefore when the Apostles baptized "into Jesus' name," they
   carried out our Lord's injunction. - ( Matt. 28:19.)

   Many have admitted that if it were not for Matt. 28:19, the logical
   way, in view of the other Scriptures, especially Acts, would be to
   baptize, "in Jesus' name." Salvation is in "no other name." - Act 4:12,
   Luke 24:47. We do everything else in Jesus' name. - Mark 16. "At the
   mouth of two or three witnesses." - II Cor. 13:1. This is God's rule.
   There are several to the name of Jesus. "Were ye baptized into the name
   of Paul?" "Were ye baptized into the name of Paul?" - I Cor. 1:13. This
   would seem to imply that they should be baptized into the name of the
   one to whom they were disciplined. How else could they confess Christ?

   We have given the general arguments used in favor of Acts 2:38, etc.
   The arguments for Matt. 28:19, are too well known to require
   repetition. We are honest truth seekers. None but fools would seek to
   change the Word of God.

   In "One hundred Contradictions of the Bible," a little book extensively
   circulated among all unbelievers, the seeming discrepancy between
   Matt.28:19, and Acts 2:38, is cited as a contradiction. What a pity
   that believers Cannot find the secret of the agreement between these
   two Scriptures, and thus present solid front to stop the mouths of the
   infidels and enemies of their common Lord and Master, instead of
   fighting one another, each with half the truth, thus confirming
   unbelievers in their infidelity. We shall have to answer to God for
   this failure. "That they all may be one: that the world may believe." -
   John 17:21.

   We that God's Word is not a Chinese Puzzle. There must be an
   explanation somewhere. And nothing is ever really settled until it is
   settled right. So far the brethren have been largely fighting one
   another, each with of the truth against the, or ignoring, if not
   denying, a part of the truth altogether. This is bad business. We dare
   not question the inspiration of the inspiration of the whole Word of
   God.

   When the writer was baptized in the Baptist church, 30 years ago, he
   received the impression that the preacher was baptizing him by the
   authority (in the name) of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. The
   commission of Matt. 28:19, was pre-Pentecostal. Jesus at that time had
   many things to say to them, but they could not bear them yet. - John
   16:12, 13. When the Holy Ghost, "the Spirit of truth," should be come,
   at Pentecost, He would "guide them into all truth." One of these truths
   was certainly "the mystery of godliness," hidden from the ages, the
   fulness or Deity in Jesus Christ, our completeness in Him, and
   salvation in His name. - Acts 4:12. That these truths were not really
   understood or realized by the disciples before the Holy Ghost was
   given, I think all will agree. They could not have understood them.
   "The Spirit was not yet given, for Jesus was not yet glorified." Jesus
   could not come in the Spirit until He had left them in the body. They
   were not yet "born again," in the N. T. sense of the word. Their
   experience was dispensational. In N. T. order they seem to have
   received the new birth and the baptism with the Holy Ghost as but two
   parts of one normal whole. This was a normal N. T. experience. They
   believed, were baptized in water, and received the Holy Ghost.

   Some have already adopted some such order in the baptismal formula as
   we have suggested above, but unfortunately, for some reason have placed
   the cart before the horse in the matter. Matt. 28:19, comes first, the
   Book of Acts order later, in process of revelation, unfolding and
   action.

   Yet we do not profess to have fully solved the situation. In Matt.
   28:19, our Authorized Version reads, "in the name." The Revised Version
   gives it, "into the name." While the Greek renders it, "to the name."
   In the Book of Acts we meet with the same difficulty, the Authorized
   and R. V. versions differing there also. In some cases it is rendered
   "in," in other cases "into," these versions differing on the same
   passages. In the Greek the prepositions used vary in the different
   cases, in some places the word being rendered "in," in other cases
   "to." The same Greek word "to," in Matt. 28:19, is used in two
   instances in the Book of Acts ( 8:16; 19:5), to the name of the Lord
   Jesus Christ." In the Syriac Version, one of the oldest and most
   authentic in existence, the translation is simply "in" in every case.
   These things being true we should certainly have charity at least with
   one another.

   We understand that in the Pentecostal work in Canada the brethren
   graciously allow full liberty of conscience in this matter, and still
   fellowship one another fully. This would seem to be, under the
   circumstances, the only real sane and christian procedure. If
   Pentecostal saints cannot have at least this much tolerance in religion
   we are surely little better than the papists after all. Brethren, let
   us pray for one another.

   Los Angeles. California

   March, 1926
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:1   [2]1:1   [3]1:1-2   [4]1:26   [5]1:26   [6]1:27   [7]2
   [8]2:4   [9]3:8   [10]3:15   [11]12:7   [12]12:7   [13]12:8
   [14]16:7   [15]16:7-10   [16]17:1-3   [17]18:22   [18]21:33
   [19]21:33   [20]22:11   [21]22:14   [22]22:15-16   [23]28:20
   [24]32:24   [25]32:24   [26]32:24   [27]32:24-30   [28]32:29
   [29]32:30   [30]35:13   [31]48:16

   Exodus

   [32]3   [33]3:2   [34]3:2-14   [35]3:13-14   [36]3:14   [37]3:14
   [38]3:14   [39]3:14   [40]3:14   [41]3:20-22   [42]4:2   [43]4:4
   [44]4:14   [45]6:2-3   [46]6:3   [47]6:3   [48]6:3   [49]14:9
   [50]15:2   [51]15:26   [52]17:15   [53]20:10   [54]23:20-21
   [55]23:20-21   [56]23:21   [57]23:21   [58]23:21   [59]31:13
   [60]33:20   [61]34:5

   Leviticus

   [62]24:11

   Deuteronomy

   [63]4:12-16   [64]4:12-16   [65]4:12-16   [66]6:4   [67]6:4   [68]6:4
   [69]6:4   [70]28:58   [71]28:58   [72]30:20

   Joshua

   [73]1:1   [74]5:15

   Judges

   [75]6:24   [76]13:8

   1 Samuel

   [77]1:3   [78]6:19   [79]16:19

   2 Samuel

   [80]22:47

   1 Chronicles

   [81]13:6

   Job

   [82]19:25-26   [83]19:25-27

   Psalms

   [84]2:7   [85]2:7   [86]7:17   [87]22:27   [88]23:1   [89]23:1
   [90]23:2   [91]23:3   [92]24:7   [93]24:8   [94]24:10   [95]27:1
   [96]35:5   [97]50:1   [98]50:1-7   [99]50:21   [100]50:21   [101]62:2
   [102]68:4   [103]78:35   [104]89:6-9   [105]90:2   [106]91:14
   [107]92:9   [108]98:9   [109]99:5   [110]102:25   [111]103:2-3
   [112]138:2   [113]138:2   [114]139:1-4

   Isaiah

   [115]4:3   [116]4:10   [117]4:13   [118]4:18   [119]6   [120]6:1-5
   [121]6:1-5   [122]6:1-8   [123]6:1-8   [124]6:3   [125]7:14
   [126]8:13-14   [127]9:6   [128]9:6   [129]9:6   [130]9:6   [131]9:6
   [132]9:6   [133]9:6   [134]9:6   [135]9:6   [136]9:6   [137]9:6
   [138]9:6   [139]9:6   [140]9:6   [141]9:6   [142]9:6   [143]9:6
   [144]9:6   [145]9:6   [146]9:6   [147]9:6   [148]9:6   [149]9:6
   [150]25:6-9   [151]35:4   [152]40:3   [153]40:3   [154]40:9
   [155]40:9-10   [156]40:9-11   [157]40:10-11   [158]40:28   [159]40:28
   [160]41:4   [161]41:4   [162]41:4   [163]42:8   [164]43:3   [165]43:3
   [166]43:3   [167]43:10   [168]43:11   [169]43:11   [170]44:6
   [171]44:6   [172]44:6   [173]45:18-24   [174]45:22   [175]48:12
   [176]48:12   [177]48:16-17   [178]48:25   [179]54:5   [180]54:5
   [181]59:15-20   [182]62:5   [183]66:15

   Jeremiah

   [184]10:10   [185]23:5-6   [186]23:6   [187]23:6   [188]23:6
   [189]23:6

   Ezekiel

   [190]1:1   [191]1:26   [192]48:25

   Daniel

   [193]7:1   [194]7:13   [195]7:13-14   [196]7:13-14   [197]11:32

   Hosea

   [198]12:4-5

   Micah

   [199]5:2   [200]5:2   [201]5:2   [202]5:2

   Zechariah

   [203]13:7   [204]13:7   [205]13:7   [206]14:5   [207]14:5-9
   [208]14:5-9   [209]14:9

   Malachi

   [210]3:1   [211]3:6

   Matthew

   [212]1:20-21   [213]1:20-21   [214]1:21   [215]1:21   [216]1:21
   [217]1:21-23   [218]1:23   [219]1:23   [220]1:23   [221]1:23
   [222]3:3   [223]9:2-6   [224]10:22   [225]11:27   [226]11:27
   [227]11:27   [228]11:27   [229]11:27   [230]11:28   [231]12:8
   [232]16:27   [233]18:20   [234]18:20   [235]19:17   [236]19:17
   [237]26:64   [238]28:9   [239]28:17   [240]28:18   [241]28:18
   [242]28:19   [243]28:19   [244]28:19   [245]28:19   [246]28:19
   [247]28:19   [248]28:19   [249]28:19   [250]28:19   [251]28:19
   [252]28:19   [253]28:19   [254]28:19   [255]28:20   [256]28:20

   Mark

   [257]2:7-10   [258]4:41   [259]10:17-18   [260]10:18   [261]13:32
   [262]14:6-8   [263]16   [264]16:17

   Luke

   [265]1:26-31   [266]1:35   [267]1:35   [268]1:35   [269]1:35
   [270]1:35   [271]1:35   [272]1:47   [273]2:13-14   [274]5:21
   [275]7:47-50   [276]7:49   [277]8:25   [278]13:34-35   [279]19:10
   [280]24:47   [281]24:47   [282]24:47

   John

   [283]1:1   [284]1:1   [285]1:1   [286]1:1   [287]1:1   [288]1:1
   [289]1:1   [290]1:1   [291]1:1   [292]1:1   [293]1:1   [294]1:1
   [295]1:1   [296]1:1   [297]1:1   [298]1:1-2   [299]1:1-2   [300]1:1-3
   [301]1:1-3   [302]1:1-14   [303]1:2   [304]1:3   [305]1:3   [306]1:3
   [307]1:3   [308]1:3   [309]1:4   [310]1:11   [311]1:14   [312]1:14
   [313]1:14   [314]1:14   [315]1:14   [316]1:14   [317]1:16   [318]1:18
   [319]1:18   [320]1:18   [321]1:18   [322]1:18   [323]1:18   [324]1:18
   [325]1:18   [326]1:18   [327]1:29   [328]1:36   [329]2:19-20
   [330]2:19-21   [331]2:23   [332]3:3   [333]3:8   [334]3:16
   [335]3:16   [336]3:16   [337]3:16   [338]3:16-18   [339]4:24
   [340]4:26   [341]5:18   [342]5:18   [343]5:21   [344]5:22   [345]5:22
   [346]5:22   [347]5:23   [348]5:26   [349]5:26   [350]5:43   [351]5:43
   [352]5:53   [353]5:58   [354]6:20   [355]6:35   [356]6:40   [357]6:44
   [358]6:46   [359]6:54   [360]6:64   [361]7:39   [362]8:19   [363]8:24
   [364]8:24   [365]8:28   [366]8:28   [367]8:28   [368]8:42
   [369]8:56-58   [370]8:57-58   [371]8:58   [372]8:58   [373]8:58
   [374]8:58   [375]8:58   [376]8:58   [377]8:58   [378]9:5   [379]9:5
   [380]9:38   [381]10   [382]10:7   [383]10:11   [384]10:11
   [385]10:11   [386]10:13   [387]10:15   [388]10:17-18   [389]10:17-18
   [390]10:18   [391]10:18   [392]10:28   [393]10:28   [394]10:30
   [395]10:30   [396]10:30   [397]10:30   [398]10:30   [399]10:30
   [400]10:30   [401]10:30   [402]10:33   [403]10:33   [404]10:38
   [405]11:25   [406]11:25   [407]12:39-41   [408]12:41   [409]12:41
   [410]12:41   [411]12:41-45   [412]12:44-45   [413]12:45   [414]12:45
   [415]14   [416]14:6   [417]14:6   [418]14:6-11   [419]14:7-9
   [420]14:7-10   [421]14:9   [422]14:9   [423]14:9   [424]14:9
   [425]14:9   [426]14:9   [427]14:10   [428]14:11   [429]14:16
   [430]14:16   [431]14:18   [432]14:18   [433]14:18   [434]14:20
   [435]14:20   [436]14:20   [437]14:20   [438]14:20   [439]14:23
   [440]14:26   [441]14:28   [442]15:1   [443]16:12-13   [444]16:12-14
   [445]16:12-14   [446]16:14   [447]16:14   [448]16:14   [449]16:28
   [450]17:3   [451]17:10   [452]17:18   [453]17:21   [454]18:5
   [455]18:6   [456]19:18   [457]20:17   [458]20:28   [459]20:28
   [460]20:28   [461]20:28   [462]20:28   [463]20:28

   Acts

   [464]2   [465]2:36   [466]2:36   [467]2:38   [468]2:38   [469]2:38
   [470]2:38   [471]2:38   [472]3:15   [473]4:12   [474]4:12   [475]4:12
   [476]4:129   [477]5:3-4   [478]5:9   [479]5:41   [480]8:16
   [481]9:4-5   [482]10:36   [483]10:48   [484]13:33   [485]15:14
   [486]16:6-7   [487]19:5   [488]20:28   [489]20:28   [490]20:28
   [491]20:28

   Romans

   [492]1:4   [493]6:4   [494]8:3   [495]8:9   [496]8:9   [497]8:11
   [498]9:5   [499]9:5   [500]9:5   [501]9:5   [502]9:5   [503]14:10

   1 Corinthians

   [504]1:2   [505]1:13   [506]1:30   [507]1:30   [508]1:30   [509]1:30
   [510]2:8   [511]2:8   [512]2:8   [513]2:11   [514]3:17   [515]4:6
   [516]10:4   [517]10:4   [518]10:9   [519]12:3   [520]12:6
   [521]12:13   [522]13:9   [523]15:24   [524]15:24-28   [525]15:25
   [526]15:27-28   [527]15:28   [528]15:45   [529]15:47

   2 Corinthians

   [530]3:14-18   [531]3:17   [532]3:17   [533]3:17   [534]3:17
   [535]3:17-18   [536]4:6   [537]4:6   [538]4:6   [539]5:16   [540]5:16
   [541]5:16   [542]5:19   [543]5:19   [544]5:21   [545]13:1

   Galatians

   [546]1:12   [547]4:4   [548]4:4

   Ephesians

   [549]1:10   [550]1:10   [551]1:10   [552]1:10   [553]1:10   [554]1:17
   [555]1:17   [556]1:17   [557]1:19   [558]1:21   [559]1:21-23
   [560]1:23   [561]1:23   [562]2:7   [563]3:17-19   [564]3:18
   [565]4:4   [566]4:4   [567]4:13   [568]4:13   [569]4:23-24
   [570]4:32   [571]5:25-32

   Philippians

   [572]1:19   [573]2:5-11   [574]2:6   [575]2:6   [576]2:6   [577]2:6
   [578]2:6   [579]2:6   [580]2:6   [581]2:6   [582]2:7   [583]2:7
   [584]2:9   [585]2:9   [586]2:9   [587]2:9-10   [588]2:9-11   [589]2:10

   Colossians

   [590]1:15   [591]1:15   [592]1:15   [593]1:15   [594]1:15   [595]1:15
   [596]1:15   [597]1:15   [598]1:15-17   [599]1:15-17   [600]1:15-19
   [601]1:15-20   [602]1:16   [603]1:16   [604]1:16-17   [605]1:16-17
   [606]1:17   [607]1:17   [608]1:17   [609]1:17   [610]1:17   [611]1:17
   [612]1:19   [613]1:27   [614]2:2   [615]2:2-3   [616]2:3
   [617]2:8-10   [618]2:9   [619]2:9   [620]2:9   [621]2:9   [622]2:9
   [623]2:9   [624]2:9   [625]2:9-10   [626]2:9-10   [627]2:9-10
   [628]2:9-10   [629]2:9-10   [630]2:9-10   [631]2:9-10   [632]2:9-10
   [633]3:3   [634]3:3   [635]3:10   [636]3:11   [637]3:11   [638]3:17

   2 Thessalonians

   [639]1:7-10   [640]2:4

   1 Timothy

   [641]1:17   [642]1:17   [643]1:17   [644]2:3   [645]2:5   [646]2:5
   [647]3:16   [648]3:16   [649]3:16   [650]3:16   [651]3:16   [652]3:16
   [653]3:16   [654]3:16   [655]3:16   [656]3:16   [657]3:16
   [658]6:14-15   [659]6:15   [660]6:15-16   [661]6:16

   Titus

   [662]1:3   [663]1:3   [664]2:10   [665]2:10   [666]2:10   [667]2:13
   [668]2:13   [669]3:4   [670]3:4-6

   Hebrews

   [671]1:1-2   [672]1:2   [673]1:2   [674]1:2   [675]1:2   [676]1:3
   [677]1:3   [678]1:3   [679]1:3   [680]1:3   [681]1:3   [682]1:3
   [683]1:5-6   [684]1:6   [685]1:8   [686]1:8   [687]1:8   [688]1:8
   [689]1:8   [690]1:8-9   [691]1:10   [692]2:9   [693]2:9   [694]2:14
   [695]2:16   [696]2:16-17   [697]5:5   [698]5:11   [699]6:13-18
   [700]7:3   [701]7:26   [702]10:5   [703]10:20   [704]11:3   [705]11:3
   [706]12:9   [707]13:8   [708]13:8   [709]13:8   [710]13:8   [711]13:15

   James

   [712]2:7   [713]5:4   [714]5:7

   1 Peter

   [715]1:10-12   [716]1:11   [717]1:12   [718]1:12   [719]2:8
   [720]4:14   [721]4:14   [722]4:16   [723]5:4

   2 Peter

   [724]1:1

   1 John

   [725]1:2   [726]1:2   [727]2:1   [728]2:18   [729]2:23   [730]2:23-24
   [731]4:9   [732]4:14   [733]4:15   [734]4:15   [735]5:7   [736]5:7
   [737]5:7   [738]5:7   [739]5:7   [740]5:8   [741]5:11   [742]5:20
   [743]5:20   [744]5:20   [745]5:20   [746]5:20   [747]5:20   [748]5:20
   [749]5:20   [750]5:20   [751]5:20   [752]5:20   [753]5:20   [754]5:20
   [755]5:20   [756]5:21   [757]5:21   [758]5:21

   2 John

   [759]1:9   [760]1:9

   3 John

   [761]1:7

   Jude

   [762]1:24-25   [763]1:25

   Revelation

   [764]1   [765]1:4   [766]1:5   [767]1:5   [768]1:8   [769]1:8
   [770]1:8   [771]1:8   [772]1:8   [773]1:8   [774]1:8   [775]1:8
   [776]1:8   [777]1:8   [778]1:12-17   [779]1:17   [780]1:17
   [781]1:17   [782]1:17   [783]1:17   [784]1:17   [785]1:18   [786]1:18
   [787]2:1   [788]2:8   [789]3:1   [790]3:1   [791]3:8   [792]3:8
   [793]3:14   [794]4:5   [795]4:11   [796]5   [797]5   [798]5:6-14
   [799]11:15   [800]13:8   [801]15:3   [802]17:4   [803]18:17
   [804]19:10   [805]19:16   [806]21:2   [807]21:6   [808]21:7
   [809]21:9   [810]21:23   [811]22   [812]22:1   [813]22:4   [814]22:4
   [815]22:6   [816]22:12   [817]22:12-13   [818]22:13   [819]22:13
   [820]22:13   [821]22:13   [822]22:13   [823]22:13   [824]22:16
   [825]22:16
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [826]1  [827]2  [828]3  [829]4  [830]5  [831]6  [832]7  [833]8  [834]9
   [835]10  [836]11  [837]12  [838]13  [839]14  [840]15  [841]16  [842]17
   [843]18  [844]19  [845]20  [846]21  [847]22  [848]23  [849]24  [850]25
   [851]26  [852]27  [853]28  [854]29  [855]30  [856]31  [857]32  [858]33
   [859]34  [860]35  [861]36  [862]37  [863]38  [864]39  [865]40  [866]41
   [867]42  [868]43  [869]44  [870]45  [871]46  [872]47  [873]48  [874]49
   [875]50  [876]51  [877]52  [878]53  [879]47  [880]55  [881]47  [882]57
   [883]58  [884]59  [885]60  [886]61  [887]62  [888]63  [889]64  [890]65
   [891]66  [892]67  [893]68  [894]69
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p9.7
   2. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p70.1
   3. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p14.2
   4. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii-p13.1
   5. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii-p14.1
   6. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii-p23.2
   7. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv-p64.4
   8. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v-p47.3
   9. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii-p22.1
  10. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi-p11.1
  11. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii-p18.2
  12. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v-p96.5
  13. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iii-p19.1
  14. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=16&scrV=7#v-p14.3
  15. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=16&scrV=7#iii-p20.1
  16. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#v-p96.14
  17. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=22#iii-p20.2
  18. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=33#v-p47.1
  19. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=33#v-p97.1
  20. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=11#iii-p21.1
  21. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=14#v-p98.1
  22. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=15#iii-p21.2
  23. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii-p26.1
  24. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#iii-p22.1
  25. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#v-p14.4
  26. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#v-p39.7
  27. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#v-p96.6
  28. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=29#v-p100.1
  29. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=30#iii-p22.2
  30. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=13#iii-p23.1
  31. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=16#iii-p24.1
  32. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v-p10.3
  33. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v-p14.5
  34. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v-p107.1
  35. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v-p43.1
  36. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v-p22.11
  37. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv-p55.1
  38. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv-p64.1
  39. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v-p100.2
  40. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v-p103.2
  41. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iv-p58.1
  42. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iii-p25.1
  43. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii-p25.2
  44. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii-p25.3
  45. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v-p96.15
  46. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v-p22.12
  47. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iv-p64.2
  48. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v-p101.4
  49. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=9#v-p107.2
  50. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=2#v-p98.12
  51. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=26#v-p98.2
  52. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=15#v-p98.3
  53. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=10#v-p48.12
  54. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=20#v-p107.3
  55. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=20#vii-p11.17
  56. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=21#iii-p25.4
  57. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=21#v-p43.5
  58. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=21#v-p100.3
  59. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=13#v-p98.4
  60. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=20#vi-p1.3
  61. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=5#v-p43.3
  62. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=24&scrV=11#vii-p11.14
  63. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii-p20.3
  64. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v-p33.1
  65. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii-p21.3
  66. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iii-p12.1
  67. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv-p9.2
  68. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v-p40.3
  69. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vii-p2.1
  70. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=58#v-p43.4
  71. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=58#vii-p11.16
  72. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=20#v-p48.3
  73. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p52.2
  74. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v-p14.6
  75. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=24#v-p98.5
  76. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v-p100.4
  77. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p98.6
  78. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii-p13.1
  79. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iii-p3.1
  80. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=47#v-p22.4
  81. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=13&scrV=6#vii-p11.15
  82. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=25#vii-p22.3
  83. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=25#vii-p9.18
  84. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii-p36.2
  85. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv-p32.1
  86. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=17#v-p98.9
  87. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=27#v-p47.15
  88. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=1#v-p98.10
  89. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=1#vii-p10.1
  90. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vii-p10.3
  91. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=3#vii-p10.5
  92. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=7#v-p37.1
  93. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=8#v-p39.8
  94. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=10#v-p37.2
  95. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=1#v-p48.5
  96. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=5#v-p48.7
  97. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=1#v-p37.11
  98. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=1#vii-p9.19
  99. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=21#iii-p11.1
 100. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=21#iii-p18.1
 101. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=2#v-p22.5
 102. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=4#v-p98.11
 103. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=35#v-p22.6
 104. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=6#v-p47.13
 105. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=2#iii-p28.3
 106. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=14#vi-p37.2
 107. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=92&scrV=9#v-p47.9
 108. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=98&scrV=9#v-p48.14
 109. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=99&scrV=5#v-p48.17
 110. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=25#v-p15.4
 111. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=2#v-p48.9
 112. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=2#v-p99.1
 113. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=2#vii-p20.4
 114. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=1#v-p47.5
 115. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v-p39.1
 116. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=10#v-p39.2
 117. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v-p36.1
 118. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v-p36.2
 119. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v-p9.1
 120. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v-p96.7
 121. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi-p40.1
 122. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv-p69.3
 123. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v-p96.17
 124. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v-p39.3
 125. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v-p9.3
 126. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=13#v-p37.9
 127. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iii-p36.21
 128. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p77.1
 129. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p77.2
 130. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p78.1
 131. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v-p9.4
 132. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p37.1
 133. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p37.14
 134. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p37.15
 135. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p43.1
 136. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p67.2
 137. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iv-p68.2
 138. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi-p23.1
 139. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v-p37.12
 140. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v-p37.21
 141. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v-p38.5
 142. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v-p41.2
 143. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v-p45.1
 144. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v-p100.5
 145. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v-p112.1
 146. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi-p50.1
 147. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi-p50.2
 148. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vii-p19.2
 149. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vii-p20.3
 150. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=25&scrV=6#v-p40.5
 151. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=4#vii-p9.21
 152. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=3#v-p34.1
 153. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=3#v-p38.3
 154. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=9#v-p34.2
 155. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=9#vii-p9.20
 156. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=9#vii-p18.6
 157. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=10#v-p22.1
 158. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=28#v-p37.16
 159. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=28#v-p38.6
 160. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=4#v-p12.7
 161. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=4#v-p22.14
 162. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=4#vi-p11.5
 163. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#v-p107.4
 164. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=3#v-p22.15
 165. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=3#v-p21.1
 166. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=3#v-p21.3
 167. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=10#vi-p11.6
 168. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=11#v-p21.2
 169. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=11#v-p48.1
 170. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#v-p12.8
 171. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#v-p12.13
 172. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#v-p22.16
 173. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=18#v-p95.1
 174. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=22#v-p95.2
 175. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=12#v-p12.9
 176. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=12#v-p22.17
 177. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=16#vii-p1.3
 178. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=25#v-p36.3
 179. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#v-p37.25
 180. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#v-p38.11
 181. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=15#vii-p9.22
 182. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=5#v-p37.26
 183. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=15#vii-p9.23
 184. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v-p37.14
 185. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=5#v-p37.5
 186. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=6#v-p9.5
 187. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=6#v-p39.9
 188. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=6#v-p98.7
 189. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=6#vii-p10.6
 190. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p13.1
 191. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v-p13.2
 192. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=48&scrV=25#v-p98.8
 193. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vii-p29.2
 194. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=13#vii-p29.3
 195. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=13#v-p14.7
 196. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=13#vii-p9.24
 197. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=32#vii-p27.1
 198. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v-p39.6
 199. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv-p29.1
 200. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv-p37.2
 201. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iv-p66.1
 202. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v-p37.22
 203. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v-p15.5
 204. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v-p37.7
 205. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=7#vii-p31.1
 206. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=5#v-p39.5
 207. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=5#vii-p3.2
 208. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=5#vii-p8.6
 209. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=9#v-p47.11
 210. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii-p25.6
 211. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v-p47.7
 212. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v-p100.6
 213. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v-p101.1
 214. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii-p38.2
 215. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv-p51.1
 216. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv-p52.1
 217. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v-p99.3
 218. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv-p37.12
 219. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi-p27.1
 220. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v-p38.2
 221. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii-p8.3
 222. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v-p34.3
 223. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=2#v-p48.11
 224. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=22#vii-p11.1
 225. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi-p25.5
 226. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#v-p32.2
 227. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi-p1.4
 228. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vii-p5.2
 229. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vii-p14.8
 230. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vii-p10.4
 231. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=8#v-p48.13
 232. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=27#v-p48.16
 233. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=20#iv-p68.12
 234. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=20#vi-p25.8
 235. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vi-p35.1
 236. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vii-p9.1
 237. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=64#vii-p29.6
 238. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#v-p48.19
 239. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=17#v-p48.20
 240. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#v-p20.1
 241. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#vii-p19.1
 242. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p2.1
 243. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p2.2
 244. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p3.1
 245. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p12.1
 246. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p13.1
 247. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p13.3
 248. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p14.1
 249. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p15.2
 250. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p16.1
 251. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p18.1
 252. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p19.1
 253. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p20.1
 254. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#viii-p20.2
 255. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vi-p25.9
 256. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vii-p30.9
 257. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii-p9.2
 258. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=41#vii-p9.3
 259. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi-p26.4
 260. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iv-p39.4
 261. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=32#iv-p39.5
 262. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii-p41.1
 263. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=0#viii-p14.4
 264. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=17#vii-p11.2
 265. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v-p101.2
 266. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iii-p38.1
 267. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iii-p36.13
 268. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iv-p30.1
 269. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iv-p30.2
 270. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#vii-p6.2
 271. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#vii-p24.1
 272. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=47#v-p38.9
 273. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iii-p36.7
 274. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii-p9.4
 275. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#v-p48.10
 276. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=49#vii-p9.5
 277. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=25#vii-p9.6
 278. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=34#vi-p37.1
 279. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=10#v-p48.2
 280. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#vii-p11.3
 281. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#viii-p7.2
 282. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#viii-p14.3
 283. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p15.1
 284. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p36.19
 285. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p36.22
 286. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p9.6
 287. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p10.6
 288. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p28.2
 289. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p28.5
 290. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p32.2
 291. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p36.1
 292. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p37.3
 293. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p68.1
 294. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p37.23
 295. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p99.2
 296. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p39.1
 297. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p55.3
 298. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv-p72.1
 299. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi-p36.1
 300. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p47.4
 301. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p47.6
 302. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p43.1
 303. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v-p38.1
 304. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p30.2
 305. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p31.1
 306. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi-p26.1
 307. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p56.1
 308. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p96.1
 309. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v-p48.4
 310. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v-p40.1
 311. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii-p37.1
 312. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii-p36.8
 313. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv-p27.1
 314. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v-p96.8
 315. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v-p99.2
 316. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii-p23.1
 317. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii-p20.7
 318. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p9.9
 319. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii-p33.2
 320. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii-p36.9
 321. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p14.1
 322. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv-p39.2
 323. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iv-p59.1
 324. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p19.1
 325. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi-p1.5
 326. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii-p18.1
 327. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#v-p95.3
 328. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=36#v-p10.5
 329. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v-p37.19
 330. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii-p23.3
 331. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v-p113.1
 332. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v-p37.17
 333. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii-p22.2
 334. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii-p36.20
 335. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii-p44.2
 336. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii-p15.1
 337. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii-p15.2
 338. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii-p36.10
 339. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v-p108.1
 340. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v-p44.1
 341. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v-p10.7
 342. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iv-p68.3
 343. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii-p16.1
 344. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v-p48.15
 345. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii-p16.2
 346. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii-p21.7
 347. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vii-p16.3
 348. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=26#vii-p16.4
 349. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=26#vii-p25.3
 350. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=43#v-p20.3
 351. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=43#vii-p18.8
 352. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=53#iv-p68.7
 353. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=58#iv-p68.8
 354. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v-p44.2
 355. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=35#v-p44.8
 356. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=40#vii-p16.5
 357. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#vii-p16.6
 358. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=46#vi-p1.6
 359. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=54#vii-p16.7
 360. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=64#vii-p9.7
 361. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#vii-p30.7
 362. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=19#vii-p5.1
 363. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v-p44.6
 364. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#vii-p3.3
 365. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v-p44.3
 366. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v-p44.5
 367. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v-p44.7
 368. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=42#iii-p33.1
 369. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#v-p96.16
 370. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=57#v-p103.1
 371. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#v-p9.8
 372. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#v-p10.4
 373. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#v-p22.13
 374. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#iv-p37.4
 375. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#iv-p64.3
 376. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#vi-p25.7
 377. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#v-p43.2
 378. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v-p44.9
 379. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v-p48.6
 380. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=38#v-p48.18
 381. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vii-p18.7
 382. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=7#v-p44.10
 383. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v-p22.2
 384. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v-p44.11
 385. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#vii-p10.2
 386. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v-p37.20
 387. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=15#iv-p68.9
 388. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vii-p16.14
 389. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vii-p17.2
 390. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iv-p38.1
 391. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#vii-p16.8
 392. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iv-p68.10
 393. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vii-p16.9
 394. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v-p10.1
 395. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iv-p14.1
 396. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iv-p20.1
 397. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v-p15.6
 398. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vi-p25.6
 399. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v-p104.3
 400. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vi-p53.3
 401. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii-p14.7
 402. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=33#v-p10.2
 403. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=33#vii-p9.8
 404. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=38#v-p104.4
 405. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii-p16.10
 406. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii-p31.5
 407. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=39#iv-p69.4
 408. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#v-p9.2
 409. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#v-p39.4
 410. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#vi-p40.2
 411. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#v-p96.18
 412. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=44#v-p104.5
 413. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=45#vi-p25.3
 414. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=45#vii-p9.9
 415. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v-p71.1
 416. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#v-p48.8
 417. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii-p31.4
 418. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii-p14.5
 419. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=7#vi-p53.2
 420. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=7#v-p104.2
 421. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#iv-p39.1
 422. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi-p25.1
 423. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi-p25.2
 424. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi-p2.1
 425. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi-p55.1
 426. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#viii-p11.2
 427. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#v-p32.6
 428. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=11#vii-p21.5
 429. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v-p55.1
 430. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#vii-p30.1
 431. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=18#vi-p53.1
 432. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=18#vii-p30.2
 433. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=18#vii-p30.8
 434. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=20#v-p79.1
 435. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=20#v-p93.2
 436. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=20#v-p106.1
 437. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=20#vii-p14.6
 438. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=20#vii-p30.3
 439. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=23#v-p106.2
 440. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vii-p30.4
 441. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#iv-p39.3
 442. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=1#v-p44.12
 443. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#viii-p18.2
 444. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#vii-p14.2
 445. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#vii-p30.5
 446. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vii-p14.9
 447. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vii-p14.11
 448. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vii-p21.4
 449. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=28#vii-p18.2
 450. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iv-p67.4
 451. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=10#v-p104.6
 452. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=18#iii-p36.12
 453. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=21#viii-p16.3
 454. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=5#v-p44.4
 455. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#vii-p9.10
 456. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=18#v-p110.1
 457. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vii-p28.1
 458. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iv-p36.2
 459. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iv-p60.1
 460. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iv-p68.11
 461. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v-p38.8
 462. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v-p112.3
 463. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#vi-p55.4
 464. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v-p93.1
 465. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v-p107.5
 466. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=36#vii-p27.2
 467. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#viii-p7.1
 468. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#viii-p8.1
 469. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#viii-p10.2
 470. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#viii-p15.1
 471. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#viii-p16.2
 472. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv-p37.18
 473. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii-p4.1
 474. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii-p11.4
 475. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#viii-p18.3
 476. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=129#viii-p14.2
 477. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii-p27.6
 478. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vii-p27.7
 479. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#vii-p26.1
 480. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=16#viii-p20.3
 481. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii-p3.1
 482. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=36#vii-p27.3
 483. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=48#viii-p9.1
 484. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=33#iii-p36.1
 485. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=14#vii-p11.5
 486. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vii-p27.5
 487. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=5#viii-p20.4
 488. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v-p4.1
 489. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iv-p36.3
 490. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v-p35.2
 491. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#vi-p55.5
 492. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii-p36.5
 493. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vii-p16.12
 494. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v-p96.13
 495. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v-p32.3
 496. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v-p51.2
 497. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii-p16.13
 498. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#iv-p36.4
 499. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#vi-p26.3
 500. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v-p38.10
 501. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v-p112.4
 502. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#vi-p55.6
 503. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=10#vii-p21.8
 504. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv-p68.6
 505. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=13#viii-p14.6
 506. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#v-p37.6
 507. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#vi-p27.4
 508. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#vii-p10.7
 509. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#vii-p25.5
 510. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v-p22.8
 511. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv-p37.17
 512. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v-p37.3
 513. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii-p22.5
 514. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v-p107.8
 515. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii-p4.1
 516. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v-p22.7
 517. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vii-p9.11
 518. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vii-p9.12
 519. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vii-p6.1
 520. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iv-p13.1
 521. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#viii-p10.1
 522. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#vii-p41.2
 523. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iv-p57.1
 524. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vi-p9.1
 525. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=25#v-p47.10
 526. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=27#vi-p45.1
 527. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#iv-p57.2
 528. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=45#vii-p16.11
 529. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=47#v-p107.7
 530. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v-p40.2
 531. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv-p28.2
 532. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v-p40.4
 533. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v-p108.2
 534. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii-p27.4
 535. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii-p14.10
 536. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii-p28.1
 537. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v-p36.8
 538. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi-p57.4
 539. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v-p41.3
 540. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii-p20.8
 541. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii-p30.10
 542. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi-p11.2
 543. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii-p31.6
 544. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv-p50.1
 545. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#viii-p14.5
 546. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii-p25.4
 547. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii-p36.14
 548. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii-p38.4
 549. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi-p5.1
 550. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v-p50.6
 551. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi-p28.3
 552. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi-p56.1
 553. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii-p6.6
 554. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii-p7.2
 555. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi-p57.1
 556. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii-p6.7
 557. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii-p25.7
 558. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii-p11.6
 559. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v-p99.4
 560. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii-p8.4
 561. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii-p20.6
 562. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii-p21.1
 563. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vi-p28.4
 564. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vii-p21.2
 565. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v-p32.5
 566. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v-p51.1
 567. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii-p7.1
 568. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi-p28.2
 569. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=23#iv-p9.4
 570. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vii-p31.7
 571. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v-p37.27
 572. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii-p27.8
 573. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v-p13.3
 574. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii-p44.1
 575. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v-p10.8
 576. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv-p36.6
 577. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi-p4.1
 578. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v-p37.8
 579. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi-p47.1
 580. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi-p55.8
 581. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii-p14.1
 582. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv-p30.4
 583. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v-p96.12
 584. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p20.2
 585. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p47.14
 586. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p99.5
 587. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii-p11.7
 588. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p107.6
 589. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v-p47.16
 590. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv-p31.2
 591. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv-p68.14
 592. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v-p50.1
 593. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vi-p1.2
 594. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii-p6.5
 595. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii-p14.3
 596. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii-p20.1
 597. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii-p23.5
 598. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v-p96.2
 599. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vi-p1.1
 600. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii-p6.3
 601. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv-p69.2
 602. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v-p37.18
 603. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v-p39.11
 604. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi-p4.2
 605. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v-p56.2
 606. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv-p37.5
 607. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv-p67.1
 608. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv-p68.15
 609. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v-p37.24
 610. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v-p101.6
 611. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v-p103.4
 612. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii-p20.5
 613. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii-p30.6
 614. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii-p31.8
 615. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi-p57.3
 616. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii-p25.6
 617. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi-p56.2
 618. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii-p25.5
 619. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv-p28.1
 620. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv-p36.5
 621. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p50.7
 622. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p104.1
 623. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi-p55.7
 624. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#viii-p11.1
 625. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii-p48.1
 626. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p44.15
 627. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p101.5
 628. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii-p6.4
 629. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii-p13.2
 630. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii-p14.4
 631. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii-p29.8
 632. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#viii-p13.2
 633. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii-p21.6
 634. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii-p29.7
 635. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv-p9.3
 636. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iv-p13.2
 637. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vii-p8.5
 638. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii-p11.8
 639. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii-p9.15
 640. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv-p86.1
 641. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v-p50.2
 642. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi-p1.7
 643. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii-p20.2
 644. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v-p21.4
 645. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii-p17.1
 646. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv-p39.6
 647. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii-p45.1
 648. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p80.1
 649. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p14.2
 650. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p32.3
 651. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p36.7
 652. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p40.1
 653. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv-p68.4
 654. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi-p25.4
 655. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v-p38.12
 656. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi-p55.9
 657. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii-p31.9
 658. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v-p22.9
 659. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=15#iv-p37.16
 660. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vi-p1.8
 661. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vii-p18.3
 662. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p21.5
 663. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii-p22.4
 664. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv-p36.8
 665. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v-p21.6
 666. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi-p55.10
 667. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v-p21.7
 668. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v-p38.14
 669. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v-p21.8
 670. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v-p32.4
 671. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii-p38.5
 672. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii-p36.17
 673. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v-p15.1
 674. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv-p31.1
 675. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v-p56.3
 676. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv-p9.1
 677. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii-p30.3
 678. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv-p68.16
 679. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv-p42.1
 680. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v-p39.12
 681. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi-p2.2
 682. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii-p23.4
 683. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii-p36.6
 684. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii-p36.16
 685. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv-p36.9
 686. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p15.2
 687. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p38.4
 688. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p112.2
 689. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi-p55.11
 690. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv-p68.5
 691. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v-p15.3
 692. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p35.1
 693. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v-p96.9
 694. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v-p96.10
 695. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vii-p14.12
 696. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v-p96.11
 697. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii-p36.3
 698. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=11#vi-p28.1
 699. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii-p21.3
 700. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=3#iv-p37.6
 701. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=26#iv-p68.13
 702. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#iv-p30.3
 703. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=20#v-p23.1
 704. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iii-p30.4
 705. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii-p29.4
 706. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vii-p24.2
 707. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iv-p37.7
 708. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iv-p69.1
 709. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v-p103.3
 710. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vii-p27.11
 711. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=15#vii-p11.12
 712. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii-p11.13
 713. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=4#vii-p9.13
 714. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vii-p9.14
 715. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv-p44.1
 716. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v-p50.4
 717. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v-p50.8
 718. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi-p44.1
 719. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v-p37.10
 720. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii-p11.9
 721. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii-p26.2
 722. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vii-p26.3
 723. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v-p22.3
 724. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v-p38.13
 725. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v-p32.1
 726. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vii-p25.1
 727. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v-p55.2
 728. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v-p20.4
 729. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#vii-p31.2
 730. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v-p104.7
 731. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iii-p36.11
 732. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii-p36.18
 733. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iii-p38.3
 734. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v-p104.8
 735. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii-p12.2
 736. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii-p38.6
 737. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vii-p1.1
 738. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vii-p17.1
 739. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vii-p29.5
 740. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii-p1.2
 741. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=11#iv-p67.3
 742. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iv-p86.2
 743. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v-p2.1
 744. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iv-p23.1
 745. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iv-p36.10
 746. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iv-p62.1
 747. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vi-p26.2
 748. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v-p37.15
 749. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v-p38.7
 750. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vi-p27.3
 751. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vi-p40.4
 752. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vi-p54.1
 753. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vi-p55.2
 754. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii-p13.3
 755. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii-p25.2
 756. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv-p86.3
 757. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv-p62.2
 758. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v-p37.4
 759. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii-p4.2
 760. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii-p31.3
 761. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii-p11.10
 762. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi-p27.2
 763. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v-p21.9
 764. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v-p12.1
 765. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v-p36.4
 766. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii-p36.15
 767. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii-p36.4
 768. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p12.5
 769. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv-p37.8
 770. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv-p37.9
 771. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi-p11.3
 772. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p37.13
 773. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p39.10
 774. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p44.13
 775. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v-p101.3
 776. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii-p8.1
 777. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii-p27.9
 778. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii-p9.16
 779. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v-p12.6
 780. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v-p12.10
 781. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v-p22.18
 782. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv-p37.13
 783. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii-p8.2
 784. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii-p27.10
 785. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p47.2
 786. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v-p47.8
 787. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii-p24.2
 788. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v-p12.11
 789. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v-p36.5
 790. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi-p39.2
 791. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v-p101.7
 792. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii-p11.11
 793. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v-p96.3
 794. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v-p36.6
 795. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v-p96.4
 796. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v-p12.2
 797. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vii-p29.1
 798. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v-p48.21
 799. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=15#v-p47.12
 800. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii-p17.2
 801. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=3#vi-p39.3
 802. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=4#vi-p39.4
 803. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=17#iii-p28.4
 804. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iii-p30.1
 805. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=16#v-p22.10
 806. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=2#v-p37.28
 807. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=6#iv-p37.10
 808. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=7#v-p41.1
 809. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=9#v-p37.29
 810. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=23#vii-p18.4
 811. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v-p12.3
 812. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=1#iv-p57.3
 813. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=4#v-p36.7
 814. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=4#viii-p11.3
 815. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=6#v-p50.3
 816. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=12#vii-p18.5
 817. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=12#vii-p9.17
 818. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#v-p12.4
 819. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#v-p12.12
 820. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#v-p22.19
 821. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#iv-p37.11
 822. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#vi-p11.4
 823. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#vi-p40.3
 824. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=16#v-p44.14
 825. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=16#v-p50.5
 826. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#i-Page_1
 827. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#i-Page_2
 828. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#i-Page_3
 829. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#ii-Page_4
 830. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_5
 831. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_6
 832. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_7
 833. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_8
 834. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_9
 835. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_10
 836. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_11
 837. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_12
 838. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_13
 839. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iii-Page_14
 840. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_15
 841. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_16
 842. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_17
 843. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_18
 844. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_19
 845. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_20
 846. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_21
 847. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_22
 848. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_23
 849. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_24
 850. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_25
 851. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_26
 852. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_27
 853. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_28
 854. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_29
 855. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#iv-Page_30
 856. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_31
 857. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_32
 858. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_33
 859. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_34
 860. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_35
 861. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_36
 862. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_37
 863. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_38
 864. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_39
 865. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_40
 866. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_41
 867. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_42
 868. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_43
 869. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_44
 870. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_45
 871. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#v-Page_46
 872. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_47
 873. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_48
 874. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_49
 875. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_50
 876. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_51
 877. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_52
 878. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_53
 879. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_47_1
 880. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_55
 881. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vi-Page_47_2
 882. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_57
 883. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_58
 884. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_59
 885. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_60
 886. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_61
 887. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_62
 888. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_63
 889. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_64
 890. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#vii-Page_65
 891. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#viii-Page_66
 892. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#viii-Page_67
 893. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#viii-Page_68
 894. file:///ccel/b/bartleman/deity/cache/deity.html3#viii-Page_69
