     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: History of Dogma - Volume I
      Creator(s): Harnack, Adolf (1851-1930)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Theology; History
      LC Call no: BT21.H33 V.1
     LC Subjects:

                  Doctrinal theology

                  Doctrine and dogma
     __________________________________________________________________

                                HISTORY OF DOGMA

    BY

DR. ADOLPH HARNACK

    ORDINARY PROF. OF CHURCH HISTORY IN THE UNIVERSITY, AND FELLOW OF THE ROYAL
    ACADEMY OF SCIENCE, BERLIN

   TRANSLATED FROM THE THIRD GERMAN
   EDITION

    BY

  NEIL BUCHANAN

  VOLUME I
     __________________________________________________________________

Volume I.
     __________________________________________________________________

VORWORT ZUR ENGLISCHEN AUSGABE.

   Ein theologisches Buch erhælt erst dadurch einen Platz in der
   Weltlitteratur, dass es Deutsch und Englisch gelesen werden kann. Diese
   beiden Sprachen zusammen haben auf dem Gebiete der Wissenschaft vom
   Christenthum das Lateinische abgelöst. Es ist mir daher eine grosse
   Freude, dass mein Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte in das Englische
   übersetzt worden ist, und ich sage dem Uebersetzer sowie den Verlegern
   meinen besten Dank.

   Der schwierigste Theil der Dogmengeschichte ist ihr Anfang, nicht nur
   weil in dem Anfang die Keime fur alle späteren Entwickelungen liegen,
   und daher ein Beobachtungsfehler beim Beginn die Richtigkeit der ganzen
   folgenden Darstellung bedroht, sondern auch desshalb, weil die Auswahl
   des wichtigsten Stoffs aus der Geschichte des Urchristenthums und der
   biblischen Theologie ein schweres Problem ist. Der Eine wird finden,
   dass ich zu viel in das Buch aufgenommen habe, und der Andere zu
   wenig--vielleicht haben Beide recht; ich kann dagegen nur anführen,
   dass sich mir die getroffene Auswahl nach wiederholtem Nachdenken und
   Experimentiren auf's Neue erprobt hat.

   Wer ein theologisches Buch aufschlagt, fragt gewöhnlich zuerst nach dem
   "Standpunkt" des Verfassers. Bei geschichtlichen Darstellungen sollte
   man so nicht fragen. Hier handelt es sich darum, ob der Verfasser einen
   Sinn hat für den Gegenstand den er darstellt, ob er Originales und
   Abgeleitetes zu unterscheiden versteht, ob er seinen Stoff volkommen
   kennt, ob er sich der Grenzen des geschichtlichen Wissens bewusst ist,
   und ob er wahrhaftig ist. Diese Forderungen erhalten den kategorischen
   Imperativ für den Historiker; aber nur indem man rastlos an sich selber
   arbeitet, sind sie zu erfüllen,--so ist jede geschichtliche Darstellung
   eine ethische Aufgabe. Der Historiker treu sein: ob er das gewesen ist,
   darnach soll mann fragen.

   Berlin, am 1. Mai, 1894.

   ADOLF HARNACK.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.

   No theological book can obtain a place in the literature of the world
   unless it can be read both in German and in English. These two
   languages combined have taken the place of Latin in the sphere of
   Christian Science. I am therefore greatly pleased to learn that my
   "History of Dogma" has been translated into English, and I offer my
   warmest thanks both to the translator and to the publishers.

   The most difficult part of the history of dogma is the beginning, not
   only because it contains the germs of all later developments, and
   therefore an error in observation here endangers the correctness of the
   whole following account, but also because the selection of the most
   important material from the history of primitive Christianity and
   biblical theology is a hard problem. Some will think that I have
   admitted too much into the book, others too little. Perhaps both are
   right. I can only reply that after repeated consideration and
   experiment I continue to be satisfied with my selection.

   In taking up a theological book we are in the habit of enquiring first
   of all as to the "stand-point" of the Author. In a historical work
   there is no room for such enquiry. The question here is, whether the
   Author is in sympathy with the subject about which he writes, whether
   he can distinguish original elements from those that are derived,
   whether he has a thorough acquaintance with his material, whether he is
   conscious of the limits of historical knowledge, and whether he is
   truthful. These requirements constitute the categorical imperative for
   the historian: but they can only be fulfilled by an unwearied
   self-discipline. Hence every historical study is an ethical task. The
   historian ought to be faithful in every sense of the word ; whether he
   has been so or not is the question on which his readers have to decide.

   Berlin, 1st May, 1894.

   ADOLF HARNACK.

FROM THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

   The task of describing the genesis of ecclesiastical dogma which I have
   attempted to perform in the following pages, has hitherto been proposed
   by very few scholars, and, properly speaking, undertaken by one only. I
   must therefore crave the indulgence of those acquainted with the
   subject for an attempt which no future historian of dogma can avoid.

   At first I meant to confine myself to narrower limits, but I was unable
   to carry out that intention, because the new arrangement of the
   material required a more detailed justification. Yet no one will find
   in the book, which presupposes the knowledge of Church history so far
   as it is given in the ordinary manuals, any repertory of the
   theological thought of Christian antiquity. The diversity of Christian
   ideas, or of ideas closely related to Christianity, was very great in
   the first centuries. For that very reason a selection was necessary;
   but it was required, above all, by the aim of the work. The history of
   dogma has to give an account only of those doctrines of Christian
   writers which were authoritative in wide circles, or which furthered
   the advance of the development; otherwise it would become a collection
   of monographs, and thereby lose its proper value. I have endeavoured to
   subordinate everything to the aim of exhibiting the development which
   led to the ecclesiastical dogmas, and therefore have neither, for
   example, communicated the details of the gnostic systems, nor brought
   forward in detail the theological ideas of Clemens Romanus, Ignatius,
   etc. Even a history of Paulinism will be sought for in the book in
   vain. It is a task by itself, to trace the after-effects of the
   theology of Paul in the post-Apostolic age. The History of Dogma can
   only furnish fragments here; for it is not consistent with its task to
   give an accurate account of the history of a theology the effects of
   which were at first very limited. It is certainly no easy matter to
   determine what was authoritative in wide circles at the time when dogma
   was first being developed, and I may confess that I have found the
   working out of the third chapter of the first book very difficult. But
   I hope that the severe limitation in the material will be of service to
   the subject. If the result of this limitation should be to lead
   students to read connectedly the manual which has grown out of my
   lectures, my highest wish will be gratified.

   There can be no great objection to the appearance of a text-book on the
   history of dogma at the present time. We now know in what direction we
   have to work; but we still want a history of Christian theological
   ideas in their relation to contemporary philosophy. Above all, we have
   net got an exact knowledge of the Hellenistic philosophical
   terminologies in their development up to the fourth century. I have
   keenly felt this want, which can only be remedied by well-directed
   common labour. I have made a plentiful use of the controversial
   treatise of Celsus against Christianity, of which little use has
   hitherto been made for the history of dogma. On the other hand, except
   in a few cases, I have deemed it inadmissible to adduce parallel
   passages, easy to be got, from Philo, Seneca, Plutarch, Epictetus,
   Marcus Aurelius, Porphyry, etc.; for only a comparison strictly carried
   out would have been of value here. I have been able neither to borrow
   such from others, nor to furnish it myself. Yet I have ventured to
   submit my work, because, in my opinion, it is possible to prove the
   dependence of dogma on the Greek spirit, without being compelled to
   enter into a discussion of all the details.

   The Publishers of the Encyclopedia Brittannica have allowed me to print
   here, in a form but slightly altered, the articles on Neoplatonism and
   Manichæism which I wrote for their work, and for this I beg to thank
   them.

   It is now eighty-three years since my grandfather, Gustav Ewers, edited
   in German the excellent manual on the earliest history of dogma by
   Münter, and thereby got his name associated with the history of the
   founding of the new study. May the work of the grandson be found not
   unworthy of the clear and disciplined mind which presided over the
   beginnings of the young science.

   Giessen, 1st August, 1885.

AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.

   In the two years that have passed since the appearance of the first
   edition I have steadily kept in view the improvement of this work, and
   have endeavoured to learn from the reviews of it that have appeared. I
   owe most to the study of Weizsäcker's work on the Apostolic Age, and
   his notice of the first edition of this volume in the Göttinger
   gelehrte Anzeigen, 1886, No. 21. The latter, in several decisive
   passages concerning the general conception, drew my attention to the
   fact that I had emphasised certain points too strongly, but had not
   given due prominence to others of equal importance, while not entirely
   overlooking them. I have convinced myself that these hints were, almost
   throughout, well founded, and have taken pains to meet them in the new
   edition. I have also learned from Heinrici's commentary on the Second
   Epistle to the Corinthians, and from Bigg's "Lectures on the Christian
   Platonists of Alexandria." Apart from these works there has appeared
   very little that could be of significance for my historical account;
   but I have once more independently considered the main problems, and in
   some cases, after repeated reading of the sources, checked my
   statements, removed mistakes and explained what had been to briefly
   stated. Thus, in particular, Chapter II. §§©1-3 of the
   "Presuppositions," also the Third Chapter of the First Book (especially
   Section 6), also in the Second Book, Chapter I. and Chapter II. (under
   B), the Third Chapter (Supplement 3 and excursus on "Catholic and
   Romish"), the Fifth Chapter (under 1 and 3) and the Sixth Chapter
   (under 2) have been subjected to changes and greater additions.
   Finally, a new excursus has been added on the various modes of
   conceiving pre-existence, and in other respects many things have been
   improved in detail. The size of the book has thereby been increased by
   about fifty pages. As I have been misrepresented by some as one who
   knew not how to appreciate the uniqueness of the Gospel history and the
   evangelic faith, while others have conversely reproached me with making
   the history of dogma proceed from an "apostasy" from the Gospel to
   Hellenism, I have taken pains to state my opinions on both these points
   as clearly as possible. In doing so I have only wrought out the hints
   which were given in the first edition, and which, as I supposed, were
   sufficient for readers. But it is surely a reasonable desire when I
   request the critics in reading the paragraphs which treat of the
   "Presuppositions," not to forget how difficult the questions there
   dealt with are, both in themselves and from the nature of the sources,
   and how exposed to criticism the historian is who attempts to unfold
   his position towards them in a few pages. As is self-evident, the
   centre of gravity of the book lies in that which forms its subject
   proper, in the account of the origin of dogma within the Græco-Roman
   empire. But one should not on that account, as many have done, pass
   over the beginning which lies before the beginning, or arbitrarily
   adopt a starting-point of his own; for everything here depends on where
   and how one begins. I have not therefore been able to follow the
   well-meant counsel to simply strike out the "Presuppositions."

   I would gladly have responded to another advice to work up the notes
   into the text; but I would then have been compelled to double the size
   of some chapters. The form of this book, in many respects awkward, may
   continue as it is so long as it represents the difficulties by which
   the subject is still pressed. When they have been removed--and the
   smallest number of them lie in the subject matter--I will gladly break
   up this form of the book and try to give it another shape. For the
   friendly reception given to it I have to offer my heartiest thanks. But
   against those who, believing themselves in possession of a richer view
   of the history here related, have called my conception meagre, I appeal
   to the beautiful words of Tertullian: Malumus in scripturis minus, si
   forte, sapere quam contra."

   Marburg, 24th December, 1887.

AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

   In the six years that have passed since the appearance of the second
   edition I have continued to work at the book, and have made use of the
   new sources and investigations that have appeared during this period,
   as well as corrected and extended my account in many passages. Yet I
   have not found it necessary to make many changes in the second half of
   the work. The increase of about sixty pages is almost entirely in the
   first half.

   Berlin, 31st December, 1893.

   To` do'gmatos o'noma tes anthropi'nes e'chetai boules te kai` gno'mes.
   O'ti de` touth' ou'tos e'chei, marturei me`n, ikanos e dogmatike` ton
   iatron te'chne marturei de` kai` ta` ton philoso'phon kalou'mena
   do'gmata. O'ti de` kai` ta` sunkle'to do'xanta e'ti kai` nun do'gmata
   sunkle'tou le'getai, oude'na agnoein oimai.

   Marcellus of Ancyra

   Die Christliche Religion hat nichts in der Philosophie zu thun, Sie ist
   ein mächtiges Wesen für sich, woran die gesunkene und leidende
   Menschheit von Zeit zu Zeit sich immer wieder emporgearbeitet hat; und
   indem man ihr diese Wirkung zugesteht, ist sie über aller Philosophie
   erhaben und bedarf von ihr keine Stütze.

   Gespräche mit Goethe von
   Eckermann, Th. p. 39

CONTENTS.

   Page
   INTRODUCTORY DIVISION
   CHAPTER I.--Prolegomena to the Study of the History 1-40
     §©1. The Idea and Task of the History of Dogma 1-23

   Definition 1
   Limits and Divisions 3
   Dogma and Theology 9
   Factors in the formation of Dogma 12
   Explanation as to the conception and task of the History of Dogma 13
   §©2. History of the History of Dogma 23-40

   The Early, the Mediæval, and the Roman Catholic Church 23
   The Reformers and the 17th Century 25
   Mosheim, Walch Ernesti 27
   Lessing, Semler, Lange, Münscher, Baumgarten-Crusius, Meir 29
   Baur, Neander, Kliefoth, Thomasius, Nitzsch, Ritschl, Renan, Loofs 37
   CHAPTER II.--The Presuppositions of the History of Dogma 41-136
     §©1. Introductory 41-57

   The Gosppel and the Old Testament 41
   The Detachment of the Christians from the Jewish Church 43
   The Church and the Græco-Roman World 45
   The Greek spirit an element of the Ecclesiastical Doctrine of Faith 47

   The Elements connecting Primitive Christianity and the growing Catholic
   Church
   50

   The Presuppositions of the origin of the Apostolic Catholic Doctrine of
   Faith
   57

   §©2. The Gospel of Jesus Christ according to His own Testimony
   concerning Himself
   58-76

   Fundamental Features 58
   Details 61
   Supplements 70
   Literature 75

   §©3. The Common Preaching concerning Jesus Christ in the first
   generation of believers
   76-98

   General Outline 76
   The faith of the first Disciples 78
   The beginnings of Christology 80
   Conceptions of the Work of Jesus 83
   Belief in the Resurrection 84
   Righteousness and the Law 86
   Paul 86
   The Self-consciousness of being the Church of God 88
   Supplement 1. Universalism 89

   Supplement 2. Questions as to the validity of the Law; the four main
   tendencies at the close of the Apostolic Age
   89
   Supplement 3. The Pauline Theology 92
   Supplement 4. The Johannine Writings 95
   Supplement 5. The Authorities in the Church 98

   §©4. The current Exposition of the Old Testament and the Jewish hopes
   of the future, in their significance for the Earliest types of
   Christian preaching
   99-107

   The Rabbinical and Exegetical Methods 99
   The Jewish Apocalyptic literature 100

   Mythologies and poetical ideas, notions of pre-existence and their
   application to Messiah
   102
   The limits of the explicable 105
   Literature 107

   §©5. The Religious Conceptions and the Religious Philosophy of the
   Hellenistic Jews in their significance for the later formulation of the
   Gospel
   107-116

   Spiritualising and Moralising of the Jewish Religion 107
   Philo 109
   The Hermeneutic principles of Philo 114

   §©6. The religious dispositions of the Greeks and Romans in the first
   two centuries, and the current Græco-Roman philosophy of religion
   116-129

   The new religious needs and the old worship (Excursus on theo's
   116
   The System of associations, and the Empire 121
   Philosophy and its acquisitions 122
   Platonic and Stoic Elements in the philiosophy of religion 126
   Greek culture and Roman ideas in the Church 127
   The Empire and philosophic schools (the Cynics) 128
   Literature 128
   SUPPLEMENTARY.


   (1) The twofold conception of the blessing of Salvation in its
   significance for the following period
   129

   (2) Obscurity in the origin of the most important Christian ideas and
   Ecclesiastical forms
   132

   (3) Significance of the Pauline theology for the legitimising and
   reformation of the doctrine of the Church in the following period
   133

   DIVISION I.--The Genesis of Ecclesiastical Dogma, or the Genesis of the
   Catholic Apostolic Dogmatic Theology, and the first Scientific
   Ecclesiastical System of Doctrine
   BOOK I.
   THE PREPARATION.
   CHAPTER I.--Historical Survey 141-144

   CHAPTER II.--The Element common to all Christians and the breach with
   Judaism
   145-149

   CHAPTER III.--The Common Faith and the Beginnings of Knowledge in
   Gentile Christianity as it was being developed into Catholicism
   150-222
     (1) The Communities and the Church 150

   (2) The Foundation of the Faith; the Old Testament, and the traditions
   about Jesus (sayings of Jesus, the Kerygma about Jesus), the
   significance of the "Apostolic"
   155
   (3) The main articles of Christianity and the conceptions of salvation.
   The new law. Eschatology. 163
   (4) The Old Testament as source of the knowledge of faith 175
   (5) The knowledge of God and of the world, estimate of the world
   (Demons) 180
   (6) Faith in Jesus Christ 183
     Jesus the Lord 183
   Jesus the Christ 184
   Jesus the Son of God, the Theologia Christi 186
   The Adoptian and the Pneumatic Christology 190
   Ideas of Christ's work 199
   (7) The Worship, the sacred actions, and the organization of the
   Churches 204
     The Worship and Sacrifice 204
   Baptism and the Lord's Supper 207
   The organization 214
   SUPPLEMENTARY.
     The premises of Catholicism 218
     Doctrinal diversities of the Apostolic Fathers 218

   CHAPTER IV.--The attempts of the Gnostics to create an Apostolic
   Dogmatic, and a Christian theology; or the acute secularising of
   Christianity
   223-266
     (1) The conditions for the rise of Gnosticism 223
   (2) The nature of Gnosticism 227

   (3) History of Gnosticism and the forms in which it appeared
   238
   (4) The most important Gnostic doctrines 253

   CHAPTER V.--The attempt of Marcion to set aside the Old Testament
   foundation of Christianity, to purify the tradition and reform
   Christendom on the basis of the Pauline Gospel
   267-286
     Characterisation of Marcion's attempt 267
   (1) His estimate of the Old Testament and the god of the Jews 271
   (2) The God of the Gospel 272
   (3) The relation of the two Gods according to Marcion 274
     The Gnostic woof in Marcion's Christianity 275
   (4) The Christology 275
   (5) Eschatology and Ethics 277
   (6) Criticism of the Christian tradition, the Marcionite Church 278
     Remarks 282

   CHAPTER VI.--The Christianity of Jewish Christians, Definition of the
   notion Jewish Christianity
   287-317
     Characterisation of Marcion's attempt 267
   (1) General conditions for the development of Jewish Christianity 287
   (2)

   Jewish Christianity and the Catholic Church, insignificance of Jewish
   Christianity, "Judaising" in Catholicism
   289


   Alleged documents of Jewish Christianity (Apocalpse of John, Acts of
   the Apostles, Epistle to the Hebrews, Hegesippus)
   295
   History of Jewish Christianity 296
   The witness of Justin 296
   The witness of Celsus 298
   The witness of Irenæus and Origen 299
   The witness of Eusebius and Jerome 300
   The Gnostic Jewish Christianity 302
   The Elkesaites and Ebionites of Epiphanius 304

   Estimate of the Pseudo-Clementine Recognitions and Homilies, their want
   of significance for the question as to the genesis of Catholicism and
   its doctrine
   311
   APPENDICES.
   I. On the different notions of Pre-existence 318
   II. On Liturgies and the genesis of Dogma 332
   III. On Neoplatonism 335
     Literature 361
     __________________________________________________________________

I

PROLEGOMENA TO THE DISCIPLINE OF
THE HISTORY OF DOGMA.

II

THE PRESUPPOSITIONS OF THE
HISTORY OF DOGMA
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER I.

  PROLEGOMENA TO THE DISCIPLINE OF THE HISTORY OF DOGMA.

   §©I. The Idea and Task of the History of Dogma.

   1. The History of Dogma is a discipline of general Church History,
   which has for its object the dogmas of the Church. These dogmas are the
   doctrines of the Christian faith logically formulated and expressed for
   scientific and apologetic purposes, the contents of which are a
   knowledge of God, of the world, and of the provisions made by God for
   man's salvation. The Christian Churches teach them as the truths
   revealed in Holy Scripture, the acknowledgment of which is the
   condition of the salvation which religion promises. But as the
   adherents of the Christian religion had not these dogmas from the
   beginning, so far, at least, as they form a connected system, the
   business of the history of dogma is, in the first place, to ascertain
   the origin of Dogmas (of Dogma), and then secondly, to describe their
   development (their variations).

   2. We cannot draw any hard and fast line between the time of the origin
   and that of the development of dogma; they rather shade off into one
   another. But we shall have to look for the final point of division at
   the time when an article of faith logically formulated and
   scientifically expressed, was first raised to the articulus
   constitutivus ecclesia, and as such was universally enforced by the
   Church. Now that first happened when the doctrine of Christ, as the
   pre-existent and personal Logos of God, had obtained acceptance
   everywhere in the confederated Churches as the revealed and fundamental
   doctrine of faith, that is, about the end of the third century or the
   beginning of the fourth. We must therefore, in our account, take this
   as the final point of division. [1] As to the development of dogma, it
   seems to have closed in the Eastern Church with the seventh OEcumenical
   Council (787). After that time no further dogmas were set up in the
   East as revealed truths. As to the Western Catholic, that is, the
   Romish Church, a new dogma was promulgated as late as the year 1870,
   which claims to be, and in point of form really is, equal in dignity to
   the old dogmas. Here, therefore, the History of Dogma must extend to
   the present time. Finally, as regards the Protestant Churches, they are
   a subject of special difficulty in the sphere of the history of dogma;
   for at the present moment there is no agreement within these Churches
   as to whether, and in what sense, dogmas (as the word was used in the
   ancient Church) are valid. But even if we leave the present out of
   account and fix our attention on the Protestant Churches of the 16th
   century, the decision is difficult. For, on the one hand, the
   Protestant faith, the Lutheran as well as the Reformed (and that of
   Luther no less), presents itself as a doctrine of faith which, resting
   Catholic canon of scripture, is, in point of form, quite analogous to
   the Catholic doctrine of faith, has a series of dogmas in common with
   it, and only differs in a few. On the other hand, Protestantism has
   taken its stand in principle on the Gospel exclusively, and declared
   its readiness at all times to test all doctrines afresh by a true
   understanding of the Gospel. The Reformers, however, in addition to
   this, began to unfold a conception of Christianity which might be
   described, in contrast with the Catholic type of religion, as a new
   conception, and which indeed draws support from the old dogmas, but
   changes their original significance materially and formally. What this
   conception was may still be ascertained from those writings received by
   the Church, the Protestant symbols of the 16th century, in which the
   larger part of the traditionary dogmas are recognised as the
   appropriate expression of the Christian religion, nay, as the Christian
   religion itself. [2] Accordingly, it can neither be maintained that the
   expression of the Christian faith in the form of dogmas is abolished in
   the Protestant Churches--the very acceptance of the Catholic canon as
   the revealed record of faith is opposed to that view--nor that its
   meaning has remained absolutely unchanged. [3] The history of dogma has
   simply to recognise this state of things, and to represent it exactly
   as it lies before us in the documents.

   But the point to which the historian should advance here still remains
   an open question. If we adhere strictly to the definition of the idea
   of dogma given above, this much is certain, that dogmas were no longer
   set up after the Formula of Concord, or in the case of the Reformed
   Church, after the decrees of the Synod of Dort. It cannot, however, be
   maintained that they have been set aside in the centuries that have
   passed since then; for apart from some Protestant National and
   independent Churches, which are too insignificant and whose future is
   too uncertain to be taken into account here, the ecclesiastical
   tradition of the 16th century, and along it the tradition of the early
   Church, have not been abrogated in authoritative form. Of course,
   changes of the greatest importance with regard to doctrine have
   appeared everywhere in Protestantism from the 17th century to the
   present day. But these changes cannot in any sense be taken into
   account in a history of dogma, because they have not as yet attained a
   form valid for the Church. However we may changes, whether we regard
   them as corruptions or improvements, or explain the want of fixity in
   which the Protestant Churches find themselves, as a situation that is
   forced on them, or the situation that is agreeable to them and for
   which they are adapted, in no sense is there here a development which
   could be described as history of dogma.

   These facts would seem to justify those who, like Thomasius and Schmid,
   carry the history of dogma in Protestantism to the Formula of Concord,
   or, in the case of the Reformed Church, to the decrees of the Synod of
   Dort. But it may be objected to this boundary line; (1) That those
   symbols have at all times attained only a partial authority in
   Protestantism; (2) That as noted above, the dogmas, that is, the
   formulated doctrines of faith have different meanings on different
   matters in the Protestant and in the Catholic Churches. Accordingly, it
   seems advisable within the frame-work of the history of dogma, to
   examine Protestantism only so far as this is necessary for obtaining a
   knowledge of its deviations from the Catholic dogma materially and
   formally, that is, to ascertain the original position of the Reformers
   with regard to the doctrine of the Church, a position which is beset
   with contradictions. The more accurately we determine the relation of
   the Reformers to Catholicism, the more intelligible will be the
   developments which Protestantism has passed through in the course of
   its history. But these developments themselves (retrocession and
   advance) do not belong to the sphere of the history of dogma, because
   they stand in no comparable relation to the course of the history of
   dogma within the Catholic Church. As history of Protestant doctrines
   they form a peculiar independent province of Church history.

   As to the division of the history of dogma, it consists of two main
   parts. The first has to describe the origin of dogma, that is, of the
   Apostolic Catholic system of doctrine based on the foundation of the
   tradition authoritatively embodied in the creeds and Holy Scripture,
   and extends to the beginning of the fourth century. This may be
   conveniently divided into two parts, the first of which will treat of
   the preparation, the second of the establishment of the ecclesiastical
   doctrine of faith. The second main part, which has to portray the
   development of dogma, comprehends three stages. In the first stage the
   doctrine of faith appears as Theology and Christology. The Eastern
   Church has never got beyond this stage, although it has to a large
   extent enriched dogma ritually and mystically (see the decrees of the
   seventh council). We will have to shew how the doctrines of faith
   formed in this stage have remained for all time in the Church dogmas
   kat' exoche'n. The second stage was initiated by Augustine. The
   doctrine of faith appears here on the one side completed, and on the
   other re-expressed by new dogmas, which treat of the relation of sin
   and grace, freedom and grace, grace and the means of grace. The number
   and importance of the dogmas that were, in the middle ages, really
   fixed after Augustine's time, had no relation to the range and
   importance of the questions which they raised, and which emerged in the
   course of centuries in consequence of advancing knowledge, and not less
   in consequence of the growing power of the Church. Accordingly, in this
   second stage which comprehends the whole of the middle ages, the Church
   as an institution kept believers together in a larger measure than was
   possible to dogmas. These in their accepted form were too poor to
   enable them to be the expression of religious conviction and the
   regulator of Church life. On the other hand, the new decisions of
   Theologians, Councils and Popes, did not yet possess the authority
   which could have made them incontestable truths of faith. The third
   stage begins with the Reformation, which compelled the Church to fix
   its faith on the basis of the theological work of the middle ages. Thus
   arose the Catholic dogma which has found in the Vatican decrees its
   provisional settlement. This Roman Catholic dogma, as it was formulated
   at Trent, was moulded in express opposition to the Theses of the
   Reformers. But these Theses themselves represent a peculiar conception
   of Christianity, which has its root in the theology of Paul and
   Augustine, and includes either explicitly or implicitly a revision of
   the whole ecclesiastical tradition, and therefore of dogma also. The
   History of Dogma in this last stage, therefore, has a twofold task. It
   has, on the one hand, to present the Romish dogma as a product of the
   ecclesiastical development of the middle ages under the influence of
   the Reformation faith which was to be rejected, and on the other hand,
   to portray the conservative new formation which we have in original
   Protestantism, and determine its relation to dogma. A closer
   examination, however, shews that in none of the great confessions does
   religion live in dogma, as of old. Dogma everywhere has fallen into the
   background; in the Eastern Church it has given place to ritual, in the
   Roman Church to ecclesiastical instructions, in the Protestant
   Churches, so far as they are mindful of their origin, to the Gospel. At
   the same time, however, the paradoxical fact is unmistakable that dogma
   as such is nowhere at this moment so powerful as in the Protestant
   Churches, though by their history they are furthest removed from it.
   Here, however, it comes into consideration as an object of immediate
   religious interest, which, strictly speaking, in the Catholic Church is
   not the case. [4] The Council of Trent was simply wrung from the Romish
   Church, and she has made the dogmas of that council in a certain sense
   innocuous by the Vatican decrees. [5] In this sense, it may be said
   that the period of development of dogma is altogether closed, and that
   therefore our discipline requires a statement such as belongs to a
   series of historical phenomena that has been completed.

   3. The Church has recognised her faith, that is religion itself, in her
   dogmas. Accordingly, one very important business of the History of
   Dogma is to exhibit the unity that exists in the dogmas of a definite
   period, and to shew how the several dogmas are connected with one
   another and what leading ideas they express. But, as a matter of
   course, this undertaking has its limits in the degree of unanimity
   which actually existed in the dogmas of the particular period. It may
   be shewn without much difficulty, that a strict though by no means
   absolute unanimity is expressed only in the dogmas of the Greek Church.
   The peculiar character of the western post-Augustinian ecclesiastical
   conception of Christianity, no longer finds a clear expression in
   dogma, and still less is this the case with the conception of the
   Reformers. The reason of this is that Augustine, as well as Luther,
   disclosed a new conception of Christianity, but at the same time
   appropriated the old dogmas. [6] But neither Baur's nor Kliefoth's
   method of writing the history of dogmas has done justice to this fact.
   Not Baur's, because, notwithstanding the division into six periods, it
   sees a uniform process in the development of dogma, a process which
   begins with the origin of Christianity and has run its course, as is
   alleged, in a strictly logical way. Not Kliefoth's, because, in the
   dogmas of the Catholic Church which the East has never got beyond, it
   only ascertains the establishment of one portion of the Christian
   faith, to which the parts still wanting have been successively added in
   later times. [7] In contrast with this, we may refer to the fact that
   we can clearly distinguish three styles of building in the history of
   dogma, but only three; the style of Origen, that of Augustine, and that
   of the Reformers. But the dogma of the post-Augustinian Church, as well
   as that of Luther, does not in any way represent itself as a new
   building, not even as the mere extension of an old building, but as a
   complicated rebuilding, and by no means in harmony with former styles,
   because neither Augustine nor Luther ever dreamed of building
   independently. [8] This perception leads us to the most peculiar
   phenomenon which meets the historian of dogma, and which must determine
   his method.

   Dogmas arise, develop themselves and are made serviceable to new aims;
   this in all cases takes place through Theology. But Theology is
   dependent on innumerable factors, above all on the spirit of the time;
   for it lies in the nature of theology that it desires to make its
   object intelligible. Dogmas are the product of theology, not inversely;
   of a theology of course which, as a rule, was in correspondence with
   the faith of the time. The critical view of history teaches this: first
   we have the Apologists and Origen, then the councils of Nice and
   Chalcedon; first the Scholastics, and the Council of Trent. In
   consequence of this, dogma bears the mark of all the factors on which
   the theology was dependent. That is one point. But the moment in which
   the product of theology became dogma, the way which led to it must be
   obscured; for, according to the conception of the Church, dogma can be
   nothing else than the revealed faith itself. Dogma is regarded not as
   the exponent, but as the basis of theology, and there-fore the product
   of theology having passed into dogma limits, and criticises the work of
   theology both past and future. [9] That is the second point. It follows
   from this that the history of the Christian religion embraces a very
   complicated relation of ecclesiastical dogma and theology, and that the
   ecclesiastical conception of the significance of theology cannot at all
   do justice to this significance. The ecclesiastical scheme which is
   here formed and which denotes the utmost concession that can be made to
   history, is to the effect that theology gives expression only to the
   form of dogma, while so far as it is ecclesiastical theology, it
   presupposes the unchanging dogma, i.e., the substance of dogma. But
   this scheme, which must always leave uncertain what the form really is,
   and what the substance, is in no way applicable to the actual
   circumstances. So far, however, as it is itself an article of faith it
   is an object of the history of dogma. Ecclesiastical dogma when put on
   its defence must at all times take up an ambiguous position towards
   theology, and ecclesiastical theology a corresponding position towards
   dogma; for they are condemned to perpetual uncertainty as to what they
   owe each other, and what they have to fear from each other. The
   theological Fathers of dogma have almost without exception failed to
   escape being condemned by dogma, either because it went beyond them, or
   lagged behind their theology. The Apologist, Origen and Augustine may
   be cited in support of this; and even in Protestantism, mutatis
   mutandis, the same of thing has been repeated, as is proved by the fate
   of Melanchthon and Schleiermacher. On the other hand, there have been
   few theologians who have not shaken some article of the traditional
   dogma. We are wont to get rid of these fundamental facts by
   hypostatising the ecclesiastical principle or the common ecclesiastical
   spirit, and by this normal hypostasis, measuring, approving or
   condemning the doctrines of the theologians, unconcerned about the
   actual conditions and frequently following a hysteron-proteron. But
   this is a view of history which should in justice be left to the
   Catholic Church, which indeed cannot dispense with it. The critical
   history of dogma has, on the contrary, to shew above all how an
   ecclesiastical theology has arisen; for it can only give account of the
   origin of dogma in connection with this main question. The horizon must
   be taken here as wide as possible; for the question as to the origin of
   theology can only be answered by surveying all the relations into which
   the Christian religion has entered in naturalising itself in the world
   and subduing it. When ecclesiastical dogma has once been created and
   recognised as an immediate expression of the Christian religion, the
   history of dogma has only to take the history of theology into account
   so far as it has been active in the formation of dogma. Yet it must
   always keep in view the peculiar claim of dogma to be a criterion and
   not a product of theology. But it will also be able to shew how, partly
   by means of theology and partly by other means--for dogma is also
   dependent on ritual, constitution, and the practical ideals of life, as
   well as on the letter, whether of Scripture, or of tradition no longer
   understood--dogma in its development and re-expression has continually
   changed, according to the conditions under which the Church was placed.
   If dogma is originally the formulation of Christian faith as Greek
   culture understood it and justified it to itself, then dogma has never
   indeed lost this character, though it has been radically modified in
   later times. It is quite as important to keep in view the tenacity of
   dogma as its changes, and in this respect the Protestant way of writing
   history, which, here as elsewhere in the history of the Church, is more
   disposed to attend to differences than to what is permanent, has much
   to learn from the Catholic. But as the Protestant historian, as far as
   possible, judges of the progress of development in so far as it agrees
   with the Gospel in its documentary form, he is still able to shew, with
   all deference to that tenacity, that dogma has been so modified and
   used to the best advantage by Augustine and Luther, that its Christian
   character has in many respects gained, though in other respects it has
   become further and further alienated from that character. In proportion
   as the traditional system of dogmas lost its stringency it became
   richer. In proportion as it was stripped by Augustine and Luther of its
   apologetic philosophic tendency, it was more and more filled with
   Biblical ideas, though, on the other hand, it became more full of
   contradictions and less impressive.

   This outlook, however, has already gone beyond the limits fixed for
   these introductory paragraphs and must not be pursued further. To treat
   in abstracto of the method of the history of dogma in relation to the
   discovery, grouping, and interpretation of the material is not to be
   recommended; for general rules to preserve the ignorant and half
   instructed from overlooking the important, and laying hold of what is
   not important, cannot be laid down. Certainly everything depends on the
   arrangement of the material; for the understanding of history is to
   find the rules according to which the phenomena should be grouped, and
   every advance in the knowledge of history is inseparable from an
   accurate observance of these rules. We must, above all, be on our guard
   against preferring one principle at the expense of another in the
   interpretation of the origin and aim of particular dogmas. The most
   diverse factors have at all times been at work in the formation of
   dogmas. Next to the effort to determine the doctrine of religion
   according to the finis religionis, the blessing of salvation, the
   following may have been the most important. (1) The conceptions and
   sayings contained in the canonical Scriptures. (2) The doctrinal
   tradition originating in earlier epochs of the Church, and no longer
   understood. (3) The needs of worship and organisation. (4) The effort
   to adjust the doctrine of religion to the prevailing doctrinal
   opinions. (5) Political and social circumstances. (6) The changing
   moral ideals of life. (7) The so-called logical consistency, that is
   the abstract analogical treatment of one dogma according to the form of
   another. (8) The effort to adjust different tendencies and
   contradictions in the Church. (9) The endeavour to reject once for all
   a doctrine regarded as erroneous. (10) The sanctifying power of blind
   custom. The method of explaining everything wherever possible by "the
   impulse of dogma to unfold itself," must be given up as unscientific,
   just as all empty abstractions whatsoever must be given up as
   scholastic and mythological. Dogma has had its history in the
   individual living man and nowhere else. As soon as one adopts this
   statement in real earnest, that mediæval realism must vanish to which a
   man so often thinks himself superior while imbedded in it all the time.
   Instead of investigating the actual conditions in which believing and
   intelligent men have been placed, a system of Christianity has been
   constructed from which, as from a Pandora's box, all doctrines which in
   course of time have been formed, are extracted, and in this way
   legitimised as Christian. The simple fundamental proposition that that
   only is Christian which can be established authoritatively by the
   Gospel, has never yet received justice in the history of dogma. Even
   the following account will in all probability come short in this point;
   for in face of a prevailing false tradition the application of a simple
   principle to every detail can hardly succeed at the first attempt.

   Explanation as to the Conception and Task of the History of Dogma.

   No agreement as yet prevails with regard to the conception of the
   history of dogma. Münscher (Handbuch der Christl. D. G. 3rd ed. I. p. 3
   f.) declared that the business of the history of dogma is "To represent
   all the changes which the theoretic part of the Christian doctrine of
   religion has gone through from its origin up to the present, both in
   form and substance," and this definition held sway for a long time.
   Then it came to be noted that the question was not about changes that
   were accidental, but about those that were historically necessary, that
   dogma has a relation to the Church, and that it represents a rational
   expression of the faith. Emphasis was put sometimes on one of these
   elements and sometimes on the other. Baur, in particular, insisted on
   the first; V. Hofmann, after the example of Schleiermacher, on the
   second, and indeed exclusively (Encyklop. der theol. p. 257 f.: "The
   history of dogma is the history of the Church confessing the faith in
   words"). Nitzsch (Grundriss der Christl. D. G. I. p. I) insisted on the
   third: "The history of dogma is the scientific account of the origin
   and development of the Christian system of doctrine or that part of
   historical theology which presents the history of the expression of the
   Christian faith in notions, doctrines and doctrinal systems." Thomasius
   has combined the second and third by conceiving the history of dogma as
   the history of the development of the ecclesiastical system of
   doctrine. But even this conception is not sufficiently definite,
   inasmuch as it fails to do complete justice to the special peculiarity
   of the subject.

   Ancient and modern usage does certainly seem to allow the word dogma to
   be applied to particular doctrines, or to a uniform system of doctrine,
   to fundamental truths, or to opinions, to theoretical propositions or
   practical rules, to statements of belief that have not been reached by
   a process of reasoning, as well as to those that bear the marks of such
   a process. But this uncertainty vanishes on closer examination. We then
   see that there is always an authority at the basis of dogma, which
   gives it to those who recognise that authority the signification of a
   fundamental truth "quæ sine scelere prodi non poterit" (Cicero Quæst.
   Acad. IV. 9). But therewith at the same time is introduced into the
   idea of dogma a social element (see Biedermann, Christl. Dogmatik. 2
   Edit. I. p. 2 f.); the confessors of one and the same dogma form a
   community.

   There can be no doubt that these two elements are also demonstrable in
   Christian dogma, and therefore we must reject all definitions of the
   history of dogma which do not take them into account. If we define it
   as the history of the understanding of Christianity by itself, or as
   the history of the changes of the theoretic part of the doctrine of
   religion or the like, we shall fail to do justice to the idea of dogma
   in its most general acceptation. We cannot describe as dogmas,
   doctrines such as the Apokatastasis, or the Kenosis of the Son of God,
   without coming into conflict with the ordinary usage of language and
   with ecclesiastical law.

   If we start, therefore, from the supposition that Christian dogma is an
   ecclesiastical doctrine which presupposes revelation as its authority,
   and therefore claims to be strictly binding, we shall fail to bring out
   its real nature with anything like completeness. That which Protestants
   and Catholics call dogmas, are not only ecclesiastical doctrines, but
   they are also: (1) theses expressed in abstract terms, forming together
   a unity, and fixing the contents of the Christian religion as a
   knowledge of God, of the world, and of the sacred history under the
   aspect of a proof of the truth. But (2) they have also emerged at a
   definite stage of the history of the Christian religion; they shew in
   their conception as such, and in many details, the influence of that
   stage, viz., the Greek period, and they have preserved this character
   in spite of all their reconstructions and additions in after periods.
   This view of dogma Cannot be shaken by the fact that particular
   historical facts, Miraculous or not miraculous are described as dogmas;
   for here they are regarded as such only in so far as they have got the
   value of doctrines which have been inserted in the complete structure
   of doctrines and are, on the other hand, members of a chain of proofs,
   viz., proofs from prophecy.

   But as soon as we perceive this, the parallel between the
   ecclesiastical dogmas and those of ancient schools of philosophy
   appears to be in point of form complete. The only difference is that
   revelation is here put as authority in the place of human knowledge,
   although the later philosophic schools appealed to revelation also. The
   theoretical as well as the practical doctrines which embraced the
   peculiar conception of the world and the ethics of the school, together
   with their rationale, were described in these schools as dogmas. Now,
   in so far as the adherents of the Christian religion possess dogmas in
   this sense, and form a community which has gained an understanding of
   its religious faith by analysis and by scientific definition and
   grounding, they appear as a great philosophic school in the ancient
   sense of the word. But they differ from such a school in so far as they
   have always eliminated the process of thought which has led to the
   dogma, looking upon the whole system of dogma as a revelation and
   there-fore, even in respect of the reception of the dogma, at least at
   first, they have taken account not of the powers of human
   understanding, but of the Divine enlightenment which is bestowed on all
   the willing and the virtuous. In later times, indeed, the analogy was
   far more complete, in so far as the Church reserved the full possession
   of dogma to a circle of consecrated and initiated individuals. Dogmatic
   Christianity is therefore a definite stage in the history of the
   development of Christianity. It corresponds to the antique mode of
   thought, but has nevertheless continued to a very great extent in the
   following epochs, though subject to great transformations. Dogmatic
   Christianity stands between Christianity as the religion of the Gospel,
   presupposing a personal experience and dealing with disposition and
   conduct, and Christianity as a religion of cultus, sacraments,
   ceremonial and obedience, in short of superstition, and it can be
   united with either the one or the other. In itself and in spite of all
   its mysteries it is always intellectual Christianity, and therefore
   there is always the danger here that as knowledge it may supplant
   religious faith, or connect it with a doctrine of religion, instead of
   with God and a living experience.

   If then the discipline of the history of dogma is to be what its name
   purports, its object is the very dogma which is so formed, and its
   fundamental problem will be to discover how it has arisen. In the
   history of the canon our method of procedure has for long been to ask
   first of all, how the canon originated, and then to examine the changes
   through which it has passed. We must proceed in the same way with the
   history of dogma, of which the history of the canon is simply a part.
   Two objections will be raised against this. In the first place, it will
   be said that from the very first the Christian religion has included a
   definite religious faith as well as a definite ethic, and that
   therefore Christian dogma is as original as Christianity itself, so
   that there can be no question about a genesis, but only as to a
   development or alteration of dogma within the Church. Again it will be
   said, in the second place, that dogma as defined above, has validity
   only for a definite epoch in the history of the Church, and that it is
   therefore quite impossible to write a comprehensive history of dogma in
   the sense we have indicated.

   As to the first objection, there can of course be no doubt that the
   Christian religion is founded on a message, the contents of which are a
   definite belief in God and in Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and that
   the promise of salvation is attached to this belief. But faith in the
   Gospel and the later dogmas of the Church are not related to each other
   as theme and the way in which it is worked out, any more than the dogma
   of the New Testament canon is only the explication of the original
   reliance of Christians on the word of their Lord and the continuous
   working of the Spirit; but in these later dogmas an entirely new
   element has entered into the Conception of religion. The message of
   religion appears here Clothed in a knowledge of the world and of the
   ground of the World which had already been obtained without any
   reference to it, and therefore religion itself has here become a
   doctrine Which has, indeed, its certainty in the Gospel, but only in
   part derives its contents from it, and which can also be appropriated
   by such as are neither poor in spirit nor weary itnd heavy laden. Now,
   it may of course be shewn that a philosophic conception of the
   Christian religion is possible, Ind began to make its appearance from
   the very first, as in the case of Paul. But the Pauline gnosis has
   neither been simply identified with the Gospel by Paul himself (I Cor.
   III. 2 f.: XII. 3: Phil. I. 18) nor is it analogous to the later dogma,
   not to speak of being identical with it. The characteristic of this
   dogma is that it represents itself in no sense as foolishness, but as
   wisdom, and at the same time desires to be regarded as the contents of
   revelation itself. Dogma in its conception and development is a work of
   the Greek spirit on the soil of the Gospel. By comprehending in itself
   and giving excellent expression to the religious conceptions contained
   in Greek philosophy and the Gospel, together with its Old Testament
   basis; by meeting the search for a revelation as well as the desire for
   a universal knowledge; by subordinating itself to the aim of the
   Christian religion to bring a Divine life to humanity as well as to the
   aim of philosophy to know the world: it became the instrument by which
   the Church conquered the ancient world and educated the modern nations.
   But this dogma--one cannot but admire its formation or fail to regard
   it as a great achievement of the spirit, which never again in the
   history of Christianity has made itself at home with such freedom and
   boldness in religion--is the product of a comparatively long history
   which needs to be deciphered; for it is obscured by the completed
   dogma. The Gospel itself is not dogma, for belief in the Gospel
   provides room for knowledge only so far as it is a state of feeling and
   course of action, that is a definite form of life. Between practicl
   faith in the Gospel and the historico-critical account of the Christian
   religion and its history, a third element can no longer be thrust in
   without its coming into conflict with faith, or with the historical
   data--the only thing left is the practical task of defending the faith.
   But a third element has been thrust into the history of this religion,
   viz., dogma, that is, the philosophical means which were used in early
   times for the purpose of making the Gospel intelligible have been fused
   with the contents of the Gospel and raised to dogma. This dogma, next
   to the Church, has become a real world power, the pivot in the history
   of the Christian religion. The transformation of the Christian faith
   into dogma is indeed no accident, but has its reason is in spiritual
   character of the Christian religion, which at all times will feel the
   need of a scientific apologetic. [10] But the question here is not as
   to something indefinite and general, but as to the definite dogma
   formed in the first centuries, and binding even yet.

   This already touches on the second objection which was raised above,
   that dogma, in the given sense of the word, was too narrowly conceived,
   and could not in this conception be applied throughout the whole
   history of the Church. This objection would only be justified, if our
   task were to carry the history of the development of dogma through the
   whole history of the Church. But the question is just whether we are
   right in proposing such a task. The Greek Church has no history of
   dogma after the seven great Councils, and it is incomparably more
   important to recognise this fact than to register the theologoumena
   which were later on introduced by Individual Bishops and scholars in
   the East, who were partly Influenced by the West. Roman Catholicism in
   its dogmas, though, as noted above, these at present do not very
   clearly characterise it, is to-day essentially--that is, so far as it
   is religion--what it was 1500 years ago, viz., Christianity as
   Understood by the ancient world. The changes which dogma has
   experienced in the course of its development in western Catholicism are
   certainly deep and radical: they have, in point of fact, as has been
   indicated in the text above, modified the position of the Church
   towards Christianity as dogma. But as the Catholic Church herself
   maintains that she adheres to Christianity in the old dogmatic sense,
   this claim of hers cannot be contested. She has embraced new things and
   changed her relations to the old, but still preserved the old. But she
   has further developed new dogmas according to the scheme of the old.
   The decrees of Trent and of the Vatican are formally analogous to the
   old dogmas. Here, then, a history of dogma may really be carried
   forward to the present day without thereby shewing that the definition
   of dogma given above is too narrow to embrace the new doctrines.
   Finally, as to Protestantism, it has been briefly explained above why
   the changes in Protestant systems of doctrine are not to be taken up
   into the history of dogma. Strictly speaking, dogma, as dogma, has had
   no development in Protestantism, inasmuch as a secret note of
   interrogation has been here associated with it from the very beginning.
   But the old dogma has continued to be a power in it, because of its
   tendency to look back and to seek for authorities in the past, and
   partly in the original unmodified form. The dogmas of the fourth and
   fifth centuries have more influence to-day in wide circles of
   Protestant Churches than all the doctrines which are concentrated
   around justification by faith. Deviations from the latter are borne
   comparatively easy, while as a rule, deviations from the former are
   followed by notice to quit the Christian communion, that is, by
   excommunication. The historian of to-day would have no difficulty in
   answering the question whether the power of Protestantism as a Church
   lies at present in the elements which it has in common with the old
   dogmatic Christianity, or in that by which it is distinguished from it.
   Dogma, that is to say, that type of Christianity which was formed in
   ecclesiastical antiquity, has not been suppressed even in Protestant
   Churches, has really not been modified or replaced by a new conception
   of the Gospel. But, on the other hand, who could deny that the
   Reformation began to disclose such a conception, and that this new
   conception was related in a very different way to the traditional dogma
   from that of the new propositions of Augustine to the dogmas handed
   down to him? Who could further call in question that, in consequence of
   the reforming impulse in Protestantism, the way was opened up for a
   conception which does not identify Gospel and dogma, which does not
   disfigure the latter by changing or paring down its meaning while
   failing to come up to the former? But the historian who has to describe
   the formation and changes of dogma can take no part in these
   developments. It is a task by itself more rich and comprehensive than
   that of the historian of dogma, to portray the diverse conceptions that
   have been formed of the Christian religion, to portray how strong men
   and weak men, great and little minds have explained the Gospel outside
   and inside the frame-work of dogma, and how under the cloak, or in the
   province of dogma, the Gospel has had its own peculiar history. But the
   more limited theme must not be put aside. For it can in no way be
   conducive to historical knowledge to regard as indifferent the peculiar
   character of the expression of Christian faith as dogma, and allow the
   history of dogma to be absorbed in a general history of the various
   conceptions of Christianity. Such a "liberal" view would not agree
   either with the teaching of history or with the actual situation of the
   Protestant Churches of the present day: for it is, above all, of
   crucial importance to perceive that it is a peculiar stage in the
   development of the human spirit which is described by dogma. On this
   stage, parallel with dogma and inwardly united with it, stands a
   definite psychology, metaphysic and natural philosophy, as well as a
   view of history of a definite type. This is the conception of the world
   obtained by antiquity after almost a thousand years' labour, and it is
   the same connection of theoretic perceptions and practical ideals which
   it accomplished. This stage on which the Christian religion has also
   entered we have in no way as yet transcended, though science has raised
   itself above it. [11] But the Christian religion, as it was not born of
   the culture of the ancient world, is not for ever chained to it. The
   form and the new contents which the Gospel received when it entered
   into that world have only the same guarantee of endurance as that world
   itself. And that endurance is limited. We must indeed be on our guard
   against taking episodes for decisive crises. But every episode carries
   us forward, and retrogressions are unable to undo that progress. The
   Gospel since the Reformation, in spite of retrograde movements which
   have not been wanting, is working itself out of the forms which it was
   once compelled to assume, and a true comprehension of its history will
   also contribute to hasten this process.

   1. The definition given above, p. 17: "Dogma in its conception and
   development is a work of the Greek spirit on the soil of the Gospel,"
   has frequently been distorted by my critics, as they have suppressed
   the words "on the soil of the Gospel." But these words are decisive.
   The foolishness of identifying dogma and Greek philosophy never entered
   my mind; on the contrary, the peculiarity of ecclesiastical dogma
   seemed to me to lie in the very fact that, on the one hand, it gave
   expression to Christian Monotheism and the central significance of the
   person of Christ, and, on the other hand, comprehended this religious
   faith and the historical knowledge connected with it in a philosophic
   system. I have given quite as little ground for the accusation that I
   look upon the whole development of the history of dogma as a
   pathological process within the history of the Gospel. I do not even
   look upon the history of the origin of the Papacy as such a process,
   not to speak of the history of dogma. But the perception that
   "everything must happen as it has happened" does not absolve the
   historian from the task of ascertaining the powers which have formed
   the history, and distinguishing between original and later, permanent
   and transitory, nor from the duty of stating his own opinion.

   2. Sabatier has published a thoughtful treatise on "Christian Dogma:
   its Nature and its Development," I agree with the author in this, that
   in dogma--rightly understood--two elements are to be distinguished, the
   religious proceeding from the experience of the individual or from the
   religious spirit of the Church, and the intellectual or theoretic. But
   I regard as false the statement which he makes, that the intellectual
   element in dogma is only the symbolical expression of religious
   experience. The intellectual element is itself again to be
   differentiated. On the one hand, it certainly is the attempt to give
   expression to religious feeling, and so far is symbolical; but, on the
   other hand, within the Christian religion it belongs to the essence of
   the thing itself, inasmuch as this not only awakens feeling, but has a
   quite definite content which determines and should determine the
   feeling. In this sense Christianity without dogma, that is, without a
   clear expression of its content, is inconceivable. But that does not
   justify the unchangeable permanent significance of that dogma which has
   once been formed under definite historical conditions.

   3. The word "dogmas" (Christian dogmas) is, if I see correctly, used
   among us in three different senses, and hence spring all manner of
   misconceptions and errors. By dogmas are denoted: (1) The historical
   doctrines of the Church. (2) The historical facts on which the
   Christian religion is reputedly or actually founded. (3) Every definite
   exposition of the contents of Christianity is described as dogmatic. In
   contrast with this the attempt has been made in the following
   presentation to use dogma only in the sense first stated. When I speak,
   therefore, of the decomposition of dogma, I mean by that, neither the
   historical facts which really establish the Christian religion, nor do
   I call in question the necessity for the Christian and the Church to
   have a creed. My criticism refers not to the general genus dogma, but
   to the species, viz., the defined dogma, as it was formed on the soil
   of the ancient world, and is still a power, though under modifications.

   §©2. History of the History of Dogma.

   The history of dogma as a historical and critical discipline had its
   origin in the last century through the works of Mosheim, C. W. F.
   Walch, Ernesti, Lessing and Semler. Lange gave to the world in 1796 the
   first attempt at a history of dogma as a special branch of theological
   study. The theologians of the Early and Mediaeval Churches have only
   transmitted histories of Heretics and of Literature, regarding dogma as
   unchangeable. [12] This presupposition is so much a part of the nature
   of Catholicism that it has been maintained till the present day. It is
   there-fore impossible for a Catholic to make a free, impartial and
   scientific investigation of the history of dogma. [13] There have,
   indeed, at almost all times before the Reformation, been critical
   efforts in the domain of Christianity, especially of western
   Christianity, efforts which in some cases have led to the proof of the
   novelty and inadmissibility of particular dogmas. But, as a rule, these
   efforts were of the nature of a polemic against the dominant Church.
   They scarcely prepared the way for, far less produced a historical view
   of, dogmatic tradition. [14] The progress of the sciences [15] and the
   conflict with Protestantism could here, for the Catholic Church, have
   no other effect than that of leading to the collecting, with great
   learning, of material for the history of dogma, [16] the establishing
   of the consensus patrum et doctorum, the exhibition of the necessity of
   a continuous explication of dogma, and the description of the history
   of heresies pressing in from without, regarded now as unheard-of
   novelties, and again as old enemies in new masks. The modern
   Jesuit-Catholic historian indeed exhibits, in certain circumstances, a
   manifest indifference to the task of establishing the semper idem in
   the faith of the Church, but this indifference is at present regarded
   with disfavour, and, besides, is only an apparent one, as the
   continuous though inscrutable guidance of the Church by the infallible
   teaching of the Pope is the more emphatically maintained. [17]

   It may be maintained that the Reformation opened the way for a critical
   treatment of the history of dogma. [18] But even in Protestant
   Churches, at first, historical investigations remained under the ban of
   the confessional system of doctrine and were used only for polemics.
   [19] Church history itself up to the 18th century was not regarded as a
   theological discipline in the strict sense of the word; and the history
   of dogma existed only within the sphere of dogmatics as a collection of
   testimonies to the truth, theologia patristica. It was only after the
   material had been prepared in the course of the 16th and 17th centuries
   by scholars of the various Church parties, and, above all, by excellent
   editions of the Fathers, [20] and after Pietism had exhibited the
   difference between Christianity and Ecclesiasticism, and had begun to
   treat the traditional confessional structure of doctrine with
   indifference, [21] that a critical investigation was entered on.

   The man who was the Erasmus of the 18th century, neither orthodox nor
   pietistic, nor rationalistic, but capable of appreciating all these
   tendencies; familiar with English, French and Italian literature;
   influenced by the spirit of the new English Science, [22] while
   avoiding all statements of it that would endanger positive
   Christianity: John Lorenz Mosheim, treated Church history in the spirit
   of his great teacher Leibnitz, [23] and by impartial analysis, living
   reproduction, and methodical artistic form raised it for the first time
   to the rank of a science. In his monographic works also, he endeavours
   to examine impartially the history of dogma, and to acquire the
   historic stand-point between the estimate of the orthodox dogmatics and
   that of Gottfried Arnold. Mosheim, averse to all fault-finding and
   polemic, and abhorring theological crudity as much as pietistic
   narrowness and undevout Illuminism, aimed at an actual correct
   knowledge of history, in accordance with the principle of Leibnitz,
   that the valuable elements which are everywhere to be found in history
   must be sought out and recognised. And the richness and many-sidedness
   of his mind qualified him for gaining such a knowledge. But his
   latitudinarian dogmatic standpoint as well as the anxiety to awaken no
   controversy or endanger the gradual naturalising of a new science and
   culture, caused him to put aside the most important problems of the
   history of dogma and devote his attention to political Church history
   as well as to the more indifferent historical questions. The opposition
   of two periods which he endeavoured peacefully to reconcile could not
   in this way be permanently set aside. [24] In Mosheim's sense, but
   without the spirit of that great man, C. W. F. Walch taught on the
   subject and described the religious controversies of the Church with an
   effort to be impartial, and has thus made generally accessible the
   abundant material collected by the diligence of earlier scholars. [25]
   Walch, moreover, in the "Gedanken von der Geschichte der
   Glaubenslehre," 1756, gave the impulse that was needed to fix attention
   on the history of dogma as a special discipline. The stand-point which
   he took up was still that of subjection to ecclesiastical dogma, but
   without confessional narrowness. Ernesti in his programme of the year
   1759, "De theologiæ historiæ et dogmaticæ conjungendæ necessitate,"
   gave eloquent expression to the idea that Dogmatic is a positive
   science which has to take its material from history, but that history
   itself requires a devoted and candid study, on account of our being
   separated from the earlier epochs by a complicated tradition. [26] He
   has also shewn in his celebrated "Antimuratorius," that an impartial
   and critical investigation of the problems of the history of dogma,
   might render the most effectual service to the polemic against the
   errors of Romanism. Besides, the greater part of the dogmas were
   already unintelligible to Ernesti, and yet during his lifetime the way
   was opened up for that tendency in theology, which, prepared in Germany
   by Chr. Thomasius, supported by English writers, drew the sure
   principles of faith and life from what is called reason, and therefore
   was not only indifferent to the system of dogma, but felt it more and
   more to be the tradition of unreason and of darkness. Of the three
   requisites of a historian ; knowledge of his subject, candid criticism,
   and a capacity for finding himself at home in foreign interests and
   ideas, the Rationalistic Theologians who had outgrown Pietism and
   passed through the school of the English Deists and of Wolf, no longer
   possessed the first, a knowledge of the subject, to the same extent as
   some scholars of the earlier generation. The second, free criticism,
   they possessed in the high degree guaranteed by the conviction of
   having a rational religion; the third, the power of comprehension, only
   in a very limited measure. They had lost the idea of positive religion,
   and with it a living and just conception of the history of religion.

   In the history of thought there is always need for an apparently
   disproportionate expenditure of power, in order to produce an advance
   in the development. And it would appear as if a certain self-satisfied
   narrow-mindedness within the progressing ideas of the present, as well
   as a great measure of inability even to understand the past and
   recognise its own dependence on it, must make its appearance, in order
   that a whole generation may be freed from the burden of the past. It
   needed the absolute certainty which Rationalism had found in the
   religious philosophy of the age, to give sufficient courage to subject
   to historical criticism the central dogmas on which the Protestant
   system as well as the Catholic finally rests, the dogmas of the canon
   and inspiration on the one hand, and of the Trinity and Christology on
   the other. The work of Lessing in this respect had no great results. We
   to-day see in his theological writings the most important contribution
   to the understanding of the earliest history of dogma, which that
   period supplies; but we also understand why its results were then so
   trifling. This was due, not only to the fact that Lessing was no
   theologian by profession, or that his historical observations were
   couched in aphorisms, but because, like Leibnitz and Mosheim, he had a
   capacity for appreciating the history of religion which forbade him to
   do violence to that history or to sit in judgment on it, and because
   his philosophy in its bearings on the case allowed him to seek no more
   from his materials than an assured understanding of them; in a word
   again, because he was no theologian. The Rationalists, on the other
   hand, who within certain limits were no less his opponents than the
   orthodox, derived the strength of their opposition to the systems of
   dogma, as the Apologists of the second century had already done with
   regard to polytheism, from their religious belief and their inability
   to estimate these systems historically. That, however, is only the
   first impression which one gets here from the history, and it is
   everywhere modified by other impressions. In the first place, there is
   no mistaking a certain latitudinarianism in several prominent
   theologians of the rationalistic tendency. Moreover, the attitude to
   the canon was still frequently, in virtue of the Protestant principle
   of scripture, an uncertain one, and it was here chiefly that the
   different types of rational supernaturalism were developed. Then, with
   all subjection to the dogmas of Natural religion, the desire for a real
   true knowledge was unfettered and powerfully excited. Finally, very
   significant attempts were made by some rationalistic theologians to
   explain in a real historical way the phenomena of the history of dogma,
   and to put an authentic and historical view of that history in the
   place of barren pragmatic or philosophic categories.

   The special zeal with which the older rationalism applied itself to the
   investigation of the canon, either putting aside the history of dogma,
   or treating it merely in the frame-work of Church history, has only
   been of advantage for the treatment of our subject. It first began to
   be treated with thoroughness when the historical and critical interests
   had become more powerful than the rationalistic. After the important
   labours of Semler, which here, above all, have wrought in the interests
   of freedom, [27] and after some monographs on the history of dogma,
   [28] S. G. Lange for the first time treated the history of dogma as a
   special subject. [29] Unfortunately, his comprehensively planned and
   carefully written work, which shews a real understanding of the early
   history of dogma, remains in-complete. Consequently, W. Münscher, in
   his learned manual, which was soon followed by his compendium of the
   history of dogma, was the first to produce a complete presentation of
   our subject. [30] Münscher's compendium is a counterpart to Giesler's
   Church history; it shares with that the merit of drawing from the
   sources, intelligent criticism and impartiality, but with a thorough
   knowledge of details it fails to impart a real conception of the
   development of ecclesiastical dogma. The division of the material into
   particular loci, which, in three sections, is carried through the whole
   history of the Church, makes insight into the whole Christian
   conception of the different epochs impossible, and the prefixed
   "General History of Dogma," is far too sketchily treated to make up for
   that defect. Finally, the connection between the development of dogma
   and the general ideas of the time is not sufficiently attended to. A
   series of manuals followed the work of Münscher, but did not materially
   advance the study. [31] The compendium of Baumgarten Crusius, [32] and
   that of F. K. Meier, [33] stand out prominently among them. The work of
   the former is distinguished by its independent learning as well as by
   the discernment of the author that the centre of gravity of the subject
   lies in the so-called general history of dogma. [34] The work of Meier
   goes still further, and accurately perceives that the division into a
   general and special history of dogma must be altogether given up, while
   it is also characterised by an accurate setting and proportional
   arrangement of the facts. [35]

   The great spiritual revolution at the beginning of our century, which
   must in every respect be regarded as a reaction against the efforts of
   the rationalistic epoch, changed also the conceptions of the Christian
   religion and its history. It appears therefore plainly in the treatment
   of the history of dogma. The advancement and deepening of Christian
   life, the zealous study of the past, the new philosophy which no longer
   thrust history aside, but endeavoured to appreciate it in all its
   phenomena as the history of the spirit, all these factors co-operated
   in begetting a new temper, and accordingly, a new estimate of religion
   proper and of its history. There were three tendencies in theology that
   broke up rationalism; that which was identified with the names of
   Schleiermacher and Neander, that of the Hegelians, and that of the
   Confessionalists. The first two were soon divided into a right and a
   left, in so far as they included conservative and critical interests
   from their very commencement. The conservative elements have been used
   for building up the modern confessionalism, which in its endeavours to
   go back to the Reformers has never actually got beyond the theology of
   the Formula of Concord, the stringency of which it has no doubt
   abolished by new theologoumena and concessions of all kinds. All these
   tendencies have in common the effort to gain a real comprehension of
   history and be taught by it, that is, to allow the idea of development
   to obtain its proper place, and to comprehend the power and sphere of
   the individual. In this and in the deeper conception of the nature and
   significance of positive religion, lay the advance beyond Rationalism.
   And yet the wish to understand history, has in great measure checked
   the effort to obtain a true knowledge of it, and the respect for
   history as the greatest of teachers, has not resulted in that supreme
   regard for facts which distinguished the critical rationalism. The
   speculative pragmatism, which, in the Hegelian School, was put against
   the "lower pragmatism," and was rigorously carried out with the view of
   exhibiting the unity of history, not only neutralised the historical
   material, in so far as its concrete definiteness was opposed, as
   phenomenon, to the essence of the matter, but also curtailed it in a
   suspicious way, as may be seem for example, in the works of Baur.
   Moreover, the universal historical suggestions which the older history
   of dogma had given were not at all, or only very little regarded. The
   history of dogma was, as it were, shut out by the watchword of the
   immanent development of the spirit in Christianity. The disciples of
   Hegel, both of the right and of the left, were, and still are, agreed
   in this watch-word, [36] the working out of which, including an apology
   for the course of the history of dogma, must be for the advancement of
   conservative theology. But at the basis of the statement that the
   history of Christianity is the history of the spirit, there lay further
   a very one-sided conception of the nature of religion, which confirmed
   the false idea that religion is theology. It will always, however, be
   the imperishable merit of Hegel's great disciple, F. Chr. Baur, in
   theology, that he was the first who attempted to give a uniform general
   idea of the history of dogma, and to live through the whole process in
   himself, without renouncing the critical acquisitions of the 18th
   century. [37] His brilliantly written manual of the history of dogma,
   in which the history of this branch of theological science is
   relatively treated with the utmost detail, is, however, in material
   very meagre, and shews in the very first proposition of the historical
   presentation an abstract view of history. [38] Neander, whose
   "Christliche Dogmengeschichte," 1857, is distinguished by the variety
   of its points of view, and keen apprehension of particular forms of
   doctrine, shews a far more lively and therefore a far more just
   conception of the Christian religion. But the general plan of the work,
   (General history of dogma--loci, and these according to the established
   scheme), proves that Neander has not succeeded in giving real
   expression to the historical character of the study, and in attaining a
   clear insight into the progress of the development. [39]

   Kliefoth's thoughtful and instructive, "Einleitung in die
   Dogmengeschichte," 1839, contains the programme for the conception of
   the history of dogma characteristic of the modern confessional
   theology. In this work the Hegelian view of history, not without being
   influenced by Schleiermacher, is so represented as to legitimise a
   return to the theology of the Fathers. In the successive great epochs
   of the Church several circles of dogmas have been successively fixed,
   so that the respective doctrines have each time been adequately
   formulated. [40] Disturbances of the development are due to the
   influence of sin. Apart from this, Kliefoth's conception is in point of
   form equal to that of Baur and Strauss, in so far as they also have
   considered the theology represented by themselves as the goal of the
   whole historical development. The only distinction is that, according
   to them, the next following stage always cancels the preceding, while
   according to Kliefoth, who, moreover, has no desire to give effect to
   mere traditionalism, the new knowledge is added to the old. The new
   edifice of true historical knowledge, according to Kliefoth, is raised
   on the ruins of Traditionalism, Scholasticism, Pietism, Rationalism and
   Mysticism. Thomasius (Das Bekenntniss der evang.-luth. Kirche in der
   Consequenz seines Princips, 1848) has, after the example of Sartorius,
   attempted to justify by history the Lutheran confessional system of
   doctrine from another side, by representing it as the true mean between
   Catholicism and the Reformed Spiritualism. This conception has found
   much approbation in the circles of Theologians related to Thomasius, as
   against the Union Theology. But Thomasius is entitled to the merit of
   having produced a Manual of the history of dogma which represents in
   the most worthy manner [41] the Lutheran confessional view of the
   history of dogma. The introduction, as well as the selection and
   arrangement of his material, shews that Thomasius has learned much from
   Baur. The way in which he distinguishes between central and peripheral
   dogmas is, accordingly, not very appropriate, especially for the
   earliest period. The question as to the origin of dogma and theology is
   scarcely even touched by him. But he has an impression that the central
   dogmas contain for every period the whole of Christianity, and that
   they must therefore be apprehended in this sense. [42] The presentation
   is dominated throughout by the idea of the self-explication of dogma,
   though a malformation has to be admitted for the middle ages, [43] and
   therefore the formation of dogma is almost everywhere justified as the
   testimony of the Church represented as completely hypostatised, and the
   outlook on the history of the time is put into the background. But
   narrow and insufficient as the complete view here is, the excellences
   of the work in details are great, in respect of exemplary clearness of
   presentation, and the discriminating knowledge and keen comprehension
   of the author for religious problems. The most important work done by
   Thomasius is contained in his account of the history of Christology.

   In his outlines of the history of Christian dogma (Grundriss der
   Christl. Dogmengesch. 1870), which unfortunately has not been carried
   beyond the first part (Patristic period), F. Nitzsch, marks an advance
   in the history of our subject. The advance lies, on the one hand, in
   the extensive use he makes of monographs on the history of dogma, and
   on the other hand, in the arrangement. Nitzsch has advanced a long way
   on the path that was first entered by F. K. Meier, and has arranged his
   material in a way that far excels all earlier attempts. The general and
   special aspects of the history of dogma are here almost completely
   worked into one, [44] and in the main divisions, "Grounding of the old
   Catholic Church doctrine," and "Development of the old Catholic Church
   doctrine," justice is at last done to the most important problem which
   the history of dogma presents, though in my opinion the division is not
   made at the right place, and the problem is not so clearly kept in view
   in the execution as the arrangement would lead one to expect. [45]
   Nitzsch has freed himself from that speculative view of the history of
   dogma which reads ideas into it. No doubt idea and motive on the one
   hand, form and expression on the other, must be distinguished for every
   period. But the historian falls into vagueness as soon as he seeks and
   professes to find behind the demonstrable ideas and aims which have
   moved a period, others of which, as a matter of fact, that period
   itself knew nothing at all. Besides, the invariable result of that
   procedure is to concentrate the attention on the theological and
   philosophical points of dogma, and either neglect or put a new
   construction on the most concrete and important, the expression of the
   religious faith itself. Rationalism has been reproached with "throwing
   out the child with the bath," but this is really worse, for here the
   child is thrown out while the bath is retained. Every advance in the
   future treatment of our subject will further depend on the effort to
   comprehend the history of dogma without reference to the momentary
   opinions of the present, and also on keeping it in closest connection
   with the history of the Church, from which it can never be separated
   without damage. We have something to learn on this point from
   rationalistic historians of dogma. [46] But progress is finally
   dependent on a true perception of what the Christian religion
   originally was, for this perception alone enables us to distinguish
   that which sprang out of the inherent power of Christianity from that
   which it has assimilated in the course of its history. For the
   historian, however, who does not wish to serve a party, there are two
   standards in accordance with which he may criticise the history of
   dogma. He may either, as far as this is possible, compare it with the
   Gospel, or he may judge it according to the historical conditions of
   the time and the result. Both ways can exist side by side, if only they
   are not mixed up with one another. Protestantism has in principle
   expressly recognised the first, and it will also have the power to bear
   its conclusions ; for the saying of Tertullian still holds good in it;
   "Nihil veritas erubescit nisi solummodo abscondi." The historian who
   follows this maxim, and at the same time has no desire to be wiser than
   the facts, will, while furthering science, perform the best service
   also to every Christian community that desires to build itself upon the
   Gospel.

   After the appearance of the first and second editions of this Work,
   Loofs published, "Leitfaden für seine Vorlesungen über
   Dogmengeschichte," Halle, 1889, and in the following year, "Leitfaden
   zum Studium der Dogmengeschichte, zunächst für seine Vorlesungen,"
   (second and enlarged edition of the first-named book). The work in its
   conception of dogma and its history comes pretty near that stated
   above, and it is distinguished by independent investigation and
   excellent selection of material. I myself have published a "Grundriss
   der Dogmengeschichte," 2 Edit. in one vol. 1893. (Outlines of the
   History of Dogma, English translation. Hodder and Stoughton). That this
   has not been written in vain, I have the pleasure of seeing from not a
   few notices of professional colleagues. I may mention the Church
   history of Herzog in the new revision by Koffmane, the first vol. of
   the Church history of Karl Müller, the first vol. of the Symbolik of
   Kattenbusch, and Kaftan's work. "The truth of the Christian religion."
   Wilhelm Schmidt, "Der alte Glaube und die Wahrheit des Christenthums,"
   1891, has attempted to furnish a refutation in principle of Kaftan's
   work.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Weizsäcker, Gott. Gel. Anz. 1886, p. 823 f. says, "It is a question
   whether we should limit the account of the genesis of Dogma to the
   Antenicene and designate all else as a development of that. This is
   undoubted correct so long as our view is limited to the history of
   dogma of the Greek Church in the second period, and the development of
   it by the OEcumenical Synods. On the other hand, the Latin Church, in
   its own way and in its own province, becomes productive from the days
   of Augustine onwards; the formal signification of dogma in the narrower
   sense becomes different in the middle ages. Both are repeated in a much
   greater measure through theReformation. We may therefore in process, in
   opposition to that division into genesis and development, regard the
   whole as a continuous process, in which the contents as well as the
   formal authority of dogma are in process of continuous development."
   This view is certainly just, and I think is indicated by myself in what
   follows. We have to decide here, as so often elsewhere in our account,
   between rival points of view. The view favoured by me has the advantage
   of making the nature of dogma clearly appear as a product of the mode
   of thought of the early church, and that is what it has remained, in
   spite of all changes both in form and substance, till the present day.

   [2] See Kattenbusch. Luther's Stellung zu den ökumenischen Symbolen,
   1883.

   [3] See Ritschl. Geschichte des Pietismus, I. p. 80 ff.: 93 ff., II. p.
   60 f.: 88 f. "The Lutheran view of life did not remain pure and
   undefiled, but was limited and obscured by the preponderance of
   dogmatic interests. Protestantism was not delivered from the womb of
   the Western Church of the middle ages in full power and equipment, like
   Athene from the head of Jupiter. The incompleteness of its ethical
   view, the splitting up of its general conceptions into a series of
   particular dogmas, the tendency to express its beliefs as a hard and
   fast whole, are defects which soon made Protestantism appear to
   disadvantage in comparison with the wealth of mediæval theology and
   asceticism. . . The scholastic form of pure doctrine is really only the
   provisional, and not the final form of Protestantism."

   [4] It is very evident how the mediæval and old catholic dogmas were
   transformed in the view which Luther originally took of them. In this
   view we must remember that he did away with all the presuppositions of
   dogma, the infallible Apostolic Canon of Scripture, the infallible
   teaching function of the Church, and the infallible Apostolic doctrine
   and constitution. On this basis dogmas can only be utterances which do
   not support faith, but are supposed by it. But, on the other hand his
   opposition to all the Apocryphal saints which the Church has created,
   compelled him to emphasise faith alone, and to give it a firm basis in
   Scripture, in order to free it from the burden of tradition. Here then,
   very soon, first by Melanchthon, a summary of articuli fide was
   substituted for the faith, and the Scriptures recovered their place as
   a rule. Luther himself, however, is responsible for both, and so it
   came about that very soon the new evangelic standpoint was explained
   almost exclusively by the "abolition of abuses," and by no means so
   surely by the transformation of the whole doctrinal tradition. The
   classic authority for this is the Augsburg confession ("hæc fere summa
   est doctrina apud suos, in qua cerni potest nihil inesse, quod
   discrepet a scripturis vel ab ecclesia Catholica vel ab ecclesia Romana
   . . . . sed dissensio est de quibusdam abusibus"). The purified
   catholic doctrine has since then become the palladium of the
   Reformation Churches. The refuters of the Augustana have justly been
   unwilling to admit the mere "purifying," but have noted in addition
   that the Augustana does not say everything that was urged by Luther and
   the Doctors (see Ficker, Die Konfutation des Augsburgischen
   Bekenntnisse, 1891). At the same time, however, the Lutheran Church,
   though not so strongly as the English, retained the consciousness of
   being the true Catholics. But, as the history of Protestantism proves,
   the original impulse has not remained inoperative. Though Luther
   himself all his life measured his personal Christian standing by an
   entirely different standard than subjection to a law of faith; yet,
   however presumptous the words may sound, we might say that in the
   complicated struggle that was forced on him, he did not always clearly
   understand his own faith.

   [5] In the modern Romish Church, dogma is, above all, a judicial
   regulation which one has to submit to, and in certain circumstances
   submission alone is sufficient, fides implicita. Dogma is thereby just
   as much deprived of its original sense and its original authority as by
   the demand of the Reformers, that every thing should be based upon a
   clear understanding of the Gospel. Moreover, the changed position of
   the Romish Church towards dogma is also shewn by the fact that it no
   longer gives a plain answer to the question as to what dogma is.
   Instead of a series of dogmas definitely defined, and of equal value,
   there is presented an infinite multitude of whole and half dogmas,
   doctrinal directions, pious opinions, probable theological
   propositions, etc. It is often a very difficult question whether a
   solemn decision has or has not already been taken on this or that
   statement, or whether such a decision is still necessary. Everything
   that must be believed is nowhere stated, and so one sometimes hears in
   Catholic circles the exemplary piety of a cleric praised with the words
   that "he believes more than is necessary." The great dogmatic conflicts
   within the Catholic Church, since the Council of Trent, have been
   silenced by arbitrary Papal pronouncements and doctrinal directions.
   Since one has simply to accommodate oneself to these as laws, it once
   more appears clear that dogma has become a judicial regulation,
   administered by the Pope, which is carried out in an administrative way
   and loses itself in an endless casuistry. We do not mean by this to
   deny that dogma has a decided value for the pious Catholic as a summary
   of the faith. But in the Catholic Church it is no longer piety, but
   obedience that is decisive. The solidarity with the orthodox
   Protestants may be explained by political reasons, in order, from
   political reasons again, to condemn, where it is necessary, all
   Protestants as heretics and revolutionaries.

   [6] See the discussions of Biedermann (Christliche Dogmatik. 2 Ed. p.
   150 f.) about what he calls the law of stability in the history of
   religion.

   [7] See Ritschl's discussion of the methods of the early histories of
   dogma in the Jahrb. f. Deutsche Theologie, 1871, p. 181 ff.

   [8] In Catholicism, the impulse which proceeded from Augustine has
   finally proved powerless to break the traditional conception of
   Christianity, as the Council of Trent and the decrees of the Vatican
   have shewn. For that very reason the development of the Roman Catholic
   Church doctrine belongs to the history of dogma. Protestantism must,
   however, under all circumstances be recognised as a new thing, which
   indeed in none of its phases has been free from contradictions.

   [9] Here then begins the ecclesiastical theology which takes as its
   starting-point the finished dogma it strives to prove or harmonise, but
   very soon, as experience has shewn, loses its firm footing in such
   efforts and so occasions new crises.

   [10] Weizsäcker, Apostolic Age, Vol. I. p. 123. "Christianity as
   religion is absolutely inconceivable without theology; first of all,
   for the same reasons which called forth the Pauline theology. As a
   religion it cannot be separated from the religion of its founder, hence
   not from historical knowledge. And as Monotheism and belief in a world
   purpose, it is the religion of reason with the inextinguishable impulse
   of thought. The first gentile Christians therewith gained the proud
   consciousness of a gnosis." But of ecclesiastical Christianity which
   rests on dogma ready made, as produced by an earlier epoch, this
   conception holds good only in a very qualified way; and of the vigorous
   Christian piety of the earliest and of every period, it may also be
   said that it no less feels the impulse to think against reason than
   with reason.

   [11] In this sense it is correct to class dogmatic theology as
   historical theology, as Schleiermacher has done. If we, maintain that
   for practical reasons it must be taken out of the province of
   historical theology, then we must make it part of practical theology.
   By dogmatic theology here, we understand the exposition of Christianity
   in the form of Church doctrine, as it has been shaped since the second
   century. As distinguished from it, a branch of theological study must
   be conceived which harmonises the historical exposition of the Gospel
   with the general state of knowledge of the time. The Church can as
   little dispense with such a discipline as there can be a Christianity
   which does not account to itself for its basis and spiritual contents.

   [12] See Eusebius' preface to his Church History. Eusebius in this work
   set himself a comprehensive task, but in doing so he never in the
   remotest sense thought of a history of dogma. In place of that we have
   a history of men "who from generation to generation proclaimed the word
   of God orally or by writing," and a history of those who by their
   passion for novelties, plunged themselves into the greatest errors.

   [13] See for example, B. Schwane, Dogmengesch. d. Vornicänischen Zeit,
   1862, where the sense in which dogmas have no historical side is first
   expounded, and then it is shewn that dogmas, "notwithstanding, present
   a certain side which permits a historical consideration, because in
   point of fact they have gone through historical developments." But
   these historical developments present themselves simply either as
   solemn promulgations and explications, or as private theological
   speculations.

   [14] If we leave out of account the Marcionite gnostic criticism of
   ecclesiastical Christianity, Paul of Samosata and Marcellus of Ancyra
   may be mentioned as men who, in the earliest period, criticised the
   apologetic Alexandrian theology which was being naturalised (see the
   remarkable statement of Marcellus in Euseb. C. Marc. I. 4: to` tou
   do'gmatos o'noma tes anthropi'nes e'chetai boules te kai` gno'mes
   k.t.l., which I have chosen as the motto of this book). We know too
   little of Stephen Gobarus (VI. cent.) to enable us to estimate his
   review of the doctrine of the Church and its development (Photius Bibl.
   232). With regard to the middle ages (Abelard "Sic et Non"), see
   Reuter, Gesch. der relig. Aufklärung im MA., 1875. Hahn Gesch. der
   Ketzer, especially in the 11th, 12th and 13th centuries, 3 vols., 1845.
   Keller, Die Reformation und die alteren Reform-Parteien, 1885.

   [15] See Voigt, Die Wiederbelebung des classischen Alterthums, 2 vols.,
   1881, especially vol. II. p. 1 ff. 363 ff. 494 ff. ("Humanism and the
   science of history"). The direct importance of humanism for
   illuminating the history of the middle ages is very little, and least
   of all for the history of the Church and of dogma. The only prominent
   works here are those of Saurentius Valla and Erasmus. The criticism of
   the scholastic dogmas of the Church and the Pope began as early as the
   12th century. For the attitude of the Renaissance to religion, see
   Burckhardt, Die Cultur der Renaissance, 2 vols., 1877.

   [16] Baronius, Annals Eccles. XIi. vol. 1588-1607. Chief work:
   Dionysius Petavius, Opus de theologicis dogmatibus. 4 vols.
   (incomplete) 1644-1650. See further Thomassin, Dogmata theologica. 3
   vols. 1684-1689.

   [17] See Holtzmann, Kanon und Tradition, 1859. Hase, Handbuch der
   protest, Polemik. 1878. Joh. Delitszch, Das Lehrsystem der röm. Kirche,
   1875. New revelations, however, are rejected, and bold assumptions
   leading that way are not favoured: See Schwane, above work p. 11: "The
   content of revelation is not enlarged by the decisions or teaching of
   the Church, nor are new revelations added in course of time. . . .
   Christian truth cannot therefore in its content be completed by the
   Church, nor has she ever claimed the right of doing so, but always
   where new designations or forms of dogma became necessary for the
   putting down of error or the instruction of the faithful, she would
   always teach what she had received in Holy Scripture or in the oral
   tradition of the Apostles." Recent Catholic accounts of the history of
   dogma are Klee, Lehrbuch der D.G. 2 vols. 1837, (Speculative). Schwane,
   Dogmengesch. der Vornicänischen Zeit, 1862, der patrist. Zeit, 1869;
   der Mittleren Zeit, 1882. Bach, Die D.G. des MA. 1873. There is a
   wealth of material for the history of dogma in Kuhn's Dogmatik, as well
   as in the great controversial writings occasioned by the celebrated
   work of Bellarmin; Disputationes de controversiis Christianæ fidei
   adversus hujus temporis hæreticos, 1581-1593. It need not be said that,
   in spite of their inability to treat the history of dogma historically
   and critically, much may be learned from these works, and some other
   striking monographs of Roman Catholic scholars. But everything in
   history that is fitted to shake the high antiquity and unanimous
   attestation of the Catholic dogmas, becomes here a problem, the
   solution of which is demanded, though indeed its carrying out often
   requires a very exceptional intellectual subtlety.

   [18] Historical interest in Protestantism has grown up around the
   questions as to the power of the Pope, the significance of Councils, or
   the Scripturalness of the doctrines set up by them, and about the
   meaning of the Lord's supper, of the conception of it by the Church
   Fathers; (see OEcolampadius and Melanchthon.) Protestants were too sure
   that the doctrine of justification was taught in the scriptures to feel
   any need of seeking proofs for it by studies in the history of dogma,
   and Luther also dispensed with the testimony of history for the dogma
   of the Lord's supper. The task of shewing how far and in what way
   Luther and the Reformers compounded with history has not even yet been
   taken up. And yet there may be found in Luther's writings surprising
   and excellent critical comments on the history of dogma and the
   theology of the Fathers, as well as genial conceptions which have
   certainly remained inoperative; see especially the treatise "Von den
   Conciliis und Kirchen," and his judgment on different Church Fathers.
   In the first edition of the Loci of Melanchthon we have also critical
   material for estimating the old systems of dogma. Calvin's depreciatory
   estimate of the Trinitarian and Christological Formula, which, however,
   he retracted at a later period is well known.

   [19] Protestant Church history was brought into being by the Interim,
   Flacius being its Father; see his Catalogus Testium Veritatis, and the
   so-called Magdeburg Centuries, 1559-1574; also Jundt., Les Centuries de
   Magdebourg, Paris, 1883. Von Engelhardt (Christenthum Justin's, p. 9
   ff.) has drawn attention to the estimate of Justin in the Centuries,
   and has justly insisted on the high importance of this first attempt at
   a criticism of the Church Fathers. Kliefoth (Einl. in d. D.G. 1839) has
   the merit of pointing out the somewhat striking judgment of A. Hyperius
   on the history of dogma. Chemnitz, Examen concilii Tridentini, 1565.
   Forbesius a Corse (a Scotsman). Instructiones historico-theologiæ de
   doctrina Christiana, 1645.

   [20] The learning, the diligence in collecting, and the carefulness of
   the Benedictines and Maurians, as well as of English, Dutch and French
   theologians, such as Casaubon, Vossius, Pearson, Dalläus, Spanheim,
   Grabe, Basnage, etc. have never since been equalled, far less
   surpassed. Even in the literary, historical and higher criticism these
   scholars have done splendid work, so far as the confessional dogmas did
   not come into question.

   [21] See especially, G. Arnold, Unpartheyische Kirchen- und
   Ketzerhistorie, 1699 also Baur, Epochen der kirchlichen
   Geschichtsschreibung, p. 84 ff.; Floring, G. Arnold als
   Kirchenhistoriker, Darmstadt, 1883. The latter determines correctly the
   measure of Arnold's importance. His work was the direct preparation for
   an impartial examination of the history of dogma, however partial it
   was in itself. Pietism, here and there, after Spener, declared war
   against scholastic dogmatics as a hindrance to piety, and in doing so
   broke the ban under which the knowledge of history lay captive.

   [22] The investigations of the so-called English Deists about the
   Christian religion contain the first, and to some extent a very
   significant free-spirited attempt at a critical view of the history of
   dogma (see Lechler, History of English Deism, 1841). But the criticism
   is an abstract, rarely a historical one. Some very learned works
   bearing on the history of dogma were written in England against the
   position of the Deists, especially by Lardner: see also at an earlier
   time Bull, Defensio fidei nic.

   [23] Calixtus of Helmstädt was the forerunner of Leibnitz with regard
   to Church history. But the merit of having recognised the main problem
   of the history of dogma does not belong to Calixtus. By pointing out
   what Protestantism and Catholicism had in common he did not in any way
   clear up the historical-critical problem. On the other hand the
   Consensus repetitus of the Wittenberg theologians shews what
   fundamental questions Calixtus had already stirred.

   [24] Among the numerous historical writings of Mosheim may be mentioned
   specially his Dissert ad hist. Eccles. pertinentes. 2 vols. 1731-1741,
   as well as the work: "De rebus Christianorum ante Constantinum M.
   Commentarii," 1753; see also "Institutions hist. Eccl." last Edition,
   1755.

   [25] Walch, "Entwurf einer vollständigen Historie der Ketzereien,
   Spaltungen und Religionsstreitigkeiten bis auf die Zeiten der
   Reformation." II Thle (incomplete), 1762-1785. See also his "Entwurf
   einer vollständigen Historie der Kirchenversammlungen," 1759, as well
   as numerous monographs on the history of dogma. Such were already
   produced by the older Walch, whose a Histor. theol. Einleitung in die
   Religionsstreitigkeiten der Ev. Luth. Kirche," 5 vols. 1730-1739, and
   "Histor.-theol. Einleit. in die Religionsstreitigkeiten welche
   sonderlich ausser der Ev. Luth. Kirche entstanden sind 5 Thle,"
   1933-1736, had already put polemics behind the knowledge of history
   (see Gass. "Desch. der protest. Dogmatik," 3rd Vol. p. 205 ff.).

   [26] Opusc. p. 576 f.: "Es quo fit, ut nullo modo in theologicis, quæ
   omnia e libris antiquis hebraicis, græcis, latinis ducuntur, possit
   aliquis bene in definiendo versari et a peccatis multis et magnis sibi
   cavere, nisi litteras et historiam assumat." The title of a programme
   of Crusius, Ernesti's opponent, "De dogmatum Christianorum historia cum
   probatione dogmatum non confundenda," 1770, is significant of the new
   insight which was steadily making way.

   [27] Semler, Einleitung zu Baumgartens evang. Glaubenslehre, 1759: also
   Geschichte der Glaubenslehre, zu Baumgartens Untersuch. theol.
   Streitigkesten, 1762-1764. Semler paved the way for the view that
   dogmas have arisen and been gradually developed under definite
   historical conditions. He was the first to grasp the problem of the
   relation of Catholicism to early Christianity, because he freed the
   early Christian documents from the letters of the Canon. Schröckh
   (Christl. Kirchengesch., 1786) in the spirit of Semler described with
   impartiality and care the changes of the dogmas.

   [28] Rössler, Lehrbegriff der Christlichen Kirche in den 3 ersten
   Jahrb., 1775; also, Arbeiten by Burscher, Heinrich, Stäudlin, etc., see
   especially, Löffler's "Abhandlung welche eine kurze Darstellung der
   Entstehungsart der Dreieinigkeit enthält, 1792, in the translation of
   Souverain's Le Platonisme devoilé, 1700. The question as to the
   Platonism of the Fathers, this fundamental question of the history of
   dogma, was raised even by Luther and Flacius, and was very vigorously
   debated at the end of the 17th and beginning of the 18th centuries,
   after the Socinians had already affirmed it strongly. The question once
   more emerges on German soil in the church history of G. Arnold, but
   cannot he said to have received the attention it deserves in the 150
   years that have followed (see the literature of the controversy in
   Tzsohirner, Fall des Heidenthums, p. 580 f.). Yet the problem was first
   thrust aside by the speculative view of the history of christianity.

   [29] Lange. Ausführ. Gesch. der Dogmen, oder der Glaubenslehre der
   Christl. Kirche nach den Kirchenvater ausgearbeitet. 1796.

   [30] Münscher, Handb. d. Christl. D. G. 4 vols. first 6 Centuries
   1797-1809; Lehrbuch, 1st Edit. 1811; 3rd Edit. edited by v. Cölln,
   Hupfeld and Neudecker, 1832-1838. Planck's epoch-making work: Gesch.
   der Veränderungen und der Bildung unseres protestantischen
   Lehrbegriffs. 6 vols. 1791-1800, had already for the most part
   appeared. Contemporary with Münscher are Wundemann, Gesch. d. Christl.
   Glaubenslehren vom Zeitalter des Athanasius bis auf Gregor. d. Gr. 2
   Thle. 1789-1799; Münter, Handbuch der alteren Christl. D. G. hrsg. von
   Ewers. 2 vols. 1802-1804; Stäudlin, Lehrbuch der Dogmatik und
   Dogmengeschichte, 1800, last Edition 1822, and Beck, Comment. hist.
   decretorum religionis Christianæ, 1801.

   [31] Augusti, Lehrb. d. Christl. D. G. 1805. 4 Edit. 1835. Berthold,
   Handb. der D. G. 2 vols. 1822-1823. Schickedanz, Versuch einer Gesch.
   d. Christl. Glaubenslehre, etc. 1827. Rüperti, Geschichte der Dogmen,
   1831. Lenz, Gesch. der Christl. Dogmen. 2 parts. 1834-1835. J. G. V.
   Engelhardt, Dogmengesch. 1839. See also Giesler, Dogmengesch. 2 vols.
   edited by Redepenning, 1855: also Illgen, Ueber den Werth der Christl.
   D. G. 1817.

   [32] Baumgarten Crusius, Lehrb. d. Christl. D. G. 1852: also conpendium
   d. Christl. D. G. 2 parts 1830-1846, the second part edited by Hase.

   [33] Meier, Lehrb. d. D. G, 1840, 2nd Edit. revised by G. Baur 1854.

   [34] The "Special History of Dogma," in Baumgarten Crusius, in which
   every particular dogma is by itself pursued through the whole history
   of the Church, is of course entirely unfruitful. But even the opinions
   which are given in the "General History of Dogma," are frequently very
   far from the mark (Cf. e.g., § 14 and p. 67), which is the more
   surprising as no one can deny that he takes a scholarly view of
   history.

   [35] Meier's Lehrbuch is formally and materially a very important piece
   of work, the value of which has not been sufficiently recognised,
   because the author followed neither the track of Neander nor of Bauer.
   Besides the excellences noted in the text, may be further mentioned,
   that almost everywhere Meier has distinguished correctly between the
   history of dogma and the history of theology, and has given an account
   only of the former.

   [36] Biedermann (Christl. Dogmatik. 2 Edit. I vol. p. 332 f.) says,
   "The history of the development of the Dogma of the Person of Christ
   will bring before us step by step the ascent of faith in the Gospel of
   Jesus Christ to its metaphysical basis in the nature of his person.
   This was the quite normal and necessary way of actual faith, and is not
   to be reckoned as a confused mixture of heterogeneous philosophical
   opinions. . . . The only thing taken from the ideas of contemporary
   philosophy was the special material of consciousness in which the
   doctrine of Christ's Divinity was at any time expressed. The process of
   this doctrinal development was an inward necessary one."

   [37] Baur, Lehrbuch der Christl. D. G. 1847. 3rd Edit. 1867: also
   Vorles. über die Christl. D. G. edited by F. Baur, 1865-68. Further the
   Monographs, "Ueber die Christl. Lehre v. d. Versöhnung in ihrer gesch.
   Entw." 1838: Ueber die Christl. Lehre v. d. Dreieinigkeit u. d.
   Menschwerdung." 1841: etc. D. F. Strauss, preceded him with his work:
   Die Christl. Glaubenslehre in ihrer gesch. Entw. 2 vols. 1840-41. From
   the stand-point of the Hegelian right we have: Marheineke, Christl. D.
   G. edited by Matthias and Vatke, 1849. From the same stand-point,
   though at the same time influenced by Schleiermacher, Dorner wrote "The
   History of the Person of Christ."

   [38] See p. 63: "As Christianity appeared in contrast with Judaism and
   Heathenism, and could only represent a new and peculiar form of the
   religious consciousness in distinction from both, reducing the
   contrasts of both to a unity in itself, so also the first difference of
   tendencies developing themselves within Christianity, must be
   determined by the relation in which it stood to Judaism on the one
   hand, and to Heathenism on the other." Compare also the very
   characteristic introduction to the first volume of the "Vorlesungen."

   [39] Hagenbach's Manual of the history of dogma, might be put alongside
   of Neander's work. It agrees with it both in plan and spirit. But the
   material of the history of dogma, which it offers in superabundance,
   seems far less connectedly worked out than by Neander. In Shedd's
   history of Christian doctrine the Americans possess a presentation of
   the history of dogma worth noting, 2 vols. 3 Edit. 1883. The work of
   Fr. Bonifas. Hist. des Dogmes. 2 vols. 1886, appeared after the death
   of the author and is not important.

   [40] No doubt Kliefoth also maintains for each period a stage of the
   disintegration of dogma, but this is not to be understood in the
   ordinary sense of the word. Besides, there are ideas in this
   introduction which would hardly obtain the approval of their author
   to-day.

   [41] Thomasius' Die Christl. Dogmengesch. als Entwickel. Gesch. des
   Kirchl. Lehrbegriffs. 2 vols. 1874-76. 2nd Edit. intelligently and
   carefully edited by Bonwetsch. and Seeberg, 1887. (Seeberg has produced
   almost a new work in vol. II.) From the same stand-point is the manual
   of the history of dogma by H. Schmid, 1859, (in the 4th Ed. revised and
   transformed into an excellent collection of passages from the sources
   by Hauck, 1887) as well as the Luther. Dogmatik (Vol. II. 1864: Der
   Kirchenglaube) of Kahnis, which, however, subjects particular dogmas to
   a freer criticism.

   [42] See Vol. I. p. 14.

   [43] See Vol. I. p. 11. "The first period treats of the development of
   the great main dogmas which were to become the basis of the further
   development (the Patristic age). The problem of the second period was,
   partly to work up this material theologically, and partly to develop
   it. But this development, under the influence of the Hierarchy, fell
   into false paths, and became partly, at least, corrupt (the age of
   Scholasticism), and therefore a reformation was necessary. It was
   reserved for this third period to carry back the doctrinal formation,
   which had become abnormal, to the old sound paths, and on the other
   hand, in virtue of the regeneration of the Church which followed, to
   deepen it and fashion it according to that form which it got in the
   doctrinal systems of the Evangelic Church, while the remaining part
   fixed its own doctrine in the decrees of Trent (period of the
   Reformation.)." This view of history, which from the Christian
   stand-point, will allow absolutely nothing to be said against the
   doctrinal formation of the early Church, is a retrogression from the
   view of Luther and the writers of the "Centuries," for these were well
   aware that the corruption did not first begin in the middle ages.

   [44] This fulfils a requirement urged by Weizsäcker (Jahrb. f. Deutsche
   Theol. 1866, p. 170 ff.).

   [45] See Ritschl's Essay, "Ueber die Methode der alteren
   Dogmengeschichte" (Jahrb. f. deutsche Theol. 1871. p. 191 ff.) in which
   the advance made by Nitzsch is estimated, and at the same time an
   arrangement proposed for the treatment of the earlier history of dogma
   which would group the material more clearly and more suitable than has
   been done by Nitzsch. After having laid the foundation for a correct
   historical estimate of the development of early Christianity in his
   work "Entstehung der Alt-Katholischen Kirche," 1857, Ritschl published
   an epoch-making study in the history of dogma in his "History of the
   doctrine of justification and reconciliation," 2 edit. 1883. We have no
   superabundance of good monographs on the history of dogma. There are
   few that give such exact information regarding the Patristic period as
   that of Von Engelhardt "Ueber das Christenthum Justin's," 1878, and
   Zahn's work on Marcellus, 1867. Among the investigators of our age,
   Renan above all has clearly recognised that there are only two main
   periods in the history of dogma, and that the changes which
   Christianity experienced after the establishment of the Catholic Church
   bear no proportion to the changes which preceded. His words are as
   follows (Hist. des origin. du Christianisme T. VII. p. 503 f.):--the
   division about the year 180 is certainly placed too early, regard being
   had to what was then really authoritative in the Church.--"Si nous
   comparons maintenant le Christianisme, tel qu'il existait vers l'an
   180, an Christianisme du IVe et du Ve siècle, au Christianisme du moyen
   âge, an Christianisme de nos jours, nous trouvons qu'en réalité it
   s'est augmente des très peu de chose dans les siècles qui ont suivis.
   En 180, le nouveau Testament est clos: it ne s'y ajoutera plus un seul
   livre nouveau(?). Lentement, les Épitres de Paul ont conquis leur place
   à la suite des Evangiles, dans le code sacré et dans la liturgie. Quant
   aux dogmes, rien n'est fixé; mais le germe de tout existe; presque
   aucune idée n'apparaitra qui ne puisse faire valoir des autorités du
   1er et du 2e siècle. Il y a du trop, il y a des contradictions; le
   travail théologique consistera bien plus á émonder, à écarter des
   superfuites qu'à inventer du nouveau. L'Église laissera tomber une
   foule de choses mal commencées, elle sortira de bien des impasses. Elle
   a encore deux coeurs, pour ainsi dire; elle a plusieurs têtes; ces
   anomalies tomberont; mais aucun dogme vraiment original ne se formera
   plus." Also the discussions in chapter 28-34 of the same volume. H.
   Thiersch (Die Kirche im Apostolischen Zeitalter, 1852) reveals a deep
   insight into the difference between the spirit of the New Testament
   writers and the post-Apostolic Fathers, but he has overdone these
   differences, and sought to explain them by the mythological assumption
   of an Apostasy. A great amount of material for the history of dogma may
   be found in the great work of Böhringer, Die Kirche Christi und ihre
   Zeugen, oder die Kirchengeschichte in Biographien. 2 Edit. 1864.

   [46] By the connection with general church history we must, above all,
   understand, a continuous regard to the world within which the church
   has been developed, The most recent works on the history of the church
   and of dogma, those of Renan, Overbeck (Anfänge der patristischen
   Litteratur). Aube, Von Engelhardt (Justin), Kühn (Minucius Felix).
   Hatch ("Organization of the Early Church," and especially his
   posthumous work "The influence of Greek ideas and usages upon the
   Christian Church," 1890, in which may be found the most ample proof for
   the conception of the early history of dogma which is set forth in the
   following pages), are in this respect worthy of special note. Deserving
   of mention also is R. Rothe, who, in his "Vorlesungen über
   Kirchengeschichte," edited by Weingarten," 1875, 2 vols., gave most
   significant suggestions towards a really historical conception of the
   history of the church and of dogma. To Rothe belongs the undiminished
   merit of realising thoroughly the significance of a nationality in
   church history. But the theology of our century is also indebted for
   the first scientific conception of Catholicism, not to Marheineke or
   Winer, but to Rothe (see Vol. II. pp. 1-11 especially p. 7 f.). "The
   development of the Christian Church in the Græco-Roman world was not at
   the same time a development of that world by the Church and further by
   Christianity. There remained, as the result of the process, nothing but
   the completed Church. The world which had built it had made itself
   bankrupt in doing so." With regard to the origin and development of the
   Catholic cultus and constitution, nay, even of the Ethic (see Luthardt,
   Die antike Ethik, 1887, preface), that has been recognised by
   Protestant scholars, which one always hesitates to recognise with
   regard to catholic dogma: see the excellent remarks of Schwegler,
   Nachapostolisches Zeitalter, Vol. I. p. 3 ff. It may be hoped that an
   intelligent consideration of early christian literature will form the
   bridge to a broad and intelligent view of the history of dogma. The
   essay of Overbeck mentioned above (Histor. Zeitschrift N. F. XII. p.
   417 ff.) may be most heartily recommended in this respect. It is very
   gratifying to find an investigator so conservative as Sohm, now fully
   admitting that "Christian theology grew up in the second and third
   centuries, when its foundations were laid for all time (?), the last
   great production of the Hellenic Spirit." (Kirchengeschichte im
   Grundriss. 1888, p. 37). The same scholar in his very important
   Kirchenrecht. Bd. I. 1892. has transferred to the history of the origin
   of Church law and Church organization, the points of view which I have
   applied in the following account to the consideration of dogma. He has
   thereby succeeded in correcting many old errors and prejudices; but in
   my opinion he has obscured the truth by exaggerations connected with a
   conception, not only of original Christianity, but also of the Gospel
   in general, which is partly a narrow legal view, partly an enthusiastic
   one. He has arrived ex errare per veritatem ad errorem; but there are
   few books from which so much may be learned about early church history
   as from this paradoxical " Kirchenrecht."
     __________________________________________________________________

II

THE PRESUPPOSITIONS OF THE HISTORY OF DOGMA

   § I. Introductory.

   THE Gospel presents itself as an Apocalyptic message on the soil of the
   Old Testament, and as the fulfilment of the law and the prophets, and
   yet is a new thing, the creation of a universal religion on the basis
   of that of the Old Testament. It appeared when the time was fulfilled,
   that is, it is not without a connection with the stage of religious and
   spiritual development which was brought about by the intercourse of
   Jews and Greeks, and was established in the Roman Empire; but still it
   is a new religion because it cannot be separated from Jesus Christ.
   When the traditional religion has become too narrow the new religion
   usually appears as something of a very abstract nature; philosophy
   comes upon the scene, and religion withdraws from social life and
   becomes a private matter. But here an overpowering personality has
   appeared--the Son of God. Word and deed coincide in that personality,
   and as it leads men into a new communion with God, it unites them at
   the same time inseparably with itself, enables them to act on the world
   as light and leaven, and joins them together in a spiritual unity and
   an active confederacy.

   2. Jesus Christ brought no new doctrine, but he set forth in his own
   person a holy life with God and before God, and gave himself in virtue
   of this life to the service of his brethren in order to win then for
   the Kingdom of God, that is, to lead them out of selfishness and the
   world to God, out of the natural connections and contrasts to a union
   in love, and prepare them for an eternal kingdom and an eternal life.
   But while working for this Kingdom of God he did not withdraw from the
   religious and political communion of his people, nor did he induce his
   disciples to leave that communion. On the contrary, he described the
   Kingdom of God as the fulfilment of the promises given to the nation,
   and himself as the Messiah whom that nation expected. By doing so he
   secured for his new message, and with it his own person, a place in the
   system of religious ideas and hopes, which by means of the Old
   Testament were then, in diverse forms, current in the Jewish nation.
   The origin of a doctrine concerning the Messianic hope, in which the
   Messiah was no longer an unknown being, but Jesus of Nazareth, along
   with the new temper and disposition of believers was a direct result of
   the impression made by the person of Jesus. The conception of the Old
   Testament in accordance with the analogia fidei, that is, in accordance
   with the conviction that this Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ, was
   therewith given. Whatever sources of comfort and strength Christianity,
   even in its New Testament, has possessed or does possess up to the
   present, is for the most part taken from the Old Testament, viewed from
   a Christian stand-point, in virtue of the impression of the person of
   Jesus. Even its dross was changed into gold; its hidden treasures were
   brought forth, and while the earthly and transitory were recognised as
   symbols of the heavenly and eternal, there rose up a world of
   blessings, of holy ordinances, and of sure grace prepared by God from
   eternity. One could joyfully make oneself at home in it; for its long
   history guaranteed a sure future and a blessed close, while it offered
   comfort and certainty in all the changes of life to every individual
   heart that would only raise itself to God. From the positive position
   which Jesus took up towards the Old Testament, that is, towards the
   religious traditions of his people, his Gospel gained a footing which,
   later on, preserved it from dissolving in the glow of enthusiasm, or
   melting away in the ensnaring dream of antiquity, that dream of the
   indestructible Divine nature of the human spirit, and the nothingness
   and baseness of all material things. [47] But from the positive
   attitude of Jesus to the Jewish tradition, there followed also, for a
   generation that had long been accustomed to grope after the Divine
   active in the world, the summons to think out a theory of the media of
   revelation, and so put an end to the uncertainty with which speculation
   had hitherto been afflicted. This, like every theory of religion,
   concealed in itself the danger of crippling the power of faith; for men
   are ever prone to compound with religion itself by a religious theory.

   3. The result of the preaching of Jesus, however, in the case of the
   believing Jews, was not only the illumination of the Old Testament by
   the Gospel and the confirmation of the Gospel by the Old Testament, but
   not less, though indirectly, the detachment of believers from the
   religious community of the Jews from the Jewish Church. How this came
   about cannot be discussed here: we may satisfy ourselves with the fact
   that it was essentially accomplished in the first two generations of
   believers. The Gospel was a message for humanity even when there was no
   break with Judaism; but it seemed impossible to bring this message home
   to men who were not Jews in any other way than by leaving the Jewish
   Church. But to leave that Church was to declare it to be worthless, and
   that could only be done by conceiving it as a malformation from its
   very commencement, or assuming that it had temporarily or completely
   fulfilled its mission. In either case it was necessary to put another
   in its place, for, according to the Old Testament, it was
   unquestionable that God had not only given revelations, but through
   these revelations had founded a nation, a religious community. The
   result, also, to which the conduct of the unbelieving Jews, and the
   social union of the disciples of Jesus required by that conduct, led,
   was carried home with irresistible power: believers in Christ are the
   community of God, they are the true Israel, the ekklesi'a tou theou:
   but the Jewish Church persisting in its unbelief is the Synagogue of
   Satan. Out of this consciousness sprang--first as a power in which one
   believed, but which immediately began to be operative, though not as a
   commonwealth--the Christian Church, a special communion of hearts on
   the basis of a personal union with God, established by Christ and
   mediated by the Spirit; a communion whose essential mark was to claim
   as its own the Old Testament and the idea of being the people of God,
   to sweep aside the Jewish conception of the Old Testament and the
   Jewish Church, and thereby gain the shape and power of a community that
   is capable of a mission for the world.

   4. This independent Christian community could not have been formed had
   not Judaism, in consequence of inner and outer developments, then
   reached a point at which it must either altogether cease to grow or
   burst its shell. This community is the presupposition of the history of
   dogma, and the position which it took up towards the Jewish tradition
   is, strictly speaking, the point of departure for all further
   developments, so far as with the removal of all national and ceremonial
   peculiarities it proclaimed itself to be what the Jewish Church wished
   to be. We find the Christian Church about the middle of the third
   century, after severe crisis, in nearly the same position to the Old
   Testament and to Judaism as it was 150 or 200 years earlier. [48] It
   makes the same claim to the Old Testament, and builds its faith and
   hope upon its teaching. It is also, as before, strictly anti-national;
   above all, anti-judaic, and sentences the Jewish religious community to
   the abyss of hell. It might appear, then, as though the basis for the
   further development of Christianity as a church was completely given
   from the moment in which the first breach of believers with the
   synagogue and the formation of independent Christian communities took
   place. The problem, the solution of which will always exercise this
   church, so far as it reflects upon its faith, will be to turn the Old
   Testament more completely to account in its own sense, so as to condemn
   the Jewish Church with its particular and national forms.

   5. But the rule even for the Christian use of the Old Testament lay
   originally in the living connection in which one stood with the Jewish
   people and its traditions, and a new religious community, a religious
   commonwealth, was not yet realised, although it existed for faith and
   thought. If again we compare the Church about the middle of the third
   century with the condition of Christendom 150 or 200 years before, we
   shall find that there is now a real religious commonwealth, while at
   the earlier period there were only communities who believed in a
   heavenly Church, whose earthly image they were, endeavoured to give it
   expression with the simplest means, and lived in the future as
   strangers and pilgrims on the earth, hastening to meet the Kingdom of
   whose existence they had the surest guarantee. We now really find a new
   commonwealth, politically formed and equipped with fixed forms of all
   kinds. We recognise in these forms few Jewish, but many Græco-Roman
   features, and finally we perceive also in the doctrine of faith on
   which this common-wealth is based, the philosophic spirit of the
   Greeks. We find a Church as a political union and worship institute, a
   formulated faith and a sacred learning; but one thing we no longer
   find, the old enthusiasm and individualism which had not felt itself
   fettered by subjection to the authority of the Old Testament. Instead
   of enthusiastic independent Christians, we find a new literature of
   revelation, the New Testament, and Christian priests. When did these
   formations begin? How and by what influence was the living faith
   transformed into the creed to be believed, the surrender to Christ into
   a philosophic Christology, the Holy Church into the corpus permixtum,
   the glowing hope of the Kingdom of heaven into a doctrine of
   immortality and deification, prophecy into a learned exegesis and
   theological science, the bearers of the spirit into clerics, the
   brethren into laity held in tutelage, miracles and healings into
   nothing or into priestcraft, the fervent prayers into a solemn ritual,
   renunciation of the world into a jealous dominion over the world, the
   "spirit" into constraint and law ?

   There can be no doubt about the answer: these formations are as old in
   their origin as the detachment of the Gospel from the Jewish Church. A
   religious faith which seeks to establish a communion of its own in
   opposition to another, is compelled to borrow from that other what it
   needs. The religion which is life and feeling of the heart cannot be
   converted into a knowledge determining the motley multitude of men
   without deferring to their wishes and opinions. Even the holiest must
   clothe itself in the same existing earthly forms as the profane if it
   wishes to found on earth a confederacy which is to take the place of
   another, and if it does not wish to enslave, but to determine the
   reason. When the Gospel was rejected by the Jewish nation, and had
   disengaged itself from all connection with that nation, it was already
   settled whence it must take the material to form for itself a new body
   and be transformed into a Church and a theology. National and
   particular, in the ordinary sense of the word, these forms could not
   be: the contents of the Gospel were too rich for that; but separated
   from Judaism, nay, even before that separation, the Christian religion
   came in contact with the Roman world and with a culture which had
   already mastered the world, viz., the Greek. The Christian Church and
   its doctrine were developed within the Roman world and Greek culture in
   opposition to the Jewish Church. This fact is just as important for the
   history of dogma as the other stated above, that this Church was
   continuously nourished on the Old Testament. Christendom was of course
   conscious of being in opposition to the empire and its culture, as well
   as to Judaism; but this from the beginning--apart from a few
   exceptions--was not without reservations. No man can serve two masters;
   but in setting up a spiritual power in this world one must serve an
   earthly master, even when he desires to naturalise the spiritual in the
   world. As a consequence of the complete break with the Jewish Church
   there followed not only the strict necessity of quarrying the stones
   for the building of the Church from the Græco-Roman world, but also the
   idea that Christianity has a more positive relation to that world than
   to the synagogue. And, as the Church was being built, the original
   enthusiasm must needs vanish. The separation from Judaism having taken
   place, it was necessary that the spirit of another people should be
   admitted, and should also materially determine the manner of turning
   the Old Testament to advantage.

   6. But an inner necessity was at work here no less than an outer.
   Judaism and Hellenism in the age of Christ were opposed to each other,
   not only as dissimilar powers of equal value, but the latter having its
   origin among a small people, became a universal spiritual power, which,
   severed from its original nationality, had for that very reason
   penetrated foreign nations. It had even laid hold of Judaism, and the
   anxious care of her professional watchmen to hedge round the national
   possession, is but a proof of the advancing decomposition within the
   Jewish nation. Israel, no doubt, had a sacred treasure which was of
   greater value than all the treasures of the Greeks,--the living God;
   but in what miserable vessels was this treasure preserved, and how much
   inferior was all else possessed by this nation in comparison with the
   riches, the power, the delicacy and freedom of the Greek spirit and its
   intellectual possessions. A movement like that of Christianity, which
   discovered to the Jew the soul whose dignity was not dependent on its
   descent from Abraham, but on its responsibility to God, could not
   continue in the frame-work of Judaism however expanded, but must soon
   recognise in that world which the Greek spirit had discovered and
   prepared, the field which belonged to it: eiko'tos Ioudai'oi's me`n
   no'mos, E'llesi de` philosophi'a me'chris tes parousi'as enteuthen de`
   e klesis e katholike' [to the Jews the law, to the Greeks Philosophy,
   up to the Parousia; from that time the catholic invitation]. But the
   Gospel at first was preached exclusively to the lost sheep of the house
   of Israel, and that which inwardly united it with Hellenism did not yet
   appear in any doctrine or definite form of knowledge.

   On the contrary, the Church doctrine of faith, in the preparatory
   stage, from the Apologists up to the time of Origen, hardly in any
   point shews the traces, scarcely even the remembrance of a time in
   which the Gospel was not detached from Judaism. For that very reason it
   is absolutely impossible to understand this preparation and development
   solely from the writings that remain to us as monuments of that short
   earliest period. The attempts at deducing the genesis of the Church's
   doctrinal system from the theology of Paul, or from compromises between
   Apostolic doctrinal ideas, will always miscarry; for they fail to note
   that to the most important premises of the Catholic doctrine of faith
   belongs an element which we cannot recognise as dominant in the New
   Testament. [49] viz., the Hellenic [50] spirit. As far backwards as we
   can trace the history of the propagation of the Church's doctrine of
   faith, from the middle of the third century to the end of the first, we
   nowhere perceive a leap, or the sudden influx of an entirely new
   element. What we perceive is rather the gradual disappearance of an
   original element, the Enthusiastic and Apocalyptic, that is, of the
   sure consciousness of an immediate possession of the Divine Spirit, and
   the hope of the future conquering the present; individual piety
   conscious of itself and sovereign, living in the future world,
   recognising no external authority and no external barriers. This piety
   became ever weaker and passed away: the utilising of the Codex of
   Revelation, the Old Testament, proportionally increased with the
   Hellenic influences which controlled the process, for the two went
   always hand in hand. At an earlier period the Churches made very little
   use of either, because they had in individual religious inspiration on
   the basis of Christ's preaching and the sure hope of his Kingdom which
   was near at hand, much more than either could bestow. The factors whose
   co-operation we observe in the second and third centuries, were already
   operative among the earliest Gentile Christians. We nowhere find a
   yawning gulf in the great development which lies between the first
   Epistle of Clement and the work of Origen, Peri` archon. Even the
   importance which the "Apostolic" was to obtain, was already
   foreshadowed by the end of the first century, and enthusiasm always had
   its limits. [51] The most decisive division, therefore, falls before
   the end of the first century; or more correctly, the relatively new
   element, the Greek, which is of importance for the forming of the
   Church as a commonwealth, and consequently for the formation of its
   doctrine, is clearly present in the churches even in the Apostolic age.
   Two hundred years, however, passed before it made itself completely at
   home in the Gospel, although there were points of connection inherent
   in the Gospel.

   7. The cause of the great historical fact is clear. It is given in the
   fact that the Gospel, rejected by the majority of the Jews, was very
   soon proclaimed to those who were not Jews, that after a few decades
   the greater number of its professors were found among the Greeks, and
   that, consequently. the development leading to the Catholic dogma took
   place within Grco-Roman culture. But within this culture there was
   lacking the power of understanding either the idea of the completed Old
   Testament theocracy, or the idea of the Messiah. Both of these
   essential elements of the original proclamation, therefore, must either
   be neglected or remodelled. [52] But it is hardly allowable to mention
   details however important, where the whole aggregate of ideas, of
   religious historical perceptions and presuppositions, which were based
   on the old Testament, understood in a Christian sense, presented itself
   as something new and strange. One can easily appropriate words, but not
   practical ideas. Side by side with the Old Testament religion as the
   presupposition of the Gospel, and using its forms of thought, the moral
   and religious views and ideals dominant in the world of Greek culture
   could not but insinuate themselves into the communities consisting of
   Gen-tiles. From the enormous material that was brought home to the
   hearts of the Greeks, whether formulated by Paul or by any other, only
   a few rudimentary ideas could at first be appropriated. For that very
   reason, the Apostolic Catholic doctrine of faith in its preparation and
   establishment, is no mere continuation of that which, by uniting things
   that are certainly very dissimilar, is wont to be described as
   "Biblical Theology of the New Testament." Biblical Theology, even when
   kept within reasonable limits, is not the presupposition of the history
   of dogma. The Gentile Christians were little able to comprehend the
   controversies which stirred the Apostolic age within Jewish
   Christianity. The presuppositions of the history of dogma are given in
   certain fundamental ideas, or rather motives of the Gospel, (in the
   preaching concerning Jesus Christ, in the teaching of Evangelic ethics
   and the future life, in the Old Testament capable of any
   interpretation, but to be interpreted with reference to Christ and the
   Evangelic history), and in the Greek spirit. [53]

   8. The foregoing statements involve that the difference between the
   development which led to the Catholic doctrine of religion and the
   original condition, was by no means a total one. By recognising the Old
   Testament as a book of Divine revelation, the Gentile Christians
   received along with it the religious speech which was used by Jewish
   Christians, were made dependent upon the interpretation which had been
   used from the very beginning, and even received a great part of the
   Jewish literature which accompanied the Old Testament. But the
   possession of a common religious speech and literature is never a mere
   outward bond of union, however strong the impulse be to introduce the
   old familiar contents into the newly acquired speech. The Jewish, that
   is, the Old Testament element, divested of its national peculiarity,
   has remained the basis of Christendom. It has saturated this element
   with the Greek spirit, but has always clung to its main idea, faith in
   God as the creator and ruler of the world. It has in the course of its
   development rejected important parts of that Jewish element, and has
   borrowed others at a later period from the great treasure that was
   transmitted to it. It has also been able to turn to account the least
   adaptable features, if only for the external confirmation of its own
   ideas. The Old Testament applied to Christ and his universal Church has
   always remained the decisive document, and it was long ere Christian
   writings received the same authority, long ere individual doctrines and
   sayings of Apostolic writings obtained an influence on the formation of
   ecclesiastical doctrine.

   9. From yet another side there makes its appearance an agreement
   between the circles of Palestinian believers in Jesus and the Gentile
   Christian communities, which endured for more than a century, though it
   was of course gradually effaced. It is the enthusiastic element which
   unites them, the consciousness of standing in an immediate union with
   God through the Spirit, and receiving directly from God's hand
   miraculous gifts, powers and revelations, granted to the individual
   that he may turn them to account in the service of the Church. The
   depotentiation of the Christian religion, where one may believe in the
   inspiration of another, but no longer feels his own, nay, dare not feel
   it, is not altogether coincident with its settlements on Greek soil. On
   the contrary, it was more than two centuries ere weakness and
   reflection suppressed, or all but suppressed, the forms in which the
   personal consciousness of God originally expressed itself. [54] Now it
   certainly lies in the nature of enthusiasm, that it can assume the most
   diverse forms of expression, and follow very different impulses, and so
   far it frequently separates instead of uniting. But so long as
   criticism and reflection are not yet awakened, and a uniform ideal
   hovers before one, it does unite, and in this sense there existed an
   identity of disposition between the earliest Jewish Christians and the
   still enthusiastic Gentile Christian communities.

   10. But, finally, there is a still further uniting element between the
   beginnings of the development to Catholicism, and the original
   condition of the Christian religion as a movement within Judaism, the
   importance of which cannot be over-rated, although we have every reason
   to complain here of the obscurity of the tradition. Between the
   Græco-Roman world which was in search of a spiritual religion, and the
   Jewish commonwealth which already possessed such a religion as a
   national property, though vitiated by exclusiveness, there had long
   been a Judaism which, penetrated by the Greek spirit, was, ex professo,
   devoting itself to the task of bringing a new religion to the Greek
   world, the Jewish religion, but that religion in its kernel Greek, that
   is, philosophically moulded, spiritualised and secularised. Here then
   was already consummated an intimate union of the Greek spirit with the
   Old Testament religion, within the Empire and to a less degree in
   Palestine itself. If everything is not to be dissolved into a grey
   mist, we must clearly distinguish this union between Judaism and
   Hellenism and the spiritualising of religion it produced, from the
   powerful but indeterminable influences which the Greek spirit exercised
   on all things Jewish, and which have been a historical condition of the
   Gospel. The alliance, in my opinion, was of no significance at all for
   the origin of the Gospel, but was of the most decided importance,
   first, for the propagation of Christianity, and then, for the
   development of Christianity to Catholicism, and for the genesis of the
   Catholic doctrine of faith. [55] We cannot certainly name any
   particular personality who was specially active in this, but we can
   mention three facts which prove more than individual references. (1)
   The propaganda of Christianity in the Diaspora followed the Jewish
   propaganda and partly took its place, that is, the Gospel was at first
   preached to those Gentiles who were already acquainted with the general
   outlines of the Jewish religion, and who were even frequently viewed as
   a Judaism of a second order, in which Jewish and Greek elements had
   been united in a peculiar mixture. (2) The conception of the Old
   Testament, as we find it even in the earliest Gentile Christian
   teachers, the method of spiritualising it, etc., agrees in the most
   surprising way with the methods which were used by the Alexandrian
   Jews. (3) There are Christian documents in no small number and of
   unknown origin, which completely agree in plan, in form and contents
   with Græco-Jewish writings of the Diaspora, as for example, the
   Christian Sibylline Oracles, and the pseudo-Justinian treatise, "de
   Monarchia." There are numerous tractates of which it is impossible to
   say with certainty whether they are of Jewish or of Christian origin.

   The Alexandrian and non-Palestinian Judaism is still Judaism. As the
   Gospel seized and moved the whole of Judaism, it must also have been
   operative in the non-Palestinian Judaism. But that already foreshadowed
   the transition of the Gospel to the non-Jewish Greek region, and the
   fate which it was to experience there. For that non-Palestinian Judaism
   formed the bridge between the Jewish Church and the Roman Empire,
   together with its culture. [56] The Gospel passed into the world
   chiefly by this bridge. Paul indeed had a large share in this, but his
   own Churches did not understand the way he led them, and were not able
   on looking back to find it. [57] He indeed became a Greek to the
   Greeks, and even began the undertaking of placing the treasures of
   Greek knowledge at the service of the Gospel. But the knowledge of
   Christ crucified, to which he subordinated all other knowledge as only
   of preparatory value, had nothing in common with Greek philosophy,
   while the idea of justification and the doctrine of the Spirit (Rom.
   VIII.), which together formed the peculiar contents of his
   Christianity, were irreconcilable with the moralism and the religious
   ideals of Hellenism. But the great mass of the earliest Gentile
   Christians became Christians because they perceived in the Gospel the
   sure tidings of the benefits and obligations which they had already
   sought in the fusion of Jewish and Greek elements. It is only by
   discerning this that we can grasp the preparation and genesis of the
   Catholic Church and its dogma.

   From the foregoing statements it appears that there fall to be
   considered as presuppositions of the origin of the Catholic Apostolic
   doctrine of faith, the following topics, though of unequal importance
   as regards the extent of their influence.

   (a). The Gospel of Jesus Christ.

   (b). The common preaching of Jesus Christ in the first generation of
   believers.

   (c). The current exposition of the Old Testament, the Jewish
   speculations and hopes of the future, in their significance for the
   earliest types of Christian preaching. [58]

   (d). The religious conceptions, and the religious philosophy of the
   Hellenistic Jews, in their significance for the later restatement of
   the Gospel.

   (e). The religious dispositions of the Greeks and Romans of the first
   two centuries, and the current Græco-Roman philosophy of religion.

   § 2. The Gospel of Jesus Christ according to His own testimony
   concerning Himself.

   I. The Fundamental Features.

   The Gospel entered into the world as an apocalyptic eschatological
   message, apocalyptical and eschatological not only in its form, but
   also in its contents. But Jesus announced that the kingdom of God had
   already begun with his own work, and those who received him in faith
   became sensible of this beginning; for the "apocalyptical" was not
   merely the unveiling of the future, but above all the revelation of God
   as the Father, and the "eschatological" received its counterpoise in
   the view of Jesus' work as Saviour, in the assurance of being certainly
   called to the kingdom, and in the conviction that life and future
   dominion is hid with God the Lord and preserved for believers by him.
   Consequently, we are following not only the indications of the
   succeeding history, but also the requirement of the thing itself, when,
   in the presentation of the Gospel, we place in the foreground, not that
   which unites it with the contemporary disposition of Judaism, but that
   which raises it above it. Instead of the hope of inheriting the
   kingdom, Jesus had also spoken simply of preserving the soul, or the
   life. In this one substitution lies already a transformation of
   universal significance, of political religion into a religion that is
   individual and therefore holy; for the life is nourished by the word of
   God, but God is the Holy One.

   The Gospel is the glad message of the government of the world and of
   every individual soul by the almighty and holy God, the Father and
   Judge. In this dominion of God, which frees men from the power of the
   Devil, makes them rulers in a heavenly kingdom in contrast with the
   kingdoms of the world, and which will also be sensibly realised in the
   future on just about to appear, is secured life for all men who yield
   themselves to God, although they should lose the world and the earthly
   life. That is, the soul which is pure and holy in connection with God,
   and in imitation of the Divine perfection is eternally preserved with
   God, while those who would gain the world and preserve their life, fall
   into the hands of the Judge who sentences them to Hell. This dominion
   of God imposes on men a law, an old and yet a new law, viz., that of
   the Divine perfection and therefore of undivided love to God and to our
   neighbour. In this love, where it sways the inmost feeling, is
   presented the better righteousness (better not only with respect to the
   Scribes and Pharisees, but also with respect to Moses, see Matt. V.),
   which corresponds to the perfection of God. The way to attain it is a
   change of mind, that is, self-denial, humility before God, and
   heartfelt trust in him. In this humility and trust in God there is
   contained a recognition of one's own unworthiness; but the Gospel calls
   to the kingdom of God those very sinners who are thus minded, by
   promising the forgiveness of the sins which hitherto have separated
   them from God. But the Gospel which appears in these three elements,
   the dominion of God, a better righteousness embodied in the law of
   love, and the forgiveness of sin, is inseparably connected with Jesus
   Christ; for in preaching this Gospel Jesus Christ everywhere calls men
   to himself. In him the Gospel is word and deed; it has become his food,
   and therefore his personal life, and into this life of his he draws all
   others. He is the Son who knows the Father. In him men are to perceive
   the kindness of the Lord; in him they are to feel God's power and
   government of the world, and to become certain of this consolation;
   they are to follow him the meek and lowly, and while he, the pure and
   holy one, calls sinners to himself, they are to receive the assurance
   that God through him forgiveth sin.

   Jesus Christ has by no express statement thrust this connection of his
   Gospel with his Person into the foreground. No words could have
   certified it unless his life, the overpowering impression of his
   Person, had created it. By living, acting and speaking from the riches
   of that life which he lived with his Father, he became for others the
   revelation of the God of whom they formerly had heard, but whom they
   had not known. He declared his Father to be their Father and they
   understood him. But he also declared himself to be Messiah, and in so
   doing gave an intelligible expression to his abiding significance for
   them and for his people. In a solemn hour at the close of his life, as
   well as on special occasions at an earlier period, he referred to the
   fact that the surrender to his Person which induced them to leave all
   and follow him, was no passing element in the new position they had
   gained towards God the Father. He tells them, on the contrary, that
   this surrender corresponds to the service which he will perform for
   them and for the many, when he will give his life a sacrifice for the
   sins of the world. By teaching them to think of him and of his death in
   the breaking of bread and the drinking of wine, and by saying of his
   death that it takes place for the remission of sins, he has claimed as
   his due from all future disciples what was a matter of course so long
   as he sojourned with them, but what might fade away after he was parted
   from them. He who in his preaching of the kingdom of God raised the
   strictest self-examination and humility to a law, and exhibited them to
   his followers in his own life, has described with clear consciousness
   his life crowned by death as the imperishable service by which men in
   all ages will be cleansed from their sin and made joyful in their God.
   By so doing he put himself far above all others, although they were to
   become his brethren; and claimed a unique and permanent importance as
   Redeemer and Judge. This permanent importance as the Lord he secured,
   not by disclosures about the mystery of his Person, but by the
   impression of his life and the interpretation of his death. He
   interprets it, like all his sufferings, as a victory, as the passing
   over to his glory, and in spite of the cry of God-forsakenness upon the
   cross, he has proved himself able to awaken in his followers the real
   conviction that he lives and is Lord and Judge of the living and the
   dead.

   The religion of the Gospel is based on this belief in Jesus Christ,
   that is, by looking to him, this historical person, it becomes certain
   to the believer that God rules heaven and earth, and that God, the
   Judge, is also Father and Redeemer. The religion of the Gospel is the
   religion which makes the highest moral demands, the simplest and the
   most difficult, and discloses the contradiction in which every man
   finds himself towards them. But it also procures redemption from such
   misery, by drawing the life of men into the inexhaustible and blessed
   life of Jesus Christ, who has overcome the world and called sinners to
   himself.

   In making this attempt to put together the fundamental features of the
   Gospel, I have allowed myself to be guided by the results of this
   Gospel in the case of the first disciples. I do not know whether it is
   permissible to present such fundamental features apart from this
   guidance. The preaching of Jesus Christ was in the main so plain and
   simple, and in its application so manifold and rich, that one shrinks
   from attempting to systematise it, and would much rather merely narrate
   according to the Gospel. Jesus searches for the point in every man on
   which he can lay hold of him and lead him to the Kingdom of God. The
   distinction of good and evil--for God or against God--he would make a
   life question for every man, in order to shew him for whom it has
   become this, that he can depend upon the God whom he is to fear. At the
   same time he did not by any means uniformly fall back upon sin, or even
   the universal sinfulness, but laid hold of individuals very diversely,
   and led them to God by different paths. The doctrinal concentration of
   redemption on sin was certainly not carried out by Paul alone; but, on
   the other hand, it did not in any way become the prevailing form for
   the preaching of the Gospel. On the contrary, the antitheses, night,
   error, dominion of demons, death and light, truth, deliverance, life,
   proved more telling in the Gentile Churches. The consciousness of
   universal sinfulness was first made the negative fundamental frame of
   mind of Christendom by Augustine.

   II. Details.

   1. Jesus announced the Kingdom of God which stands in opposition to the
   kingdom of the devil, and therefore also to the kingdom of the world,
   as a future Kingdom, and yet it is presented in his preaching as
   present; as an invisible, and yet it was visible--for one actually saw
   it. He lived and spoke within the circle of eschatological ideas which
   Judaism had developed more than two hundred years before: but he
   controlled them by giving them a new content and forcing them into a
   new direction. Without abrogating the law and the prophets he, on
   fitting occasions, broke through the national, political and sensuous
   eudæmonistic forms in which the nation was expecting the realisation of
   the dominion of God, but turned their attention at the same time to a
   future near at hand, in which believers would be delivered from the
   oppression of evil and sin, and would enjoy blessedness and dominion.
   Yet he declared that even now, every individual who is called into the
   kingdom may call on God as his Father, and be sure of the gracious will
   of God, the hearing of his prayers, the forgiveness of sin. and the
   protection of God even in this present life. [59] But everything in
   this proclamation is directed to the life beyond: the certainty of that
   life is the power and earnestness of the Gospel.

   2. The conditions of entrance to the kingdom are, in the first place, a
   complete change of mind, in which a man renounces the pleasures of this
   world, denies himself, and is ready to surrender all that he has in
   order to save his soul; then, a believing trust in God's grace which he
   grants to the humble and the poor, and therefore hearty confidence in
   Jesus as the Messiah chosen and called by God to realise his kingdom on
   the earth. The announcement is therefore directed to the poor, the
   suffering, those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, not to
   those who live, but to those who wish to be healed and redeemed, and
   finds them prepared for entrance into, and reception of the blessings
   of the kingdom of God, [60] while it brings down upon the
   self-satisfied, the rich and those proud of their righteousness, the
   judgment of obduracy and the damnation of Hell.

   3. The commandment of undivided love to God and the brethren, as the
   main commandment, in the observance of which righteousness is realised,
   and forming the antithesis to the selfish mind, the lust of the world,
   and every arbitrary impulse, [61] corresponds to the blessings of the
   Kingdom of God, viz., forgiveness of sin, righteousness, dominion and
   blessedness. The standard of personal worth for the members of the
   Kingdom is self-sacrificing labour for others, not any technical mode
   of worship or legal preciseness. Renunciation of the world together
   with its goods, even of life itself in certain circumstances, is the
   proof of a man's sincerity and earnestness in seeking the Kingdom of
   God; and the meekness. which renounces every right, bears wrong
   patiently, requiting it with kindness, is the practical proof of love
   to God, the conduct that answers to God's perfection.

   4. In the proclamation and founding of this kingdom, Jesus summoned men
   to attach themselves to him, because he had recognised himself to be
   the helper called by God, and therefore also the Messiah who was
   promised. [62] He gradually declared himself to the people as such by
   the names he assumed, [63] for the names "Anointed," "King," "Lord,"
   "Son of David," "Son of Man," "Son of God," all denote the Messianic
   office, and were familiar to the greater part of the people. [64] But
   though, at first, they express only the call, office, and power of the
   Messiah, yet by means of them and especially by the designation Son of
   God, Jesus pointed to a relation to God the Father, then and in its
   immediateness unique, as the basis of the office with which he was
   entrusted. He has, however, given no further explanation of the mystery
   of this relation than the declaration that the Son alone knoweth the
   Father, and that this knowledge of God and Sonship to God are secured
   for all others by the sending of the Son. [65] In the proclamation of
   God as Father, [66] as well as in the other proclamation that all the
   members of the kingdom following the will of God in love, are to become
   one with the Son and through him with the Father, [67] the message of
   the realised kingdom of God receives its richest, inexhaustible
   content: the Son of the Father will be the first-born among many
   brethren.

   5. Jesus as the Messiah chosen by God has definitely distinguished
   himself from Moses and all the Prophets: as his preaching and his work
   are the fulfilment of the law and the prophets, so he himself is not a
   disciple of Moses, but corrects that law-giver; he is not a Prophet,
   but Master and Lord. He proves this Lordship during his earthly
   ministry in the accomplishment of the mighty deeds given him to do,
   above all in withstanding the Devil and his kingdom, [68]
   and--according to the law of the Kingdom of God--for that very reason
   in the service which he performs. In this service Jesus also reckoned
   the sacrifice of his life, designating it as a "lu'trn" which he
   offered for the redemption of man. [69] But he declared at the same
   time that his Messianic work was not yet fulfilled in his subjection to
   death. On the contrary, the close is merely initiated by his death; for
   the completion of the kingdom will only appear when he returns in glory
   in the clouds of heaven to judgment. Jesus seems to have announced this
   speedy return a short time before his death, and to have comforted his
   disciples at his departure, with the assurance that he would
   immediately enter into a supramundane position with God. [70]

   6. The instructions of Jesus to his disciples are accordingly dominated
   by the thought that the end,--the day and hour of which, however, no
   one knows,--is at hand. In consequence of this, also, the exhortation
   to renounce all earthly good takes a prominent place. But Jesus does
   not impose ascetic commandments as a new law, far less does he see in
   asceticism, as such, sanctification [71] --he himself did not live as
   an ascetic, but was reproached as a wine-bibber--but he prescribed a
   perfect simplicity and purity of disposition, and a singleness of heart
   which remains invariably the same in trouble and renunciation, in
   possession and use of earthly good. A uniform equality of all in the
   conduct of life is not commanded: "To whom much is given, of him much
   shall be required." The disciples are kept as far from fanaticism and
   overrating of spiritual results as from asceticism. "Rejoice not that
   the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written
   in heaven." When they besought him to teach them to pray, he taught
   them the "Lord's prayer", a prayer which demands such a collected mind,
   and such a tranquil, childlike elevation of the heart to God, that it
   cannot be offered at all by minds subject to passion or preoccupied by
   any daily cares.

   7. Jesus himself did not found a new religious community, but gathered
   round him a circle of disciples, and chose Apostles whom he commanded
   to preach the Gospel. His preaching was universalistic inasmuch as it
   attributed no value to ceremonialism as such, and placed the fulfilment
   of the Mosaic law in the exhibition of its moral contents, partly
   against or beyond the letter. He made the law perfect by harmonising
   its particular requirements with the fundamental moral requirements
   which were also expressed in the Mosaic law. He emphasised the
   fundamental requirements more decidedly than was done by the law
   itself, and taught that all details should be referred to them and
   deduced from them. The external righteousness of Pharisaism was thereby
   declared to be not only an outer covering, but also a fraud, and the
   bond which still united religion and nationality in Judaism was
   sundered. [72] Political and national elements may probably have been
   made prominent in the hopes of the future, as Jesus appropriated them
   for his preaching. But from the conditions to which the realising of
   the hopes for the individual was attached, there already shone the
   clearer ray which was to eclipse those elements, and one saying such as
   Matt. XXII. 31., annulled at once political religion and religious
   politics.

   Supplement 1.--The idea of the inestimable inherent value of every
   individual human soul, already dimly appearing in several psalms, and
   discerned by Greek Philosophers, though as a rule developed in
   contradiction to religion, stands out plainly in the preaching of
   Jesus. It is united with the idea of God as Father, and is the
   complement to the message of the communion of brethren realising itself
   in love. In this sense the Gospel is at once profoundly individualistic
   and Socialistic. The prospect of gaining life, and preserving it for
   ever, is therefore also the highest which Jesus has set forth; it is
   not, however, to be a motive, but a reward of grace. In the certainty
   of this prospect, which is the converse of renouncing the world, he has
   proclaimed the sure hope of the resurrection, and consequently the most
   abundant compensation for the loss of the natural life. Jesus put an
   end to the vacillation and uncertainty which in this respect still
   prevailed among the Jewish people of his day. The confession of the
   Psalmist, "Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon the
   earth that I desire beside thee", and the fulfilling of the Old
   Testament commandment, "Love thy neighbour as thyself", were for the
   first time presented in their connection in the person of Jesus. He
   himself therefore is Christianity, for the "impression of his person
   convinced the disciples of the facts of forgiveness of sin and the
   second birth, and gave them courage to believe in and to lead a new
   life". We cannot therefore state the "doctrine" of Jesus; for it
   appears as a supramundane life which must be felt in the person of
   Jesus, and its truth is guaranteed by the fact that such a life can be
   lived.

   Supplement 2.--The history of the Gospel contains two great
   transitions, both of which, however, fall within the first century;
   from Christ to the first generation of believers, including Paul, and
   from the first, Jewish Christian, generation of these believers to the
   Gentile Christians; in other words, from Christ to the brotherhood of
   believers in Christ, and from this to the incipient Catholic Church. No
   later transitions in the Church can be compared with these in
   importance. As to the first, the question has frequently been asked, Is
   the Gospel of Christ to be the authority or the Gospel concerning
   Christ? But the strict dilemma here is false. The Gospel certainly is
   the Gospel of Christ. For it has only, in the sense of Jesus, fulfilled
   its Mission when the Father has been declared to men as he was known by
   the Son, and where the life is swayed by the realities and principles
   which ruled the life of Jesus Christ. But it is in accordance with the
   mind of Jesus and at the same time a fact of history, that this Gospel
   can only be appropriated and adhered to in connection with a believing
   surrender to the person of Jesus Christ. Yet every dogmatic formula is
   suspicious, be-cause it is fitted to wound the spirit of religion; it
   should not at least be put before the living experience in order to
   evoke it; for such a procedure is really the admission of the half
   belief which thinks it necessary that the impression made by the person
   must be supplemented. The essence of the matter is a personal life
   which awakens life around it as the fire of one torch kindles another.
   Early as weakness of faith is in the Church of Christ, it is no earlier
   than the procedure of making a formulated and ostensibly proved
   confession the foundation of faith, and therefore demanding, above all,
   subjection to this confession. Faith assuredly is propagated by the
   testimony of faith, but dogma is not in itself that testimony.

   The peculiar character of the Christian religion is conditioned by the
   fact that every reference to God is at the same time a reference to
   Jesus Christ, and vice versa. In this sense the Person of Christ is the
   central point of the religion, and inseparably united with the
   substance of piety as a sure reliance on God. Such a union does not, as
   is supposed, bring a foreign element into the pure essence of religion.
   The pure essence of religion rather demands such a union; for "the
   reverence for persons, the inner bowing before the manifestation of
   moral power and goodness is the root of all true religion" (W.
   Herrmann). But the Christian religion knows and names only one name
   before which it bows. In this rests its positive character, in all
   else, as piety, it is by its strictly spiritual and inward attitude,
   not a positive religion alongside of others, but religion itself. But
   just because the Person of Christ has this significance is the
   knowledge and understanding of the "historical Christ" required: for no
   other comes within the sphere of our knowledge. "The historical Christ"
   that, to be sure, is not the powerless Christ of contemporary history
   shewn to us through a coloured biographical medium, or dissipated in
   all sorts of controversies, but Christ as a power and as a life which
   towers above our own life, and enters into our life as God's Spirit and
   God's Word, (see Herrmann, Der Verkehr des Christen mit Gott. 2. Edit.
   1892, [i. e., "The Fellowship of the Christian with God", an important
   work included in the present series of translations. Ed.]: Kähler, Der
   sog. historische Jesus und der geschichtliche biblische Christus,
   1892). But historical labour and investigation are needed in order to
   grasp this Jesus Christ ever more firmly and surely.

   As to the second transition, it brought with it the most important
   changes, which, however, became clearly manifest only after the lapse
   of some generations. They appear, first, in the belief in holy
   consecrations, efficacious in themselves, and administered by chosen
   persons; further, in the conviction, that the relation of the
   individual to God and Christ is, above all, conditioned on the
   acceptance of a definite divinely attested law of faith and holy
   writings; further, in the opinion that God has established Church
   arrangements, observance of which is necessary and meritorious, as well
   as in the opinion that a visible earthly community is the people of a
   new covenant. These assumptions, which formally constitute the essence
   of Catholicism as a religion, have no support in the teaching of Jesus,
   nay, offend against that teaching.

   Supplement 3.--The question as to what new thing Christ has brought,
   answered by Paul in the words, "If any man be in Christ he is a new
   creature, old things are passed away, behold all things are become
   new", has again and again been pointedly put since the middle of the
   second century by Apologists, Theologians and religious Philosophers
   within and without the Church, and has received the most varied
   answers. Few of the answers have reached the height of the Pauline
   confession. But where one cannot attain to this confession, one ought
   to make clear to oneself that every answer which does not lie in the
   line of it is altogether unsatisfactory; for it is not difficult to set
   over against every article from the preaching of Jesus an observation
   which deprives it of its originality. It is the Person, it is the fact
   of his life that is new and creates the new. The way in which he called
   forth and established a people of God on earth, which has become sure
   of God and of eternal life; the way in which he set up a new thing in
   the midst of the old and transformed the religion of Israel into the
   religion: that is the mystery of his Person, in which lies his unique
   and permanent position in the history of humanity.

   Supplement 4.--The conservative position of Jesus towards the religious
   traditions of his people had the necessary result that his preaching
   and his Person were placed by believers in the frame-work of this
   tradition, which was thereby very soon greatly expanded. But, though
   this way of understanding the Gospel was certainly at first the only
   possible way, and though the Gospel itself could only be preserved by
   such means (see § 1), yet it cannot be mistaken that a displacement in
   the conception of the Person and preaching of Jesus, and a burdening of
   religious faith, could not but forthwith set in, from which
   developments followed, the premises of which would be vainly sought for
   in the words of the Lord (see §§ § 3, 4). But here the question arises
   as to whether the Gospel is not inseparably connected with the
   eschatological world-renouncing element with which it entered into the
   world, so that its being is destroyed where this is omitted. A few
   words may be devoted to this question. The Gospel possesses properties
   which oppose every positive religion, because they depreciate it, and
   these properties form the kernel of the Gospel. The disposition which
   is devoted to God, humble, ardent and sincere in its love to God and to
   the brethren, is as an abiding habit, law, and at the same time a gift
   of the Gospel, and also finally exhausts it. This quiet, peaceful
   element was at the beginning strong and vigorous, even in those who
   lived in the world of ecstasy and expected the world to come. One may
   be named for all, Paul. He who wrote I. Cor. XIII. and Rom. VIII.
   should not, in spite of all that he has said elsewhere, be called upon
   to witness that the nature of the Gospel is exhausted in its
   world-renouncing, ecstatic and eschatological elements, or at least
   that it is so inseparable united with these as to fall along with them.
   He who wrote those chapters, and the greater than he who promised the
   kingdom of heaven to children and to those who were hungering and
   thirsting for righteousness, he to whom tradition ascribes the words:
   "Rejoice not that the spirits are subject to you. but rather rejoice
   that your names are written in heaven"--both attest that the Gospel
   lies above the antagonisms between this world and the next, work and
   retirement from the world, reason and ecstasy, Judaism and Hellenism.
   And because it lies above them it may be united with either, as it
   originally unfolded its powers under the ruins of the Jewish religion.
   But still more; it not only can enter into union with them, it must do
   so if it is other-wise the religion of the living and is itself living.
   It has only one aim; that man may find God and have him as his own God,
   in order to gain in him humility and patience, peace, joy and love. How
   it reaches this goal through the advancing centuries, whether with the
   co-efficients of Judaism or Hellenism, of renunciation of the world or
   of culture, of mysticism or the doctrine of predestination, of
   Gnosticism or Agnosticism, and whatever other incrustations there may
   yet be which can defend the kernel, and under which alone living
   elements can grow--all that belongs to the centuries. However each
   individual Christian may reckon to the treasure itself the earthly
   vessel in which he hides his treasure; it is the duty and the right,
   not only of the religious, but also of the historical estimate to
   distinguish between the vessel and the treasure; for the Gospel did not
   enter into the world as a positive statutory religion, and cannot
   therefore have its classic manifestation in any form of its
   intellectual or social types, not even in the first. It is therefore
   the duty of the historian of the first century of the Church, as well
   as that of those which follow, not to be content with fixing the
   changes of the Christian religion, but to examine how far the new forms
   were capable of defending, propagating and impressing the Gospel
   itself. It would probably have perished if the forms of primitive
   Christianity had been scrupulously maintained in the Church; but now
   primitive Christianity has perished in order that the Gospel might be
   preserved. To study this progress of the development, and fix the
   significance of the newly received forms for the kernel of the matter,
   is the last and highest task of the historian who himself lives in his
   subject. He who approaches from without must be satisfied with the
   general view that in the history of the Church some things have always
   remained, and other things have always been changing.

   Literature.--Weiss. Biblical Theology of the New Testament. T. and T.
   Clark. Wittichen. Beitr. z. bibl. Theol. 3. Thle. 1864-72.

   Schurer. Die Predigt Jesu in ihrem Verhaltniss z. A. T. u z. Judenthum,
   1882.

   Wellhausen. Abriss der Gesch. Israels u. Juda's (Skizzen u.
   Vorarbeiten) 1. Heft. 1884.

   Baldensperger. Das Selbstbewusstsein Jesu im Licht der Messianischen
   Hoffnungen seiner Zeit, 1888, (2 Aufl. 1891). The prize essays of
   Schmoller and Issel, Ueber die Lehre vom Reiche Gottes irn N. Test.
   1891 (besides Gunkel in d. Theol. Lit. Ztg. 1893. No. 2).

   Wendt. Die Lehre Jesu. (The teaching of Jesus. T. and T. Clark. English
   translation.)

   Job. Weiss. Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes, 1892.

   Bousset. Jesu Predigt in ihrem Gegensatz zum Judenthum, 1892.

   C. Holtzman. Die Offenbarung durch Christus und das Neue Testament
   (Zeitschr. f. Theol. und Kirche I. p. 367 ff.) The special literature
   in the above work of Weiss, and in the recent works on the life of
   Jesus, and the Biblical Theology of the New Testament by Beyschlag. [T.
   T. Clark]

   § 3. The Common Preaching concerning Jesus Christ in the First
   Generation of Believers.

   Men had met with Jesus Christ and in him had found the Messiah. They
   were convinced that God had made him to be wisdom and righteousness,
   sanctification and redemption. There was no hope that did not seem to
   be certified in him, no lofty idea which had not become in him a living
   reality. Everything that one possessed was offered to him. He was
   everything lofty that could be imagined. Everything that can be said of
   him was already said in the first two generations after his appearance.
   Nay, more: he was felt and known to be the ever living one Lord of the
   world and operative principle of one's own life. "To me to live is
   Christ and to die is gain;" "He is the way, the truth and the life."
   One could now for the first time be certain of the resurrection and
   eternal life, and with that certainty the sorrows of the world melted
   away like mist before the sun, and the residue of this present time
   became as a day. This group of facts which the history of the Gospel
   discloses in the world, is at the same time the highest and most unique
   of all that we meet in that history: it is its seal and distinguishes
   it from all other universal religions. Where in the history of mankind
   can we find anything resembling this, that men who had eaten and drunk
   with their Master should glorify him, not only as the revealer of God,
   but as the Prince of life, as the Redeemer and Judge of the world, as
   the living power of its existence, and that a choir of Jews and
   Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians, wise and foolish, should along with
   them immediately confess that out of the fulness of this one man they
   have received grace for grace? It has been said that Islam furnishes
   the unique example of a religion born in broad daylight, but the
   community of Jesus was also born in the clear light of day. The
   darkness connected with its birth is occasioned not only by the
   imperfection of the records, but by the uniqueness of the fact, which
   refers us back to the uniqueness of the Person of Jesus.

   But though it certainly is the first duty of the historian to signalise
   the overpowering impression made by the Person of Jesus on the
   disciples, which is the basis of all further developments, it would
   little become him to renounce the critical examination of all the
   utterances which have been connected with that Person with the view of
   elucidating and glorifying it; unless he were with Origen to conclude
   that Jesus was to each and all whatever they fancied him to be for
   their edification. But this would destroy the personality. Others are
   of opinion that we should conceive him, in the sense of the early
   communities, as the second God who is one in essence with the Father,
   in order to understand from this point of view all the declarations and
   judgments of these communities. But this hypothesis leads to the most
   violent distortion of the original declarations, and the suppression or
   concealment of their most obvious features. The duty of the historian
   rather consists in fixing the common features of the faith of the first
   two generations, in explaining them as far as possible from the belief
   that Jesus is Messiah, and in seeking analogies for the several
   assertions. Only a very meagre sketch can be given in what follows. The
   presentation of the matter in the frame-work of the history of dogma
   does not permit of more, because as noted above, § 1, the
   presupposition of dogma forming itself in the Gentile Church is not the
   whole infinitely rich abundance of early Christian views and
   perceptions. That presupposition is simply a proclamation of the one
   God and of Christ transferred to Greek soil, fixed merely in its
   leading features and otherwise very plastic, accompanied by a message
   regarding the future, and demands for a holy life. At the same time the
   Old Testament and the early Christian Palestinian writings with the
   rich abundance of their contents, did certainly exercise a silent
   mission in the earliest communities, till by the creation of the canon
   they became a power in the Church.

   1. The contents of the faith of the disciples, [73] and the common
   proclamation which united them, may be comprised in the following
   propositions. Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah promised by the
   prophets. Jesus after his death is by the Divine awakening raised to
   the right hand of God, and will soon return to set up his kingdom
   visibly upon the earth. He who believes in Jesus, and has been received
   into the community of the disciples of Jesus, who, in virtue of a
   sincere change of mind, calls on God as Father, and lives according to
   the commandments of Jesus, is a saint of God, and as such can be
   certain of the sin-forgiving grace of God, and of a share in the future
   glory, that is, of redemption. [74]

   A community of Christian believers was formed within the Jewish
   national community. By its organisation, the close brotherly union of
   its members, it bore witness to the impression which the Person of
   Jesus had made on it, and drew from faith in Jesus and hope of his
   return, the assurance of eternal life, the power of believing in God
   the Father and of fulfilling the lofty moral and social commands which
   Jesus had set forth. They knew themselves to be the true Israel of the
   Messianic time (see § 1), and for that very reason lived with all their
   thoughts and feelings in the future. Hence the Apocalyptic hopes which
   in manifold types were current in the Judaism of the time, and which
   Jesus had not demolished, continued to a great extent in force (see
   § 4). One guarantee for their fulfilment was supposed to be possessed
   in the various manifestations of the Spirit, [75] which were displayed
   in the members of the new communities at their entrance, with which an
   act of baptism seems to have been united from the very first, [76] and
   in their gatherings. They were a guarantee that believers really were
   the ekklesi'a tou theou, those called to be saints, and, as such, kings
   and priests unto God [77] for whom the world, death and devil are
   overcome, although they still rule the course of the world. The
   confession of the God of Israel as the Father of Jesus, and of Jesus as
   Christ and Lord [78] was sealed by the testimony of the possession of
   the Spirit, which as Spirit of God assured every individual of his call
   to the kingdom, united him personally with God himself and became to
   him the pledge of future glory. [79]

   2. As the Kingdom of God which was announced had not yet visibly
   appeared, as the appeal to the Spirit could not be separated from the
   appeal to Jesus as Messiah, and as there was actually nothing possessed
   but the reality of the Person of Jesus, so, in preaching, all stress
   must necessarily fall on this Person. To believe in him was the
   decisive fundamental requirement, and, at first, under the
   presupposition of the religion of Abraham and the Prophets, the sure
   guarantee of salvation. It is not surprising then to find that in the
   earliest Christian preaching Jesus Christ comes before us as frequently
   as the Kingdom of God in the preaching of Jesus himself. The image of
   Jesus and the power which proceeded from it were the things which were
   really possessed. Whatever was expected was expected only from Jesus
   the exalted and returning one. The proclamation that the Kingdom of
   heaven is at hand must therefore become the proclamation that Jesus is
   the Christ, and that in him the revelation of God is complete. He who
   lays hold of Jesus lays hold in him of the grace of God and of a full
   salvation. We cannot, however, call this in itself a displacement: but
   as soon as the proclamation that Jesus is the Christ ceased to be made
   with the same emphasis and the same meaning that it had in his own
   preaching, and what sort of blessings they were which he brought, not
   only was a displacement inevitable, but even a dispossession. But every
   dispossession requires the given forms to be filled with new contents.
   Simple as was the pure tradition of the confession: "Jesus is the
   Christ," the task of rightly appropriating and handing down entire the
   peculiar contents which Jesus had given to his self-witnessing and
   preaching was nevertheless great, and in its limit uncertain. Even the
   Jewish Christian could perform this task only according to the measure
   of his spiritual understanding and the strength of his religious life.
   Moreover, the external position of the first communities in the midst
   of contemporaries who had crucified and rejected Jesus, compelled them
   to prove, as their main duty, that Jesus really was the Messiah who was
   promised. Consequently, everything united to bring the first
   communities to the conviction that the proclamation of the Gospel with
   which they were entrusted, resolved itself into the proclamation that
   Jesus is the Christ. The dida'skein terein pa'nta o`sa enetei'lato o
   Iesous (teaching to observe all that Jesus had commanded), a thing of
   heart and life, could not lead to reflection in the same degree, as the
   dida'skein o'ti outo`s estin o christo`s tou theou (teaching that this
   is the Christ of God); for a community which possesses the Spirit does
   not reflect on whether its conception is right, but, especially a
   missionary community, on what the certainty of its faith rests.

   The proclamation of Jesus as the Christ, though rooted entirely in the
   Old Testament, took its start from the exaltation of Jesus, which again
   resulted from his suffering and death. The proof that the entire Old
   Testament points to him, and that his person, his deeds and his destiny
   are the actual and precise fulfilment of the Old Testament predictions,
   was the foremost interest of believers, so far as they at all looked
   backwards. This proof was not used in the first place for the purpose
   of making the meaning and value of the Messianic work of Jesus more
   intelligible, of which it did not seem to be in much need, but to
   confirm the Messiahship of Jesus. Still, points of view for
   contemplating the Person and work of Jesus could not fail to be got
   from the words of the Prophets. The fundamental conception of Jesus
   dominating everything was, according to the Old Testament, that God had
   chosen him and through him the Church. God had chosen him and made him
   to be both Lord and Christ. He had made over to him the work of setting
   up the Kingdom, and had led him through death and resurrection to a
   supramundane position of sovereignty, in which he would soon visibly
   appear and bring about the end. The hope of Christ's speedy return was
   the most important article in the "Christology," inasmuch as his work
   was regarded as only reaching its conclusion by that return. It was the
   most difficult, inasmuch as the Old Testament contained nothing of a
   second advent of Messiah. Belief in the second advent became the
   specific Christian belief.

   But the searching in the scriptures of the Old Testament, that is, in
   the prophetic texts, had already, in estimating the Person and dignity
   of Christ, given an important impulse towards transcending the
   frame-work of the idea of the theocracy completed solely in and for
   Israel. Moreover, belief in the exaltation of Christ to the right hand
   of God, caused men to form a corresponding idea of the beginning of his
   existence. The missionary work among the Gentiles, so soon begun and so
   rich in results, threw a new light on the range of Christ's purpose and
   work, and led to the consideration of its significance for the whole
   human race. Finally, the self-testimony of Jesus summoned them to
   ponder his relation to God the Father, with the presuppositions of that
   relation, and to give it expression in intelligible statements.
   Speculation had already begun on these four points in the Apostolic
   age, and had resulted in very different utterances as to the Person and
   dignity of Jesus (§ 4). [80]

   3. Since Jesus had appeared and was believed on as the Messiah promised
   by the Prophets, the aim and contents of his mission seemed already to
   be therewith stated with sufficient clearness. Further, as the work of
   Christ was not yet completed, the view of those contemplating it was,
   above all, turned to the future. But in virtue of express words of
   Jesus, and in the consciousness of having received the Spirit of God,
   one was already certain of the forgiveness of sin dispensed by God, of
   righteousness before him, of the full knowledge of the Divine will, and
   of the call to the future Kingdom as a present possession. In the
   procuring of these blessings not a few perceived with certainty the
   results of the first advent of Messiah, that is, his work. This work
   might be seen in the whole activity of Christ. But as the forgiveness
   of sins might be conceived as the blessing of salvation which included
   with certainty every other blessing, as Jesus had put his death in
   express relation with this blessing, and as the fact of this death so
   mysterious and offensive required a special explanation, there appeared
   in the foreground from the very beginning the confession, in I Cor. XV.
   3: pare'doka umin en pro'tois, o kai` pare'labon, o'ti Christo`s
   ape'thanen upe`r ton amartion emon. "I delivered unto you first of all
   that which I also received, that Christ died for our sins." Not only
   Paul, for whom, in virtue of his special reflections and experiences,
   the cross of Christ had become the central point of all knowledge, but
   also the majority of believers, must have regarded the preaching of the
   death of the Lord as an essential article, in the preaching of Christ,
   [81] seeing that, as a rule, they placed it somehow under the aspect of
   a sacrifice offered to God. Still, there were very different
   conceptions of the value of the death as a means of procuring
   salvation, and there may have been many who were satisfied with basing
   its necessity on the fact that it had been predicted, (ape'thanen kata`
   ta`s grapha's: "he died for our sins according to the scriptures"),
   while their real religious interests were entirely centered in the
   future glory to be procured by Christ. But it must have been of greater
   significance for the following period that, from the first, a short
   account of the destiny of Jesus lay at the basis of all preaching about
   him (see a part of this in 1. Cor. XV. 1-11). Those articles in which
   the identity of the Christ who had appeared with the Christ who had
   been promised stood out with special clearness, must have been taken up
   into this report, as well as those which transcended the common
   expectations of Messiah, which for that very reason appeared of special
   importance, viz., his death and resurrection. In putting together this
   report, there was no intention of describing the "work" of Christ. But
   after the interest which occasioned it had been obscured, and had given
   place to other interests, the customary preaching of those articles
   must have led men to see in them Christ's real performance, his "work."
   [82]

   4. The firm confidence of the disciples in Jesus was rooted in the
   belief that he did not abide in death, but was raised by God. That
   Christ had risen was, in virtue of what they had experienced in him,
   certainly only after they had seen him, just as sure as the fact of his
   death, and became the main article of their preaching about him. [83]
   But in the message of the risen Lord was contained not only the
   conviction that he lives again, and now lives for ever, but also the
   assurance that his people will rise in like manner and live eternally.
   Consequently, the resurrection of Jesus became the sure pledge of the
   resurrection of all believers, that is of their real personal
   resurrection. No one at the beginning thought of a mere immortality of
   the spirit, not even those who assumed the perishableness of man's
   sensuous nature. In conformity with the uncertainty which yet adhered
   to the idea of resurrection in Jewish hopes and speculations, the
   concrete notions of it in the Christian communities were also
   fluctuating. But this could not affect the certainty of the conviction
   that the Lord would raise his people from death. This conviction, whose
   reverse side is the fear of that God who casts into hell, has become
   the mightiest power through which the Gospel has won humanity. [84]

   5. After the appearance of Paul, the earliest communities were greatly
   exercised by the question as to how believers obtain the righteousness
   which they possess, and what significance a precise observance of the
   law of the Fathers may have in connection with it. While some would
   hear of no change in the regulations and conceptions which had hitherto
   existed, and regarded the bestowal of righteousness by God as possible
   only on condition of a strict observance of the law, others taught that
   Jesus as Messiah had procured righteousness for his people, had
   fulfilled the law once for all, and had founded a new covenant, either
   in opposition to the old, or as a stage above it. Paul especially saw
   in the death of Christ the end of the law, and deduced righteousness
   solely from faith in Christ, and sought to prove from the Old Testament
   itself, by means of historical speculation, the merely temporary
   validity of the law and therewith the abrogation of the Old Testament
   religion. Others, and this view, which is not everywhere to be
   explained by Alexandrian influences (see above p. 72 f.), is not
   foreign to Paul, distinguished between spirit and letter in the Mosaic
   law, giving to everything a spiritual significance, and in this sense
   holding that the whole law as no'mos tneumatiko's was binding. The
   question whether righteousness comes from the works of the law or from
   faith, was displaced by this conception, and therefore remained in its
   deepest grounds unsolved, or was decided in the sense of a
   spiritualised legalism. But the detachment of Christianity from the
   political forms of the Jewish religion, and from sacrificial worship,
   was also completed by the conception, although it was regarded as
   identical with the Old Testament religion rightly understood. The
   surprising results of the direct mission to the Gentiles would seem to
   have first called forth those controversies (but see Stephen) and given
   them the highest significance. The fact that one section of Jewish
   Christians, and even some of the Apostles at length recognised the
   right of the Gentile Christians to be Christians without first becoming
   Jews, is the clearest proof that what was above all prized was faith in
   Christ and surrender to him as the Saviour. In agreeing to the direct
   mission to the Gentiles the earliest Christians, while they themselves
   observed the law, broke up the national religion of Israel, and gave
   expression to the conviction that Jesus was not only the Messiah of his
   people, but the redeemer of humanity. [85] The establishment of the
   universal character of the Gospel, that is, of Christianity as a
   religion for the world, became now, however, a problem, the solution of
   which, as given by Paul, but few were able to understand or make their
   own.

   6. In the conviction that salvation is entirely bound up with faith in
   Jesus Christ, Christendom gained the consciousness of being a new
   creation of God. But while the sense of being the true Israel was
   thereby, at the same time, held fast, there followed, on the one hand,
   entirely new historical perspectives, and on the other, deep problems
   which demanded solution. As a new creation of God, e ekklesi'a tou
   theou, the community was conscious of having been chosen by God in
   Jesus before the foundation of the world. In the conviction of being
   the true Israel, it claimed for itself the whole historical development
   recorded in the Old Testament, convinced that all the divine activity
   there recorded had the new community in view. The great question which
   was to find very different answers, was how, in accordance with this
   view, the Jewish nation, so far as it had not recognised Jesus as
   Messiah, should be judged. The detachment of Christianity from Judaism
   was the most important preliminary condition, and therefore the most
   important preparation, for the Mission among the Gentile nations, and
   for union with the Greek spirit.

   Supplement 1.--Renan and others go too far when they say that Paul
   alone has the glory of freeing Christianity from the fetters of
   Judaism. Certainly the great Apostle could say in this connection also:
   perisso'teron auton pa'nton ekopi'asa, but there were others beside him
   who, in the power of the Gospel, transcended the limits of Judaism.
   Christian communities, it may now be considered certain, had arisen in
   the empire, in Rome for example, which were essentially free from the
   law without being in any way determined by Paul's preaching. It was
   Paul's merit that he clearly formulated the great question, established
   the universalism of Christianity in a peculiar manner, and yet in doing
   so held fast the character of Christianity as a positive religion, as
   distinguished from Philosophy and Moralism. But the later development
   presupposes neither his clear formulation nor his peculiar
   establishment of universalism, but only the universalism itself.

   Supplement 2.--The dependence of the Pauline Theology on the Old
   Testament or on Judaism is overlooked in the traditional contrasting of
   Paulinism and Jewish Christianity, in which Paulinism is made
   equivalent to Gentile Christianity. This theology, as we might a priori
   suppose, could, apart from individual exceptions, be intelligible as a
   whole to born Jews, if to any, for its doctrinal presuppositions were
   strictly Pharisaic, and its boldness in criticising the Old Testament,
   rejecting and asserting the law in its historical sense, could be as
   little congenial to the Gentile Christians as its piety towards the
   Jewish people. This judgment is confirmed by a glance at the fate of
   Pauline Theology in the 120 years that followed. Marcion was the only
   Gentile Christian who understood Panl, and even he misunderstood him:
   the rest never got beyond the appropriation of particular Pauline
   sayings, and exhibited no comprehension especially of the theology of
   the Apostle, so far as in it the universalism of Christianity as a
   religion is proved, even without recourse to Moralism and without
   putting a new construction on the Old Testament religion. It follows
   from this, however, that the scheme "Jewish Christianity"--"Gentile
   Christianity" is insufficient. We must rather, in the Apostolic age, at
   least at its close, distinguish four main tendencies that may have
   crossed each other here and there, [86] (within which again different
   shades appear). (1) The Gospel has to do with the people of Israel, and
   with the Gentile world only on the condition that believers attach
   themselves to the people of Israel. The punctilious observance of the
   law is still necessary and the condition on which the messianic
   salvation is bestowed (particularism and legalism, in practice and in
   principle, which, however, was not to cripple the obligation to
   prosecute the work of the Mission). (2) The Gospel has to do with Jews
   and Gentiles: the first, as believers in Christ, are under obligation
   as before to observe the law, the latter are not; but for that reason
   they cannot on earth fuse into one community with the believing Jews.
   Very different judgments in details were possible on this stand-point;
   but the bestowal of salvation could no longer be thought of as
   depending simply on the keeping of the ceremonial commandments of the
   law [87] (universalism in principle, particularism in practice; the
   prerogative of Israel being to some extent clung to). (3) The Gospel
   has to do with both Jews and Gentiles; no one is any longer under
   obligation to observe the law; for the law is abolished (or fulfilled),
   and the salvation which Christ's death has procured is appropriated by
   faith. The law (that is the Old Testament religion) in its literal
   sense is of divine origin, but was intended from the first only for a
   definite epoch of history. The prerogative of Israel remains, and is
   shewn in the fact that salvation was first offered to the Jews, and it
   will be shewn again at the end of all history. That prerogative refers
   to the nation as a whole, and has nothing to do with the question of
   the salvation of individuals (Paulinism: universalism in principle and
   in practice, and Antinomianism in virtue of the recognition of a merely
   temporary validity of the whole law; breach with the traditional
   religion of Israel; recognition of the prerogative of the people of
   Israel; the clinging to the prerogative of the people of Israel was
   not, however, necessary on this stand-point: see the epistle to the
   Hebrews and the Gospel of John). (4) The Gospel has to do with Jews and
   Gentiles: no one need therefore be under obligation to observe the
   ceremonial commandments and sacrificial worship, because these
   commandments themselves are only the wrappings or moral and spiritual
   commandments which the Gospel has set forth as fulfilled in a more
   perfect form (universalism in principle and in practice in virtue of a
   neutralising of the distinction between law and Gospel, old and new;
   spiritualising and universalising of the law). [88]

   Supplement 3.--The appearance of Paul is the most important fact in the
   history of the Apostolic age. It is impossible to give in a few
   sentences an abstract of his theology and work; and the insertion here
   of a detailed account is forbidden, not only by the external limits,
   but by the aim of this investigation. For, as already indicated (§ 1),
   the doctrinal formation in the Gentile Church is not connected with the
   whole phenomenon of the Pauline theology, but only with certain leading
   thoughts which were only in part peculiar to the Apostle. His most
   peculiar thoughts acted on the development of Ecclesiastical doctrine
   only by way of occasional stimulus. We can find room here only for a
   few general outlines. [89]

   (1) The inner conviction that Christ had revealed himself to him, that
   the Gospel was the message of the crucified and risen Christ, and that
   God had called him to proclaim that message to the world, was the power
   and the secret of his personality and his activity. These three
   elements were a unity in the consciousness of Paul, constituting his
   conversion and determining his after-life. (2) In this conviction he
   knew himself to be a new creature, and so vivid was this knowledge that
   he was constrained to become a Jew to the Jews, and a Greek to the
   Greeks in order to gain them. (3) The crucified and risen Christ became
   the central point of his theology, and not only the central point, but
   the one source and ruling principle. The Christ was not in his
   estimation Jesus of Nazareth now exalted, but the mighty personal
   spiritual being in divine form who had for a time humbled himself, and
   who as Spirit has broken up the world of law, sin and death, and
   continues to overcome them in believers. (4) Theology therefore was to
   him, looking forwards, the doctrine of the liberating power of the
   Spirit (of Christ) in all the concrete relations of human life and
   need. The Christ who has already overcome law, sin and death, lives as
   Spirit, and through his Spirit lives in believers, who for that very
   reason know him not after the flesh. He is a creative power of life to
   those who receive him in faith in his redeeming death upon the cross,
   that is to say, to those who are justified. The life in the Spirit,
   which results from union with Christ, will at last reveal itself also
   in the body (not in the flesh). (5) Looking backwards, theology was to
   Paul a doctrine of the law and of its abrogation; or more accurately, a
   description of the old system before Christ in the light of the Gospel,
   and the proof that it was destroyed by Christ. The scriptural proof,
   even here, is only a superadded support to inner considerations which
   move entirely within the thought that that which is abrogated has
   already had its due, by having its whole strength made manifest that it
   might then be annulled,--the law, the flesh of sin, death: by the law
   the law is destroyed, sin is abolished in sinful flesh, death is
   destroyed by death. (6) The historical view which followed from this
   begins, as regards Christ, with Adam and Abraham; as regards the law,
   with Moses. It closes, as regards Christ, with the prospect of a time
   when he shall have put all enemies beneath his feet, when God will be
   all in all; as regards Moses and the promises given to the Jewish
   nation, with the prospect of a time when all Israel will be saved. (7)
   Paul's doctrine of Christ starts from the final confession of the
   primitive Church, that Christ is with the Father as a heavenly being
   and as Lord of the living and the dead. Though Paul must have
   accurately known the proclamation concerning the historical Christ, his
   theology in the strict sense of the word does not revert to it: but
   springing over the historical, it begins with the pre-existent Christ
   (the Man from heaven), whose moral deed it was to assume the flesh in
   self-denying love, in order to break for all men the powers of nature
   and the doom of death. But he has pointed to the words and

   example of the historical Christ in order to rule the life in the
   Spirit. (8) Deductions, proofs, and perhaps also conceptions, which in
   point of form betray the theology of the Pharisaic schools, were forced
   from the Apostle by Christian opponents, who would only grant a place
   to the message of the crucified Christ beside the dikaiosu'ne ex
   e'rgon. Both as an exegete and as a typologist he appears as a disciple
   of the Pharisees. But his dialectic about law, circumcision and
   sacrifice, does not form the kernel of his religious mode of thought,
   though, on the other hand, it was unquestionably his very Pharisaism
   which qualified him for becoming what he was. Pharisaism embraced
   nearly everything lofty which Judaism apart from Christ at all
   possessed, and its doctrine of providence, its energetic insistance on
   making manifest the religious contrasts, its Messianic expectations,
   its doctrines of sin and predestination, were conditions for the
   genesis of a religious and Christian character such as Paul. [90] This
   first Christian of the second generation is the highest product of the
   Jewish spirit under the creative power of the Spirit of Christ.
   Pharisaism had fulfilled its mission for the world when it produced
   this man. (9) But Hellenism also had a share in the making of Paul, a
   fact which does not conflict with his Pharisaic origin, but is partly
   given with it. In spite of all its exclusiveness the desire for making
   proselytes especially in the Diaspora, was in the blood of Pharisaism.
   Paul continued the old movement in a new way, and he was qualified for
   his work among the Greeks by an accurate knowledge of the Greek
   translation of the Old Testament, by considerable dexterity in the use
   of the Greek language, and by a growing insight into the spiritual life
   of the Greeks. But the peculiarity of his Gospel as a message from the
   Spirit of Christ, which was equally near to and equally distant from
   every religious and moral mode of thought among the nations of the
   world, signified much more than all this. This Gospel--who can say
   whether Hellenism had already a share in its conception--required that
   the missionary to the Greeks should become a Greek and that believers
   should come to know, "all things are yours, and ye are Christ's." Paul,
   as no doubt other missionaries besides him, connected the preaching of
   Christ with the Greek mode of thought; he even employed philosophic
   doctrines of the Greeks as presuppositions in his apologetic, [91] and
   therewith prepared the way for the introduction of the Gospel to the
   Græco-Roman world of thought. But, in my opinion, he has nowhere
   allowed that world of thought to influence his doctrine of salvation.
   This doctrine, however, was so fashioned in its practical aims that it
   was not necessary to become a Jew in order to appropriate it. (10) Yet
   we cannot speak of any total effect of Paulinism, as there was no such
   thing. The abundance of its details was too great and the greatness of
   its simplicity too powerful, its hope of the future too vivid, its
   doctrine of the law too difficult, its summons to a new life in the
   spirit too mighty to be comprehended and adhered to even by those
   communities which Paul himself had founded. What they did comprehend
   was its Monotheism, its universalism, its redemption, its eternal life,
   its asceticism; but all this was otherwise combined than by Paul. The
   style became Hellenic, and the element of a new kind of knowledge from
   the very first, as in the Church of Corinth, seems to have been the
   ruling one. The Pauline doctrine of the incarnate heavenly Man was
   indeed apprehended; it fell in with Greek notions, although it meant
   something very different from the notions which Greeks had been able to
   form of it.

   Supplement 4.--What we justly prize above all else in the New Testament
   is that it is a union of the three groups, Synoptic Gospels, Pauline
   Epistles, [92] and Johannine writings, in which are expressed the
   richest contents of the earliest history of the Gospel. In the Synodic
   Gospels and the epistles of Paul are represented two types of preaching
   the Gospel which mutually supplement each other. The subsequent history
   is dependent on both, and would have been other than it is had not both
   existed alongside of each other. On the other hand, the peculiar and
   lofty conception of Christ and of the Gospel, which stands out in the
   writings of John, has directly exercised no demonstrable influence on
   the succeeding development--with the exception of one peculiar
   movement, the Montanistic which, however, does not rest on a true
   understanding of these writings--and indeed partly for the same reason
   that has prevented the Pauline theology as a whole from having such an
   influence. What is given in these writings is a criticism of the Old
   Testament as religion, or the independence of the Christian religion,
   in virtue of an accurate knowledge of the Old Testament through
   development of its hidden germs. The Old Testament stage of religion is
   really transcended and over-come in the Johannine Christianity, just as
   in Paulinism, and in the theology of the epistle to the Hebrews. "The
   circle of disciples who appropriated this characterisation of Jesus
   is," says Weizsäcke, "a revived Christ-party in the higher sense." But
   this transcending of the Old Testament religion was the very thing that
   was unintelligible, because there were few ripe for such a conception.
   Moreover, the origin of the Johannine writings is, from the stand-point
   of a history of literature and dogma, the most marvellous enigma which
   the early history of Christianity presents: Here we have portrayed a
   Christ who clothes the indescribable with words, and proclaims as his
   own self-testimony what his disciples have experienced in him, a
   speaking, acting, Pauline Christ, walking on the earth, far more human
   than the Christ of Paul and yet far more Divine, an abundance of
   allusions to the historical Jesus, and at the same time the most
   sovereign treatment of the history. One divines that the Gospel can
   find no loftier expression than John XVII.: one feels that Christ
   himself put these words into the mouth of the disciple, who gives them
   back to him, but word and thing, history and doctrine are surrounded by
   a bright cloud of the suprahistorical. It is easy to shew that this
   Gospel could as little have been written without Hellenism, as Luther's
   treatise on the freedom of a Christian man could have been written
   without the "Deutsche Theologie." But the reference to Philo and
   Hellenism is by no means sufficient here, as it does not satisfactorily
   explain even one of the external aspects of the problem. The elements
   operative in the Johannine theology were not Greek Theologoumena--even
   the Logos has little more in common with that of Philo than the name,
   and its mention at the be-ginning of the book is a mystery, not the
   solution of one [93] --but the Apostolic testimony concerning Christ
   has created from the old faith of Psalmists and Prophets, a new faith
   in a man who lived with the disciples of Jesus among the Greeks. For
   that very reason, in spite of his abrupt Anti Judaism, we must without
   doubt regard the Author as a born Jew.

   Supplement 5.--The authorities to which the Christian communities were
   subjected in faith and life, were these: (1) The Old Testament
   interpreted in the Christian sense. (2) The tradition of the Messianic
   history of Jesus. (3) The words of the Lord: see the epistles of Paul,
   especially I Corinthians. But every writing which was proved to have
   been given by the Spirit has also to be regarded as an authority, and
   every tested Christian Prophet and Teacher inspired by the Spirit could
   claim that his words be received and regarded as the words of God.
   Moreover, the twelve whom Jesus had chosen had a special authority, and
   Paul claimed a similiar authority for himself (diata'xeis ton
   aposto'lon). Consequently, there were numerous courts of appeal in the
   earliest period of Christendom, of diverse kinds and by no means
   strictly defined. In the manifold gifts of the spirit was given a fluid
   element indefinable in its range and scope, an element which guaranteed
   freedom of development, but which also threatened to lead the
   enthusiastic communities to extravagance.

   Literature.--Weiss, Biblical Theology of the New Testament, 1884.
   Beyschlag, New Testament Theology, 1892. Ritschl, Entstehung der
   Alt-Katholischen Kirche, 2 Edit. 1857. Reuss, History of Christian
   Theology in the Apostolic Age, 1864. Baur, The Apostle Paul, 1866.
   Holsten, Zum Evangelium des Paulus und Petrus, 1868. Pfleiderer,
   Paulinism, 1873: also, Das Urchristenthum, 1887. Schenkel, Das
   Christusbild der Apostel, 1879. Renan, Origins of Christianity, Vols.
   II.--IV. Havet, Le Christianisme et ses orig. T. IV. 1884. Lechler, The
   Apostolic and Post-Apostolic Age, 1885. Weizsäcker, The Apostolic Age,
   1892. Hatch, Article "Paul" in the Encyclopædia Britannica. Everett,
   The Gospel of Paul. Boston, 1893. On the origin and earliest history of
   the Christian proofs from prophecy, see my "Texte und Unters. z. Gesch.
   der Alt-Christl." Lit. I. 3, p. 56 f.

   § 4. The Current Exposition of the Old Testament, and the Jewish hopes
   of the future, in their significance for the earliest types of
   Christian preaching.

   Instead of the frequently very fruitless investigations about
   "Jewish-Christian", and "Gentile-Christian", it should be asked, What
   Jewish elements have been naturalised in the Christian Church, which
   were in no way demanded by the contents of the Gospel? Have these
   elements been simply weakened in course of the development, or have
   some of them been strengthened by a peculiar combination with the
   Greek? We have to do here, in the first instance, with the doctrine of
   Demons and Angels, the view of history, the growing exclusiveness, the
   fanaticism; and on the other hand, with the cultus, and the Theocracy,
   expressing itself in forms of law.

   1. Although Jesus had in principle abolished the methods of pedantry,
   the casuistic treatment of the law, and the subtleties of prophetic
   interpretation, yet the old Scholastic exegesis remained active in the
   Christian communities above all the unhistorical local method in the
   exposition of the Old Testament, both allegoristic and Haggadic; for in
   the exposition of a sacred text--and the Old Testament was regarded as
   such--one is always required to look away from its historical
   limitations and to expound it according to the needs of the present.
   [94] The traditional view exercised its influence on the exposition of
   the Old Testament, as well as on the representations of the person,
   fate and deeds of Jesus, especially in those cases where the question
   was about the proof of the fulfilment of prophecy, that is, of the
   Messiahship of Jesus. (See above § 3, 2.) Under the impression made by
   the history of Jesus it gave to many Old Testament passages a sense
   that was foreign to them, and, on the other hand, enriched the life of
   Jesus with new facts, turning the interest at the same time to details
   which were frequently unreal and seldom of striking importance. [95]

   2. The Jewish Apocalyptic literature, especially as it flourished since
   the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, and was impregnated with new elements
   borrowed from an ethico-religious philosophy, as well as with
   Babylonian and Persian myths (Greek myths can only be detected in very
   small number), was not banished from the circles of the first
   professors of the Gospel, but was rather held fast, eagerly read, and
   even extended with the view of elucidating the promises of Jesus. [96]
   Though their contents seem to have been modified on Christian soil, and
   especially the uncertainty about the person of the Messiah exalted to
   victory and coming to judgment, [97] yet the sensuous earthly hopes
   were in no way repressed. Green fat meadows and sulphurous abysses,
   white horses and frightful beasts, trees of life, splendid cities, war
   and blood-shed filled the fancy, [98] and threatened to obscure the
   simple and yet, at bottom, much more affecting maxims about the
   judgment which is certain to every individual soul, and drew the
   confessors of the Gospel into a restless activity, into politics, and
   abhorrence of the State. It was an evil inheritance which the
   Christians took over from the Jews, [99] an inheritance which makes it
   impossible to reproduce with certainty the eschatological sayings of
   Jesus. Things directly foreign were mixed up with them, and, what. was
   most serious, delineations of the hopes of the future could easily lead
   to the undervaluing of the most important gifts and duties of the
   Gospel. [100]

   3. A wealth of mythologies and poetic ideas was naturalised and
   legitimised [101] in the Christian communities, chiefly by the
   reception of the Apocalyptic literature, but also by the reception of
   artificial exegesis and Haggada. Most important for the following
   period were the speculations about Messiah, which were partly borrowed
   from expositions of the Old Testament and from the Apocalypses, partly
   formed in-dependently, according to methods the justice of which no one
   contested, and the application of which seemed to give a firm basis to
   religious faith.

   Some of the Jewish Apocalyptists had already attributed pre-existence
   to the expected Messiah, as to other precious things in the Old
   Testament history and worship, and, without any thought of denying his
   human nature, placed him as already existing before his appearing in a
   series of angelic beings. [102] This took place in accordance with an
   established method of speculation, so far as an attempt was made
   thereby to express the special value of an empiric object, by
   distinguishing between the essence and the inadequate form of
   appearance, hypostatising the essence, and exalting it above time and
   space. But when a later appearance was conceived as the aim of a series
   of preparations, it was frequently hypostatised and placed above these
   preparations even in time. The supposed aim was, in a kind of real
   existence, placed, as first cause, before the means which were destined
   to realise it on earth. [103]

   Some of the first confessors of the Gospel, though not all the writers
   of the New Testament, in accordance with the same method, went beyond
   the declarations which Jesus himself had made about his person, and
   endeavoured to conceive its value and absolute significance abstractly
   and speculatively. The religious convictions (see § 3. 2): (1) That the
   founding of the Kingdom of God on earth, and the mission of Jesus as
   the perfect mediator, were from eternity based on God's plan of
   Salvation, as his main purpose; (2) that the exalted Christ was called
   into a position of Godlike Sovereignty belonging to him of right; (3)
   that God himself was manifested in Jesus, and that he therefore
   surpasses all mediators of the Old Testament, nay, even all angelic
   powers,--these convictions with some took the form that Jesus
   pre-existed, and that in him has appeared and taken flesh a heavenly
   being fashioned like God, who is older than the world, nay, its
   creative principle. [104] The conceptions of the old Teachers, Paul,
   the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Apocalypse, the author of
   the first Epistle of Peter, the fourth Evangelist, differ in many ways
   when they attempt to define these convictions more closely. The latter
   is the only one who has recognised with perfect clearness that the
   premundane Christ must be assumed to be theo`s o'n en arche pro's to`n
   theo'n, so as not to endanger by this speculation the contents and
   significance of the revelation of God which was given in Christ. This,
   in the earliest period, was essentially a religious problem, that is,
   it was not introduced for the explanation of cosmological problems,
   (see, especially, Epistle to the Ephesians, I Peter; but also the
   Gospel of John), and there stood peacefully beside it, such conception
   as recognised the equipment of the man Jesus for his office in a
   communication of the Spirit at his baptism, [105] or in virtue of
   Isaiah VII., found the germ of his unique nature in his miraculous
   origin. [106] But as soon as that speculation was detached from its
   original foundation, it necessarily withdrew the minds of believers
   from the consideration of the work of Christ, and from the
   contemplation of the revelation of God which was given in the ministry
   of the historical person Jesus. The mystery of the person of Jesus in
   itself, would then necessarily appear as the true revelation. [107]

   A series of theologoumena and religious problems for the future
   doctrine of Christianity lay ready in the teaching of the Pharisees and
   in the Apocalypses (see especially the fourth book of Ezra), and was
   really fitted for being of service to it; e.g., doctrines about Adam,
   universal sinfulness, the fall, predestination, Theodocy, etc., besides
   all kinds of ideas about redemption. Besides these spiritual doctrines
   there were not a few spiritualised myths which were variously made use
   of in the Apocalypses. A rich, spiritual, figurative style, only too
   rich and therefore confused, waited for the theological artist to
   purify, reduce and vigorously fashion. There really remained very
   little of the Cosmico-Mythological in the doctrine of the great Church.

   Supplement.--The reference to the proof from prophecy, to the current
   exposition of the Old Testament, the Apocalyptic and the prevailing
   methods of speculation, does not suffice to explain all the elements
   which are found in the different types of Christian preaching. We must
   rather bear in mind here that the earliest communities were
   enthusiastic, and had yet among them prophets and ecstatic persons.
   Such circumstances will always directly produce facts in the history.
   But, in the majority of cases, it is absolutely impossible to account
   subsequently for the causes of such productions, because their
   formation is subject to no law accessible to the understanding. It is
   therefore inadmissible to regard as proved the reality of what is
   recorded and believed to be a fact, when the motive and interest which
   led to its acceptance can no longer be ascertained. [108]

   Moreover, if we consider the conditions, outer and inner, in which the
   preaching of Christ in the first decades was placed, conditions which
   in every way threatened the Gospel with extravagance, we shall only see
   cause to wonder that it continued to shine forth amid all its
   wrappings. We can still, out of the strangest "fulfilments", legends
   and mythological ideas, read the religious conviction that the aim and
   goal of history is disclosed in the history of Christ, and that the
   Divine has now entered into history in a pure form.

   Literature.--The Apocalypses of Daniel, Enoch, Moses, Baruch, Ezra;
   Schürer, History of the Jewish People in the time of Christ;
   Baldensperger, in the work already mentioned. Weber, System der
   Altsynagogalen palästinischen Theologie, 1880, Kuenen, Hibbert
   Lectures, 1883. Hilgenfeld, Die jüdische Apokalyptik, 1859. Wellhausen,
   Sketch of the History of Israel and Judah, 1887. Diestel, Gesch. des A.
   T. in der Christl. Kirche, 1869. Other literature in Schürer. The essay
   of Hellwag in the Theol. Jahrb. von Baur and Zeller, 1848, "Die
   Vorstellung von der Präexistenz Christi in der ältesten Kirche", is
   worth noting; also Joël; Blicke in die Religionsgeschichte zu Anfang
   des 2 Christl. Jahrhunderts, 1880-- 1883.

   § 5. The Religious Conceptions and the Religious Philosophy of the
   Hellenistic Jews, in their significance for the later formulation of
   the Gospel.

   1. From the remains of the Jewish Alexandrian literature and the Jewish
   Sibylline writings, also from the work of Josephus, and especially from
   the great propaganda of Judaism in the Græco-Roman world, we may gather
   that there was a Judaism in the Diaspora, for the consciousness of
   which the cultus and ceremonial law were of comparatively subordinate
   importance; while the monotheistic worship of God, apart from images,
   the doctrines of virtue and belief in a future reward beyond the grave,
   stood in the foreground as its really essential marks. Converted
   Gentiles were no longer everywhere required to be even circumcised; the
   bath of purification was deemed sufficient. The Jewish religion here
   appears transformed into a universal human ethic and a monotheistic
   cosmology. For that reason, the idea of the Theocracy as well as the
   Messianic hopes of the future faded away or were uprooted. The latter,
   indeed, did not altogether pass away; but as the oracles of the
   Prophets were made use of mainly for the purpose of proving the
   antiquity and certainty of monotheistic belief, the thought of the
   future was essentially exhausted in the expectation of the dissolution
   of the Roman empire, the burning of the world, and the eternal
   recompense. The specific Jewish element, however, stood out plainly in
   the assertion that the Old Testament, and especially the books of
   Moses, were the source of all true knowledge of God, and the sum total
   of all doctrines of virtue for the nations, as well as in the connected
   assertion that the religious and moral culture of the Greeks was
   derived from the Old Testament, as the source from which the Greek
   Poets and Philosophers had drawn their inspiration. [109]

   These Jews and the Greeks converted by them formed, as it were, a
   Judaism of a second order without law, i.e., ceremonial law, and with a
   minimum of statutory regulations. This Judaism prepared the soil for
   the Christianising of the Greeks, as well as for the genesis of a great
   Gentile Church in the empire, free from the law; and this the more
   that, as it seems, after the second destruction of Jerusalem, the
   punctilious observance of the law [110] was imposed more strictly than
   before on all who worshipped the God of the Jews. [111]

   The Judaism just portrayed, developed itself, under the influence of
   the Greek culture with which it came in contact, into a kind of
   Cosmopolitanism. It divested itself, as religion, of all national
   forms, and exhibited itself as the most perfect expression of that
   "natural" religion which the stoics had disclosed. But in proportion as
   it was enlarged and spiritualised to a universal religion for humanity,
   it abandoned what was most peculiar to it, and could not compensate for
   that loss by the assertion of the thesis that the Old Testament is the
   oldest and most reliable source of that natural religion, which in the
   traditions of the Greeks had only witnesses of the second rank. The
   vigour and immediateness of the religious feeling was flattened down to
   a moralism, the barrenness of which drove some Jews even into Gnosis,
   mysticism and asceticism. [112]

   2. The Jewish Alexandrian philosophy of religion, of which Philo gives
   us the clearest conception, [113] is the scientific theory which
   corresponded to this religious conception. The theological system which
   Philo, in accordance with the example of others, gave out as the Mosaic
   system revealed by God, and proved from the Old Testament by means of
   the allegoric exegetic method, is essentially identical with the system
   of Stoicism, which had been mixed with Platonic elements and had lost
   its Pantheistic materialistic impress. The fundamental idea from which
   Philo starts is a Platonic one; the dualism of God and the world,
   spirit and matter. The idea of God itself is therefore abstractly and
   negatively conceived (God, the real substance which is not finite), and
   has nothing more in common with the Old Testament conception. The
   possibility, however, of being able to represent God as acting on
   matter, which as the finite is the non-existent, and therefore the
   evil, is reached, with the help of the Stoic lo'goi as working powers
   and of the Platonic doctrine of archetypal ideas, and in outward
   connection with the Jewish doctrine of angels and the Greek doctrine of
   demons, by the introduction of intermediate spiritual beings which, as
   personal and impersonal powers proceeding from God, are to be thought
   of as operative causes and as Archetypes. All these beings are, as it
   were, comprehended in the Logos. By the Logos Philo understands the
   operative reason of God, and consequently also the power of God. The
   Logos is to him the thought of God and at the same time the product of
   his thought, therefore both idea and power. But further, the Logos is
   God himself on that side of him which is turned to the world, as also
   the ideal of the world and the unity of the spiritual forces which
   produce the world and rule in it. He can therefore be put beside God
   and in opposition to the world; but he can also, so far as the
   spiritual contents of the world are comprehended in him, be put with
   the world in contrast with God. The Logos accordingly appears as the
   Son of God, the foremost creature, the representative, Viceroy, High
   Priest, and Messenger of God; and again as principle of the world,
   spirit of the world, nay, as the world itself. He appears as a power
   and as a person, as a function of God and as an active divine being.
   Had Philo cancelled the contradiction which lies in this whole
   conception of the Logos, his system would have been demolished; for
   that system with its hard antithesis of God and the world, needed a
   mediator who was, and yet was not God, as well as world. From this
   contrast, however, it further followed that we can only think of a
   world-formation by the Logos, not of a world-creation. [114] Within
   this world man is regarded as a microcosm, that is, as a being of
   Divine nature according to his spirit, who belongs to the heavenly
   world, while the adhering body is a prison which holds men captive in
   the fetters of sense, that is, of sin.

   The Stoic and Platonic ideals and rules of conduct (also the
   Neo-pythagorean) were united by Philo in the religious Ethic as well as
   in the Cosmology. Rationalistic moralism is surmounted by the
   injunction to strive after a higher good lying above virtue. But here,
   at the same time, is the point at which Philo decidedly goes beyond
   Platonism, and introduces a new thought into Greek Ethics, and also in
   correspondence therewith into theoretic philosophy. This thought, which
   indeed lay altogether in the line of the development of Greek
   philosophy, was not, however, pursued by Philo into all its
   consequences, though it was the expression of a new frame of mind.
   While the highest good is resolved by Plato and his successors into
   knowledge of truth, which truth, together with the idea of God, lies in
   a sphere really accessible to the intellectual powers of the human
   spirit, the highest good, the Divine original being, is considered by
   Philo, though not invariably, to be above reason, and the power of
   comprehending it is denied to the human intellect. This assumption, a
   concession which Greek speculation was compelled to make to positive
   religion for the supremacy which was yielded to it, was to have
   far-reaching consequences in the future. A place was now for the first
   time provided in philosophy for a mythology to be regarded as
   revelation. The highest truths which could not otherwise be reached,
   might be sought for in the oracles of the Deity; for knowledge resting
   on itself had learnt by experience its inability to attain to the truth
   in which blessedness consists. In this very experience the
   intellectualism of Greek Ethics was, not indeed cancelled, but
   surmounted. The injunction to free oneself from sense and strive
   upwards by means of knowledge, remained; but the wings of the thinking
   mind bore it only to the entrance of the sanctuary. Only ecstasy
   produced by God himself was able to lead to the reality above reason.
   The great novelties in the system of Philo, though in a certain sense
   the way had al-ready been prepared for them, are the introduction of
   the idea of a philosophy of revelation and the advance beyond the
   absolute intellectualism of Greek philosophy, an advance based on
   scepticism, but also on the deep-felt needs of life. Only the germs of
   these are found in Philo, but they are already operative. They are
   innovations of world-wide importance: for in them the covenant between
   the thoughts of reason on the one hand, and the belief in revelation
   and mysticism on the other, is already so completed that neither by
   itself could permanently maintain the supremacy. Thought about the
   world was henceforth dependent, not only on practical motives, it is
   always that, but on the need of a blessedness and peace which is higher
   than all reason. It might, perhaps, be allowable to say that Philo was
   the first who, as a philosopher, plainly expressed that need, just
   because he was not only a Greek, but also a Jew. [115]

   Apart from the extremes into which the ethical counsels of Philo run,
   they contain nothing that had not been demanded by philosophers before
   him. The purifying of the affections, the renunciation of sensuality,
   the acquisition of the four cardinal virtues, the greatest possible
   simplicity of life, as well as a cosmopolitan disposition are enjoined.
   [116] But the attainment of the highest morality by our own strength is
   despaired of, and man is directed beyond himself to God's assistance.
   Redemption begins with the spirit reflecting on its own condition; it
   advances by a knowledge of the world and of the Logos, and it is
   perfected, after complete asceticism, by mystic ecstatic contemplation
   in which a man loses himself, but in return is entirely filled and
   moved by God. [117] In this condition man has a foretaste of the
   blessedness which shall be given him when the soul, freed from the
   body, will be restored to its true existence as a heavenly being.

   This system, notwithstanding its appeal to revelation, has, in the
   strict sense of the word, no place for Messianic hopes, of which
   nothing but very insignificant rudiments are found in Philo. But he was
   really animated by the hope of a glorious time to come for Judaism. The
   synthesis of the Messiah and the Logos did not lie within his horizon.
   [118]

   3. Neither Philo's philosophy of religion, nor the mode of thought from
   which it springs, exercised any appreciable influence on the first
   generation of believers in Christ. [119] But its practical
   ground-thoughts, though in different degrees, must have found admission
   very early into the Jewish Christian circles of the Diaspora, and
   through them to Gentile Christian circles also. Philo's philosophy of
   religion became operative among Christian teachers from the beginning
   of the second century, [120] and at a later period actually obtained
   the significance of a standard of Christian theology, Philo gaining a
   place among Christian writers. The systems of Valentinus and Origen
   presuppose that of Philo. It can no longer, however, be shewn with
   certainty how far the direct influence of Philo reached, as the
   development of religious ideas in the second century took a direction
   which necessarily led to views similar to those which Philo had
   anticipated (see § 6, and the whole following account).

   Supplement.--The hermeneutic principles (the "Biblical-alchemy"), above
   all, became of the utmost importance for the following period. These
   were partly invented by Philo himself, partly traditional,--the
   Haggadic rules of exposition and the hermeneutic principles of the
   Stoics having already at an earlier period been united in Alexandria.
   They fall into two main classes: "first, those according to which the
   literal sense is excluded, and the allegoric proved to be the only
   possible one; and then, those according to which the allegoric sense is
   discovered as standing beside and above the literal sense." [121] That
   these rules permitted the discovery of a new sense by minute changes
   within a word, was a point of special importance. [122] Christian
   teachers went still further in this direction, and, as can be proved,
   altered the text of the Septuagint in order to make more definite what
   suggested itself to them as the meaning of a passage, or in order to
   give a satisfactory meaning to a sentence which appeared to them
   unmeaning or offensive. [123] Nay, attempts were not wanting among
   Christians in the second century--they were aided by the uncertainty
   that existed about the extent of the Septuagint, and by the want of
   plain predictions about the death upon the cross--to determine the Old
   Testament canon in accordance with new principles; that is, to alter
   the text on the plea that the Jews had corrupted it, and to insert new
   books into the Old Testament, above all, Jewish Apocalypses revised in
   a Christian sense. Tertullian (de cultu fem. 1. 3,) furnishes a good
   example of the latter. "Scio scripturam Enoch, quæ hunc ordinem angelis
   dedit, non recipi a quibusdam, quia nec in armorium Judaicum admittitur
   . . . sed cum Enoch eadem scriptura etiam de domino prædicarit, a nobis
   quidem nihil omnino reiciendum est quod pertinet ad nos. Et legimus
   omnem scripturam ædificationi habilem divinitus inspirari. A Judæis
   potest jam videri propterea reiecta, sicut et cetera fera quæ Christum
   sonant. . . . . Eo accedit quod Enoch apud Judam apostolum testimonium
   possidet." Compare also the history of the Apocalypse of Ezra in the
   Latin Bible (Old Testament). Not only the genuine Greek portions of the
   Septuagint, but also many Apocalypses were quoted by Christians in the
   second century as of equal value with the Old Testament. It was the New
   Testament that slowly put an end to these tendencies towards the
   formation of a Christian Old Testament.

   To find the spiritual meaning of the sacred text, partly beside the
   literal, partly by excluding it, became the watchword for the
   "scientific" Christian theology which was possible only on this basis,
   as it endeavoured to reduce the immense and dissimilar material of the
   Old Testament to unity with the Gospel, and both with the religious and
   scientific culture of the Greeks,--yet without knowing a relative
   standard, the application of which would alone have rendered possible
   in a loyal way the solution of the task. Here, Philo was the master;
   for he first to a great extent poured the new wine into old bottles.
   Such a procedure is warranted by its final purpose; for history is a
   unity. But applied in a pedantic and stringently dogmatic way it is a
   source of deception, of untruthfulness, and finally of total blindness.

   Literature.--Gefrörer, Das Jahr des Heils, 1838. Parthey, Das Alexandr.
   Museum, 1838. Matter, Hist. de l'école d'Alex. 1840. Dähne, Gesch.
   Darstellung der jüd.-alex. Religionsphilos. 1834. Zeller, Die
   Philosophie der Griechen, III. 2. 3rd Edition. Mommsen, History of
   Rome, Vol. V. Siegfried, Philo van Alex. 1875. Massebieau, Le
   Classement des OEuvres de Philon. 1889. Hatch, Essays in Biblical
   Greek, 1889. Drummond, Philo Judæus, 1888. Bigg, The Christian
   Platonists of Alexandria, 1886. Schürer, History of the Jewish People.
   The investigations of Freudenthal (Hellenistische Studien), and Bernays
   (Ueber das phokylideische Gedicht; Theophrastos' Schrift über
   Frömmigkeit; Die heraklitischen Briefe). Kuenen, Hibbert Lectures:
   "Christian Theology could have made and has made much use of Hellenism.
   But the Christian religion cannot have sprung from this source." Havet
   thinks otherwise, though in the fourth volume of his "Origines" he has
   made unexpected admissions.

   § 6. The Religious Dispositions of the Greeks and Romans in the first
   two centuries, and the current Græco-Roman Philosophy of Religion.

   1. After the national religion and the religious sense generally in
   cultured circles had been all but lost in the age of Cicero and
   Augustus, there is noticeable in the Græco-Roman world from the
   beginning of the second century a revival of religious feeling which
   embraced all classes of society, and appears, especially from the
   middle of that century, to have increased from decennium to decennium.
   [124] Parallel with it went the not altogether unsuccessful attempt to
   restore the old national worship, religious usages, oracles, etc. In
   these attempts, however, which were partly superficial and artificial,
   the new religious needs found neither vigorous nor clear expression.
   These needs rather sought new forms of satisfaction corresponding to
   the wholly changed conditions or the time, including intercourse and
   mixing of the nations; decay of the old republican orders, divisions
   and ranks; monarchy and absolutism and social crises; pauperism;
   influence of philosophy on the domain of public morality and law;
   cosmopolitanism and the rights of man; influx of Oriental cults into
   the West; knowledge of the world and disgust with it. The decay of the
   old political cults and syncretism produced a disposition in favour of
   monotheism both among the cultured classes who had been prepared for it
   by philosophy, and also gradually among the masses. Religion and
   individual morality became more closely connected. There was developed
   a corresponding attempt at spiritualising the worship alongside of and
   within the ceremonial forms, and at giving it a direction towards the
   moral elevation of man through the ideas of moral personality,
   conscience, and purity, The ideas of repentance and of expiation and
   healing of the soul became of special importance, and consequently such
   Oriental cults came to the front as required the former and guaranteed
   the latter. But what was sought above all, was to enter into an inner
   union with the Deity, to be saved by him and become a partaker in the
   possession and enjoyment of his life. The worshipper consequently
   longed to find a "præsens numen" and the revelation of him in the
   cultus, and hoped to put himself in possession of the Deity by
   asceticism and mysterious rites. This new piety longed for health and
   purity of soul, and elevation above earthly things, and in connection
   with these a divine, that is a painless and eternal, life beyond the
   grave ("renatus in æternum taurobolio"). A world beyond was desired,
   sought for, and viewed with an uncertain eye. By detachment from
   earthly things and the healing of its diseases (the passions) the
   freed, new born soul should return to its divine nature and existence.
   It is not a hope of immortality such as the ancients had dreamed of for
   their heroes, where they continue, as it were, their earthly existence
   in blessed enjoyment. To the more highly pitched self-consciousness
   this life had become a burden, and in the miseries of the present, one
   hoped for a future life in which the pain and vulgarity of the unreal
   life of earth would be completely laid aside (Enkra'teia and
   ana'stasis). If the new moralistic feature stood out still more
   emphatically in the piety of the second century, it vanished more and
   more behind the religious feature, the longing after life [125] and
   after a Redeemer God. No one could any longer be a God who was not also
   a saviour. [126]

   With all this Polytheism was not suppressed, but only put into a
   subordinate place. On the contrary, it was as lively and active as
   ever. For the idea of a numen supremum did not exclude belief in the
   existence and manifestation of sub-ordinate deities. Apotheosis came
   into currency. The old state religion first attained its highest and
   most powerful expression in the worship of the emperor, (the emperor
   glorified as "dominus ac deus noster", [127] as "præsens et corporalis
   deus", the Antinous cult, etc.), and in many circles an incarnate ideal
   in the present or the past was sought, which might be worshipped as
   revealer of God and as God, and which might be an example of life and
   an assurance of religious hope. Apotheosis became less offensive in
   proportion as, in connection with the fuller recognition of the
   spiritual dignity of man, the estimate of the soul, the spirit, as of
   supramundane nature, and the hope of its eternal continuance in a form
   of existence befitting it, became more general. That was the import of
   the message preached by the Cynics and the Stoics, that the truly wise
   man is Lord, Messenger of God, and God upon the earth. On the other
   hand, the popular belief clung to the idea that the gods could appear
   and be visible in human form, and this faith, though mocked by the
   cultured, gained numerous adherents, even among them, in the age of the
   Antonines. [128]

   The new thing which was here developed, continued to be greatly
   obscured by the old forms of worship which reasons of state and pious
   custom maintained. And the new piety, dispensing with a fixed
   foundation, groped uncertainly around, adapting the old rather than
   rejecting it. The old religious practices of the Fathers asserted
   themselves in public life generally, and the reception of new cults by
   the state, which was certainly effected, though with many checks, did
   not disturb them. The old religious customs stood out especially on
   state holidays, in the games in honour of the Gods, frequently
   degenerating into shameless immorality, but yet protecting the
   institutions of the state. The patriot, the wise man, the sceptic, and
   the pious man compounded with them, for they had not really at bottom
   outgrown them, and they knew of nothing better to substitute for the
   services they still rendered to society (see the lo'gos alethe's of
   Celsus).

   2. The system of associations, naturalised centuries before among the
   Greeks, was developed under the social and political pressure of the
   empire, and was greatly extended by the change of moral and religious
   ideas. The free unions, which, as a rule, had a religious element and
   were established for mutual help, support, or edification, balanced to
   some extent the prevailing social cleavage, by a free democratic
   organisation. They gave to many individuals in their small circle the
   rights which they did not possess in the great world, and were
   frequently of service in obtaining admission for new cults. Even the
   new piety and cosmopolitan disposition seem to have turned to them in
   order to find within them forms of expression. But the time had not
   come for the greater corporate unions, and of an organised connection
   of societies in one city with those of another we know nothing. The
   state kept these associations under strict control. It granted them
   only to the poorest classes (collegia tenuiorum) and had the strictest
   laws in readiness for them. These free unions, however, did not in
   their historical importance approach the fabric of the Roman state in
   which they stood. That represented the union of the greater part of
   humanity under one head, and also more and more under one law. Its
   capital was the capital of the world, and also, from the beginning of
   the third century, of religious syncretism. Hither migrated all who
   desired to exercise an influence on the great scale: Jew, Chaldean,
   Syrian priest, and Neoplatonic teacher. Law and Justice radiated from
   Rome to the provinces, and in their light nationalities faded away, and
   a cosmopolitanism was developed which pointed beyond itself, because
   the moral spirit can never find its satisfaction in that which is
   realised. When that spirit finally turned away from all political life,
   and after having laboured for the ennobling of the empire, applied
   itself, in Neoplatonism, to the idea of a new and free union of men,
   this certainly was the result of the felt failure of the great
   creation, but it nevertheless had that creation for its presupposition.
   The Church appropriated piecemeal the great apparatus of the Roman
   state, and gave new powers, new significance and respect to every
   article that had been depreciated. But what is of greatest importance
   is that the Church by her preaching would never have gained whole
   circles, but only individuals, had not the universal state already
   produced a neutralising of nationalities and brought men nearer each
   other in temper and disposition.

   3. Perhaps the most decisive factor in bringing about the revolution of
   religious and moral convictions and moods, was philosophy, which in
   almost all its schools and representatives, had deepened ethics, and
   set it more and more in the fore-ground. After Possidonius, Seneca,
   Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius of the Stoical school, and men like
   Plutarch of the Platonic, attained to an ethical view, which, though
   not very clear in principle (knowledge, resignation, trust in God), is
   hardly capable of improvement in details. Common to them all, as
   distinguished from the early Stoics, is the value put upon the soul,
   (not the entire human nature), while in some of them there comes
   clearly to the front a religious mood, a longing for divine help, for
   redemption and a blessed life beyond the grave, the effort to obtain
   and communicate a religious philosophical therapeutic of the soul.
   [129] From the beginning of the second century, however, already
   announced itself that eclectic philosophy based on Platonism, which
   after two or three generations appeared in the form of a school, and
   after three generations more was to triumph over all other schools. The
   several elements of the Neoplatonic philosophy, as they were already
   foreshadowed in Philo, are clearly seen in the second century, viz.,
   the dualistic opposition of the divine and the earthly, the abstract
   conception of God, the assertion of the unknowableness of God,
   scepticism with regard to sensuous experience, and distrust with regard
   to the powers of the understanding, with a greater readiness to examine
   things and turn to account the result of former scientific labour;
   further, the demand of emancipation from sensuality by means of
   asceticism, the need of authority, belief in a higher revelation, and
   the fusion of science and religion. The legitimising of religious fancy
   in the province of philosophy was already begun. The myth was no longer
   merely tolerated and re-interpreted as formerly, but precisely the
   mythic form with the meaning imported into it was the precious element.
   [130] There were, however, in the second century numerous
   representatives of every possible philosophic view. To pass over the
   frivolous writers of the day, the Cynics criticised the traditional
   mythology in the interests of morality and religion. [131] But there
   were also men who opposed the "ne quid nimis" to every form of
   practical scepticism, and to religion at the same time, and were above
   all intent on preserving the state and society, and on fostering the
   existing arrangements which appeared to be threatened far more by an
   intrusive religious than by a nihilistic philosophy. [132] Yet men
   whose interest was ultimately practical and political, became ever more
   rare, especially as from the death of Marcus Aurelius, the maintenance
   of the state had to be left more and more to the sword of the Generals.
   The general conditions from the end of the second century were
   favourable to a philosophy which no longer in any respect took into
   real consideration the old forms of the state.

   The theosophic philosophy which was prepared for in the second century,
   [133] was, from the stand-point of enlightenment and knowledge of
   nature, a relapse; but it was the expression of a deeper religious
   need, and of a self-knowledge such as had not been in existence at an
   earlier period. The final consequences of that revolution in
   philosophy, which made consideration of the inner life the
   starting-point of thought about the world, only now began to be
   developed. The ideas of a divine, gracious providence, of the
   relationship of all men, of universal brotherly love, of a ready
   forgiveness of wrong, of forbearing patience, of insight into one's own
   weakness--affected no doubt with many shadows--became, for wide
   circles, a result of the practical philosophy of the Greeks as well as
   the conviction of inherent sinfulness, the need of redemption, and the
   eternal value and dignity of a human soul which finds rest only in God.
   These ideas, convictions and rules, had been picked up in the long
   journey from Socrates to Ammonius Saccas: at first, and for long
   afterwards, they crippled the interest in a rational knowledge of the
   world; but they deepened and enriched the inner life, and therewith the
   source of all knowledge. Those ideas, however, lacked as yet the
   certain coherence, but, above all, the authority which could have
   raised them above the region of wishes, presentiments, and strivings,
   and have given them normative authority in a community of men. There
   was no sure revelation, and no view of history which could be put in
   the place of the no longer prized political history of the nation or
   state to which one belonged. [134] There was, in fact, no such thing as
   certainty. In like manner, there was no power which might overturn
   idolatry and abolish the old, and therefore one did not get beyond the
   wavering between self-deification, fear of God, and deification of
   nature. The glory is all the greater of those statesmen and jurists
   who, in the second and third centuries, introduced human ideas of the
   Stoics into the legal arrangements of the empire, and raised them to
   standards. And we must value all the more the numerous undertakings and
   performances in which it appeared that the new view of life was
   powerful enough in individuals to beget a corresponding practice even
   without a sure belief in revelation. [135]

   Supplement.--For the correct understanding of the beginning of
   Christian theology, that is, for the Apologetic and Gnosis, it is
   important to note where they are dependent on Stoic and where on
   Platonic lines of thought. Platonism and Stoicism, in the second
   century, appeared in union with each other: but up to a certain point
   they may be distinguished in the common channel in which they flow.
   Wherever Stoicism prevailed in religious thought and feeling, as, for
   example, in Marcus Aurelius, religion gains currency as natural
   religion in the most comprehensive sense of the word. The idea of
   revelation or redemption scarcely emerges. To this rationalism the
   objects of knowledge are unvarying, ever the same: even cosmology
   attracts interest only in a very small degree. Myth and history are
   pageantry and masks. Moral ideas (virtues and duties) dominate even the
   religious sphere, which in its final basis has no independent
   authority. The interest in psychology and apologetic is very
   pronounced. On the other hand, the emphasis which, in principle, is put
   on the contrast of spirit and matter, God and the world, had for
   results: inability to rest in the actual realities of the cosmos,
   efforts to unriddle the history of the universe backwards and forwards,
   recognition of this process as the essential task of theoretic
   philosophy, and a deep, yearning conviction that the course of the
   world needs assistance. Here were given the conditions for the ideas of
   revelation, redemption, etc., and the restless search for powers from
   whom help might come, received here also a scientific justification.
   The rationalistic apologetic interests thereby fell into the
   background: contemplation and historical description predominated.
   [136]

   The stages in the ecclesiastical history of dogma, from the middle of
   the first to the middle of the fifth century, correspond to the stages
   in the history of the ancient religion during the same period. The
   Apologists, Irenæus, Tertullian, Hippolytus; the Alexandrians;
   Methodius, and the Cappadocians; Dionysius, the Areopagite, have their
   parallels in Seneca, Marcus Aurelius; Plutarch, Epictetus, Numenius;
   Plotinus, Porphyry; Iamblichus and Proclus.

   But it is not only Greek philosophy that comes into question for the
   history of Christian dogma. The whole of Greek culture must be taken
   into account. In his posthumous work Hatch has shewn in a masterly way
   how that is to be done. He describes the Grammar, the Rhetoric, the
   learned Profession, the Schools, the Exegesis, the Homilies, etc., of
   the Greeks, and everywhere shews how they passed over into the Church,
   thus exhibiting the Philosophy, the Ethic, the speculative Theology,
   the Mysteries, etc., of the Greeks, as the main factors in the process
   of forming the ecclesiastical mode of thought.

   But, besides the Greek, there is no mistaking the special influence of
   Romish ideas and customs upon the Christian Church. The following
   points specially claim attention: (1) The conception of the contents of
   the Gospel and its application as "salus legitima," with the results
   which followed from the naturalising of this idea. (2) The conception
   of the word of Revelation, the Bible, etc., as "lex." (3) The idea of
   tradition in its relation to the Romish idea. (4) The Episcopal
   constitution of the Church, including the idea of succession, of the
   Primateship and universal Episcopate, in their dependence on Romish
   ideas and institutions (the Ecclesiastical organisation in its
   dependence on the Roman Empire). (5) The separation of the idea of the
   "sacrement" from that of the "mystery," and the development of the
   forensic discipline of penance. The investigation has to proceed in a
   historical line, described by the following series of chapters: Rome
   and Tertullian; Rome and Cyprian; Rome, Optatus and Augustine; Rome and
   the Popes of the fifth century. We have to shew how, by the power of
   her constitution and the earnestness and consistency of her policy,
   Rome a second time, step by step, conquered the world, but this time
   the Christian world. [137]

   Greek philosophy exercised the greatest influence not only on the
   Christian mode of thought, but also through that, on the institutions
   of the Church. The Church never indeed be-came a philosophic school:
   but yet in her was realised in a peculiar way, that which the Stoics
   and the Cynics had aimed at. The Stoic (Cynic) Philosopher also
   belonged to the factors from which the Christian Priests or Bishops
   were formed. That the old bearers of the Spirit--Apostles, Prophets,
   Teachers--have been changed into a class of professional moralists and
   preachers, who bridle the people by counsel and reproof (nouthetein
   kai` ele'nchein), that this class considers itself and de-sires to be
   considered as a mediating Kingly Divine class, that its representatives
   became "Lords" and let themselves be called "Lords," all this was
   prefigured in the Stoic wise man and in the Cynic Missionary. But so
   far as these several "Kings and Lords" are united in the idea and
   reality of the Church and are subject to it, the Platonic idea of the
   republic goes beyond the Stoic and Cynic ideals, and subordinates them
   to it. But this Platonic ideal has again obtained its political
   realisation in the Church through the very concrete laws of the Roman
   Empire, which were more and more adopted, or taken possession of.
   Consequently, in the completed Church we find again the philosophic
   schools and the Roman Empire.

   Literature.--Besides the older works of Tzschirner, Döllinger,
   Burckhardt, Preller, see Friedländer, Darstellungen aus der
   Sittengesch. Roms in der Zeit von August bis zum Ausgang der Antonine,
   3 Bd. Aufl. Boissier, La Religion Romaine d'Auguste aux Antonins, 2 Bd.
   1874. Ramsay, The Church in the Roman Empire before 170. London, 1893.
   Réville, La Religion à Rome sous les Sévères, 1886. Schiller,
   Geschichte der Röm Kaiserzeit, 1883. Marquardt, Römische
   Staatsverwaltung, 3 Bde. 1878. Foucart, Les Associations Relig. chez
   les Grecs, 1873. Liebeman, Z. Gesch. u. Organisation d. Röm.
   Vereinswesen, 189o. K. J. Neumann, Der Röm. Staat und die allg. Kirche,
   Bd. I. 1890. Leopold Schmidt, Die Ethik der alten Griechen, 2 Bd. 1882.
   Heinrici, Die Christengemeinde Korinth's und die religiösen
   Genossenschaften der Griechen, in der Ztschr. f. wissensch. Theol.
   1876-77. Hatch, The Influence of Greek Ideas and Usages upon the
   Christian Church. Buechner, De neocoria, 1888. Hirschfeld. Z. Gesch. d.
   röm. Kaisercultus. The Histories of Philosophy by Zeller, Erdmann,
   Ueberweg, Strümpell, Windelband, etc. Heinze, Die Lehre vom Logos in
   der Griech. Philosophie, 1872. By same Author, Der Eudämonismus in der
   Griech. Philosophic, 1883. Hirzel, Untersuchungen zu Cicero's philos.
   Schriften, 3 Thle. 1877-1883. These investigations are of special value
   for the history of dogma, because they set forth with the greatest
   accuracy and care, the later developments of the great Greek
   philosophic schools, especially on Roman soil. We must refer specially
   to the discussions on the influence of the Roman on the Greek
   Philosophy. Volkmann, Die Rhetorik der Griechen und Römer, 1872.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [47] The Old Testament of itself alone could not have convinced the
   Græco-Roman world. But the converse question might perhaps be raised as
   to what results the Gospel would have had in that world without its
   union with the Old Testament. The Gnostic Schools and the Marcionite
   Church are to some extent the answer. But would they ever have arisen
   without the presupposition of a Christian community which recognised
   the Old Testament?

   [48] We here leave out of account learned attempts to expound
   Paulinism. Nor do we take any notice of certain truths regarding the
   relation of the Old Testament to the New, and regarding the Jewish
   religion, stated by the Antignostic church teachers, truths which are
   certainly very important, but have not been sufficiently utilised.

   [49] There is indeed no single writing of the new Testament which does
   not betray the influence of the mode of thought and general conditions
   of the culture of the time which resulted from the Hellenising of the
   east: even the use of the Greek translation of the Old Testament
   attests this fact. Nay, we may go further, and say that the Gospel
   itself is historically unintelligible, so long as we compare it with an
   exclusive Judaism as yet unaffected by any foreign influence. But on
   the other hand, it is just as clear that, specifically, Hellenic ideas
   form the pre-suppositions neither for the Gospel itself, nor for the
   most important New Testament writings. It is a question rather as to a
   general spiritual atmosphere created by Hellenism, which above all
   strengthened the individual element, and with it the idea of completed
   personality, in itself living and responsible. On this foundation we
   meet with a religious mode of thought in the Gospel and the early
   Christian writings, which so far as it is at all dependent on an
   earlier mode of thought, is determined by the spirit of the Old
   Testament (Psalms and Prophets) and of Judaism. But it is already
   otherwise with the earliest Gentile Christian writings. The mode of
   thought here is so thoroughly determined by the Hellenic spirit that we
   seem to have entered a new world when we pass from the synoptists, Paul
   and John, to Clement, Barnabas, Justin or Valeutinus. We may therefore
   say, especially in the frame-work of the history of dogma, that the
   Hellenic element has exercised an influence on the Gospel first on
   Gentile Christian soil, and by those who were Greek by birth, if only
   we reserve the general spiritual atmosphere above referred to. Even
   Paul is no exception; for in spite of the well-founded statement of
   Weizsäcker (Apostolic Age, vol. I. Book II) and Heinrici (Das 2
   Sendschreiben an die Korinthier, 1887, p. 578 ff.), as to the Hellenism
   of Paul, it is certain that the Apostle's mode of religious thought, in
   the strict sense of the word, and therefore also the doctrinal
   formation peculiar to him, are but little determined by the Greek
   spirit. But it is to he specially noted that as a missionary and an
   Apologist he made use of Greek ideas (Epistles to the Romans and
   Corinthians). He was not afraid to put the Gospel into Greek modes of
   thought. To this extent we can already observe in him the beginning of
   the development which we can trace so clearly in the Gentile Church
   from Clement to Justin, and from Justin to Irenæus.

   [50] The complete universalism of salvation is given in the Pauline
   conception of Christianity. But this conception is singular. Because:
   (1) the Pauline universalism is based on a criticism of the Jewish
   religion as religion, including the Old Testament, which was not
   understood and therefore not received by Christendom in general. (2)
   Because Paul not only formulated no national anti-judaism, but always
   recognised the prerogative of the people of Israel as a people. (3)
   Because his idea of the Gospel, with all his Greek culture, is
   independent of Hellenism in its deepest grounds. This peculiarity of
   the Pauline Gospel is the reason why little more could pass from it
   into the common consciousness of Christendom than the universalism of
   salvation, and why the later development of the Church cannot be
   explained from Paulinism. Baur, therefore, was quite right when he
   recognised that we must exhibit another and more powerful element in
   order to comprehend the post-Pauline formations. In the selection of
   this element, however, he has made a fundamental mistake by introducing
   the narrow national Jewish Christianity, and he has also given much too
   great scope to Paulinism by wrongly conceiving it as Gentile Christian
   doctrine. One great difficulty for the historian of the early Church is
   that he cannot start from Paulinism, the plainest phenomenon of the
   Apostolic age, in seeking to explain the following development, that in
   fact the premises for this development are not at all capable of being
   indicated in the form of outlines, just because they were too general.
   But, on the other hand, the Pauline theology, this theology of one who
   had been a Pharisee, is the strongest proof of the independent and
   universal power of the impression made by the Person of Jesus.

   [51] In the main writings of the New Testament itself we have a twofold
   conception of the Spirit. According to the one he comes upon the
   believer fitfully, expresses himself in visible signs, deprives men of
   self-consciousness, and puts them beside themselves. According to the
   other, the spirit is a constant possession of the Christian, operates
   in him by enlightening the conscience and strengthening the character,
   and his fruits are love, joy, peace, patience, gentleness, etc. (Gal.
   V. 22). Paul above all taught Christians to value these fruits of the
   spirit higher than all the other effects of his working. But he has not
   by any means produced a perfectly clear view on this point: for "he
   himself spoke with more tongues than they all." As yet "Spirit" lay
   within "Spirit." One felt in the spirit of sonship a completely new
   gift coming from God and recreating life, a miracle of God; further,
   this spirit also produced sudden exclamations--"Abba, Father" and thus
   shewed himself in a way patent to the senses. For that very reason, the
   spirit of ecstasy and of miracle appeared identical with the spirit of
   sonship. (See Gunkel, Die Wirkungen d. h. Geistes nach der popularen
   Anschauung der Apostol. Zeit. Göttingen, 1888).

   [52] It may even be said here that the athanasi'a (zoe` aio'nios), on
   the one hand, and the ekklesi'a, on the other, have already appeared in
   place of the Basilei'a tou theou, and that the idea of Messiah has been
   finally replaced by that of the Divine Teacher and of God manifest in
   the flesh.

   [53] It is one of the merits of Bruno Bauer (Christus und die Cäsaren,
   1877), that he has appreciated the real significance of the Greek
   element in the Gentile Christianity which became the Catholic Church
   and doctrine, and that he has appreciated the influence of the Judaism
   of the Diaspora as a preparation for this Gentile Christianity. But
   these valuable contributions have unfortunately been deprived of their
   convincing power by a baseless criticism of the early Christian
   literature, to which Christ and Paul have fallen a sacrifice. Somewhat
   more cautious are the investigations of Havet in the fourth volume of
   Le Christianisme, 1884; Le Nouveau Testament. He has won great merit by
   the correct interpretation of the elements of Gentile Christianity
   developing themselves to catholicism, but his literary criticism is
   often unfortunately entirely abstract, reminding one of the criticism
   of Voltaire, and therefore his statements in detail are, as a rule,
   arbitrary and untenable. There is a school in Holland at the present
   time closely related to Bruno Bauer and Havet, which attempts to banish
   early Christianity from the world. Christ and Paul are creations of the
   second century: the history of Christianity begins with the passage of
   the first century into the second--a peculiar phenomenon on the soil of
   Hellenised Judaism in quest of a Messiah. This Judaism created Jesus
   Christ just as the later Greek religious philosophers created their
   Saviour (Apollonius, for example). The Marcionite Church produced Paul,
   and the growing Catholic Church completed him. See the numerous
   treatises of Loman, the Verisimilia of Pierson and Naber (1886), and
   the anonymous English work "Antigua Mater" (1887), also the works of
   Steck (see especially his Untersuchung über den Galaterbrief). Against
   these works see P. V. Schmidt's "Der Galaterbrief," 1892. It requires a
   deep knowledge of the problems which the first two centuries of the
   Christian Church present, in order not to thrust aside as simply absurd
   these attempts, which as yet have failed to deal with the subject in a
   connected way. They have their strength in the difficulties and riddles
   which are contained in the history of the formation of the Catholic
   tradition in the second century. But the single circumstance that we
   are asked to regard as a forgery such a document as the first Epistle
   of Paul to the Corinthians, appears to me, of itself, to be an
   unanswerable argument against the new hypotheses.

   [54] It would be a fruitful task, though as yet it has not been
   undertaken, to examine how long visions, dreams and apocalypses, on the
   one hand, and the claim of speaking in the power and name of the Holy
   Spirit, on the other, played a rôle in the early Church; and further to
   shew how they nearly died out among the laity, but continued to live
   among the clergy and the monks, and how, even among the laity, there
   were again and again sporadic outbreaks of them. The material which the
   first three centuries present is very great. Only a few may he
   mentioned here: Ignat. ad. Rom. VII. 2: ad Philad VII. ad. Eph. XX. I.
   etc.: 1 Clem. LXIII. 2: Martyr. Polyc.: Acta Perpet. et Felic: Tertull
   de animo XLVII.: "Major pæne vis hominum e visionibus deum discunt."
   Orig. c. Celsum. 1. 46: polloi` osperei` a'kontes proselelu'thasi
   christianismo, pneu'mato's tino's tre'psantos . . . kai`
   phantasio'santos autou`s u'par e' o'nar (even Arnobius was ostensibly
   led to Christianity by a dream). Cyprian makes the most extensive use
   of dreams, visions, etc., in his letters, see for example Ep. XI. 3-5:
   XVI. 4 ("præter nocturnas visiones per dies quoque impletur apud nos
   spiritu sancto puerorum innocens ætas, quæ in ecstasi videt," etc.);
   XXXIX. i: LXVI. Io (very interesting: "quamquam sciam somnia ridicula
   et visiones ineptas quibusdam videri, sed utique illis, qui malunt
   contra sacerdotes credere quam sacerdoti, sed nihil mirum, quando de
   Joseph fratres sui dixerunt: ecce somniator ille," etc.). One who took
   part in the baptismal controversy in the great Synod of Carthage
   writes, "secundum motum animi mei et spiritus Sancti." The enthusiastic
   element was always evoked with special power in times of persecution,
   as the genuine African matyrdoms, from the second half of the third
   century, specially shew. Cf. especially the passio Jacobi, Mariani,
   etc. But where the enthusiasm was not convenient it was called, as in
   the case of the Montanists, dæmonic. Even Constantine operated with
   dreams and visions of Christ (see his Vita).

   [55] As to the first, the recently discovered "Teaching of the
   Apostles" in its first moral part, shews a great affinity with the
   moral philosophy which was set up by Alexandrian Jews and put before
   the Greek world as that which had been revealed: see Massebieau,
   L'enseignement des XII. Apôtres. Paris. 1884, and in the Journal "Le
   Témoignage," 7 Febr. 1885. Usener, in his Preface to the Ges. Abhandl.
   Jacob Bernays', which he edited, 1885, p. v. f., has, independently of
   Massebieau, pointed out the relationship of chapters 1-5 of the
   "Teaching of the Apostles" with the Phocylidean poem (see Bernays'
   above work, p. 192 ff.). Later Taylor "The teaching of the twelve
   Apostles," 1886, threw out the conjecture that the Didache had a Jewish
   foundation, and I reached the same conclusion independently of him: see
   my Treatise: Die Apostellehre und die jüdischen beiden Wege, 1886.

   [56] It is well known that Judaism at the time of Christ embraced a
   great many different tendencies. Beside Pharisaic Judaism as the stem
   proper, there was a motley mass of formations which resulted from the
   contact of Judaism with foreign ideas, customs and institutions (even
   with Babylonian and Persian), and which attained importance for the
   development of the predominant church, as well as for the formation of
   the so-called gnostic Christian communions. Hellenic elements found
   their way even into Pharisaic theology. Orthodox Judaism itself has
   marks which shew that no spiritual movement was able to escape the
   influence which proceeded from the victory of the Greeks over the east.
   Besides, who would venture to exhibit definitely the origin and causes
   of that spiritualising of religions and that limitation of the moral
   standard of which we can find so many traces in the Alexandrian age?
   The nations who inhabited the eastern shore of the Mediterranean sea,
   had from the fourth century B. C., a common history, and therefore had
   similar convictions. Who can decide what each of them acquired by its
   own exertions, and what it obtained through interchange of opinions?
   But in proportion as we see this we must be on our guard against
   jumbling the phenomena together and effacing them. There is little
   meaning in calling a thing Hellenic, as that really formed an element
   in all the phenomena of the age. All our great political and
   ecclesiastical parties to-day are dependent on the ideas of 1789, and
   again on romantic ideas. It is just as easy to verify this as it is
   difficult to determine the measure and the manner of the influence for
   each group. And yet the understanding of it turns altogether on this
   point. To call Pharisaism, or the Gospel, or the old Jewish
   Christianity Hellenic, is not paradox, but confusion.

   [57] The Acts of the Apostles is in this respect a most instructive
   book. It, as well as the Gospel of Luke, is a document of Gentile
   christianity developing itself to Catholicism: Cf. Overbeck in his
   Commentar z. Apostelgesch. But the comprehensive judgment of Havet (in
   the work above mentioned, IV. p. 395 is correct. "L'hellénisme tient
   assez peu de place clans le N. T., du moins l'hellénisme voulu et
   réfléchi. Ces livres sont écrits en grec et leurs auteurs vivaient en
   pays grec; il y a donc eu chez eux infiltration des idées et des
   sentiments helléniques; quelquefois même l'imagination hellénique y a
   pénétré comme dans le 3 évangile et dans les Actes . . . . Dans son
   ensemble, le N. T. garde le caractère d'un livre hébraïque Le
   christianisme ne commence avoir une littérature et des doctrines
   vraiment helléniques qu'au milieu du second siècle. Mais il y avait un
   judaïsme, celui d'Alexandrie, qui avait faite alliance avec
   1'hellénisme avant même qu'il y eût des chrétiens."

   [58] The right of distinguishing (b) and (c) may be contested. But if
   we surrender this we therewith surrender the right to distinguish
   kernel and husk in the original proclamation of the Gospel. The dangers
   to which the attempt is exposed should not frighten us from it, for it
   has its justification in the fact that the Gospel is neither doctrine
   nor law.

   [59] Therewith are, doubtless, heavenly blessings bestowed in the
   present. Historical investigation has, notwithstanding, every reason
   for closely examining, whether, and in how far, we may speak of a
   present for the Kingdom of God, in the sense of Jesus. But even if the
   question had to be answered in the negative, it would make little or no
   difference for the correct understanding of Jesus' preaching. The
   Gospel viewed in its kernel is independent of this question. It deals
   with the inner constitution and mood of the soul.

   [60] The question whether, and in what degree, a man of himself can
   earn righteousness before God is one of those theoretic questions to
   which Jesus gave no answer. He fixed his attention on all the
   gradations of the moral and religious conduct of his countrymen as they
   were immediately presented to him, and found some prepared for entrance
   into the kingdom of God, not by a technical mode of outward
   preparation, but by hungering and thirsting for it, and at the same
   time unselfishly serving their brethren. Humility and love unfeigned
   were always the decisive marks of these prepared ones. They are to be
   satisfied with righteousness before God, that is, are to receive the
   blessed feeling that God is gracious to them as sinners, and accepts
   them as his children. Jesus, however, allows the popular distinction of
   sinners and righteous to remain, but exhibits its perverseness by
   calling sinners to himself, and by describing the opposition of the
   righteous to his Gospel as a mark of their godlessness and hardness of
   heart.

   [61] The blessings of the kingdom were frequently represented by Jesus
   as a reward for work done. But this popular view is again broken
   through by reference to the fact that all reward is the gift of God's
   free grace.

   [62] Some Critics--most recently Havet, Le Christianisme et ses
   origines, 1884. T. IV. p. 15 ff.--have called in question the fact that
   Jesus called himself Messiah. But this article of the Evangelic
   tradition seems to me to stand the test of the most minute
   investigation. But, in the case of Jesus, the consciousness of being
   the Messiah undoubtedly rested on the certainty of being the Son of
   God, therefore of knowing the Father and being constrained to proclaim
   that knowledge.

   [63] We can gather with certainty from the Gospels that Jesus did not
   enter on his work with the announcement: Believe in me for I am the
   Messiah. On the contrary, he connected his work with the baptising
   movement of John, but carried that movement further, and thereby made
   the Baptist his forerunner (Mark I. 15: peple'rotai o kairo`s kai`
   e'ngiken e' basilei'a tou theou· metanoeite kai` pisteu'ete en to
   euangeli'o). He was in no hurry to urge anything that went beyond that
   message, but gradually prepared, and cautiously required of his
   followers an advance beyond it. The goal to which he led them was to
   believe in him as Messiah without putting the usual political
   construction on the Messianic ideal.

   [64] Even "Son of Man" probably means Messiah: we do not know whether
   Jesus had any special reason for favouring this designation which
   springs from Dan. VII. The objection to interpreting the word as
   Messiah really resolves itself into this, that the disciples (according
   to the Gospels) did not at once recognise him as Messiah. But that is
   explained by the contrast of his own peculiar idea of Messiah with the
   popular idea. The confession of him as Messiah was the keystone of
   their confidence in him, inasmuch as by that confession they separated
   themselves from old ideas.

   [65] The distinction between the Father and the Son stands out just as
   plainly in the sayings of Jesus, as the complete obedient subordination
   of the Son to the Father. Even according to John's Gospel, Jesus
   finishes the work which the Father has given him, and is obedient in
   everything even unto death. He declares Mat. XIX. 17: ei?s estin o
   agatho's. Special notice should be given to Mark XIII. 32, (Matt. XXIV,
   36). Behind the only manifested life of Jesus, later speculation has
   put a life in which he wrought, not in subordination and obedience, but
   in like independence and dignity with God. That goes beyond the
   utterances of Jesus even in the fourth Gospel. But it is no advance
   beyond these, especially in the religious view and speech of the time,
   when it is announced that the relation of the Father to the Son lies
   beyond time. It is not even improbable that the sayings in the fourth
   Gospel referring to this, have a basis in the preaching of Jesus
   himself.

   [66] Paul knew that the designation of God as the Father of our Lord
   Jesus Christ, was the new Evangelic confession. Origen was the first
   among the Fathers (though before him Marcion) to recognise that the
   decisive advance beyond the Old Testament stage of religion, was given
   in the preaching of God as Father; see the exposition of the Lord's
   Prayer in his treatise De oratione. No doubt the Old Testament, and the
   later Judaism knew the designation of God as Father; but it applied it
   to the Jewish nation, it did not attach the evangelic meaning to the
   name, and it did not allow itself in any way to be guided in its
   religion by this idea.

   [67] See the farewell discourses in John, the fundamental ideas of
   which are, in my opinion, genuine, that is, proceed from Jesus.

   [68] The historian cannot regard a miracle as a sure given historical
   event: for in doing so he destroys the mode of consideration on which
   all historical investigation rests. Every individual miracle remains
   historically quite doubtful, and a summation of things doubtful never
   leads to certainty. But should the historian, notwithstanding, be
   convinced that Jesus Christ did extraordinary things, in the strict
   sense miraculous things, then, from the unique impression he has
   obtained of this person, he infers the possession by him of
   supernatural power. This conclusion itself belongs to the province of
   religious faith: though there has seldom been a strong faith which
   would not have drawn it. Moreover, the healing miracles of Jesus are
   the only ones that come into consideration in a strict historical
   examination. These certainly cannot be eliminated from the historical
   accounts without utterly destroying them. But how unfit are they of
   themselves, after 1800 years, to secure any special importance to him
   to whom they are attributed, unless that importance was already
   established apart from them. That he could do with him-self what he
   would, that he created a new thing without overturning the old, that he
   won men to himself by announcing the Father, that he inspired without
   fanaticism, set up a kingdom without politics, set men free from the
   world without asceticism, was a teacher without theology, at a time of
   fanaticism and politics, asceticism and theology, is the great miracle
   of his person, and that he who preached the Sermon on the Mount
   declared himself in respect of his life and death, to be the Redeemer
   and Judge of the world, is the offence and foolishness which mock all
   reason.

   [69] See Mark X. 45--That Jesus at the celebration of the first Lord's
   supper described his death as a sacrifice which he should offer for the
   forgiveness of sin, is clear from the account of Paul. From that
   account it appears to be certain that Jesus gave expression to the idea
   of the necessity and saving significance of his death for the
   forgiveness of sins, in a symbolical ordinance (based on the conclusion
   of the covenant, Exod. XXIV. 3 ff., perhaps, as Paul presupposes, on
   the Passover), in order that his disciples by repeating it in
   accordance with the will of Jesus, might be the more deeply impressed
   by it. Certain observations based on John VI., on the supper prayer in
   the Didache, nay, even on the report of Mark, and supported at the same
   time by features of the earliest practice in which it had the character
   of a real meal, and the earliest theory of the supper, which viewed it
   as a communication of eternal life and an anticipation of the future
   existence, have for years made me doubt very much whether the Pauline
   account and the Pauline conception of it, were really either the
   oldest, or the universal and therefore only one. I have been
   strengthened in this suspicion by the profound and remarkable
   investigation of Spitta (z. Gesch. u. Litt. d. Urchristenthums: Die
   urchristl. Traditionen ü. den Urspr. u. Sinnd. Abendmahls, 1893). He
   sees in the supper as not instituted, but celebrated by Jesus, the
   festival of the Messianic meal, the anticipated triumph over death, the
   expression of the perfection of the Messianic work, the symbolic
   representation of the filling of believers with the powers of the
   Messianic kingdom and life. The reference to the Passover and the death
   of Christ was attached to it later, though it is true very soon. How
   much is thereby explained that was hitherto obscure--critical,
   historical, and dogmatico-historical questions--cannot at all be stated
   briefly. And yet I hesitate to give a full recognition to Spitta's
   exposition: the words I. Cor. XI. 23: ego` ga`r pare'labon apo` tou
   kuri'ou, o` kai` pare'doka umin k.t.l., are too strong for me. Cf.
   besides, Weizsäcker's investigation in "The Apostolic Age." Lobstein,
   La doctrine de la s. cène, 1889. A. Harnack i. d. Texten u. Unters.
   VII. 2 p. 139 if. Schürer, Theol. Lit. Ztg. 1891, p. 29 if. Jülicher
   Abhandl. f. Weizsäker, 1892, p. 215 ff.

   [70] With regard to the eschatology, no one can say in detail what
   proceeds from Jesus, and what from the disciples. What has been said in
   the text does not claim to be certain, but only probable. The most
   important, and at the same time the most certain point, is that Jesus
   made the definitive fate of the individual depend on faith, humility
   and love. There are no passages in the Gospel which conflict with the
   impression that Jesus reserved day and hour to God, and wrought in
   faith and patience as long as for him it was day.

   [71] He did not impose on every one, or desire from every one even the
   outward following of himself: see Mark V. 18-19. The "imitation of
   Jesus," in the strict sense of the word, did not play any noteworthy
   role either in the Apostolic or in the old Catholic period.

   [72] It is asserted by well-informed investigators, and may be inferred
   from the Gospels (Mark XII. 32-34; Luke X. 27, 28), perhaps also from
   the Jewish original of the Didache, that some representatives of
   Pharisaism, beside the pedantic treatment of the law, attempted to
   concentrate it on the fundamental moral commandments. Consequently, in
   Palestinian and Alexandrian Judaism at the time of Christ, in virtue of
   the prophetic word and the Thora, influenced also, perhaps, by the
   Greek spirit which everywhere gave the stimulus to inwardness, the path
   was indicated in which the future development of religion was to
   follow. Jesus entered fully into the view of the law thus attempted,
   which comprehended it as a whole and traced it back to the disposition.
   But he freed it from the contradiction that adhered to it, (because, in
   spite of and alongside the tendency to a deeper perception, men still
   persisted in deducing righteousness from a punctilious observance of
   numerous particular commandments, because in so doing they became
   self-satisfied, that is, irreligious, and because in belonging to
   Abraham, they thought they had a claim of right on God). For all that,
   so far as a historical understanding of the activity of Jesus is at all
   possible, it is to be obtained from the soil of Pharisaism, as the
   Pharisees were those who cherished and developed the Messianic
   expectations, and because, along with their care for the Thora, they
   sought also to preserve, in their own way, the prophetic inheritance.
   If everything does not deceive us, there were already contained in the
   Pharisaic theology of the age, speculations which were fitted to modify
   considerably the narrow view of history, and to prepare for
   universalism. The very men who tithed mint, anise and cummin, who kept
   their cups and dishes outwardly clean, who, hedging round the Thora,
   attempted to hedge round the people, spoke also of the sum total of the
   law. They made room in their theology for new ideas which are partly to
   be described as advances, and on the other hand, they have already
   pondered the question even in relation to the law, whether submission
   to its main contents was not sufficient for being numbered among the
   people of the covenant (see Renan: Paul). In particular the whole
   sacrificial system, which Jesus also essentially ignored, was therewith
   thrust into the background. Baldensperger (Selbstbewusstsein Jesu. p.
   46) justly says, "There lie before us definite marks that the certainty
   of the nearness of God in the Temple (from the time of the Maccabees)
   begins to waver, and the efficacy of the temple institutions to be
   called in question. Its recent desecration by the Romans, appears to
   the author of the Psalms of Solomon (II. 2) as a kind of Divine
   requital for the sons of Israel themselves having been guilty of so
   grossly profaning the sacrificial gifts. Enoch calls the shewbread of
   the second Temple polluted and unclean . . . There had crept in among
   the pious a feeling of the insufficiency of their worship, and from
   this side the Essenic schism will certainly represent only the open
   outbreak of a disease which had already begun to gnaw secretly at the
   religious life of the nation": see here the excellent explanations of
   the origin of Essenism in Lucius (Essenism, 75 ff. 509 ff.). The spread
   of Judaism in the world, the secularization and apostacy of the
   priestly caste, the desecration of the Temple, the building of the
   Temple at Leontopolis, the perception brought about by the
   spiritualising of religion in the empire of Alexander the Great, that
   no blood of beasts can be a means of reconciling God--all these
   circumstances must have been absolutely dangerous and fatal, both to
   the local centralisation of worship, and to the statutory sacrificial
   system. The proclamation of Jesus (and of Stephen) as to the overthrow
   of the Temple, is therefore no absolutely new thing, nor is the fact
   that Judaism fell back upon the law and the Messianic hope, a mere
   result of the destruction of the Temple. This change was rather
   prepared by the inner development. Whatever point in the preaching of
   Jesus we may fix on, we shall find, that--apart from the writings of
   the Prophets and the Psalms, which originated in the Greek Maccabean
   periods--parallels can be found only in Pharisaism, but at the same
   time that the sharpest contrasts must issue from it. Talmudic Judaism
   is not in every respect the genuine continuance of Pharisaic Judaism,
   but a product of the decay which attests that the rejection of Jesus by
   the spiritual leaders of the people had deprived the nation and even
   the Virtuosi of Religion of their best part: (see for this the
   expositions of Kuenen "Judaismus und Christenthum," in his (Hibbert)
   lectures on national religions and world religions). The ever recurring
   attempts to deduce the origin of Christianity from Hellenism, or even
   from the Roman Greek culture, are there also rightly, briefly and
   tersely rejected. Also the hypotheses, which either entirely eliminate
   the person of Jesus or make him an Essene, or subordinate him to the
   person of Paul, may be regarded as definitively settled. Those who
   think they can ascertain the origin of Christian religion from the
   origin of Christian Theology will indeed always think of Hellenism:
   Paul will eclipse the person of Jesus with those who believe that a
   religion for the world must be born with a universalistic doctrine.
   Finally, Essenism will continue in authority with those who see in the
   position of indifference which Jesus took to the Temple worship, the
   main thing, and who, besides, create for themselves an "Essenism of
   their own finding." Hellenism, and also Essenism, can of course
   indicate to the historian some of the conditions by which the
   appearance of Jesus was prepared and rendered possible; but they
   explain only the possibility, not the reality of the appearance. But
   this with its historically not deducible power is the decisive thing.
   If some one has recently said that "the historical speciality of the
   person of Jesus" is not the main thing in Christianity; he has thereby
   betrayed that he does not know how a religion that is worthy of the
   name is founded, propagated, and maintained. For the latest attempt to
   put the Gospel in a historical connection with Buddhism (Seydel. Das
   Ev. von Jesus in seinem Verhältnissen zur Buddha-Sage, 1882: likewise,
   Die Buddha-Legende und das Leben Jesu, 1884), see, Oldenburg, Theol.
   Lit.-Ztg. 1882, Col. 415 f.; 1884, 185 f. However much necessarily
   remains obscure to us in the ministry of Jesus when we seek to place it
   in a historical connection, what is known is sufficient to confirm the
   judgment that his preaching developed a germ in the religion of Israel
   (see the Psalms) which was finally guarded and in many respects
   developed by the Pharisees, but which languished and died under their
   guardianship. The power of development which Jesus imported to it was
   not a power which he himself had to borrow from without; but doctrine
   and speculation were as far from him as ecstasy and visions. On the
   other hand, we must remember we do not know the history of Jesus up to
   his public entrance on his ministry, and that therefore we do not know
   whether in his native province he had any connection with Greeks.

   [73] See the brilliant investigations of Weizsäcker (Apost. Zeitalter.
   p. 36) as to the earliest significant names, self-designations, of the
   disciples. The twelve were in the first place "mathetai'" (disciples
   and family-circle of Jesus, see also the significance of James and the
   brethren of Jesus), then witnesses of the resurrection and therefore
   Apostles; very soon there appeared beside them, even in Jerusalem,
   Prophets and Teachers.

   [74] The christian preaching is very pregnantly described in Acts
   XXVIII. 31, as keru'ssein te`n Basilei'an tou theou, kai` dida'skein
   ta` peri` tou kuri'ou Iesou Christou.

   [75] On the spirit of God (of Christ) see note, p. 50. The earliest
   christians felt the influence of the spirit as one coming on them from
   without.

   [76] It cannot be directly proved that Jesus instituted baptism, for
   Matth. XXVIII. 19, is not a saying of the Lord. The reasons for this
   assertion are: (1) It is only a later stage of the tradition that
   represents the risen Christ as delivering speeches and giving
   commandments. Paul knows nothing of it. (2) The Trinitarian formula is
   foreign to the mouth of Jesus, and has not the authority in the
   Apostolic age which it must have had if it had descended from Jesus
   himself. On the other hand, Paul knows of no other way of receiving the
   Gentiles into the Christian communities than by baptism, and it is
   highly probable that in the time of Paul all Jewish Christians were
   also baptised. We may perhaps assume that the practice of baptism was
   continued in consequence of Jesus' recognition of John the Baptist and
   his baptism, even after John himself had been removed. According to
   John IV. 2, Jesus himself baptised not, but his disciples under his
   superintendence. It is possible only with the help of tradition to
   trace back to Jesus a "Sacrament of Baptism," or an obligation to it ex
   necessitate salutis, though it is credible that tradition is correct
   here. Baptism in the Apostolic age was eis to` a'phesin amartion, and
   indeed eis to` o'noma (1. Cor. I. 13: Acts XIX. 5). We cannot make out
   when the formula, eis to` o'noma tou patro`s, kai` tou uiou, kai` tou
   agi'ou rneu'matos, emerged. The formula, eis to` o'noma, expresses that
   the person baptised is put into a relation of dependence on him into
   whose name he is baptised. Paul has given baptism a relation to the
   death of Christ, or justly inferred it from the eis a'phesin amartion.
   The descent of the spirit on the baptised very soon ceased to be
   regarded as the necessary and immediate result of baptism; yet Paul,
   and probably his contemporaries also, considered the grace of baptism
   and the communication of the spirit to be inseparably united. See
   Scholten. Die Taufformel. 1885. Holtzman, Die Taufe im N. T. Ztsch. f.
   wiss. Theol. 1879.

   [77] The designation of the Christian community as ekklesi'a originates
   perhaps with Paul, though that is by no means certain; see as to this
   "name of honour," Sohm, Kirchenrecht, Vol. I. p. 16 ff. The words of
   the Lord, Matt. XVI. 18: XVIII. 17, belong to a later period. According
   to Gal. I. 22, tais en Christo is added to the tais ekklesi'ais tes
   Ioudai'as. The independence of every individual Christian in and before
   God is strongly insisted on in the Epistles of Paul, and in the Epistle
   of Peter, and in the Christian portions of Revelations: emas
   basilei'an, iereis to theo kai` patri` autou.

   [78] Jesus is regarded with adoring reverence as Messiah and Lord, that
   is, these are regarded as the names which his Father has given him.
   Christians are those who call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ (1
   Cor. I. 2): every creature must bow before him and confess him as Lord
   (Phil. II. 9): see Deissmann on the N. T. formula "in Christo Jesu."

   [79] The confession of Father, Son and Spirit is therefore the
   unfolding of the belief that Jesus is the Christ; but there was no
   intention of expressing by this confession the essential equality of
   the three persons, or even the similar relation of the Christian to
   them. On the contrary, the Father in it is regarded as the God and
   Father over all, the Son as revealer, redeemer and Lord, the Spirit as
   a possession, principle of the new supernatural life and of holiness.
   From the Epistles of Paul we perceive that the Formula, Father, Son and
   Spirit, could not yet have been customary, especially in Baptism. But
   it was approaching (2 Cor. XIII. 13).

   [80] The Christological utterances which are found in the New Testament
   writings, so far as they explain and paraphrase the confession of Jesus
   as the Christ and the Lord, may be almost entirely deduced from one or
   other of the four points mentioned in the text. But we must at the same
   time insist that these declarations were meant to be explanations of
   the confession that "Jesus is the Lord," which of course included the
   recognition that Jesus by the resurrection became a heavenly being (see
   Weizsäcker in above mentioned work, p. 110). The solemn protestation of
   Paul, I Cor. XII. 3; dio` gnori'zo umin o'ti oudeis en pneu'mati theou
   lalon le'gei, ANAThEMA IESOUS, kai` oudeis du'natai eipein, KURIOS
   IESOUS ei me` en pneu'mati agi'o (cf. Rom. X. 9), shews that he who
   acknowledged Jesus as the Lord, and accordingly believed in the
   resurrection of Jesus, was regarded as a full-born Christian. It
   undoubtedly excludes from the Apostolic age the independent authority
   of any christological dogma besides that confession and the worship of
   Christ connected with it. It is worth notice, however, that those early
   Christian men who recognised Christianity as the vanquishing of the Old
   Testament religion (Paul, the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
   John) all held that Christ was a being who had come down from heaven.

   [81] Compare in their fundamental features the common declarations
   about the saving value of the death of Christ in Paul, in the johannine
   writings, in 1st Peter, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and in the
   Christian portions of the book of Revelation: To agaponi' emas kai`
   lu'santi emas ek tou amartion en to ai'mati auto, auto e do'xa: Compare
   the reference to Isaiah LIII. and the Passover lamb: the utterances
   about the "lamb" generally in the early writings: see Westcott, The
   Epistles of John, p. 34 f.: The idea of the blood of Christ in the New
   Testament.

   [82] This of course could not take place otherwise than by reflecting
   on its significance. But a dislocation was already completed as soon as
   it was isolated and separated from the whole of Jesus, or even from his
   future activity. Reflection on the meaning or the causes of particular
   facts might easily, in virtue of that isolation, issue in entirely new
   conceptions.

   [83] See the discriminating statements of Weizsäcker, "Apostolic Age,"
   p. 1 f., especially as to the significance of Peter as first witness of
   the resurrection. Cf. 1 Cor. XV. 5 with Luke XXIV. 34: also the
   fragment of the "Gospel of Peter" which unfortunately breaks off at the
   point where one expects the appearance of the Lord to Peter.

   [84] It is often said that Christianity rests on the belief in the
   resurrection of Christ. This may be correct, if it is first declared
   who this Jesus Christ is, and what his life signifies. But when it
   appears as a naked report to which one must above all submit, and when
   in addition, as often happens, it is supplemented by the assertion that
   the resurrection of Christ is the most certain fact in the history of
   the world, one does not know whether he should marvel more at its
   thoughtlessness or its unbelief. We do not need to have faith in a
   fact, and that which requires religious belief, that is, trust in God,
   can never be a fact which would hold good apart from that belief. The
   historical question and the question of faith must therefore be clearly
   distinguished here. The following points are historically certain. (1)
   That none of Christ's opponents saw him after his death. (2) That the
   disciples were convinced that they had seen him soon after his death.
   (3) That the succession and number of those appearances can no longer
   be ascertained with certainty. (4) That the disciples and Paul were
   conscious of having seen Christ not in the crucified earthly body, but
   in heavenly glory--even the later incredible accounts of the
   appearances of Christ, which strongly emphasise the reality of the
   body, speak at the same time of such a body as can pass through closed
   doors, which certainly is not an earthly body. (5) That Paul does not
   compare the manifestation of Christ given to him with any of his later
   visions, but, on the other hand, describes it in the words (Gal. I. 15:
   o'te eudo'kesen o theo`s apokalu'psai to`n uio`n autou en emoi', and
   yet puts it on a level with the appearances which the earlier Apostles
   had seen. But, as even the empty grave on the third day can by no means
   be regarded as a certain historical fact, because it appears united in
   the accounts with manifest legendary features, and further because it
   is directly excluded by the way in which Paul has portrayed the
   resurrection 1 Cor. XV. it follows: (1) That every conception which
   represents the resurrection of Christ as a simple reanimation of his
   mortal body, is far from the original conception, and (2) that the
   question generally as to whether Jesus has risen, can have no existence
   for any one who looks at it apart from the contents and worth of the
   Person of Jesus. For the mere fact that friends and adherents of Jesus
   were convinced that they had seen him, especially when they themselves
   explain that he appeared to them in heavenly glory, gives, to those who
   are in earnest about fixing historical facts, not the least cause for
   the assumption that Jesus did not continue in the grave. History is
   therefore at first unable to bring any succour to faith here. However
   firm may have been the faith of the disciples in the appearances of
   Jesus in their midst, and it was firm, to believe in appearances which
   others have had is a frivolity which is always revenged by rising
   doubts. But history is still of service to faith: it limits its scope
   and therewith shews the province to which it belongs. The question
   which history leaves to faith is this: Was Jesus Christ swallowed up of
   death, or did he pass through suffering and the cross to glory, that
   is, to life, power and honour? The disciples would have been convinced
   of that in the sense in which Jesus meant them to understand it, though
   they had not seen him in glory (a consciousness of this is found in
   Luke XXIV. 26: ouchi` tauta e'dei pathein to`n Christo`n kai'
   euselthein eis te`n do'xan autou? and Joh. XX. 29: o'ti eo'rakas me
   pepi'steukas, makarioi oi me` idontes kai` piste'usantes) and we might
   probably add, that no appearances of the Lord could permanently have
   convinced them of his life, if they had not possessed in their hearts
   the impression of his Person. Faith in the eternal life of Christ and
   in our own eternal life is not the condition of becoming a disciple of
   Jesus, but is the final confession of discipleship. Faith has by no
   means to do with the knowledge of the form in which Jesus lives, but
   only with the conviction that he is the living Lord The determination
   of the form was immediately dependent on the most varied general ideas
   of the future life, resurrection, restoration, and glorification of the
   body, which were current at the time. The idea of the rising again of
   the body of Jesus appeared comparatively early, because it was this
   hope which animated wide circles of pious people for their own future.
   Faith in Jesus, the living Lord, in spite of the death on the cross,
   cannot be generated by proofs of reason or authority, but only to-day
   in the same way as Paul has confessed of himself: o'te eudo'kesen o
   theo`s apokalu'pssai to`n uio`n autou en emoi`. The conviction of
   having seen the Lord was no doubt of the greatest importance for the
   disciples and made them Evangelists: but what they saw cannot at first
   help us. It can only then obtain significance for us when we have
   gained that confidence in the Lord which Peter has expressed in Mark
   VIII. 29. The Christian even to-day confesses with Paul: ei en te zoe
   tau'te` en christo elpiko'tes esme`n mo'non, eleeino'teroi pa'nton
   anthro'pon esme'n. He believes in a future life for himself with God
   because he believes that Christ lives. That is the peculiarity and
   paradox of Christian faith. But these are not convictions that can be
   common and matter of course to a deep feeling and earnest thinking
   being standing amid nature and death, but can only be possessed by
   those who live with their whole hearts and minds in God, and even they
   need the prayer: "I believe, help thou mine unbelief." To act as if
   faith in eternal life and in the living Christ was the simplest thing
   in the world, or a dogma to which one has just to submit, is
   irreligious. The whole question about the resurrection of Christ, its
   mode and its significance, has thereby been so thoroughly confused in
   later Christendom, that we are in the habit of considering eternal life
   as certain, even apart from Christ. That, at any rate, is not
   Christian. It is Christian to pray that God would give the Spirit to
   make us strong to overcome the feelings and the doubts of nature, and
   create belief in an eternal life through the experience of "dying to
   live." Where this faith, obtained in this way, exists, it has always
   been supported by the conviction that the Man lives who brought life
   and immortality to light. To hold fast this faith is the goal of life,
   for only what we consciously strive for is in this matter our own. What
   we think we possess is very soon lost.

   [85] Weizsäcker (Apostolic Age, p. 73) says very justly: "The rising of
   Judaism against believers put them on their own feet. They saw
   themselves for the first time persecuted in the name of the law, and
   therewith for the first time it must have become clear to them, that in
   reality the law was no longer the same to them as to the others. Their
   hope is the coming kingdom of heaven, in which it is not the law, but
   their Master from whom they expect salvation. Everything connected with
   salvation is in him. But we should not investigate the conditions of
   the faith of that early period, as though the question had been laid
   before the Apostles whether they could have part in the Kingdom of
   heaven without circumcision, or whether it could be obtained by faith
   in Jesus, with or without the observance of the law. Such questions had
   no existence for them either practically or as questions of the school.
   But though they were Jews, and the law which even their Master had not
   abolished, was for them a matter of course, that did not exclude a
   change of inner position towards it, through faith in their Master and
   hope of the Kingdom. There is an inner freedom which can grow up
   along-side of all the constraints of birth, custom, prejudice, and
   piety. But this only comes into consciousness, when a demand is made on
   it which wounds it, or when it is assailed on account of an inference
   drawn not by its own consciousness, but only by its opponents.

   [86] Only one of these four tendencies--the Pauline, with the Epistle
   to the Hebrews and the Johannine writings which are related to
   Paulinism--has seen in the Gospel the establishment of a new religion.
   The rest identified it with Judaism made perfect, or with the Old
   Testament religion rightly understood. But Paul, in connecting
   Christianity with the promise given to Abraham, passing thus beyond the
   actual Old Testament religion, has not only given it a historical
   foundation, but also claimed for the Father of the Jewish nation a
   unique significance for Christianity. As to the tendencies named 1 and
   2, see Book I. chap. 6.

   [87] It is clear from Gal. II. 11 ff. that Peter then and for long
   before occupied in principle the stand-point of Paul: see the judicious
   remarks of Weizsäcker in the book mentioned above, p. 75 f.

   [88] These four tendencies were represented in the Apostolic age by
   those who had been born and trained in Judaism, and they were
   collectively transplanted into Greek territory. But we cannot be sure
   that the third of the above tendencies found intelligent and
   independent representatives in this domain, as there is no certain
   evidence of it. Only one who had really been subject to it, and
   therefore understood it, could venture on a criticism of the Old
   Testament religion. Still, it may be noted that the majority of
   non-Jewish converts in the Apostolic age had probably come to know the
   Old Testament beforehand--not always the Jewish religion, (see Havet,
   Le Christianisme, T. IV. p. 120: "Je ne sais s'il y est entré, du
   vivant de Paul, un seul païen: je veux dire un homme, qui ne connût pas
   déjà, avant d'y entrer, le judaism et la Bible"). These indications
   will shew how mistaken and misleading it is to express the different
   tendencies in the Apostolic age and the period closely following by the
   designations "Jewish Christianity--Gentile Christianity." Short
   watchwords are so little appropriate here that one might even with some
   justice reverse the usual conception, and maintain that what is usually
   understood by Gentile Christianity (criticism of the Old Testament
   religion) was possible only within Judaism, while that which is
   frequently called Jewish Christianity is rather a conception which must
   have readily suggested itself to born Gentiles superficially acquainted
   with the Old Testament.

   [89] The first edition of this volume could not appeal to Weizsäcker's
   work, Das Apostolisehe Zeitalter der Christlichen Kirche, 1886, [second
   edition translated in this series]. The author is now in the happy
   position of being able to refer the readers of his imperfect sketch to
   this excellent presentation, the strength of which lies in the
   delineation of Paulinism in its relation to the early Church, and to
   early Christian theology (p. 79-172). The truth of Weizsäcker's
   expositions of the inner relations (p. 85 f.), is but little affected
   by his assumptions concerning the outer relations, which I cannot
   everywhere regard as just. (The work of Weizsäcker as a whole is, in my
   opinion, the most important work on Church history we have received
   since Ritschl's "Entstehung der alt-katholischen Kirche." 2 Aufl.
   1857.)

   [90] Kabisch, Die Eschatologie des Paulus, 1893, has shewn how strongly
   the eschatology of Paul was influenced by the later Pharisaic Judaism.
   He has also called attention to the close connection between Paul's
   doctrine of sin and the fall, and that of the Rabbis.

   [91] Some of the Church Fathers (see Socr. H. E. III. 16) have
   attributed to Paul an accurate knowledge of Greek literature and
   philosophy: but that cannot be proved. The references of Heinrici (2
   Kor -Brief. p. 537-604) are worthy of our best thanks; but no certain
   judgment can be formed about the measure of the Apostles' Greek
   culture, so long as we do not know how great was the extent of
   spiritual ideas which were already precipitated in the speech of the
   time.

   [92] The epistle to the Hebrews and the first epistle of Peter, as well
   as the Pastoral epistles belong to the Pauline circle; they are of the
   greatest value because they shew that certain fundamental features of
   Pauline theology took effect after-wards in an original way, or
   received independent parallels, and because they prove that the cosmic
   Christology of Paul made the greatest impression and was continued. In
   Christology, the epistle to the Ephesians in particular, leads directly
   from Paul to the pneumatic Christology of the post-apostolic period.
   Its non-genuineness is by no means certain to me.

   [93] In the Ztschr. für Theol. und Kirche, II. p. 1.89 if. I have
   discussed the relation of the prologue of the fourth Gospel to the
   whole work and endeavoured to prove the following: "The prologue of the
   Gospel is not the key to its comprehension. It begins with a well-known
   great object, the Logos, re-adapts and transforms it--implicitly
   opposing false Christologies--in order to substitute for it Jesus
   Christ, the monogene`s the'os, or in order to unveil it as this Jesus
   Christ. The idea of the Logos is allowed to fall from the moment that
   this takes place." The author continues to narrate of Jesus only with
   the view of establishing the belief that he is the Messiah, the Son of
   God. This faith has for its main article the recognition that Jesus is
   descended from God and from heaven; but the author is far from
   endeavouring to work out this recognition from cosmological,
   philosophical considerations. According to the Evangelist, Jesus proves
   himself to be the Messiah, the Son of God, in virtue of his
   self-testimony, and because he has brought a full knowledge of God and
   life--purely supernatural divine blessings. (Cf. besides, and partly in
   opposition, Holtzmann, i. d. Ztschr. f. wissensch. Theol. 1893.) The
   author's peculiar world of theological ideas, is not, however, so
   entirely isolated in the early Christian literature as appears on the
   first impression. If, as is probable, the Ignatian Epistles are
   independent of the Gospel of John, further, the Supper prayer in the
   Didache, finally, certain mystic theological phrases in the Epistle of
   Barnabas, in the second epistle of Clement, and in Hermas: a complex of
   Theologoumena may be put together, which reaches back to the primitive
   period of the Church, and may be conceived as the general ground for
   the theology of John. This complex has on its side a close connection
   with the final development of the Jewish Hagiographic literature under
   Greek influence.

   [94] The Jewish religion, specially since the (relative) close of the
   canon, had become more and more a religion of the Book.

   [95] Examples of both in the New Testament are numerous. See above all,
   Matt. I. II. Even the belief that Jesus was born of a Virgin sprang
   from Isaiah VII. 14. It cannot, however, be proved to be in the
   writings of Paul (the two genealogies in Matt. and Luke directly
   exclude it: according to Dillmann, Jahrb. f. protest. Theol. p. 192 ff.
   Luke I. 34, 35 would be the addition of a redactor); but it must have
   arisen very early, as the Gentile Christians of the second century
   would seem to have unanimously confessed it (see the Romish Symbol.
   Ignatius, Aristides, Justin, etc.). For the rest, it was long before
   theologians recognised in the Virgin birth of Jesus more than
   fulfilment of a prophecy, viz., a fact of salvation. The conjecture of
   Usener, that the idea of the birth from a Virgin is a heathen myth
   which was received by the Christians, contradicts the entire earliest
   development of Christian tradition, which is free from heathen myths so
   far as these had not already been received by wide circles of Jews,
   (above all, certain Babylonian and Persian Myths), which in the case of
   that idea is not demonstrable. Besides, it is in point of method not
   permissible to stray so far when we have near at hand such a complete
   explanation as Isaiah VII. 14. Those who suppose that the reality of
   the Virgin birth must be held fast, must assume that a misunderstood
   prophecy has been here fulfilled (on the true meaning of the passage
   see Dillmann [Jesajas, 5 Aufl. p. 69]: "of the birth by a Virgin [i.e.,
   of one who at the birth was still a Virgin.] the Hebrew text says
   nothing . . . Immanuel as beginning and representative of the new
   generation, from which one should finally take possession of the king's
   throne"). The application of an unhistorical local method in the
   exposition of the Old Testament--Haggada and Rabbinic allegorism--may
   be found in many passages of Paul (see, e.g., Gal. III. 16, 19; IV.
   22-31; 1 Cor. IX. 9; X. 4; XI. 10; Rom. IV. etc.).

   [96] The proof of this may be found in the quotations in early
   Christian writings from the Apocalypses of Enoch, Ezra, Eldad and
   Modad, the assumption of Moses and other Jewish Apocalypses unknown to
   us. They were regarded as Divine revelations beside the Old Testament;
   see the proofs of their frequent and long continued use in Schürer's
   "History of the Jewish people in the time of our Lord." But the
   Christians in receiving these Jewish Apocalypses did not leave them
   intact, but adapted them with greater or less Christian additions (see
   Esra, Enoch, Ascension of Isaiah). Even the Apocalypse of John is, as
   Vischer (Texte u. Unters. 3 altchristl. lit. Gesch. Bd. II. H. 4) has
   shown, a Jewish Apocalypse adapted to a Christian meaning. But in this
   activity, and in the production of little Apocalyptic prophetic sayings
   and articles, (see in the Epistle to the Ephesians, and in those of
   Barnabas and Clement) the Christian labour here in the earliest period
   seems to have exhausted itself. At least we do not know with certainty
   of any great Apocalyptic writing of an original kind proceeding from
   Christian circles. Even the Apocalypse of Peter which, thanks to the
   discovery of Bouriant, we now know better, is not a completely original
   work as contrasted with the Jewish Apocalypses.

   [97] The Gospel reliance on the Lamb who was slain very significantly
   pervades the Revelation of John, that is, its Christian parts. Even the
   Apocalypse of Peter shews Jesus Christ as the comfort of believers and
   as the Revealer of the future. In it (v. 3,) Christ says; "Then will
   God come to those who believe on me, those who hunger and thirst and
   mourn, etc."

   [98] These words were written before the Apocalypse of Peter was
   discovered. That Apocalypse confirms what is said in the text.
   Moreover, its delineation of Paradise and blessedness are not wanting
   in poetic charm and power. In its delineation of Hell, which prepares
   the way for Dante's Hell, the author is scared by no terror.

   [99] These ideas, however, encircled the earliest Christendom as with a
   wall of fire, and preserved it from a too early contact with the world.

   [100] An accurate examination of the eschatological sayings of Jesus in
   the synoptists shews that much foreign matter is mixed with them (see
   Weiffenbach, Der Wiederkunftsgedanke Jesu, 1875). That the tradition
   here was very uncertain, because influenced by the Jewish Apocalyptic,
   is shewn by the one fact that Papias (in Iren. V. 33) quotes as words
   of the Lord which had been handed down by the disciples, a group of
   sayings which we find in the Apocalypse of Baruch, about the amazing
   fruitfulness of the earth during the time of the Messianic Kingdom.

   [101] We may here call attention to an interesting remark of Goethe.
   Among his Apophthegms (no. 537) is the following: "Apocrypha: It would
   be important to collect what is historically known about these books,
   and to shew that these very Apocryphal writings with which the
   communities of the first centuries of our era were flooded, were the
   real cause why Christianity at no moment of political or Church history
   could stand forth in all her beauty and purity." A historian would not
   express himself in this way, but yet there lies at the root of this
   remark a true historical insight.

   [102] See Schürer, History of the Jewish people. Div. II. vol. II. p.
   160 f.; yet the remarks of the Jew Trypho in the dialogue of Justin
   shew that the notions of a pre-existent Messiah were by no means very
   widely spread in Judaism. (See also Orig. c. Cels. 1. 49: "A Jew would
   not at all admit that any Prophet had said the Son of God will come;
   they avoided this designation and used instead the saying, the anointed
   of God will come.") The Apocalyptists and Rabbis attributed
   pre-existence, that is, a heavenly origin, to many sacred things and
   persons, such as the Patriarchs, Moses, the Tabernacle, the Temple
   vessels, the city of Jerusalem. That the true Temple and the real
   Jerusalem were with God in heaven and would come down from heaven at
   the appointed time, must have been a very wide-spread idea, especially
   at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, and even earlier than that
   (see Gal. IV. 26: Rev. XXI. 2: Heb. XII. 22). In the Assumption of
   Moses (c. I) Moses says of himself: Dominus invenit me, qui ab initio
   orbis terrarum præparatus sum, ut sim arbiter (mesi'tes) testamenti
   illius (tes diathe'kes autou). In the Midrasch Bereschith rabba VIII.
   2. we read, "R. Simeon ben Lakisch says, 'The law was in existence 2000
   years before the creation of the world.'" In the Jewish treatise
   Proseuche` Iose'ph, which Origen has several times quoted, Jacob says
   of himself (ap. Orig. torn. II. in Joann. c. 25. Op. IV. 84: "o ga`r
   lalon pro`s umas, ego Iako`b kai` Israe'l, a'ngelos theou eimi` ego`
   kai` pneuma archiko`n kai` Abraa`m kai` Isaa`k proekti'sthesan pro
   pantos e'rgou, ego` de` Iako`b . . . . ego` protogonos panto` zo'os
   zooume'nou upo` theou." These examples could easily be increased. The
   Jewish speculations about Angels and Mediators, which at the time of
   Christ grew very luxuriantly among the Scribes and Apocalyptists, and
   endangered the purity and vitality of the Old Testament idea of God,
   were also very important for the development of Christian dogmatics.
   But neither these speculations, nor the notions of heavenly Archetypes,
   nor of pre-existence, are to be referred to Hellenic influence. This
   may have co-operated here and there, but the rise of these speculations
   in Judaism is not to be explained by it; they rather exhibit the
   Oriental stamp. But, of course, the stage in the development of the
   nations had now been reached, in which the creations of Oriental fancy
   and Mythology could be fused with the ideal conceptions of Hellenic
   philosophy.

   [103] The conception of heavenly ideals of precious earthly things
   followed from the first naive method of speculation we have mentioned,
   that of a pre-existence of persons from the last. If the world was
   created for the sake of the people of Israel, and the Apocalyptists
   expressly taught that, then it follows that in the thought of God
   Israel was older than the world. The idea of a kind of pre-existence of
   the people of Israel follows from this. We can still see this process
   of thought very plainly in the shepherd of Hermas, who expressly
   declares that the world was created for the sake of the Church. In
   consequence of this he maintains that the Church was very old, and was
   created before the foundation of the world. See Vis. I. 2. 4: II. 4.
   11: Diati' oun presbute'ra (sci1. e ekklesi'a): O'ti, phesi'n, pa'nton
   pro'te ektisthe dia` touto presbute'ra, kai` dia` tau'ten o ko'smos
   katerti'sthe. But in order to estimate aright the bearing of these
   speculations, we must observe that, according to them, the precious
   things and persons, so far as they are now really manifested, were
   never conceived as endowed with a double nature. No hint is given of
   such an assumption; the sensible appearance was rather conceived as a
   mere wrapping which was necessary only to its becoming visible, or,
   conversely, the pre-existence or the archetype was no longer thought of
   in presence of the historical appearance of the object. That pneumatic
   form of existence was not set forth in accordance with the analogy of
   existence verified by sense, but was left in suspense. The idea of
   "existence" here could run through all the stages which, according to
   the Mythology and Metaphysic of the time, lay between what we now call
   "valid," and the most concrete being. He who nowadays undertakes to
   justify the notion of pre-existence, will find himself in a very
   different situation from these earlier times, as he will no longer be
   able to count on shifting conceptions of existence. See Appendix I. at
   the end of this Vol. for a fuller discussion of the idea of
   pre-existence.

   [104] It must be observed here that Palestinian Judaism, without any
   apparent influence from Alexandria, though not independently of the
   Greek spirit, had already created a multitude of intermediate beings
   between God and the world, avowing thereby that the idea of God had
   become stiff and rigid. "Its original aim was simply to help the God of
   Judaism in his need." Among these intermediate beings should be
   specially mentioned the Memra of God (see also the Shechina and the
   Metatron).

   [105] See Justin. Dial. 48. fin: Justin certainly is not favourably
   disposed towards those who regard Christ as a "man among men," but he
   knows that there are such people.

   [106] The miraculous genesis of Christ in the Virgin by the Holy Spirit
   and the real pre-existence are of course mutually exclusive. At a later
   period, it is true, it became necessary to unite them in thought.

   [107] There is the less need for treating this more fully here, as no
   New Testament Christology has become the direct starting-point of later
   doctrinal developments. The Gentile Christians had transmitted to them,
   as an unanimous doctrine, the message that Christ is the Lord who is to
   be worshipped, and that one must think of him as the Judge of the
   living and the dead, that is, os peri` theou. But it certainly could
   not fail to be of importance for the result that already many of the
   earliest Christian writers, and therefore even Paul, perceived in Jesus
   a spiritual being come down from heaven (pneuma) who was en morphe
   theou, and whose real act of love consisted in his very descent.

   [108] The creation of the New Testament canon first paved the way for
   putting an end, though only in part, to the production of Evangelic
   "facts" within the Church. For Hermas (Sim. IX. 16) can relate that the
   Apostles also descended to the under world and there preached. Others
   report the same of John the Baptist. Origen in his homily on 1. Kings
   XXVII. says that Moses, Samuel and all the Prophets descended to Hades
   and there preached. A series of facts of Evangelic history which have
   no parallel in the accounts of our Synoptists, and are certainly
   legendary, may be but together from the epistle of Barnabas, Justin,
   the second epistle of Clement, Papias, the Gospel to the Hebrews, and
   the Gospel to the Egyptians. But the synoptic reports themselves,
   especially in the articles for which we have only a solitary witness,
   shew an extensive legendary material, and even in the Gospel of John,
   the free production of facts cannot be mistaken. Of what a curious
   nature some of these were, and that they are by no means to be entirely
   explained from the Old Testament, as for example, Justin's account of
   the ass on which Christ rode into Jerusalem, having been bound to a
   vine, is shewn by the very old fragment in one source of the Apostolic
   constitutions (Texte u. Unters. II, 5. p. 28 ff.); o'te etosen o
   dida'skalos to`n a`rton kai` to` pote'rion kai` eulo'gesen auta`
   le'gon; touto esti to` soma' mou kai` to` haima, ouk epe`trepse
   tau'tais the women) sustenai emin . . . . Ma'rtha eipen dia` Maria'm,
   o'ti eiden aute`n meidiotan. Mari'a eipen ouke'ti ege'lasa. Narratives
   such as those of Christ's descent to Hell and ascent to heaven, which
   arose comparatively late, though still at the close of the first
   century (see Book I. Chap. 3) sprang out of short formula containing an
   antithesis (death and resurrection, first advent in lowliness, second
   advent in glory: descensus de coelo, ascensus in coelum; ascensus in
   coelum, descensus ad inferna) which appeared to be required by Old
   Testament predictions, and were commended by their naturalness. Just as
   it is still, in the same way naively inferred: if Christ rose bodily he
   must also have ascended bodily (visibly?) into heaven.

   [109] The Sibylline Oracles, composed by Jews, from 160 B.C. to 189
   A.D. are specially instructive here: see the Editions of Friedlieb.
   1852; Alexandre, 1869; Rzach. 1891. Delaunay, Moines et Sibylles dans
   l'antiquité judéo-grecque, 1874. Schürer in the work mentioned above.
   The writings of Josephus also yield rich booty, especially his apology
   for Judaism in the two books against Apion. But it must be noted that
   there were Jews enlightened by Hellenism, who were still very zealous
   in their observance of the law. "Philo urges most earnestly to the
   observance of the law in opposition to that party which drew the
   extreme inferences of the allegoristic method, and put aside the outer
   legality as something not essential for the spiritual life. Philo
   thinks that by exact observance of these ceremonies on their material
   side, one will also come to know better their symbolical meaning"
   (Siegfried, Philo, p. 157).

   [110] Direct evidence is certainly almost entirely wanting here, but
   the indirect speaks all the more emphatically: see § 3, Supplement 1.
   2.

   [111] The Jewish propaganda, though by no means effaced, gave way very
   distinctly to the Christian from the middle of the second century. But
   from this time we find few more traces of an enlightened Hellenistic
   Judaism. Moreover, the Messianic expectation also seems to have
   somewhat given way to occupation with the law. But the God of Abraham,
   Isaac and Jacob, as well as other Jewish terms certainly played a great
   rôle in Gentile and Gnostic magical formulæ of the third century, as
   may be seen e.g., from many passages in Origen c. Celtum.

   [112] The prerogative of Israel was, for all that, clung to: Israel
   remains the chosen people.

   [113] The brilliant investigations of Bernays, however, have shewn how
   many-sided that philosophy of religion was. The proofs of asceticism in
   this Hellenistic Judaism are especially of great interest for the
   history of dogma (see Theophrastus' treatise on piety). In the eighth
   Epistle of Heraclitus, composed by a Hellenistic Jew in the first
   century, it is said (Bernays, p. 182). "So long a time before, O
   Hermodorus, saw thee that Sibyl, and even then thou wert" (eidr se pro`
   posou'tou aionos, Ermo'dore, e Si'bulla ekei'ne, kai` to'te estha).
   Even here then the notion is expressed that foreknowledge and
   predestination invest the known and the deter-mined with a kind of
   existence. Of great importance is the fact that even before Philo, the
   idea of the wisdom of God creating the world and passing over to men
   had been hypostatised in Alexandrian Judaism (see Sirach, Baruch. the
   wisdom of Solomon, Enoch, nay, even the book of Proverbs). But so long
   as the deutero-canonical Old Testament, and also the Alexandrine and
   Apocalyptic literature continue in the sad condition in which they are
   at present, we can form no certain judgment and draw no decided
   conclusions on the subject. When will the scholar appear who will at
   length throw light on these writings, and therewith or the section of
   inner Jewish history most interesting to the Christian theologian? As
   yet we have only a most thankworthy preliminary study in Schürer's
   great work, and beside it particular or dilettante attempts which
   hardly shew what the problem really is, far less solve it. What
   disclosures even the fourth book of the Maccabees alone yields for the
   connection of the Old Testament with Hellenism!

   [114] "So far as the sensible world is a work of the Logos, it is
   called neo'teros uio's (quod deus immut. 6. I. 277), or according to
   Prov. VIII. 22, an offspring of God and wisdom: e de` paradexame'ne to`
   tou theou spe'rma telespho'rois odisi to`n mo'non kai` agapeto`n
   aistheto`n uio`n apeku'ese to`nde to`n ko`smon (de ebriet. 8. I. 361
   f.). So far as the Logos is High Priest his relation to the world is
   symbolically expressed by the garment of the High Priest, to which
   exegesis the play on the word ko'smos, as meaning both ornament and
   world, lent its aid." This speculation (see Siegfried. Philo. 235) is
   of special importance, for it shews how closely the ideas ko`smos and
   lo`gos were connected.

   [115] Of all the Greek Philosophers of the second century, Plutarch of
   Chäronea, died c. 125 A.D., and Numenius of Apamea, second half of the
   second century, approach nearest to Philo; but the latter of the two
   was undoubtedly familiar with Jewish philosophy, specially with Philo,
   and probably also with Christian writings.

   [116] As to the way in which Philo (see also 4 Maccab. V. 24) learned
   to connect the Stoic ethics with the authority of the Torah, as was
   also done by the Palestinian Midrash, and represented the Torah as the
   foundation of the world, and therewith as the law of nature: see
   Siegfried, Philo, p. 156.

   [117] Philo by his exhortations to seek the blessed life, has by no
   means broken with the intellectualism of the Greek philosophy, he has
   only gone beyond it. The way of knowledge and speculation is to him
   also the way of religion and morality. But his formal principle is
   supernatural and leads to a supernatural knowledge which finally passes
   over into sight.

   [118] But everything was now ready for this synthesis, so that it could
   be, and immediately was, completed by Christian philosophers.

   [119] We cannot discover Philo's influence in the writings of Paul. But
   here again we must remember that the scripture learning of Palestinian
   teachers developed speculations which appear closely related to the
   Alexandrian, and partly are so, but yet cannot be deduced from them.
   The element common to them must, for the present at least, be deduced
   from the harmony of conditions in which the different nations of the
   East were at that time placed, a harmony which we cannot exactly
   measure.

   [120] The conception of God's relation to the world as given in the
   fourth Gospel is not Philonic. The Logos doctrine there is therefore
   essentially not that of Philo. (Against Kuenen and others, see p. 93.)

   [121] Siegfried (Philo. pp. 160-197) has presented in detail Philo's
   allegorical interpretation of scripture, his hermeneutic principles and
   their application. Without an exact knowledge of these principles we
   cannot understand the Scripture expositions of the Fathers, and
   therefore also cannot do them justice.

   [122] See Siegfried, Philo, p. 176. Yet, as a rule, the method of
   isolating and adapting passages of scripture, and the method of
   unlimited combination were sufficient.

   [123] Numerous examples of this may he found in the epistle of Barnabas
   (see cc. 4-9), and in the dialogue of Justin with Trypho (here they are
   objects of controversy, see cc. 71-73, 120), but also in many other
   Christian writings, (e.g. 1 Clem. ad Cor. VIII. 3: XVII. 6: XXIII. 3,
   4: XXVI. 5: XLVI. 2: 2 Clem. XIII. 2). These Christian additions were
   long retained in the Latin Bible, (see also Lactantius and other
   Latins: Pseudo-Cyprian de aleat. 2 etc.), the most celebrated of them
   is the addition "a ligno" to "dominus regnavit" in Psalm XCVI., see
   Credner, Beiträge II. The treatment of the Old Testament in the epistle
   of Barnabas is specially instructive, and exhibits the greatest formal
   agreement with that of Philo. We may close here with the words in which
   Siegfried sums up his judgment on Philo: "No Jewish writer has
   contributed so much as Philo to the breaking up of particularism and
   the dissolution of Judaism. The history of his people, though he
   believed in it literally, was in its main points a didactic allegoric
   poem for enabling him to inculcate the doctrine that man attains the
   vision of God by mortification of the flesh. The law was regarded by
   him as the best guide to this, but it had lost its exclusive value, as
   it was admitted to be possible to reach the goal without it, and it
   had, besides, its aim outside itself. The God of Philo was no longer
   the old living God of Israel, but an imaginary being who, to obtain
   power over the world, needed a Logos by whom the palladium of Israel,
   the unity of God, was taken a prey. So Israel lost everything which had
   hitherto characterised her."

   [124] Proofs in Friedländer, Sittengeschichte, vol. 3.

   [125] See the chapter on belief in immortality in Friedländer,
   Sittengesch. Roms Bde. 3. Among the numerous mysteries known to us,
   that of Mythras deserves special consideration. From the middle of the
   second century the Church Fathers saw in it, above all, the caricature
   of the Church. The worship of Mithras had its redeemer, its mediator,
   hierarchy, sacrifice, baptism and sacred meal. The ideas of expiation,
   immortality, and the Redeemer God, were very vividly present in this
   cult, which of course, in later times, borrowed from Christianity: see
   the accounts of Marquardt, Réville, and the Essay of Sayous, Le
   Taurobole in the Rev. de l'Hist. des Religions, 1887, where the
   earliest literature is also utilised. The worship of Mithras in the
   third century became the most powerful rival of Christianity. In
   connection with this should be specially noted the cult of Æsculapius,
   the God who helps the body and the soul; see my essay "Medicinisches
   aus der ältesten Kirchengeschichte," 1892. p. 93 ff.

   [126] Hence the wide prevalence of the cult of Æsculapius.

   [127] Dominus in certain circumstances means more than deus; see
   Tertull. Apol. It signifies more than Soter: see Irenæus I. 1. 3; .
   . . . . to`n sotera le'gousin, oude` ga`r ku'rion onoma'zein auto`n
   the`lousin--ku'rios and despo'tes are almost synonymous. See Philo.
   Quis. rer. div. heres. 6: suno'numa tauta einai le'getai.

   [128] We must give special attention here to the variability and
   elasticity of the concept "theo`s", and indeed among the cultured as
   well as the uncultured (Orig. prolegg. in Psalm. in Pitra, Anal. T. II.
   p. 437i according to a Stoic source; kat' a'llon de' tro'pon le'gesthai
   theo`n zoon atha'naton logiko`n spoudaion, o'ste pasan astei'an
   psuche'n theo`n upa'rchein, ka`n perio'chetai, a'llos de` lenesthai
   theo`n to` kath' auto` o'n zonn atha'naton os ta` en anthropois sophois
   periechome'nas psucha`s me` upa'rchein theou's). They still regarded
   the Gods as passionless, blessed men living for ever. The idea
   therefore of a theopoi'esis, and on the other hand, the idea of the
   appearance of the Gods in human form presented no difficulty (see Acts
   XIV. 11: XXVIII. 6). But philosophic speculation--the Platonic, as well
   as in yet greater measure the Stoic, and in the greatest measure of all
   the Cynic--had led to the recognition of something divine in man's
   spirit (pneuma, nous). Marcus Aurelius in his Meditations frequently
   speaks of the God who dwells in us. Clement of Alexandria (Strom. VI.
   14. 113) says: ou'tos du'namin labousa kuriake`n e psuche` meleta einai
   theo's, kako`n me`n oude`n a'llo ple`n agnoi'as einai nomi'zousa. In
   Bernays' Heraclitian Epistles, pp. 37 f. 135 f., will be found a
   valuable exposition of the Stoic [Heraclitian] thesis and its history,
   that men are Gods. See Norden, Beitrage zur Gesch. d. griech. Philos.
   Jahrb. f. klass. Philol. XIX. Suppl. Bd. p. 373 ff., about the Cynic
   Philosopher who, contemplating the life and activity of man
   [kata'skopos], becomes its epi'skopos, and further ku'rio's, a'ngelos
   theou, theo`s en anthro'pois. The passages which he adduces are of
   importance for the history of dogma in a twofold respect. (1) They
   present remarkable parallels to Christiology [one even finds the
   designations, ku'rios, a'ngelos, kata'skopos, epi'skopos, theo`s
   associated with the philosophers as with Christ, e.g, in Justin; nay,
   the Cynics and Neoplatonics speak of epi'skopoi dai'mones; cf. also the
   remarkable narrative in Laertius VI. 102, concerning the Cynic
   Menedemus; houto`s, katha' phesin Ippo'botos, eis posos ton teratei'as
   e'lasen, o'ste Erinu'os analabo`n schema perieei, le'gon episkopos
   aphichthai ex A'idou ton amarto'me'non, o'pos pa'lin katio`n tasta
   apange'lloi tois ekei, dai'mosin (2) They also explain how the
   ecclesiastical epi'skopoi came to be so highly prized, inasmuch as
   these also were from a very early period regarded as mediators between
   God and man, and considered as en anthro'pois theoi'). There where not
   a few who in the first and second centuries, appeared with the claim to
   be regarded as a God or an organ inspired and chosen by God (Simon
   Magus [cf. the manner of his treatment in Hippol. Philos. VI. 8: see
   also Clem. Hom. II. 27], Apollonius of Tyana (?), see further Tacitus
   Hist. II. 51: "Mariccus . . . . iamque adsertor Galliarum et deus,
   nomen id sibi indiderat,"; here belongs also the gradually developing
   worship of the Emperor: "dominus ac deus noster." Cf. Augustus,
   Inscription of the year 25/24 B.C. in Egypt, [where the Ptolemies were
   for long described as Gods]: Upe`r Kai'saros Autokra'ttoros theou
   (Zeitschrift für Ægypt. Sprache. XXXI. Bd. p. 3). Domitian: theo`s
   Adriano's, Kaibel Inscr. Gr. 829. 1053. theo's Seoueros Eusebes,
   1061--the Antinous cult with its prophets. See also Josephus on Herod
   Agrippa. Antiq. XIX. 8. 2. (Euseb. H. E. II. Io). The flatterers said
   to him, theo`n prosagoreu'ontes; ei kai' me'chri nun os a'nthropon
   ephobe'themen, alla` tou'nteuthen krei'ttona se thnetes tes phu'seos
   omologoumen. Herod himself, § 7, says to his friends in his sickness; o
   theo`s umin ego` e'de katastre'phein epita'ttomai to`n bi'on . . . . o
   kletheis atha'natos uph' emon e'de thanein apa'gomai). On the other
   hand, we must mention the worship of the founder in some philosophic
   schools, especially among the Epicureans. Epictetus says (Moral. 15),
   Diogenes and Heraclitus and those like them are justly called Gods.
   Very instructive in this connection are the reproaches of the heathen
   against the Christians, and of Christian partisans against one another
   with regard to the almost divine veneration of their teachers. Lucian
   (Peregr. II) reproaches the Christians in Syria for having regarded
   Peregrinus as a God and a new Socrates. The heathen in Smyrna, after
   the burning of Polycarp, feared that the Christians would begin to pay
   him divine honours (Euseb. H. E. IV. 15. 41). Cæcilius in Minucius
   Felix speaks of divine honours being paid by Christians to priests.
   (Octav. IX. 10.) The Antimontanist (Euseb. H. E. V. 18. 6) asserts that
   the Montanists worship their prophet and Alexander the Confessor as
   divine. The opponents of the Roman Adoptians (Euseb. H. E. V. 28)
   reproach them with praying to Galen. There are many passages in which
   the Gnostics are reproached with paying Divine honours to the heads of
   their schools, and for many Gnostic schools (the Carpocratians, for
   example) the reproach seems to have been just. All this is extremely
   instructive. The genius, the hero, the founder of a new school who
   promises to shew the certain way to the vita beata, the emperor, the
   philosopher, (numerous Stoic passages might be noted here) finally man,
   in so far as he is inhabited by nous--could all somehow be considered
   as theoi', so elastic was the concept. All these instances of
   Apotheosis in no way endangered the Monotheism which had been developed
   from the mixture of Gods and from philosophy; for the one supreme
   Godhead can unfold his inexhaustible essence in a variety of
   existences, which, while his creatures as to their origin, are parts of
   his essence as to their contents. This Monotheism does not yet exactly
   disclaim its Polytheistic origin. The Christian, Hermas, says to his
   Mistress (Vis. I. 1. 7) ou pa'ntote' se os thea'n egesa'men, and the
   author of the Epistle of Diognetus writes (X. 6) tauta tois
   epideome'nois choregon (i.e., the rich man) theo`s gi'netai ton
   lambano'nton. That the concept theo`s was again used only of one God,
   was due to the fact that one now started from the definition "qui vitam
   æternam habet," and again from the definition "qui est super omnia et
   originem nescit." From the latter followed the absolute unity of God,
   from the former a plurality of Gods. Both could be so harmonised (see
   Tertull. adv. Prax. and Novat. de Trinit.) that one could assume that
   the God qui est super omnia, might allow his monarchy to be
   administered by several persons, and might dispense the gift of
   immortality and with it a relative divinity.

   [129] The longing for redemption and divine help is, for example,
   clearer in Seneca than in the Christian philosopher, Minucius Felix:
   see Kühn, Der Octavius des M. F. 1882, and Theol. Lit. Ztg. 1883. No.
   6.

   [130] See the so-called Neopythagorean philosophers and the so-called
   forerunners of Neoplatonism. (Cf. Bigg, The Platonists of Alexandria,
   p. 250, as to Numenius.) Unfortunately, we have as yet no sufficient
   investigation of the question what influence, if any, the Jewish
   Alexandrian Philosophy of religion had on the development of Greek
   philosophy in the second and third centuries. The answering of the
   question would be of the greatest importance. But at present it cannot
   even be said whether the Jewish philosophy of religion had any
   influence on the genesis of Neoplatonism. On the relation of
   Neoplatonism to Christianity and their mutual approximation, see the
   excellent account in Tzschirner, Fall des Heidenthums, pp. 574-618. Cf.
   also Réville,, La Religion à Rome. 1886.

   [131] The Christians, that is the Christian preachers, were most in
   agreement with the Cynics (see Lucian's Peregrinus Proteus), both on
   the negative and on the positive side; but for that very reason they
   were hard on one another (Justin and Tatian against Crescens)--not only
   because the Christians gave a different basis for the right mode of
   life from the Cynics, but above all, because they did not approve of
   the self-conscious, contemptuous, proud disposition which Cynicism
   produced in many of its adherents. Morality frequently underwent change
   for the worse in the hands of Cynics, and became the morality of a
   "Gentleman," such as we have also experience of in modern Cynicism.

   [132] The attitude of Celsus, the opponent of the Christians, is
   specially instructive here.

   [133] For the knowledge of the spread of the idealistic philosophy the
   statement of Origen (c. Celsum VI. 2) that Epictetus was admired not
   only by scholars, but also by ordinary people who felt in themselves
   the impulse to be raised to something higher, is well worthy of notice.

   [134] This point was of importance for the propaganda of Christianity
   among the cultured. There seemed to be given here a reliable, because
   revealed, Cosmology and history of the world--which already contained
   the foundation of everything worth knowing. Both were needed and both
   were here set forth in closest union.

   [135] The universalism as reached by the Stoics is certainly again
   threatened by the self-righteous and self-complacent distinction
   between men of virtue and men of pleasure, who, properly speaking, are
   not men. Aristotle had already dealt with the virtuous elite in a
   notable way. He says (Polit. 3. 13. p. 1284), that men who are
   distinguished by perfect virtue should not be put on a level with the
   ordinary mass, and should not be subjected to the constraints of a law
   adapted to the average man. "There is no law for these elect, who are a
   law to themselves."

   [136] Notions of pre-existence were readily suggested by the Platonic
   philosophy; yet this whole philosophy rests on the fact that one again
   posits the thing (after stripping it of certain marks as accidental or
   worthless, or ostensibly foreign to it) in order to express its value
   in this form, and hold fast the permanent in the change of the
   phenomena.

   [137] See Tzschirn. i. d. Ztschr. f. K.-Gesch. XII. p 215 if. "The
   genesis of the Romish Church in the second century." What he presents
   is no doubt partly incomplete, partly overdone and not proved: yet much
   of what he states is useful.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Supplementary.

   Perhaps the most important fact for the following development of the
   history of Dogma, the way for which had already been prepared in the
   Apostolic age, is the twofold conception of the aim of Christ's
   appearing, or of the religious blessing of salvation. The two
   conceptions were indeed as yet mutually dependent on each other, and
   were twined together in the closest way, just as they are presented in
   the teaching of Jesus himself; but they began even at this early period
   to be differentiated. Salvation, that is to say, was conceived, on the
   one hand, as sharing in the glorious kingdom of Christ soon to appear,
   and everything else was regarded as preparatory to this sure prospect;
   on the other hand, however, attention was turned to the conditions and
   to the provisions of God wrought by Christ, which first made men
   capable of attaining that portion, that is, of becoming sure of it.
   Forgiveness of sin, righteousness, faith, knowledge, etc., are the
   things which come into consideration here, and these blessings
   themselves, so far as they have as their sure result life in the
   kingdom of Christ, or more accurately eternal life, may be regarded as
   salvation. It is manifest that these two conceptions need not be
   exclusive. The first regards the final effect as the goal and all else
   as a preparation, the other regards the preparation, the facts already
   accomplished by Christ and the inner transformation of men as the main
   thing, and all else as the natural and necessary result. Paul, above
   all, as may be seen especially from the arguments in the epistle to the
   Romans, unquestionably favoured the latter conception and gave it
   vigorous expression. The peculiar conflicts with which he saw himself
   confronted, and, above all, the great controversy about the relation of
   the Gospel and the new communities to Judaism, necessarily concentrated
   the attention on questions as to the arrangements on which the
   community of those sanctified in Christ should rest, and the conditions
   of admission to this community. But the centre of gravity of Christian
   faith might also for the moment be removed from the hope of Christ's
   second advent, and would then necessarily be found in the first advent,
   in virtue of which salvation was already prepared for man, and man for
   salvation (Rom. III.-VIII.). The dual development of the conception of
   Christianity which followed from this, rules the whole history of the
   Gospel to the present day. The eschatological view is certainly very
   severely repressed, but it always breaks out here and there, and still
   guards the spiritual from the secularisation which threatens it. But
   the possibility of uniting the two conceptions in complete harmony with
   each other, and on the other hand, of expressing them antithetically,
   has been the very circumstance that has complicated in an extraordinary
   degree the progress of the development of the history of dogma. From
   this follows the antithesis, that from that conception which somehow
   recognises salvation itself in a present spiritual possession, eternal
   life in the sense of immortality may be postulated as final result,
   though not a glorious kingdom of Christ on earth; while, conversely,
   the eschatological view must logically depreciate every blessing which
   can be possessed in the present life.

   It is now evident that the theology, and, further, the Hellenising, of
   Christianity, could arise and has arisen in connection, not with the
   eschatological, but only with the other conception. Just because the
   matters here in question were present spiritual blessings, and because,
   from the nature of the case, the ideas of forgiveness of sin,
   righteousness, knowledge, etc., were not so definitely outlined in the
   early tradition, as the hopes of the future, conceptions entirely new
   and very different, could, as it were, be secretly naturalised. The
   spiritual view left room especially for the great contrast of a
   religious and a moralistic conception, as well as for a frame of mind
   which was like the eschatological in so far as, according to it, faith
   and knowledge were to be only preparatory blessings in contrast with
   the peculiar blessing of immortality, which of course was contained in
   them. In this frame of mind the illusion might easily arise that this
   hope of immortality was the very kernel of those hopes of the future
   for which old concrete forms of expression were only a temporary shell.
   But it might further be assumed that contempt for the transitory and
   finite as such, was identical with contempt for the kingdom of the
   world which the returning Christ would destroy.

   The history of dogma has to shew how the old eschatological view was
   gradually repressed and transformed in the Gen-tile Christian
   communities, and how there was finally developed and carried out a
   spiritual conception in which a strict moralism counterbalanced a
   luxurious mysticism, and wherein the results of Greek practical
   philosophy could find a place. But we must here refer to the fact,
   which is already taught by the development in the Apostolic age, that
   Christian dogmatic did not spring from the eschatological, but from the
   spiritual mode of thought. The former had nothing but sure hopes and
   the guarantee of these hopes by the Spirit, by the words of prophecy
   and by the apocalyptic writings. One does not think, he lives and
   dreams, in the eschatological mode of thought; and such a life was
   vigorous and powerful till beyond the middle of the second century.
   There can be no external authorities here; for one has at every moment
   the highest authority in living operation in the Spirit. On the other
   hand, not only does the ecclesiastical christology essentially spring
   from the spiritual way of thinking, but very specially also the system
   of dogmatic guarantees. The co-ordination of lo'gos theou, didache'
   ku'riou, ke'rugma ton do'deka aposto'lon [word of God, teaching of the
   Lord, preaching of the twelve Apostles], which lay at the basis of all
   Gentile Christian speculation almost from the very beginning, and which
   was soon directed against the enthusiasts, originated in a conception
   which regarded as the essential thing in Christianity, the sure
   knowledge which is the condition of immortality. If, however, in the
   following sections of this historical presentation, the pervading and
   continuous opposition of the two conceptions is not everywhere clearly
   and definitely brought into prominence, that is due to the conviction
   that the historian has no right to place the factors and impelling
   ideas of a development in a clearer light than they appear in the
   development itself. He must respect the obscurities and complications
   as they come in his way. A clear discernment of the difference of the
   two conceptions was very seldom attained to in ecclesiastical
   antiquity, because they did not look beyond their points of contact,
   and because certain articles of the eschatological conception could
   never be suppressed or remodelled in the Church. Goethe (Dichtung und
   Wahrheit, II. 8,) has seen this very clearly. "The Christian religion
   wavers between its own historic positive element and a pure Deism,
   which, based on morality, in its turn offers itself as the foundation
   of morality. The difference of character and mode of thought shew
   themselves here in infinite gradations, especially as another main
   distinction co-operates with them, since the question arises, what
   share the reason, and what the feelings, can and should have in such
   convictions." See, also, what immediately follows.

   2. The origin of a series of the most important Christian customs and
   ideas is involved in an obscurity which in all probability will never
   be cleared up. Though one part of those ideas may be pointed out in the
   epistles of Paul, yet the question must frequently remain unanswered,
   whether he found them in existence or formed them independently, and
   accordingly the other question, whether they are exclusively indebted
   to the activity of Paul for their spread and naturalisation in
   Christendom. What was the original conception of baptism? Did Paul
   develop independently his own conception? What significance had it in
   the following period? When and where did baptism in the name of the
   Father, Son and Holy Spirit arise, and how did it make its way in
   Christendom? In what way were views about the saving value of Christ's
   death developed alongside of Paul's system? When and how did belief in
   the birth of Jesus from a Virgin gain acceptance in Christendom? Who
   first distinguished Christendom, as ekklesi'a tou theou, from Judaism,
   and how did the concept ekklesi'a become current? How old is the triad:
   Apostles, Prophets and Teachers? When were Baptism and the Lord's
   Supper grouped together? How old are our first three Gospels? To all
   these questions and many more of equal importance there is no sure
   answer. But the greatest problem is presented by Christology, not
   indeed in its particular features doctrinally expressed, these almost
   everywhere may be explained historically, but in its deepest roots as
   it was preached by Paul as the principle of a new life (2 Cor. V. 17),
   and as it was to many besides him the expression of a personal union
   with the exalted Christ (Rev. II. 3). But this problem exists only for
   the historian who considers things only from the outside, or seeks for
   objective proofs. Behind and in the Gospel stands the Person of Jesus
   Christ who mastered men's hearts, and constrained them to yield
   themselves to him as his own, and in whom they found their God.
   Theology attempted to describe in very uncertain and feeble outline
   what the mind and heart had grasped. Yet it testifies of a new life
   which, like all higher life, was kindled by a Person, and could only be
   maintained by connection with that Person. "I can do all things through
   Christ who strengtheneth me." "I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in
   me." These convictions are not dogmas and have no history, and they can
   only be propagated in the manner described by Paul, Gal. I. 15, 16.

   3. It was of the utmost importance for the legitimising of the later
   development of Christianity as a system of doctrine. that early
   Christianity had an Apostle who was a theologian, and that his Epistles
   were received into the canon. That the doctrine about Christ has become
   the main article in Christianity is not of course the result of Paul's
   preaching, but is based on the confession that Jesus is the Christ. The
   theology of Paul was not even the most prominent ruling factor in the
   transformation of the Gospel to the Catholic doctrine of faith,
   although an earnest study of the Pauline Epistles by the earliest
   Gentile Christian theologians, the Gnostics, and their later opponents,
   is unmistakable. But the decisive importance of this theology lies in
   the fact that, as a rule, it formed the boundary and the
   foundation--just as the words of the Lord himself--for those who in the
   following period endeavoured to ascertain original Christianity,
   because the Epistles attesting it stood in the canon of the New
   Testament. Now, as this theology comprised both speculative and
   apologetic elements, as it can be thought of as a system, as it
   contained a theory of history and a definite conception of the Old
   Testament,--finally, as it was composed of objective and subjective
   ethical considerations and included the realistic elements of a
   national religion (wrath of God, sacrifice, reconciliation, Kingdom of
   glory), as well as profound psychological perceptions and the highest
   appreciation of spiritual blessings, the Catholic doctrine of faith as
   it was formed in the course of time, seemed, at least in its leading
   features, to be related to it, nay, demanded by it. For the
   ascertaining of the deep-lying distinctions, above all for the
   perception that the question in the two cases is about elements quite
   differently conditioned, that even the method is different,--in short,
   that the Pauline Gospel is not identical with the original Gospel and
   much less with any later doctrine of faith, there is required such
   historical judgment and such honesty of purpose not to be led astray in
   the investigation by the canon of the New Testament, [138] that no
   change in the prevailing ideas can be hoped for for long years to come.
   Besides, critical theology has made it difficult to gain an insight
   into the great difference that lies between the Pauline and the
   Catholic theology, by the one-sided prominence it has hitherto given to
   the antagonism between Paulinism and Judaistic Christianity. In
   contrast with this view the remark of Havet, though also very
   one-sided, is instructive, "Quand on vient de relire Paul, on ne peut
   méconnaître le caractère élevé de son oeuvre. Je dirai en un mot, qu'il
   a agrandi dans une proportion extraordinaire l'attrait que le judaïsme
   exerçait sur le monde ancien" (Le Christianisme, T. IV. p. 216). That,
   however, was only very gradually the case and within narrow limits. The
   deepest and most important writings of the New Testament are
   incontestably those in which Judaism is understood as religion, but
   spiritually overcome and subordinated to the Gospel as a new
   religion,--the Pauline Epistles, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the
   Gospel and Epistle of John. There is set forth in these writings a new
   and exalted world of religious feelings, views and judgments, into
   which the Christians of succeeding centuries got only meagre glimpses.
   Strictly speaking, the opinion that the New Testament in its whole
   extent comprehends a unique literature is not tenable; but it is
   correct to say that between its most important constituent parts and
   the literature of the period immediately following there is a great
   gulf fixed.

   But Paulinism especially has had an immeasurable and blessed influence
   on the whole course of the history of dogma, an influence it could not
   have had if the Pauline Epistles had not been received into the canon.
   Paulinism is a religious and Christocentric doctrine, more inward and
   more powerful than any other which has ever appeared in the Church. It
   stands in the clearest opposition to all merely natural moralism, all
   righteousness of works, all religious ceremonialism, all Christianity
   without Christ. It has therefore become the con-science of the Church,
   until the Catholic Church in Jansenism killed this her conscience. "The
   Pauline reactions describe the critical epochs of theology and the
   Church." [139] One might write a history of dogma as a history of the
   Pauline reactions in the Church, and in doing so would touch on all the
   turning-points of the history. Marcion after the Apostolic Fathers;
   Irenæus, Clement and Origen after the Apologists; Augustine after the
   Fathers of the Greek Church; [140] the great Reformers of the middle
   ages from Agobard to Wessel in the bosom of the mediæval Church; Luther
   after the Scholastics; Jansenism after the council of
   Trent:--everywhere it has been Paul, in these men, who produced the
   Reformation. Paulinism has proved to be a ferment in the history of
   dogma, a basis it has never been. [141] Just as it had that
   significance in Paul himself, with reference to Jewish Christianity, so
   it has continued to work through the history of the Church.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [138] What is meant here is the imminent danger of taking the several
   constituent parts of the canon, even for historical investigation, as
   constituent parts, that is, of explaining one writing by the standard
   of another and so creating an artificial unity. The contents of any of
   Paul's epistles, for example, will be presented very differently if it
   is considered by itself and in the circumstances in which it was
   written, or if attention is fixed on it as part of a collection whose
   unity is presupposed.

   [139] See Bigg, The Christian Platonist of Alexandria, pp. 53, 283 ff.

   [140] Reuter (August. Studien, p. 492) has drawn a valuable parallel
   between Marcion and Augustine with regard to Paul.

   [141] Marcion of course wished to raise it to the exclusive basis, but
   he entirely misunderstood it.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  DIVISION I.

THE GENESIS OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL DOGMA,

  OR

THE GENESIS OF
THE CATHOLIC APOSTOLIC DOGMATIC THEOLOGY,

  AND

THE FIRST SCIENTIFIC ECCLESIASTICAL
SYSTEM OF DOCTRINE.

                                    BOOK I.

THE PREPARATION.

   Ea'n muri'ous paidagogou`s e'chete en christo all' ou pollous pate'ras

   1 Cor. IV. 15.

   Eine jede Idee tritt als ein fremder Gast in die Erscheinung, und wie
   sie sich zu realisiren beginnt, ist sie kaum von Phantasie und
   Phantasterei zu unterscheiden.

   Goethe, Sprüche in Prosa, 566.

                                     BOOK I

   THE PREPARATION
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER I

   HISTORICAL SURVEY

   THE first century of the existence of Gentile Christian communities is
   particularly characterised by the following features:

   I. The rapid disappearance of Jewish Christianity. [142]

   II. The enthusiastic character of the religious temper: the Charismatic
   teachers and the appeal to the Spirit. [143]

   III. The strength of the hopes for the future, Chiliasm. [144]

   IV. The rigorous endeavour to fulfil the moral precepts of Christ, and
   truly represent the holy and heavenly community of God in abstinence
   from everything unclean, and in love to God and the brethren here on
   earth "in these last days. [145]

   V. The want of a fixed doctrinal form in relation to the abstract
   statement of the faith, and the corresponding variety and freedom of
   Christian preaching on the basis of clear formulæ and an increasingly
   rich tradition.

   VI. The want of a clearly defined external authority in the
   communities, sure in its application, and the corresponding
   independence and freedom of the individual Christian in relation to the
   expression of the ideas, beliefs and hopes of faith. [146]

   VII. The want of a fixed political union of the several communities
   with each other--every ecclesia is an image complete in itself, and an
   embodiment of the whole heavenly Church--while the consciousness of the
   unity of the holy Church of Christ which has the spirit in its midst,
   found strong expression. [147]

   VIII. A quite unique literature in which were manufactured facts for
   the past and for the future, and which did not submit to the usual
   literary rules and forms, but came forward with the loftiest
   pretensions. [148]

   IX. The reproduction of particular sayings and arguments of Apostolic
   Teachers with an uncertain understanding of them. [149]

   X. The rise of tendencies which endeavoured to hasten in every respect
   the inevitable process of fusing the Gospel with the spiritual and
   religious interests of the time, viz., the Hellenic, as well as
   attempts to separate the Gospel from its origins and provide for it
   quite foreign presuppositions. To the latter belongs, above all, the
   Hellenic idea that knowledge is not a charismatic supplement to the
   faith, or an outgrowth of faith alongside of others, but that it
   coincides with the essence of faith itself. [150]

   The sources for this period are few, as there was not much written, and
   the following period did not lay itself out for preserving a great part
   of the literary monuments of that epoch. Still we do possess a
   considerable number of writings and important fragments, [151] and
   further important inferences here are rendered possible by the
   monuments of the following period, since the conditions of the first
   century were not changed in a moment, but were partly, at least, long
   preserved, especially in certain national Churches and in remote
   communities. [152]

   Supplement.--The main features of the message concerning Christ, of the
   matter of the Evangelic history, were fixed in the first and second
   generations of believers, and on Palestinian soil. But yet, up to the
   middle of the second century, this matter was in many ways increased in
   Gentile Christian regions, revised from new points of view, handed down
   in very diverse forms, and systematically allegorised by individual
   teachers. As a whole, the Evangelic history certainly appears to have
   been completed at the beginning of the second century. But in detail,
   much that was new was produced at a later period--and not only in
   Gnostic circles--and the old tradition was recast or rejected. [153]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [142] This fact must have been apparent as early as the year too. The
   first direct evidence of it is in Justin (Apol. I. 53).

   [143] Every individual was, or at least should have been conscious, as
   a Christian, of having received the pneuma theou, though that does not
   exclude spiritual grades. A special peculiarity of the enthusiastic
   nature of the religious temper is that it does not allow reflection as
   to the authenticity of the faith in which a man lives. As to the
   Charismatic teaching, see my edition of the Didache (Texte u. Unters.
   II. 1. 2. p. 93 ff.).

   [144] The hope of the approaching end of the world and the glorious
   kingdom of Christ still determined men's heart; though exhortations
   against theoretical and practical scepticism became more and more
   necessary. On the other hand, after the Epistles to the Thessalonians,
   there were not wanting exhortations to continue sober and diligent.

   [145] There was a strong consciousness that the Christian Church is,
   above all, a union for a holy life, as well as a consciousness of the
   obligation to help one another, and use all the blessings bestowed by
   God in the service of our neighbours. Justin (2 Apol. in Euseb. H. E.
   IV. 17. 10) calls Christianity to` didaska'lion tes thei'as aretes.

   [146] The existing authorities (Old Testament, sayings of the Lord,
   words of Apostles) did not necessarily require to be taken into
   account; for the living acting Spirit, partly attesting himself also to
   the senses, gave new revelations. The validity of these authorities
   therefore held good only in theory, and might in practice be completely
   set aside. (Cf., above all, the Shepherd of Hermas.)

   [147] Zahn remarks (Ignatius. v. A. p. VII.): "I do not believe it to
   be the business of that province of historical investigation which is
   dependent on the writings of the so-called Apostolic Fathers as main
   sources, to explain the origin of the universal Church in any sense of
   the term; for that Church existed before Clement and Hermas, before
   Ignatius and Polycarp. But an explanatory answer is needed for the
   question: By what means did the consciousness of the "universal
   Church," so little favoured by our circumstances, maintain itself
   unbroken in the post-Apostolic communities? This way of stating it
   obscures, at least, the problem which here lies before us, for it does
   not take account of the changes which the idea "universal Church"
   underwent up to the middle of the third century--besides, we do not
   find the title before Ignatius. In so far as the "universal Church" is
   set forth as an earthly power recognisable in a doctrine or in
   political forms, the question as to the origin of the idea is not only
   allowable, but must be regarded as one of the most important. On the
   earliest conception of the "Ecclesia" and its realisation, see the fine
   investigations of Sohm "Kirchenrecht," I. p. 1 ff., which, however,
   suffer from being a little overdriven.

   [148] See the important essay of Overbeck: Ueber die Anfänge d.
   patrist. Litteratur (Hist. Ztschr. N. F. Bd. XII. pp. 417-472). Early
   Christian literature, as a rule, claims to be inspired writing. One can
   see, for example, in the history of the resurrection in the recently
   discovered Gospel of Peter (fragment) how facts were remodelled or
   created.

   [149] The writings of men of the Apostolic period, and that immediately
   succeeding, attained in part a wide circulation, and in some portions
   of them, often of course incorrectly understood, very great influence.
   How rapidly this literature was diffused, even the letters, may be
   studied in the history of the Epistles of Paul, the first Epistle of
   Clement, and other writings.

   [150] That which is here mentioned is of the greatest importance; it is
   not a mere reference to the so-called Gnostics. The foundations for the
   Hellenising of the Gospel in the Church were already laid in the first
   century (50-150).

   [151] We should not over-estimate the extent of early Christian
   literature. It is very probable that we know, so far as the titles of
   hooks are concerned, nearly all that was effective, and the greater
   part, by very diverse means, has also been preserved to us. We except,
   of course, the so-called Gnostic literature of which we have only a few
   fragments. Only from the time of Commodus, as Eusebius H. E. V. 21. 27,
   has remarked, did the great Church preserve an extensive literature.

   [152] It is therefore important to note the locality in which a
   document orginates, and the more so the earlier the document is. In the
   earliest period, in which the history of the Church was more uniform,
   and the influence from without relatively less, the differences are
   still in the background. Yet the spirit of Rome already announces
   itself in the Epistle of Clement, that of Alexandria in the Epistle of
   Barnabas, that of the East in the Epistles of Ignatius.

   [153] The history of the genesis of the four Canonical Gospels, or the
   comparison of them, is instructive on this point. Then we must bear in
   mind the old Apocryphal Gospels, and the way in which the so-called
   Apostolic Fathers and Justin attest the Evangelic history, and in part
   reproduce it independently; the Gospels of Peter, of the Egyptians, and
   of Marcion; the Diatesseron of Tatian; the Gnostic Gospels and Acts of
   the Apostles, etc. The greatest gap in our knowledge consists in the
   fact, that we know so little about the course of things from about the
   year 61 to the beginning of the reign of Trajan. The consolidating and
   remodelling process must, for the most part, have taken place in this
   period. We possess probably not a few writings which belong to that
   period; but how are we to prove this? how are they to be arranged? Here
   lies the cause of most of the differences, combinations and
   uncertainties; many scholars, therefore, actually leave these 40 years
   out of account, and seek to place everything in the first three
   decennia of the second century.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER II.

  THE ELEMENT COMMON TO ALL CHRISTIANS AND THE BREACH WITH JUDAISM

   ON account of the great differences among those who, in the first
   century, reckoned themselves in the Church of God, and called
   themselves by the name of Christ, [154] it seems at first sight
   scarcely possible to set up marks which would hold good for all, or
   even for nearly all, the groups. Yet the great majority had one thing
   in common, as is proved, among other things, by the gradual expulsion
   of Gnosticism. The conviction that they knew the supreme God, the
   consciousness of being responsible to him (Heaven and Hell), reliance
   on Jesus Christ, the hope of an eternal life, the vigorous elevation
   above the world--these are the elements that formed the fundamental
   mood. The author of the Acts of Thecla expresses the general view when
   he (c. 5.7) co-ordinates to`n tou christou lo'gon, with lo'gos theou
   peri` enkatei'as, kai` anasta'seos. The following particulars may here
   be specified. [155]

   I. The Gospel, because it rests on revelation, is the sure
   manifestation of the supreme God, and its believing acceptance
   guarantees salvation (soteri'a).

   II. The essential content of this manifestation (besides the revelation
   and the verification of the oneness and spirituality of God), [156] is,
   first of all, the message of the resurrection and eternal life
   (ana'stasis, zoe` aio'nios), then the preaching of moral purity and
   continence (enkra'teia), on the basis of repentance toward God
   (meta'noia), and of an expiation once assured by baptism, with eye ever
   fixed on the requital of good and evil. [157]

   III. This manifestation is mediated by Jesus Christ, who is the Saviour
   (sote'r) sent by God "in these last days," and who stands with God
   himself in a union special and unique, (cf. the ambiguous pais theou,
   which was much used in the earliest period). He has brought the true
   and full knowledge of God, as well as the gift of immortality (gno'sis
   kai` zoe, or gno'sis tes zoes, as an expression for the sum of the
   Gospel. See the supper prayer in the Didache, c. IX. and X.;
   eucharistoume'n soi, pa'ter emon uper tes zoes kai` gno'seos hes
   egno'risas emin dia` Iesou tou paido's sou), and is for that very
   reason the redeemer (so'ter and victor over the demons) on whom we are
   to place believing trust. But he is, further, in word and walk the
   highest example of all moral virtue, and therefore in his own person
   the law for the perfect life, and at the same time the God-appointed
   lawgiver and judge. [158]

   IV. Virtue, as continence, embraces as its highest task, renunciation
   of temporal goods and separation from the common world; for the
   Christian is not a citizen, but a stranger on the earth, and expects
   its approaching destruction. [159]

   V. Christ has committed to chosen men, the Apostles (or to one
   Apostle), the proclamation of the message he received from God;
   consequently, their preaching represents that of Christ himself. But,
   besides, the Spirit of God rules in Christians, "the Saints." He
   bestows upon them special gifts, and, above all, continually raises up
   among them Prophets and spiritual Teachers who receive revelations and
   communications for the edification of others, and whose injunctions are
   to be obeyed.

   VI. Christian Worship is a service of God in spirit and in truth (a
   spiritual sacrifice), and therefore has no legal ceremonial and
   statutory rules. The value of the sacred acts and consecrations which
   are connected with the cultus, consists in the communication of
   spiritual blessings. (Didache X., emin de` echari'so, de'spota,
   pneumatike`n trophe'n kai` poto`n kai` zoe`n aio'nion dia` tou paido's
   sou).

   VII. Everything that Jesus Christ brought with him, may be summed up in
   gno'sis kai` zoe', or in the knowledge of immortal life. [160] To
   possess the perfect knowledge was, in wide circles, an expression for
   the sum total of the Gospel. [161]

   VIII. Christians, as such, no longer take into account the distinctions
   of race, age, rank, nationality and worldly culture, but the Christian
   community must be conceived as a communion resting on a divine
   election. Opinions were divided about the ground of that election.

   IX. As Christianity is the only true religion, and as it is no national
   religion, but somehow concerns the whole of humanity, or its best part,
   it follows that it can have nothing in common with the Jewish nation
   and its contemporary cultus. The Jewish nation in which Jesus Christ
   appeared, has, for the time at least, no special relation to the God
   whom Jesus revealed. Whether it had such a relation at an earlier
   period is doubtful (cf. here, e.g., the attitude of Marcion, Ptolemæus
   the disciple of Valentinus, the author of the Epistle of Barnabas,
   Aristides and Justin); but certain it is that God has now cast it off,
   and that all revelations of God, so far as they took place at all
   before Christ, (the majority assumed that there had been such
   revelations and considered the Old Testament as a holy record), must
   have aimed solely at the call of the "new people", and in some way
   prepared for the revelation of God through his Son. [162]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [154] See, as to this, Celsus in Orig. III. 10 ff. and V. 59 ff.

   [155] The marks adduced in the text do not certainly hold good for some
   comparatively unimportant Gnostic groups, but they do apply to the
   great majority of them, and in the main to Marcion also.

   [156] Most of the Gnostic schools know only one God, and put all
   emphasis on he knowledge of the oneness, supramundaneness, and
   spirituality of this God. The Æons, the Demiurgus, the God of matter,
   do not come near this God though they are called Gods. See the
   testimony of Hippolytus c. Noet. II; kai` ga`r pa'ntes apeklei'sthesan
   eis touto a'kontes eipein, o'ti to` pan eis e'na anatre'chei. ei oun
   ta` pa'nta eis e'na anatre'chei kai` kata` thu'alentinon kai` kata`
   Marki'ona. Ke'ri'ntho'n te` kai` pasan te`n ekei'non phluari'an, kai`
   a'kontes eis touto perie'pesan, i'na to`n e'na o'mologe'sosin ai'tion
   ton pa'nton ou'tos oun suntre'chousin kai` autoi` me` the'lontes te
   alethei'a e'na theo`n le'gein poie'santa os ethe'lsen.

   [157] Continence was regarded as the condition laid down by God for the
   resurrection and eternal life. The sure hope of this was for many, if
   not for the majority, the whole sum of religion, in connection with the
   idea of the requital of good and evil which was now firmly established.
   See the testimony of the heathen Lucian, in Peregrinus Proteus.

   [158] Even where the judicial attributes were separated from God
   (Christ) as not suitable, Christ was still comprehended as the critical
   appearance by which every man is placed in the condition which belongs
   to him. The Apocalypse of Peter expects that God himself will come as
   Judge. See the Messianic expectations of Judaism, in which it was
   always uncertain whether God or the Messiah would hold the judgment.

   [159] Celsus (Orig. c. Celsum, V. 59) after referring to the many
   Christian parties mutually provoking and fighting with each other,
   remarks (V. 64) that though they differ much from each other, and
   quarrel with each other, you can yet hear from them all the
   protestation, "The world is crucified to me and I to the world." In the
   earliest Gentile Christian communities brotherly love for reflective
   thought falls into the background behind ascetic exercises of virtue,
   in unquestionable deviation from the sayings of Christ, but in fact it
   was powerful. See the testimony of Pliny and Lucian, Aristides, Apol.
   15, Tertull. Apol. 39.

   [160] The word "life" comes into consideration in a double sense, viz.,
   as soundness of the soul and as immortality. Neither, of course, is to
   be separated from the other. But I have attempted to shew in my essay,
   "Medicinisches aus der ältesten Kirchengesch." (1892), the extent to
   which the Gospel in the earliest Christendom was preached as medicine
   and Jesus as a Physician, and how the Christian Message was really
   comprehended by the Gentiles as a medicinal religion. Even the Stoic
   philosophy gave itself out as a soul therapeutic, and Æsculapius was
   worshipped as a Saviour-God; but Christianity alone was a religion of
   healing.

   [161] Heinrici, in his commentary on the epistles to the Corinthians,
   has dealt very clearly with this matter; see especially (Bd. II. p. 557
   ff.) the description of the Christianity of the Corinthians: "On what
   did the community base its Christian character? It believed in one God
   who had revealed himself to it through Christ, without denying the
   reality of the hosts of gods in the heathen world (I. VIII. 6). It
   hoped in immortality without being clear as to the nature of the
   Christian belief in the resurrection (I. XV.) It had no doubt as to the
   requital of good and evil (I. IV. 5: 2 V. so: XI. 15: Rom. II. 4),
   without understanding the value of self-denial, claiming no merit, for
   the sake of important ends. It was striving to make use of the Gospel
   as a new doctrine of wisdom about earthly and super-earthly things,
   which led to the perfect and best established knowledge (1 I. 21: VIII.
   1). It boasted of special operations of the Divine Spirit, which in
   themselves remained obscure and non-transparent, and therefore
   unfruitful (1. XIV), while it was prompt to put aside as obscure, the
   word of the Cross as preached by Paul (2. IV. 1 f.). The hope of the
   near Parousia, however, and the completion of all things, evinced no
   power to effect a moral transformation of society. We herewith obtain
   the outline of a conviction that was spread over the widest circles of
   the Roman Empire." Naturam si expellas furca, tamen usque recurret.

   [162] Nearly all Gentile Christian groups that we know, are at one in
   the detachment of Christianity from empiric Judaism; the "Gnostics,"
   however, included the Old Testament in Judaism, while the greater part
   of Christians did not. That detachment seemed to be demanded by the
   claims of Christianity to be the one, true, absolute and therefore
   oldest religion, foreseen from the beginning. The different estimates
   of the Old Testament in Gnostic circles have their exact parallels in
   the different estimates of Judaism among the other Christians; cf. for
   example, in this respect, the conception stated in the Epistle of
   Barnabas with the views of Marcion, and Justin with Valentinus. The
   particulars about the detachment of the Gentile Christians from the
   Synagogue, which was prepared for by the inner development of Judaism
   itself, and was required by the fundamental fact that the Messiah,
   crucified and rejected by his own people, was recognised as Saviour by
   those who were not Jews, cannot be given in the frame-work of a history
   of dogma; though, see Chaps. III. IV. VI. On the other hand, the
   turning away from Judaism is also the result of the mass of things
   which were held in common with it, even in Gnostic circles.
   Christianity made its appearance in the Empire in the Jewish
   propaganda. By the preaching of Jesus Christ who brought the gift of
   eternal life, mediated the full knowledge of God, and assembled round
   him in these last days a community, the imperfect and hybrid creations
   of the Jewish propaganda in the empire were converted into independent
   formations. These formations were far superior to the synagogue in
   power of attraction, and from the nature of the case would very soon be
   directed with the utmost vigour against the synagogue.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER III.

  THE COMMON FAITH AND THE BEGINNINGS OF KNOWLEDGE
  IN GENTILE CHRISTIANITY AS IT WAS BEING
  DEVELOPED INTO CATHOLICISM [163]

   §©1. The Communities and the Church.

   THE confessors of the Gospels, belonging to organised communities who
   recognised the Old Testament as the Divine record of revelation, and
   prized the Evangelic tradition as a public message for all, to which,
   in its undiluted form, they wished to adhere truly and sincerely,
   formed the stem of Christendom both as to extent and importance. [164]
   The communities stood to each other in an outwardly loose, but inwardly
   firm connection, and every community by the vigour of its faith, the
   certainty of its hope, the holy character of its life, as well as by
   unfeigned love, unity and peace, was to be an image of the holy Church
   of God which is in heaven, and whose members are scattered over the
   earth. They were, further, by the purity of their walk and an active
   brotherly disposition, to prove to those without, that is to the world,
   the excellence and truth of the Christian faith. [165] The hope that
   the Lord would speedily appear to gather into his Kingdom the believers
   who were scattered abroad, punishing the evil and rewarding the good,
   guided these communities in faith and life. In the recently discovered
   "Teaching of the Apostles" we are confronted very distinctly with ideas
   and aspirations of communities that are not influenced by Philosophy.

   The Church, that is the totality of all believers destined to be
   received into the kingdom of God (Didache, 9. 10), is the holy Church,
   (Hermas) because it is brought together and preserved by the Holy
   Spirit. It is the one Church, not because it presents this unity
   outwardly, on earth the members of the Church are rather scattered
   abroad, but because it will be brought to unity in the kingdom of
   Christ, because it is ruled by the same spirit and inwardly united in a
   common relation to a common hope and ideal. The Church, considered in
   its origin, is the number of those chosen by God, [166] the true
   Israel, [167] nay, still more, the final purpose of God, for the world
   was created for its sake. [168] There were in connection with these
   doctrines in the earliest period, various speculations about the
   Church: it is a heavenly Æon, is older than the world, was created by
   God at the beginning of things as a companion of the heavenly Christ;
   [169] its members form the new nation which is really the oldest
   nation, [170] it is the lao`s o tou egapeme'nou o philou'menos kai`
   philon autno'n, [171] the people whom God has prepared "in the
   Beloved", [172] etc. The creation of God, the Church, as it is of an
   antemundane and heavenly nature, will also attain its true existence
   only in the Æon of the future, the Æon of the Kingdom of Christ. The
   idea of a heavenly origin, and of a heavenly goal of the Church, was
   therefore an essential one, various and fluctuating as these
   speculations were. Accordingly, the exhortations, so far as they have
   in view the Church, are always dominated by the idea of the contrast of
   the kingdom of Christ with the kingdom of the world. On the other hand,
   he who communicated knowledge for the present time, prescribed rules of
   life, endeavoured to remove conflicts, did not appeal to the peculiar
   character of the Church. The mere fact, however, that from nearly the
   beginning of Christendom, there were reflections and speculations not
   only about God and Christ, but also about the Church, teaches us how
   profoundly the Christian consciousness was impressed with being a new
   people, viz., the people of God. [173] These speculations of the
   earliest Gentile Christian time about Christ and the Church, as
   inseparable correlative ideas, are of the greatest importance, for they
   have absolutely nothing Hellenic in them, but rather have their origin
   in the Apostolic tradition. But for that very reason the combination
   very soon, comparatively speaking, be-came obsolete or lost its power
   to influence. Even the Apologists made no use of it, though Clement of
   Alexandria and other Greeks held it fast, and the Gnostics by their Æon
   "Church" brought it into discredit. Augustine was the first to return
   to it.

   The importance attached to morality is shewn in Didache cc. 1-6, with
   parallels. [174] But this section and the statements so closely related
   to it in the pseudo-phocylidean poem which is probably of Christian
   origin, as well as in Sibyl, II. v. 56-148, which is likewise to be
   regarded as Christian, and in many other Gnomic paragraphs, shews at
   the same time, that in the memorable expression and summary statement
   of higher moral commandments, the Christian propaganda had been
   preceded by the Judaism of the Diaspora, and had entered into its
   labours. These statements are throughout de-pendent on the Old
   Testament wisdom, and have the closest relationship with the genuine
   Greek parts of the Alexandrian Canon, as well as with Philonic
   exhortations. Consequently, these moral rules, "the two ways," so aptly
   compiled and filled with such an elevated spirit, represent the ripest
   fruit of Jewish as well as of Greek development. The Christian spirit
   found here a disposition which it could recognise as its own. It was of
   the utmost importance, however, that this disposition was already
   expressed in fixed forms suitable for didactic purposes. The young
   Christianity therewith received a gift of first importance. It was
   spared a labour in a region, the moral, which experience shews can only
   be performed in generations, viz., the creation of simple fixed
   impressive rules, the labour of the Catechist. The sayings of the
   Sermon on the Mount were not of themselves sufficient here. Those who
   in the second century attempted to rest in these alone, and turned
   aside from the Judheo-Greek inheritance, landed in Marcionite or
   Encratite doctrines. [175] We can see, especially from the Apologies of
   Aristides (c. 15), Justin and Tatian (see also Lucian), that the
   earnest men of the Græco-Roman world were won by the morality and
   active love of the Christians.

   §©2. The Foundations of the Faith.

   The foundations of the faith--whose abridged form was, on the one hand,
   the confession of the one true God, mo`nos alethino`s, [176] and of
   Jesus, the Lord, the Son of God, the Saviour, [177] and also of the
   Holy Spirit; and on the other hand, the confident hope of Christ's
   kingdom and the resurrection--were laid on the Old Testament
   interpreted in a Christian sense together with the Apocalypses, [178]
   and the progressively enriched traditions about Jesus Christ. (e
   para'dosis-- o paradothei`s lo'gos-- o kano`n tes alethei'as or te`s
   parado'seos--e pi'stis-- o kano'n tes pi'steos--o dotheisa pi'stis--to`
   ke'rugma--ta` dida`gmata tou christou--e didache`--ta` mathe'mata, or
   to` ma'thema). [179] The Old Testament revelations and oracles were
   regarded as pointing to Christ; the Old Testament itself, the words of
   God spoken by the Prophets, as the primitive Gospel of salvation,
   having in view the new people, which is, however, the oldest, and
   belonging to it alone. [180] The exposition of the Old Testament,
   which, as a rule, was of course read in the Alexandrian Canon of the
   Bible, turned it into a Christian book. A historical view of it, which
   no born Jew could in some measure fail to take, did not come into
   fashion, and the freedom that was used in interpreting the Old
   Testament,--so far as there was a method, it was the Alexandrian
   Jewish--went the length of even correcting the letter and enriching the
   contents. [181]

   The traditions concerning Christ on which the communities were based,
   were of a twofold character. First, there were words of the Lord,
   mostly ethical, but also of eschatological content, which were regarded
   as rules, though their expression was uncertain, ever changing, and
   only gradually assuming a fixed form. The dida'gmata tou christou are
   often just the moral commandments. [182] Second, the foundation of the
   faith, that is, the assurance of the blessing of salvation, was formed
   by a proclamation of the history of Jesus concisely expressed, and
   composed with reference to prophecy. [183] The confession of God the
   Father Almighty, of Christ as the Lord and Son of God, and of the Holy
   Spirit, [184] was, at a very early period in the communities, united
   with the short proclamation of the history of Jesus, and at the same
   time, in certain cases, referred expressly to the revelation of God
   (the Spirit) through the prophets. [185] The confession thus conceived
   had not everywhere obtained a fixed definite expression in the first
   century (cc. 50-150). It would rather seem that, in most of the
   communities, there was no exact formulation beyond a confession of
   Father, Son and Spirit, accompanied in a free way by the historical
   proclamation. [186] It is highly probable, however, that a short
   confession was strictly formulated in the Roman community before the
   middle of the second century, [187] expressing belief in the Father,
   Son and Spirit, embracing also the most important facts in the history
   of Jesus, and mentioning the Holy Church, as well as the two great
   blessings of Christianity, the forgiveness of sin, and the resurrection
   of the dead (a'phesis amartion, sarko`s [188] ). But, however the
   proclamation might be handed down, in a form somehow fixed, or in a
   free form, the disciples of Jesus, the (twelve) Apostles, were regarded
   as the authorities who mediated and guaranteed it. To them was traced
   back in the same way everything that was narrated of the history of
   Jesus, and everything that was inculcated from his sayings. [189]
   Consequently, it may be said, that beside the Old Testament, the chief
   court of appeal in the communities was formed by an aggregate of words
   and deeds of the Lord ;--for the history and the suffering of Jesus are
   his deed: o Iesous upe'meinen pathein, k.t.l.,--fixed in certain
   fundamental features, though constantly enriched, and traced back to
   apostolic testimony. [190]

   The authority which the Apostles in this way enjoyed, did not, in any
   great measure, rest on the remembrance of direct services which the
   twelve had rendered to the Gentile Churches: for, as the want of
   reliable concrete traditions proves, no such services had been
   rendered, at least not by the twelve.

   On the contrary, there was a theory operative here regarding the
   special authority which the twelve enjoyed in the Church at Jerusalem,
   a theory which was spread by the early missionaries, including Paul,
   and sprang from the a priori consideration that the tradition about
   Christ, just because it grew up so quickly, [191] must have been
   entrusted to eye-witnesses who were commissioned to proclaim the Gospel
   to the whole world, and who fulfilled that commission. The a priori
   character of this assumption is shewn by the fact that--with the
   exception of reminiscences of an activity of Peter and John among the
   e'thne, not sufficiently clear to us [192] --the twelve, as a rule, are
   regarded as a college, to which the mission and the tradition are
   traced back. [193] That such a theory, based on a dogmatic construction
   of history, could have at all arisen, proves that either the Gentile
   Churches never had a living relation to the twelve, or that they had
   very soon lost it in the rapid disappearance of Jewish Christianity,
   while they had been referred to the twelve from the beginning. But even
   in the communities which Paul had founded and for a long time guided,
   the remembrance of the controversies of the Apostolic age must have
   been very soon effaced, and the vacuum thus produced filled by a theory
   which directly traced back the status quo of the Gentile Christian
   communities to a tradition of the twelve as its foundation. This fact
   is extremely paradoxical, and is not altogether explained by the
   assumptions that the Pauline-Judaistic controversy had not made a great
   impression on the Gentile Christians, that the way in which Paul, while
   fully recognising the twelve, had insisted on his own independent
   importance, had long ceased to be really understood, and that Peter and
   John had also really been missionaries to the Gentiles. The guarantee
   that was needed for the "teaching of the Lord" must finally be given
   not by Paul, but only by chosen eye-witnesses. The less that was known
   about them, the easier it was to claim them. The conviction as to the
   unanimity of the twelve, and as to their activity in founding the
   Gentile Churches, appeared in these Churches as early as the urgent
   need of protection against the serious consequences of unfettered
   religious enthusiasm and unrestrained religious fancy. This urgency
   cannot be dated too far back. In correspondence therewith, the
   principle of tradition in the Church (Christ, the twelve Apostles) in
   the case of those who were intent on the unity and completeness of
   Christendom, is also very old. But one passed logically from the
   Apostles to the disciples of the Apostles, "the Elders," without at
   first claiming for them any other significance than that of reliable
   hearers (Apostoli et discentes ipsorum). In coming down to them, one
   here and there betook oneself again to real historical ground,
   disciples of Paul, of Peter, of John. [194] Yet even here legends with
   a tendency speedily got mixed with facts, and because, in consequence
   of this theory of tradition, the Apostle Paul must needs fall into the
   background, his disciples also were more or less forgotten. The attempt
   which we have in the Pastoral Epistles remained without effect, as
   regards those to whom these epistles were addressed. Timothy and Titus
   obtained no authority outside these epistles. But so far as the
   epistles of Paul were collected, diffused, and read, there was created
   a complex of writings which at first stood beside the "Teaching of the
   Lord by the twelve Apostles", without being connected with it, and only
   obtained such connection by the creation of the New Testament, that is,
   by the interpolation of the Acts of the Apostles, between Gospels and
   Epistles. [195]

   §©3. The Main Articles of Christianity and the Conceptions of
   Salvation. Eschatology.

   1. The main articles of Christianity were (1) belief in God the
   despo'tes, and in the Son in virtue of proofs from prophecy, and the
   teaching of the Lord as attested by the Apostles; (2) discipline
   according to the standard of the words of the Lord; (3) baptism; (4)
   the common offering of prayer, culminating in the Lord's Supper and the
   holy meal; (5) the sure hope of the nearness of Christ's glorious
   kingdom. In these appears the unity of Christendom, that is, of the
   Church which possesses the Holy Spirit. [196] On the basis of this
   unity Christian knowledge was free and manifold. It was distinguished
   as sophi'a, su'nesis, episte'me, gnosis (ton dikaioma'ton), from the
   lo'gos theou tes pi'steos, and the klesis tes epangeli'as, and the
   entolai` tes didaches (Barn. 16, 9, similarly Hermas). Perception and
   knowledge of Divine things was a Charism, possessed only by
   individuals; but, like all Charisms, it was to be used for the good of
   the whole. In so far as every actual perception was a perception
   produced by the Spirit, it was regarded as important and indubitable
   truth, even though some Christians were unable to understand it. While
   attention was given to the firm inculcation and observance of the moral
   precepts of Christ, as well as to the awakening of sure faith in
   Christ, and while all waverings and differences were excluded in
   respect of these, there was absolutely no current doctrine of faith in
   the communities, in the sense of a completed theory; and the
   theological speculations of even closely related Christian writers of
   this epoch, exhibit, the greatest differences. [197] The productions of
   fancy, the terrible or consoling pictures of the future pass for sacred
   knowledge, just as much as intelligent and sober reflections, and
   edifying interpretation of Old Testament sayings. Even that which was
   afterwards separated as Dogmatic and Ethics was then in no way
   distinguished. [198] The communities gave expression in the cultus,
   chiefly in the hymns and prayers, to what they possessed in their God
   and their Christ; here sacred formulæ were fashioned and delivered to
   the members. [199] The problem of surrendering the world in the hope of
   a life beyond was regarded as the practical side of the faith, and the
   unity in temper and disposition resting on faith in the saving
   revelation of God in Christ, permitted the highest degree of freedom in
   knowledge, the results of which were absolutely without control as soon
   as the preacher or the writer was recognised as a true teacher, that is
   inspired by the Spirit of God. [200] There was also in wide circles a
   conviction that the Christian faith, after the night of error, included
   the full knowledge of everything worth knowing, that precisely in its
   most important articles it is accessible to men of every degree of
   culture, and that in it, in the now attained truth, is contained one of
   the most essential blessings of Christianity. When it is said in the
   Epistle of Barnabas (II. 2. 3); tes pi'steos emon eisi`n boethoi`
   pho'bos kai` upomone', ta` de` summachounta emin makrothumi'a kai`
   enkra'teia; tou'ton meno'nton ta` pro`s ko'rion agnos,
   suneuphrai'nontai' autois sophi'a, su'nesis, episte'me, gnosis,
   knowledge appears in this classic formula to be an essential element in
   Christianity, conditioned by faith and the practical virtues, and
   dependent on them. Faith takes the lead, knowledge follows it: but of
   course in concrete cases it could not always be decided what was lo'gos
   tes pi'steos, which implicitly contained the highest knowledge, and
   what the special gno'sis; for in the last resort the nature of the two
   was regarded as identical, both being represented as produced by the
   Spirit of God.

   2. The conceptions of Christian salvation, or of redemption, were
   grouped around two ideas, which were themselves but loosely connected
   with each other, and of which the one influenced more the temper and
   the imagination, the other the intellectual faculty. On the one hand,
   salvation, in accordance with the earliest preaching, was regarded as
   the glorious kingdom which was soon to appear on earth with the visible
   return of Christ, which will bring the present course of the world to
   an end, and introduce for a definite series of centuries, before the
   final judgment, a new order of all things to the joy and blessedness of
   the saints. [201] In connection with this the hope of the resurrection
   of the body occupied the foreground. [202] On the other hand, salvation
   appeared to be given in the truth, that is, in the complete and certain
   knowledge of God, as contrasted with the error of heathendom and the
   night of sin, and this truth included the certainty of the gift of
   eternal life, and all conceivable spiritual blessings. [203] Of these
   the community, so far as it is a community of saints, that is, so far
   as it is ruled by the Spirit of God, already possesses forgiveness of
   sins and righteousness. But, as a rule, neither blessing was understood
   in a strictly religious sense, that is to say, the effect of their
   religious sense was narrowed. The moralistic view, in which eternal
   life is the wages and reward of a perfect moral life wrought out
   essentially by one's own power, took the place of first importance at a
   very early period. On this view, according to which the righteousness
   of God is revealed in punishment and reward alike, the forgiveness of
   sin only meant a single remission of sin in connection with entrance
   into the Church by baptism, [204] and righteousness became identical
   with virtue. The idea is indeed still operative, especially in the
   oldest Gentile-Christian writings known to us, that sinlessness rests
   upon a new creation (regeneration) which is effected in baptism; [205]
   but, so far as dissimilar eschatological hopes do not operate, it is
   everywhere in danger of being supplanted by the other idea, which
   maintains that there is no other blessing in the Gospel than the
   perfect truth and eternal life. All else is but a sum of obligations in
   which the Gospel is presented as a new law. The christianising of the
   Old Testament supported this conception. There was indeed an opinion
   that the Gospel, even so far as it is a law, comprehends a gift of
   salvation which is to be grasped by faith (no'mos a'neu zugou ana'nkes,
   [206] no'mos t. eleutheri'as, [207] Christ himself the law); [208] but
   this notion, as it is obscure in itself, was also an uncertain one and
   was gradually lost. Further, by the "law" was frequently meant in the
   first place, not the law of love, but the commandments of ascetic
   holiness, or an explanation and a turn were given to the law of love,
   according to which it is to verify itself above all in asceticism.
   [209]

   The expression of the contents of the Gospel in the concepts epangeli'a
   (zoe` aionios) gnosis (alethei'a) no'mos (enkra`te'ia), seemed quite as
   plain as it was exhaustive, and the importance of faith which was
   regarded as the basis of hope and knowledge and obedience in a holy
   life, was at the same time in every respect perceived. [210]

   Supplement 1.--The moralistic view of sin, forgiveness of sin, and
   righteousness, in Clement, Barnabas, Polycarp and Ignatius, gives place
   to Pauline formulæ; but the uncertainty with which these are
   reproduced, shews that the Pauline idea has not been clearly seen.
   [211] In Hermas, however, and in the second Epistle of Clement, the
   consciousness of being under grace, even after baptism, almost
   completely disappears behind the demand to fulfil the tasks which
   baptiser imposes. [212] The idea that serious sins, in the case of the
   baptised, no longer should or can be forgiven, except under special
   circumstances, appears to have prevailed in wide circles, if not
   everywhere. [213] It reveals the earnestness of those early Christians
   and their elevated sense of freedom and power; but it might be united
   either with the highest moral intensity, or with a lax judgment on the
   little sins of the day. The latter, in point of fact, threatened to
   become more and more the presupposition and result of that idea--for
   there exists here a fatal reciprocal action.

   Supplement 2.--The realisation of salvation--as basilei'a tou theou and
   as aphtharsi'a--being expected from the future, the whole present
   possession of salvation might be comprehended under the title of
   vocation (klesis): see, for example, the second Epistle of Clement. In
   this sense gnosis itself was regarded as something only preparatory.

   Supplement 3.--In some circles the Pauline formula about righteousness
   and salvation by faith alone, must, it would appear, not infrequently
   (as already in the Apostolic age itself) have been partly misconstrued,
   and partly taken advantage of as a cloak for laxity. Those who resisted
   such a disposition, and therefore also the formula in the
   post-Apostolic age, shew indeed by their opposition how little they
   have hit upon or understood the Pauline idea of faith: for they not
   only issued the watchword "faith and works" (though the Jewish
   ceremonial law was not thereby meant), but they admitted, and not only
   hypothetically, that one might have the true faith even though in his
   case that faith remained dead or united with immorality. See, above
   all, the Epistle of James and the Shepherd of Hermas; though the first
   Epistle of John comes also into consideration (III. 7: "He that doeth
   righteousness is righteous"). [214]

   Supplement 4.--However similar the eschatological expectations of the
   Jewish Apocalyptists and the Christians may seem, there is yet in one
   respect an important difference between them. The uncertainty about the
   final consummation was first set aside by the Gospel. It should be
   noted as highly characteristic of the Jewish hopes of the future, even
   of the most definite, how the beginning of the end, that is, the
   overthrow of the world-powers and the setting up of the earthly kingdom
   of God, was much more certainly expressed than the goal and the final
   end. Neither the general judgment, nor what we, according to Christian
   tradition, call heaven and hell, should be described as a sure
   possession of Jewish faith in the primitive Christian period. It is
   only in the Gospel of Christ, where everything is subordinated to the
   idea of a higher righteousness and the union of the individual with
   God, that the general judgment and the final condition after it are the
   clear, firmly grasped goal of all meditation. No doctrine has been more
   surely preserved in the convictions and preaching of believers in
   Christ than this. Fancy might roam ever so much and, under the
   direction of the tradition, thrust bright and precious images between
   the present condition and the final end, the main thing continued to be
   the great judgment of the world, and the certainty that the saints
   would go to God in heaven, the wicked to hell. But while the judgment,
   as a rule, was connected with the Person of Jesus himself (see the
   Romish Symbol: the words krite`s zo'nton kai` nekron, were very
   frequently applied to Christ in the earliest writings), the moral
   condition of the individual, and the believing recognition of the
   Person of Christ were put in the closest relation. The Gentile
   Christians held firmly to this. Open the Shepherd, or the second
   Epistle of Clement, or any other early Christian writing, and you will
   find that the judgment, heaven and hell, are the decisive objects. But
   that shews that the moral character of Christianity as a religion is
   seen and adhered to. The fearful idea of hell, far from signifying a
   backward step in the history of the religious spirit, is rather a proof
   of its having rejected the morally indifferent point of view, and of
   its having become sovereign in union with the ethical spirit.

   §©4. The Old Testament as Source of the Knowledge of Faith. [215]

   The sayings of the Old Testament, the word of God, were believed to
   furnish inexhaustible material for deeper knowledge. The Christian
   prophets were nurtured on the Old Testament, the teachers gathered from
   it the revelation of the past, present and future (Barn. 1. 7), and
   were therefore able as prophets to edify the Churches; from it was
   further drawn the confirmation of the answers to all emergent
   questions, as one could always find in the Old Testament what he was in
   search of. The different writers laid the holy book under contribution
   in very much the same way; for they were all dominated by the
   presupposition that this book is a Christian book, and contains the
   explanations that are necessary for the occasion. There were several
   teachers,--e.g., Barnabas,--who at a very early period boasted of
   finding in it ideas of special profundity and value--these were always
   an expression of the difficulties that were being felt. The plain words
   of the Lord as generally known, did not seem sufficient to satisfy the
   craving for knowledge, or to solve the problems that were emerging;
   [216] their origin and form also opposed difficulties at first to the
   attempt to obtain from them new disclosures by re-interpretation. But
   the Old Testament sayings and histories were in part unintelligible, or
   in their literal sense offensive; they were at the same time regarded
   as fundamental words of God. This furnished the conditions for turning
   them to account in the way we have stated. The following are the most
   important points of view under which the Old Testament was used. (1)
   The Monotheistic cosmology and view of nature were borrowed from it
   (see, for example, 1 Clem.). (2) It was used to prove that the
   appearance and entire history of Jesus had been foretold centuries,
   nay, thousands of years beforehand, and that the founding of a new
   people gathered out of all nations had been predicted and prepared for
   from the very beginning. [217] (3) It was used as a means of verifying
   all principles and institutions of the Christian Church,--the spiritual
   worship of God without images, the abolition of all ceremonial legal
   precepts, baptism, etc. (4) The Old Testament was used for purposes of
   exhortation according to the formula a minori ad majus ; if God then
   punished and rewarded this or that in such a way, how much more may we
   expect, who now stand in the last days, and have received the klesis
   tes epangeli'as. (5) It was proved from the Old Testament that the
   Jewish nation is in error, and either never had a covenant with God or
   has lost it, that it has a false apprehension of God's revelations, and
   therefore has, now at least, no longer any claim to their possession.
   But beyond all this, (6) there were in the Old Testament books, above
   all, in the Prophets and in the Psalms, a great number of
   sayings--confessions of trust in God and of help received from God, of
   humility and holy courage, testimonies of a world-overcoming faith and
   words of comfort, love and communion--which were too exalted for any
   cavilling, and intelligible to every spiritually awakened mind. Out of
   this treasure which was handed down to the Greeks and Romans, the
   Church edified herself, and in the perception of its riches was largely
   rooted the conviction that the holy book must in every line contain the
   highest truth.

   The point mentioned under (5) needs, however, further explanation. The
   self-consciousness of the Christian community of being the people of
   God, must have been, above all, expressed in its position towards
   Judaism, whose mere existence--even apart from actual
   assaults--threatened that consciousness most seriously. A certain
   antipathy of the Greeks and Romans towards Judaism co-operated here
   with a law of self-preservation. On all hands, therefore, Judaism as it
   then existed was abandoned as a sect judged and rejected by God, as a
   society of hypocrites, [218] as a synagogue of Satan, [219] as a people
   seduced by an evil angel, [220] and the Jews were declared to have no
   further right to the possession of the Old Testament. Opinions
   differed, however, as to the earlier history of the nation and its
   relation to the true God. While some denied that there ever had been a
   covenant of salvation between God and this nation, and in this respect
   recognised only an intention of God, [221] which was never carried out
   because of the idolatry of the people, others admitted in a hazy way
   that a relation did exist; but even they referred all the promises of
   the Old Testament to the Christian people. [222] While the former saw
   in the observance of the letter of the law, in the case of
   circumcision, sabbath, precepts as to food, etc., a proof of the
   special devilish temptation to which the Jewish people succumbed, [223]
   the latter saw in circumcision a sign [224] given by God, and in virtue
   of certain considerations acknowledged that the literal observance of
   the law was for the time God's intention and command, though
   righteousness never came from such observance. Yet even they saw in the
   spiritual the alone true sense, which the Jews had denied, and were of
   opinion that the burden of ceremonies was a pædagogic necessity with
   reference to a people stiff-necked and prone to idolatry, i.e., a
   defence of monotheism, and gave an interpretation to the sign of
   circumcision which made it no longer a blessing, but rather the mark
   for the execution of judgment on Israel. [225]

   Israel was thus at all times the pseudo-Church. The older people does
   not in reality precede the younger people, the Christians, even in
   point of time; for though the Church appeared only in the last days, it
   was foreseen and created by God from the beginning. The younger people
   is therefore really the older, and the new law rather the original law.
   [226] The Patriarchs, Prophets, and men of God, however, who were
   favoured with the communication of God's words, have nothing inwardly
   in common with the Jewish people. They are God's elect who were
   distinguished by a holy walk, and must be regarded as the forerunners
   and fathers of the Christian people. [227] To the question how such
   holy men appeared exclusively, or almost exclusively, among the Jewish
   people, the documents preserved to us yield no answer.

   §©5. The Knowledge of God and of the World. Estimate of the World.

   The knowledge of faith was, above all, the knowledge of God as one,
   supramundane, spiritual, [228] and almighty (pantokra'tor); God is
   creator and governor of the world and therefore the Lord. [229] But as
   he created the world a beautiful ordered whole (monotheistic view of
   nature) [230] for the sake of man, [231] he is at the same time the God
   of goodness and redemption (theo`s sote'r), and the true faith in God
   and knowledge of him as the Father, [232] is made perfect only in the
   knowledge of the identity of the God of creation and the God of
   redemption. Redemption, however, was necessary, because at the
   beginning humanity and the world alike fell under the dominion of evil
   demons, [233] of the evil one. There was no universally accepted theory
   as to the origin of this dominion; but the sure and universal
   conviction was that the present condition and course of the world is
   not of God, but is of the devil. Those, however, who believed in God,
   the almighty creator, and were expecting the transformation of the
   earth, as well as the visible dominion of Christ upon it, could not be
   seduced into accepting a dualism in principle (God and devil: spirit
   and matter). Belief in God, the creator, and eschatological hopes
   preserved the communities from the theoretic dualism that so readily
   suggested itself, which they slightly touched in many particular
   opinions, and which threatened to dominate their feelings. The belief
   that the world is of God and therefore good, remained in force. A
   distinction was made between the present constitution of the world,
   which is destined for destruction, and the future order of the world
   which will be a glorious "restitutio in integrum", The theory of the
   world as an articulated whole which had already been proclaimed by the
   Stoics, and which was strengthened by Christian monotheism, would not,
   even if it had been known to the uncultured, have been vigorous enough
   to cope with the impression of the wickedness of the course of this
   world, and the vulgarity of all things material. But the firm belief in
   the omnipotence of God, and the hope of the world's transformation
   grounded on the Old Testament, conquered the mood of absolute despair
   of all things visible and sensuous, and did not allow a theoretic
   conclusion, in the sense of dualism in principle, to be drawn from the
   practical obligation to renounce the world, or from the deep distrust
   with regard to the flesh.

   §©6. Faith in Jesus Christ.

   1. As surely as redemption was traced back to God himself, so surely
   was Jesus (o sote`r emon) held to be the mediator of it. Faith in Jesus
   was therefore, even for Gentile Christians, a compendium of
   Christianity. Jesus is mostly designated with the same name as God,
   [234] o ku'rios (emon), for we must remember the ancient use of this
   title. All that has taken place or will take place with reference to
   salvation, is traced back to the "Lord." The carelessness of the early
   Christian writers about the bearing of the word in particular cases,
   [235] shews that in a religious relation, so far as there was
   reflection on the gift of salvation, Jesus could directly take the
   place of God. The invisible God is the author, Jesus the revealer and
   mediator, of all saving blessings. The final subject is presented in
   the nearest subject, and there is frequently no occasion for expressly
   distinguishing them, as the range and contents of the revelation of
   salvation in Jesus coincide with the range and contents of the will of
   salvation in God himself. Yet prayers, as a rule, were addressed to
   God: at least, there are but few examples of direct prayers to Jesus
   belonging to the first century (apart from the prayers in the Act. Joh.
   of the so-called Leucius). The usual formula rather reads: theo
   exomologou'metha dia` I. Chr.--theo do'xa dia' I. Chr. [236]

   2. As the Gentile Christians did not understand the significance of the
   idea that Jesus is the Christ (Messiah), the designation "christo's"
   had either to be given up in their communities, or to subside into a
   mere name. [237] But even where, through the Old Testament, one was
   reminded of the meaning of the word, and allowed a value to it, he was
   far from finding in the statement that Jesus is the Lord's anointed, a
   clear expression of the dignity peculiar to him. That dignity had
   therefore to be expressed by other means. Nevertheless the
   eschatological series of ideas connected the Gentile Christians very
   closely with the early Christian ideas of faith, and therefore also
   with the earliest ideas about Jesus. In the confession that God chose
   [238] and prepared [239] Jesus, that Jesus is the Angel [240] and the
   servant of God, [241] that he will judge the living and the dead, [242]
   etc., expression is given to ideas about Jesus, in the Gentile
   Christian communities, which are borrowed from the thought that he is
   the Christ called of God and entrusted with an office. [243] Besides,
   there was a very old designation handed down from the circle of the
   disciples, and specially intelligible to Gentile Christians, though not
   frequent and gradually disappearing, viz., "the Master". [244]

   3. But the earliest tradition not only spoke of Jesus as ku'rios,
   sote'r, and dida'skalos, but as "o uio`s tou theou", and this name was
   firmly adhered to in the Gentile Christian communities. [245] It
   followed immediately from this that Jesus belongs to the sphere of God,
   and that, as is said in the earliest preaching known to us, [246] one
   must think of him "os peri` theou". This formula describes in a classic
   manner the indirect "theologia Christi" which we find unanimously
   expressed in all witnesses of the earliest epoch. [247] We must think
   about Christ as we think about God, because, on the one hand, God had
   exalted him, and committed to him as Lord, judgment over the living and
   the dead, and because, on the other hand, he has brought the knowledge
   of the truth, called sinful men, delivered them from the dominion of
   demons, and hath led, or will lead them, out of the night of death and
   corruption to eternal life. Jesus Christ is "our faith", "our hope",
   "our life", and in this sense "our God". The religious assurance that
   he is this, for we find no wavering on this point, is the root of the
   "theologia Christi"; but we must also remember that the formula
   "theo's" was inserted beside "ku'rios," that the "dominus ac deus" was
   very common at that time, [248] and that a Saviour (sote'r) could only
   be represented somehow as a Divine being. [249] Yet Christ never was,
   as "theo's", placed on an equality with the Father, [250] --monotheism
   guarded against that. Whether he was intentionally and deliberately
   identified with Him the following paragraph will shew.

   4. The common confession did not go beyond the statements that Jesus is
   the Lord, the Saviour, the Son of God, that one must think of him as of
   God, that dwelling now with God in heaven, he is to be adored as
   prosta'tes kai` boetho`s tes asthenei'as, and as archiereu`s ton
   prosphoron emon [as guardian and helper of the weak and as High Priest
   of our oblations], to be feared as the future Judge, to be esteemed
   most highly as the bestower of immortality, that he is our hope and our
   faith. There are found rather, on the basis of that confession, very
   diverse conceptions of the Person, that is, of the nature of Jesus,
   beside each other, [251] which collectively exhibit a certain analogy
   with the Greek theologies, the naive and the philosophic. [252] There
   was as yet no such thing here as ecclesiastical "doctrines" in the
   strict sense of the word, but rather conceptions more or less fluid,
   which were not seldom fashioned ad hoc. [253] These may be reduced
   collectively to two. [254] Jesus was either regarded as the man whom
   God hath chosen, in whom the Deity or the Spirit of God dwelt, and who,
   after being tested, was adopted by God and invested with dominion,
   (Adoptian Christology); [255] or Jesus was regarded as a heavenly
   spiritual being (the highest after God) who took flesh, and again
   returned to heaven after the completion of his work on earth (pneumatic
   Christology). [256] These two Christologies which are, strictly
   speaking, mutually exclusive--the man who has become a God, and the
   Divine being who has appeared in human form--yet came very near each
   other when the Spirit of God implanted in the man Jesus was conceived
   as the pre-existent Son of God, [257] and when, on the other hand, the
   title, Son of God, for that pneumatic being was derived only from the
   miraculous generation in the flesh; yet both these seem to have been
   the rule. [258] Yet, in spite of all transitional forms, the two
   Christologies may be clearly distinguished. Characteristic of the one
   is the development through which Jesus is first to become a Godlike
   Ruler, [259] and connected therewith, the value put on the miraculous
   event at the baptism; of the other, a naive docetism. [260] For no one
   as yet thought of affirming two natures in Jesus: [261] the Divine
   dignity appeared rather, either as a gift, [262] or the human nature
   (sa'rx) as a veil assumed for a time, or as the metamorphosis of the
   Spirit. [263] The formula that Jesus was a mere man (psi'lo`s
   a'nthropos), was undoubtedly always and from the first regarded as
   offensive. [264] But the converse formulæ, which identified the person
   of Jesus in its essence with the Godhead itself, do not seem to have
   been rejected with the same decision. [265] Yet such formulæ may have
   been very rare, and even objects of suspicion, in the leading
   ecclesiastical circles, at least until after the middle of the second
   century we can point to them only in documents which hardly found
   approbation in wide circles. The assumption of the existence of at
   least one heavenly and eternal spiritual being beside God was plainly
   demanded by the Old Testament writings, as they were understood; so
   that even those whose Christology did not require them to reflect on
   that heavenly being were forced to recognise it. [266] The pneumatic
   Christology accordingly meets us wherever there is an earnest
   occupation with the Old Testament, and wherever faith in Christ as the
   perfect revealer of God occupies the foreground, therefore not in
   Hermas, but Certainly in Barnabas, Clement, etc. The future belonged to
   this Christology because the current exposition of the Old Testament
   seemed directly to require it, because it alone permitted the close
   connection between creation and redemption, because it furnished the
   proof that the world and religion rest upon the same Divine basis,
   because it was represented in the most valuable writings of the early
   period of Christianity, and finally, because it had room for the
   speculations about the Logos. On the other hand, no direct and natural
   relation to the world and to universal history could be given to the
   Adoptian Christology, which was originally determined eschatologically.
   If such a relation, however, were added to it, there resulted formulæ
   such as that of two Sons of God, one natural and eternal, and one
   adopted, which corresponded neither to the letter of the Holy
   Scriptures, nor to the Christian preaching. Moreover, the revelations
   of God in the Old Testament made by Theophanies must have seemed,
   because of this their form, much more exalted than the revelations made
   through a man raised to power and glory, which Jesus constantly seemed
   to be in the Adoptian Christology. Nay, even the mysterious personality
   of Melchisedec, without father or mother, might appear more impressive
   than the Chosen Servant, Jesus, who was born of Mary, to a mode of
   thought which, in order to make no mistake, desired to verify the
   Divine by outer marks. The Adoptian Christology, that is the
   Christology which is most in keeping with the self-witness of Jesus
   (the Son as the chosen Servant of God), is here shewn to be unable to
   assure to the Gentile Christians those conceptions of Christianity
   which they regarded as of highest value. It proved itself insufficient
   when confronted by any reflection on the relation of religion to the
   cosmos, to humanity, and to its history. It might, perhaps, still have
   seemed doubtful about the middle of the second century as to which of
   the two opposing formulæ, "Jesus is a man exalted to a Godlike dignity"
   and "Jesus is a divine spiritual being incarnate", would succeed in the
   Church. But one only needs to read the pieces of writing which
   represent the latter thesis, and to compare them, say, with the
   Shepherd of Hermas, in order to see to which view the future must
   belong. In saying this, however, we are anticipating; for the
   Christological reflections were not yet vigorous enough to overcome
   enthusiasm and the expectation of the speedy end of all things; and the
   mighty practical tendency of the new religion to a holy life did not
   allow any theory to become the central object of attention. But, still,
   it is necessary to refer here to the controversies which broke out at a
   later period; for the pneumatic Christology forms an essential article
   which cannot be dispensed with, in the expositions of Barnabas, Clement
   and Ignatius; and Justin shews that he cannot conceive of a
   Christianity without the belief in a real pre-existence of Christ. On
   the other hand, the liturgical formulæ, the prayers, etc., which have
   been preserved, scarcely ever take notice of the pre-existence of
   Christ; they either comprise statements which are borrowed from the
   Adoptian Christology, or they testify in an unreflective way to the
   Dominion and Deity of Christ.

   5. The ideas of Christ's work which were influential in the
   communities--Christ as Teacher: creation of knowledge, setting up of
   the new law; Christ as Saviour: creation of life, overcoming of the
   demons, forgiveness of sins committed in the time of error,--were by
   some, in conformity with Apostolic tradition and following the Pauline
   Epistles, positively connected with the death and resurrection of
   Christ, while others maintained them without any connection with these
   events. But one nowhere finds independent thorough reflections on the
   connection of Christ's saving work with the facts proclaimed in the
   preaching, above all, with the death on the cross and the resurrection
   as presented by Paul. The reason of this undoubtedly is that in the
   conception of the work of salvation, the procuring of forgiveness fell
   into the background, as this could only be connected by means of the
   notion of sacrifice, with a definite act of Jesus, viz., with the
   surrender of his life. Consequently, the facts of the destiny of Jesus
   combined in the preaching formed only for the religious fancy, not for
   reflection, the basis of the conception of the work of Christ, and were
   therefore by many writers, Hermas, for example, taken no notice of. Yet
   the idea of suffering freely accepted, of the cross and of the blood of
   Christ, operated in wide circles as a holy mystery in which the deepest
   wisdom and power of the Gospel must somehow lie concealed. [267] The
   peculiarity and uniqueness of the work of the historical Christ seemed,
   however, to be prejudiced by the assumption that Christ, essentially as
   the same person, was already in the Old Testament the Revealer of God.
   All emphasis must therefore fall on this--without a technical
   reflection which cannot be proved--that the Divine revelation has now,
   through the historical Christ, become accessible and intelligible to
   all, and that the life which was promised will shortly be made
   manifest. [268]

   As to the facts of the history of Jesus, the real and the supposed, the
   circumstance that they formed the ever repeated proclamation about
   Christ gave them an extraordinary significance. In addition to the
   birth from the Holy Spirit and the Virgin, the death, the resurrection,
   the exaltation to the right hand of God, and the coming again, there
   now appeared more definitely the ascension to heaven, and also, though
   more uncertainly, the descent into the kingdom of the dead. The belief
   that Jesus ascended into heaven forty days after the resurrection,
   gradually made way against the older conception, according to which
   resurrection and ascension really coincided, and against other ideas
   which maintained a longer period between the two events. That probably
   is the result of a reflection which sought to distinguish the first
   from the later manifestations of the exalted Christ, and it is of the
   utmost importance as the beginning of a demarcation of the times. It is
   also very probable that the acceptance of an actual ascensus in coelum,
   not a mere assumptio, was favourable to the idea of an actual descent
   of Christ de coelo, therefore to the pneumatic Christology and vice
   versa. But there is also closely connected with the ascensus in coelum,
   the notion of a descensus ad inferna, which commended itself on the
   ground of Old Testament prediction. In the first century, however, it
   still remained uncertain, lying on the borders of those productions of
   religious fancy which were not able at once to acquire a right of
   citizenship in the communities. [269]

   One can plainly see that the articles contained in the Kerygma were
   guarded and defended in their reality (kat' alethei'an) by the
   professional teachers of the Church, against sweeping attempts at
   explaining them away, or open attacks on them. [270] But they did not
   yet possess the value of dogmas, for they were neither put in an
   indissoluble union with the idea of salvation, nor were they
   stereotyped in their extent, nor were fixed limits set to the
   imagination in the concrete delineation and conception of them. [271]

   §©7. The Worship, the Sacred Ordinances, and the Organisation of the
   Churches.

   It is necessary to examine the original forms of the worship and
   constitution, because of the importance which they acquired in the
   following period even for the development of doctrine.

   1. In accordance with the purely spiritual idea of God, it was a fixed
   principle that only a spiritual worship is well pleasing to Him, and
   that all ceremonies are abolished, ina o kaino`s no'mos tou kuri'ou
   emon Iesou Christou me` anthropopoieton e'che te`n prosphora'n. [272]
   But as the Old Testament and the Apostolic tradition made it equally
   certain that the worship of God is a sacrifice, the Christian worship
   of God was set forth under the aspect of the spiritual sacrifice. In
   the most general sense it was conceived as the offering of the heart
   and of obedience, as well as the consecration of the whole personality,
   body and soul (Rom. XIII. 1) to God. [273] Here, with a change of the
   figure, the individual Christian and the whole community were described
   as a temple of God. [274] In a more special sense, prayer as
   thanksgiving and intercession [275] was regarded as the sacrifice which
   was to be accompanied, without constraint or ceremony, by fasts and
   acts of compassionate love. [276] Finally, prayers offered by the
   worshipper in the public worship of the community, and the gifts
   brought by them, out of which were taken the elements for the Lord's
   supper, and which were used partly in the common meal, and partly in
   support of the poor, were regarded as sacrifice in the most special
   sense (prosphora`, dora). [277] For the following period, however, it
   became of the utmost importance, (1) that the idea of sacrifice ruled
   the whole worship, (2) that it appeared in a special manner in the
   celebration of the Lord's supper, and consequently invested that
   ordinance with a new meaning, (3) that the support of the poor, alms,
   especially such alms as had been gained by prayer and fasting, was
   placed under the category of sacrifice (Heb. XIII. 16); for this
   furnished the occasion for giving the widest application to the idea of
   sacrifice, and thereby substituting for the original Semitic Old
   Testament idea of sacrifice with its spiritual interpretation, the
   Greek idea with its interpretation. [278] It may, however, be
   maintained that the changes imposed on the Christian religion by
   Catholicism, are at no point so obvious and far-reaching, as in that of
   sacrifice, and especially in the solemn ordinance of the Lord's supper,
   which was placed in such close connection with the idea of sacrifice.

   2. When in the "Teaching of the Apostles," which may be regarded here
   as a classic document, the discipline of life in accordance with the
   words of the Lord, Baptism, the order of fasting and prayer, especially
   the regular use of the Lord's prayer, and the Eucharist are reckoned
   the articles on which the Christian community rests, and when the
   common Sunday offering of a sacrifice made pure by a brotherly
   disposition, and the mutual exercise of discipline are represented as
   decisive for the stability of the individual community, [279] we
   perceive that the general idea of a pure spiritual worship of God has
   nevertheless been realised in definite institutions, and that, above
   all, it has included the traditional sacred ordinances, and adjusted
   itself to them as far as that was possible. [280] This could only take
   effect under the idea of the symbolical, and therefore this idea was
   most firmly attached to these ordinances. But the symbolical of that
   time is not to be considered as the opposite of the objectively real,
   but as the mysterious, the God produced (muste'rion), as contrasted
   with the natural, the profanely clear. As to Baptism, which was
   administered in the name of the Father, Son and Spirit, though Cyprian,
   Ep. 73. 16-18, felt compelled to oppose the custom of baptising in the
   name of Jesus, we noted above (Chap. III. p. 161 f.) that it was
   regarded as the bath of regeneration, and as renewal of life, inasmuch
   as it was assumed that by it the sins of the past state of blindness
   were blotted out. [281] But as faith was looked upon as the necessary
   condition, [282] and as on the other hand, the forgiveness of the sins
   of the past was in itself deemed worthy of God, [283] the asserted
   specific result of baptism remained still very uncertain, and the hard
   tasks which it imposed, might seem more important than the merely
   retrospective gifts which it proffered. [284] Under such circumstances
   the rite could not fail to lead believers about to be baptized to
   attribute value here to the mysterious as such. [285] But that always
   creates a state of things which not only facilitates, but positively
   prepares for the introduction of new and strange ideas. For neither
   fancy nor reflection can long continue in the vacuum of mystery. The
   names sphragi's and photismo's, which at that period came into fashion
   for baptism, are instructive, inasmuch as neither of them is a direct
   designation of the presupposed effect of baptism, the forgiveness of
   sin, and as, besides, both of them evince a Hellenic conception.
   Baptism in being called the seal, [286] is regarded as the guarantee of
   a blessing, not as the blessing itself, at least the relation to it
   remains obscure; in being called enlightenment, [287] it is placed
   directly under an aspect that is foreign to it. It would be different
   if we had to think of photismo's as a gift of the Holy Spirit, which is
   given to the baptised as real principle of a new life and miraculous
   powers. But the idea of a necessary union of baptism with a miraculous
   communication of the Spirit seems to have been lost very early, or to
   have become uncertain, the actual state of things being no longer
   favourable to it; [288] at any rate, it does not explain the
   designation of baptism as photismo's.

   As regards the Lord's Supper, the most important point is that its
   celebration became more and more the central point, not only for the
   worship of the Church, but for its very life as a Church. The form of
   this celebration, the common meal, made it appear to be a fitting
   expression of the brotherly unity of the community (on the public
   confession before the meal, see Didache, 14, and my notes on the
   passage). The prayers which it included presented themselves as
   vehicles for bringing before God, in thanksgiving and intercession,
   every thing that affected the community; and the presentation of the
   elements for the holy ordinance was naturally extended to the offering
   of gifts for the poor brethren, who in this way received them from the
   hand of God himself. In all these respects, however, the holy ordinance
   appeared as a sacrifice of the community, and indeed, as it was also
   named eucharisti'a, a sacrifice of thanksgiving. [289] As an act of
   sacrifice, all the termini technici which the Old Testament applied to
   sacrifice could be applied to it, and all the wealth of ideas which the
   Old Testament connects with sacrifice could be transferred to it. One
   cannot say that anything absolutely foreign was therewith introduced
   into the ordinance, however doubtful it may be whether in the idea of
   its founder the meal was thought of as a sacrificial meal. But it must
   have been of the most wide-reaching significance, that a wealth of
   ideas was in this way connected with the ordinance, which had nothing
   whatever in common either with the purpose of the meal as a memorial of
   Christ's death, [290] or with the mysterious symbols of the body and
   blood of Christ. The result was that the one transaction obtained a
   double value. At one time it appeared as the prosphora' and thusi'a of
   the Church, [291] as the pure sacrifice which is presented to the great
   king by Christians scattered over the world, as they offer to him their
   prayers and place before him again what he has bestowed in order to
   receive it back with thanks and praise. But there is no reference in
   this to the mysterious words, that the bread and wine are the body of
   Christ broken and the blood of Christ shed for the forgiveness of sin.
   These words, in and of themselves, must have challenged a special
   consideration. They called forth the recognition in the sacramental
   action, or rather in the consecrated elements, of a mysterious
   communication of God, a gift of salvation, and this is the second
   aspect. But on a purely spiritual conception of the Divine gift of
   salvation, the blessings mediated through the Holy Supper could only be
   thought of as spiritual (faith, knowledge, or eternal life), and the
   consecrated elements could only be recognised as the mysterious
   vehicles of these blessings. There was yet no reflection on the
   distinction between symbol and vehicle; the symbol was rather regarded
   as the vehicle, and vice versa. We shall search in vain for any special
   relation of the partaking of the consecrated elements to the
   forgiveness of sin. That was made impossible by the whole current
   notions of sin and forgiveness. That on which value was put was the
   strengthening of faith and knowledge, as well as the guarantee of
   eternal life; and a meal in which there was appropriated not merely
   common bread and wine, but a trophe` pneumatike', seemed to have a
   bearing upon these. There was as yet little reflection; but there can
   be no doubt that thought here moved in a region bounded, on the one
   hand, by the intention of doing justice to the wonderful words of
   institution which had been handed down, and on the other hand, by the
   fundamental conviction that spiritual things can only be got by means
   of the Spirit. [292] There was thus attached to the Supper the idea of
   sacrifice, and of a sacred gift guaranteed by God. The two things were
   held apart, for there is as yet no trace of that conception according
   to which the body of Christ represented in the bread [293] is the
   sacrifice offered by the community. But one feels almost called upon
   here to construe from the premises the later development of the idea,
   with due regard to the ancient Hellenic ideas of sacrifice.

   3. The natural distinctions among men, and the differences of position
   and vocation which these involve, were not to be abolished in the
   Church, notwithstanding the independence and equality of every
   individual Christian, but were to be consecrated: above all, every
   relation of natural piety was to be respected. Therefore the elders
   also acquired a special authority, and were to receive the utmost
   deference and due obedience. But, however important the organisation
   that was based on the distinction between presbu'teroi and neo'teroi,
   it ought not to be considered as characteristic of the Churches, not
   even where there appeared at the head of the community a college of
   chosen elders, as was the case in the greater communities and, perhaps,
   soon everywhere. On the contrary, only an organisation founded on the
   gifts of the Spirit (chari'smata) bestowed on the Church by God, [294]
   corresponded to the original peculiarity of the Christian community.
   The Apostolic age therefore transmitted a twofold organi sation to the
   communities. The one was based on the diakoni'a tou lo`gou, and was
   regarded as established directly by God; the other stood in the closest
   connection with the economy of the Church, above all with the offering
   of gifts, and so with the sacrificial service. In the first were men
   speaking the word of God, commissioned and endowed by God, and bestowed
   on Christendom, not on a particular community, who as apo`stoloi,
   prophetai, and dida'skaloi had to spread the Gospel, that is to edify
   the Church of Christ. The were regarded as the real egou'menoi in the
   communities, whose words given them by the Spirit all were to accept in
   faith. In the second were episkopoi, and dia'konoi, appointed by the
   individual congregation and endowed with the charisms of leading and
   helping, who had to receive and administer the gifts, to perform the
   sacrificial service (if there were no prophets present), and take
   charge of the affairs of the community. [295] It lay in the nature of
   the case that as a rule the epi'skopoi, as independent officials, were
   chosen from among the elders, and might thus coincide with the chosen
   presbu'teroi. But a very important development takes place in the
   second half of our epoch. The prophets and teachers--as the result of
   causes which followed the naturalising of the Churches in the
   world--fell more and more into the background, and their function, the
   solemn service of the word, began to pass over to the officials of the
   community, the bishops, who already played a great role in the public
   worship. At the same time, however, it appeared more and more fitting
   to entrust one official, as chief leader (superintendent of public
   worship), with the reception of gifts and their administration,
   together with the care of the unity of public worship; that is, to
   appoint one bishop instead of a number of bishops, leaving, however, as
   before, the college of presbyters, as proista'menoi tes ekklesi'as, a
   kind of senate of the community. [296] Moreover, the idea of the chosen
   bishops and deacons as the antitypes of the Priests and Levites, had
   been formed at an early period in connection with the idea of the new
   sacrifice. But we find also the idea, which is probably the earlier of
   the two, that the prophets and teachers, as the commissioned preachers
   of the word, are the priests. The hesitancy in applying this important
   allegory must have been brought to an end by the disappearance of the
   latter view. But it must have been still more important that the
   bishops, or bishop, in taking over the functions of the old lalountes
   to`n lo'gon, who were not Church officials, took over also the profound
   veneration with which they were regarded as the special organs of the
   Spirit. But the condition of the organisation in the communities about
   the year 140, seems to have been a very diverse one. Here and there, no
   doubt, the convenient arrangement of appointing only one bishop was
   carried out, while his functions had not perhaps been essentially
   increased, and the prophets and teachers were still the great
   spokesmen. Conversely, there may still have been in other communities a
   number of bishops, while the prophets and teachers no longer played
   regularly an important role. A fixed organisation was reached, and the
   Apostolic episcopal constitution established, only in consequence of
   the so-called Gnostic crisis, which was epoch-making in every respect.
   One of its most important presuppositions, and one that has struck very
   deep into the development of doctrine must, however, be borne in mind
   here. As the Churches traced back all the laws according to which they
   lived, and all the blessings they held sacred, to the tradition of the
   twelve Apostles, because they regarded them as Christian only on that
   presupposition, they also in like manner, as far as we can discover,
   traced back their organisation of presbyters, i.e., of bishops and
   deacons, to Apostolic appointment. The notion which followed quite
   naturally, was that the Apostles themselves had appointed the first
   church officials. [297] That idea may have found support in some actual
   cases of the kind, but this does not need to be considered here; for
   these cases would not have led to the setting up of a theory. But the
   point in question here is a theory, which is nothing else than an
   integral part of the general theory, that the twelve Apostles were in
   every respect the middle term between Jesus and the present Churches
   (see above, p. 158). This conception is earlier than the great Gnostic
   crisis, for the Gnostics also shared it. But no special qualities of
   the officials, but only of the Church itself, were derived from it, and
   it was believed that the independence and sovereignty of the Churches
   were in no way endangered by it, because an institution by Apostles was
   considered equivalent to an institution by the Holy Spirit, whom they
   possessed and whom they followed. The independence of the Churches
   rested precisely on the fact that they had the Spirit in their midst.
   The conception here briefly sketched was completely transformed in the
   following period by the addition of another idea--that of Apostolic
   succession, [298] and then became, together with the idea of the
   specific priesthood of the leader of the Church, the most important
   means of exalting the office above the community. [299]

   Supplementary.

   This review of the common faith and the beginnings of knowledge,
   worship and organisation in the earliest Gentile Christianity will have
   shewn that the essential premises for the development of Catholicism
   were already in existence before the middle of the second century, and
   before the burning conflict with Gnosticism. We may see this, whether
   we look at the peculiar form of the Kerygma, or at the expression of
   the idea of tradition, or at the theology with its moral and
   philosophic attitude. We may therefore conclude that the struggle with
   Gnosticism hastened the development, but did not give it a new
   direction. For the Greek spirit, the element which was most operative
   in Gnosticism, was already concealed in the earliest Gentile
   Christianity itself; it was the atmosphere which one breathed; but the
   elements peculiar to Gnosticism were for the most part rejected. [300]
   We may even go back a step further (see above, pp. 41, 76). The great
   Apostle to the Gentiles himself, in his epistle to the Romans and in
   those to the Corinthians, transplanted the Gospel into Greek modes of
   thought. He attempted to expound it with Greek ideas, and not only
   called the Greeks to the Old Testament and the Gospel, but also
   introduced the Gospel as a leaven into the religious and philosophic
   world of Greek ideas. Moreover, in his pneumatico-cosmic Christology he
   gave the Greeks an impulse towards a theologoumenon, at whose service
   they could place their whole philosophy and mysticism. He preached the
   foolishness of Christ crucified, and yet in doing so proclaimed the
   wisdom of the nature-vanquishing Spirit, the heavenly Christ. From this
   moment was established a development which might indeed assume very
   different forms, but in which all the forces and ideas of Hellenism
   must gradually pass over to the Gospel. But even with this the last
   word has not been said; on the contrary, we must remember that the
   Gospel itself belonged to the fulness of the times, which is indicated
   by the inter-action of the Old Testament and the Hellenic religions
   (see above, pp. 41, 56).

   The documents which have been preserved from the first century of the
   Gentile Church are, in their relation to the history of Dogma, very
   diverse. In the Didache we have a Catechism for Christian life
   dependent on a Jewish Greek Catechism, and giving expression to what
   was specifically Christian in the prayers and in the order of the
   Church. The Epistle of Barnabas, probably of Alexandrian origin,
   teaches the correct, Christian, interpretation of the Old Testament,
   rejects the literal interpretation and Judaism as of the devil, and in
   Christology essentially follows Paul. The Romish first Epistle of
   Clement, which also contains other Pauline reminiscences
   (reconciliation and justification), represents the same Christology,
   but it set it in a moralistic mode of thought. This is a most typical
   writing in which the spirit of tradition, order, stability, and the
   universal ecclesiastical guardianship of Rome is already expressed. The
   moralistic mode of thought is classically represented by the Shepherd
   of Hermas and the second Epistle of Clement, in which, besides, the
   eschatological element is very prominent. We have in the Shepherd the
   most important document for the Church Christianity of the age,
   reflected in the mirror of a prophet who, however, takes into account
   the concrete relations. The theology of Ignatius is the most advanced,
   in so far as he, opposing the Gnostics, brings the facts of salvation
   into the foreground, and directs his Gnosis not so much to the Old
   Testament as to the history of Christ. He attempts to make Christ kata`
   tneuma and kata` sa'rka the central point of Christianity. In this
   sense his theology and speech is Christocentric, related to that of
   Paul and the fourth Evangelist, (specially striking is the relationship
   with Ephesians,) and is strongly contrasted with that of his
   contemporaries. Of kindred spirit with him are Melito and Irenæus,
   whose forerunner he is. He is related to them as Methodius at a later
   period was related to the classical orthodox theology of the fourth and
   fifth centuries. This parallel is appropriate not merely in point of
   form: it is rather one and the same tendency of mind which passes over
   from Ignatius to Melito, Irenæus, Methodius, Athanasius, Gregory of
   Nyssa (here, however, mixed with Origenic elements), and to Cyril of
   Alexandria. Its characteristic is that not only does the person of
   Christ as the God-man form the central point and sphere of theology,
   but also that all the main points of his history are mysteries of the
   world's redemption. (Ephes. 19). But Ignatius is also distinguished by
   the fact that behind all that is enthusiastic, pathetic, abrupt, and
   again all that pertains to liturgical form, we find in his epistles a
   true devotion to Christ (o theo's mou). He is laid hold of by Christ:
   Cf. Ad. Rom. 6: ekeinon zeto, to`n uper emon apothano'nta, ekeinon
   the'lo, to`n di' emas anasta'nta; Rom. 7: o emo`s e'ros estau'rotai
   kai` ouk e'stin en emoi` pur philoulon. As a sample of his theological
   speech and his rule of faith, see ad Smyrn. I: eno'esa umas
   katertisme'nous en akine'to pi'stei, o'sper kathelome'nous en to stauro
   tou kuriou Iesou Christou sarki' te kai` pneu'mari kai` edrasme'nous en
   aga'pe en to ai'mari Christou, peplerophoreme'nous eis to`n kuri'ou
   emon, alethos o'nta ek ge'nous Dabi`d kata` sa'rka, uio`n theou kata`
   the'lema kai` du'namin theou, gegeneme'non alethos ek parthe'nou,
   bebaptisme'non upo` Ioa'nnou, i'na plerothe pasa dikaiosu'ne up' autou,
   alethos epi` Ponti'ou Pila'tou kai` Ero'dou tetra'rchou kathelome'non
   upe'r emon en sarki'--aph' hou karpou emeis, apo` tou theomakari'tou
   autou pa'thous--i'na a're su'ssemon eis tou's aionas dia' tes
   anasta'seos eis tou's agi'ous kai` pistou`s autou ei'te en Ioudai'ois
   ei'te en i'thnesin en eni` so'mate tes ekklesi'as autou. The Epistle of
   Polycarp is characterised by its dependence on earlier Christian
   writings (Epistles of Paul, I Peter, I John), consequently by its
   conservative attitude with regard to the most valuable traditions of
   the Apostolic period. The Kerygma of Peter exhibits the transition from
   the early Christian literature to the apologetic (Christ as no`mos and
   as lo'gos).

   It is manifest that the lineage, "Ignatius, Polycarp, Melito, Irenæus,"
   is in characteristic contrast with all others, has deep roots in the
   Apostolic age, as in Paul and in the Johannine writings, and contains
   in germ important factors of the future formation of dogma, as it
   appeared in Methodius, Athanasius, Marcellus, Cyril of Jerusalem. It is
   very doubtful, therefore, whether we are justified in speaking of an
   Asia Minor theology. (Ignatius does not belong to Asia Minor.) At any
   rate, the expression, Asia Minor-Romish Theology, has no justification.
   But it has its truth in the correct observation, that the standards by
   which Christianity and Church matters were measured and defined must
   have been similar in Rome and Asia Minor during the second century. We
   lack all knowledge of the closer connections. We can only again refer
   to the journey of Polycarp to Rome, to that of Irenæus by Rome to Gaul,
   to the journey of Abercius and others. (Cf. also the application of the
   Montanist communities in Asia Minor for recognition by the Roman
   bishop.) In all probability, Asia Minor, along with Rome, was the
   spiritual centre of Christendom from about 60-200; but we have but few
   means for describing how this centre was brought to bear on the
   circumference. What we do know belongs more to the history of the
   Church than to the special history of dogma.

   Literature.--The writings of the so-called Apostolic Fathers. See the
   edition of v. Gebhardt, Harnack, Zahn, 1876. Hilgenfeld, Nov. Test.
   extra Can. recept. fasc. IV. 2 edit. 1884, has collected further
   remains of early Christian literature. The Teaching of the twelve
   Apostles. Fragments of the Gospel and Apocalypse of Peter (my edition,
   1893). Also the writings of Justin and other apologists, in so far as
   they give disclosures about the faith of the communities of his time,
   as well as statements in Celsus Alethe`s Lo'gos, in Irenæus, Clement of
   Alexandria, and Tertullian. Even Gnostic fragments may be cautiously
   turned to profit. Ritschl, Entstehung der altkath. Kirche, 2 Aufl.
   1857. Pfleiderer, Das Urchristenthum, 1887. Renan, Origins of
   Christianity, vol. V. V. Engelhardt, Das Christenthum Justin's, d. M.
   1878, p. 375 ff. Schenkel, Das Christusbild der Apostel, etc., 1879.
   Zahn, Gesch. des N.-Tlichen Kanons, 2 Bde. 1888. Behm, Das Christliche
   Gesetzthum der Apostolischen Väter (Zeitschr. f. kirchl. Wissensch.
   1886). Dorner, History of the doctrine of the Person of Christ, 1845.
   Schultz, Die Lehre von der Gottheit Christi, 1881, p. 22 ff: Höfling,
   Die Lehre der ältesten Kirche vom Opfer, 1851, Höfling, Das Sacrament
   d. Taufe, 1848. Kahnis, Die Lehre vom Abendmahl, 1851. Th. Harnack, Der
   Christliche Gemeindegottedienst im Apost. u. Altkath. Zeitalter, 1854.
   Hatch, Organisation of the Early Church, 1883. My Prolegomena to the
   Didache (Texte u. Unters. II. Bd. H. 1, 2). Diestel, Gesch. des A. T.
   in der Christl. Kirche, 1869. Sohm, Kirchenrecht, 1892. Monographs on
   the Apostolic Fathers: on 1 Clem.: Lipsius, Lightfoot (most accurate
   commentary), Wrede; on 2 Clem.: A. Harnack (Ztschr. f. K. Gesch. 1887);
   on Barnabas: J. Müller; on Hermas: Zahn, Hückstädt, Link; on Papias:
   Weiffenbach, Leimbach, Zahn, Lightfoot; on Ignatius and Polycarp:
   Lightfoot (accurate commentary) and Zahn; on the Gospel and Apocalypse
   of Peter: A. Harnack; on the Kerygma of Peter: von Dobschütz; on Acts
   of Thecla: Schlau.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [163] The statements made in this chapter need special forbearance,
   especially as the selection from the rich and motley material--cf. only
   the so-called Apostolic Fathers--the emphasising of this, the throwing
   into the background of that element, cannot here be vindicated. It is
   not possible, in the compass of a brief account, to give expression to
   that elasticity and those oscillations of ideas and thoughts which were
   peculiar to the Christians of the earliest period. There was indeed, as
   will be shewn, a complex of tradition in many respects fixed, but this
   complex was still under the dominance of an enthusiastic fancy, so that
   what at one moment seemed fixed, in the next had disappeared. Finally,
   attention must be given to the fact that when we speak of the
   beginnings of knowledge, the members of the Christian community in
   their totality are no longer in question, but only individuals who of
   course were the leaders of the others. If we had no other writings from
   the times of the Apostolic Fathers than the first Epistle of Clement
   and the Epistle of Polycarp, it would he comparatively easy to sketch a
   clear history of the development connecting Paulinism with the
   Old-Catholic Theology as represented by Iræneus, and so to justify the
   traditional ideas. But besides these two Epistles which are the classic
   monuments of the mediating tradition, we have a great number of
   documents which shew us how manifold and complicated the development
   was. They also teach us how carefnl we should be in the interpretation
   of the post-Apostolic documents that immediately followed the Pauline
   Epistles, and that we must give special heed to the paragraphs and
   ideas in them, which distinguish them from Paulinism. Besides, it is of
   the greatest importance that those two Epistles originated in Rome and
   Asia Minor, as these are the places where we must seek the embryonic
   stage of old-Catholic doctrine. Numerous fine threads, in the form of
   fundamental ideas and particular views, pass over from the Asia Minor
   theology of the post-Apostolic period into the old-Catholic theology.

   [164] The Epistle to the Hebrews (X. 25), the Epistle of Barnabas (IV.
   10), the Shepherd of Hermas (Sim. IX. 26. 3), but especially the
   Epistle of Ignatius and still later documents, shew that up to the
   middle of the second century, and even later, there were Christians
   who, for various reasons, stood outside the union of communities, or
   wished to have only a loose and temporary relation to them. The
   exhortation: epi` to` auto` sunercho'menoi sunzeteite peri` tou koine
   sumphe'rontos (see my note on Didache XVI. 2, and cf. for the
   expression the interesting State Inscription which was found at
   Magnesia on the Meander. Bull, Corresp. Hellen. 1883 p. 506: apagoreu'o
   me'te sune'rchesthai tou`s artoko'kous kat' etairi'an me'te
   paresteko'tas thrasu'nesthai. peitha'rchein de pa'ntos tois upe`r tou
   koine sumphe'rontos epitattome'nois k.t.l. or the exhortation:
   kollasthe tois agi'ois, o'ti oi kollo'menoi autois agiasthe'sontai (1
   Clem. 46. 2, introduced as graphe`) runs through most of the writings
   of the post-Apostolic and pre-catholic period. New doctrines were
   imported by wandering Christians who, in many cases, may not themselves
   have belonged to a community, and did not respect the arrangements of
   those they found in existence, but sought to form conventicles. If we
   remember how the Greeks and Romans were wont to get themselves
   initiated into a mystery cult, and took part for a long time in the
   religious exercises, and then, when they thought they had got the good
   of it, for the most part or wholly to give up attending, we shall not
   wonder that the demand to become a permanent member of a Christian
   community was opposed by many. The statements of Hermas are specially
   instructive here.

   [165] "Corpus sumus," says Tertullian, at a time when this description
   had already become an anachronism, "de conscientia religionis et
   disciplinæ unitate et spei foedere." (Apol. 39: cf. Ep. Petri ad Jacob.
   I.; heis theo`s, heis no'mos, mi'a elpi's). The description was
   applicable to the earlier period, when there was no such thing as a
   federation with political forms, but when the consciousness of
   belonging to a community and of forming a brotherhood (adelpho'tes) was
   all the more deeply felt: See, above all, 1 Clem. and Corinth., the
   Didache (9-15), Aristides, Apol 15: "and when they have become
   Christians they call them (the slaves) brethren without hesitation . .
   . . for they do not call them brethren according to the flesh, but
   according to the spirit and in God;" cf. also the statements on
   brotherhood in Tertullian and Minucius Felix (also Lucian). We have in
   1 Clem. 1. 2. the delineation of a perfect Christian Church. The
   Epistles of Ignatius are specially instructive as to the independence
   of each individual community: 1 Clem. and Didache, as to the obligation
   to assist stranger communities by counsel and action, and to support
   the travelling brethren. As every Christian is a pa'roikos, so every
   community is a paroikousa te`n po'lin, but it is under obligation to
   give an example to the world, and must watch that "the name be not
   blasphemed." The importance of the social element in the oldest
   Christian communities, has been very justly brought into prominence in
   the latest works on the subject (Renan, Heinrici, Hatch). The historian
   of dogma must also emphasise it, and put the fluid notions of the faith
   in contrast with the definite consciousness of moral tasks. See 1.
   Clem. 47-50; Polyc. Ep. 3; Didache 1 ff.; Ignat. ad Eph. 14, on aga'pe
   as the main requirement. Love demands that everyone: "zetei to`
   koinophele`s pasin kai` me` to` eautou" (1. Clem. 48. 6. with
   parallels; Didache 16. 3; Barn. 4. 10; Ignatius).

   [166] 1 Clem. 59. 2, in the church prayer; o'pos to`n arithmo`n to`n
   katerithmeme'non ton eklekton autou en o'lo ko'smo diaphula'xe
   a'thrauston o demiourgo`s ton apa'nton dia` tou egapeme'nou paido`s
   autou Iesou Christou.

   [167] See 1 Clem., 2 Clem., Ignatius (on the basis of the Pauline view;
   but see also Rev. II. 9).

   [168] See Hermas (the passage is given above, p. 103, note.)

   [169] See Hermas. Vis. I.-III. Papias. Fragm. VI. and VII. of my
   edition, 2 Clem. 14: poeountes to` the'lema tou patro`s emon eso'metha
   ek tes ekklesi'as tes pro'tes tes pneumatikes, tes pro` eli'ou kai`
   sele'nes ektisme'nes . . . . ekklesi'a zosa soma' esti Christou; le'gei
   ga'r e graphe'; epoi'esen o theo`s to`n a'nthropon a'rsen kai' thelu.
   To` a'rsen esti`n o Christo's, to` thelu e ekklesi'a.

   [170] See Barn. 13 (2 Clem. 2).

   [171] See Valentinus in Clem. Strom. VI. 6. 52. "Holy Church", perhaps
   also in Marcion, if his text (Zahn. Gesch. des N. T. lichen Kanons, II
   p. 502) in Gal. IV. 21, read; e'tis esti`n me'ter emon, gennosa eis e`n
   epengeila'metha agi'an ekklesi'an.

   [172] Barn. 3. 6.

   [173] We are also reminded here of the "tertium genus." The nickname of
   the heathen corresponded to the self-consciousness of the Christians,
   (see Aristides, Apol.).

   [174] See also the letter of Pliny, the paragraphs about Christian
   morality in the first third-part of Justin's apology, and especially
   the apology of Aristides, c. 15. Aristides portrays Christianity by
   portraying Christian morality. "The Christians know and believe in God,
   the creator of heaven and of earth, the God by whom all things consist,
   i.e., in him from whom they have received the commandments which they
   have written in their hearts, commandments which they observe in faith
   and in the expectation of the world to come. For this reason they do
   not commit adultery, nor practise unchastity, nor bear false witness,
   nor covet that with which they are entrusted, or what does not belong
   to them, etc." Compare how in the Apocalypse of Peter definite
   penalties in hell are portrayed for the several forms of immorality.

   [175] An investigation of the Græco-Jewish, Christian literature of
   gnomes and moral rules, commencing with the Old Testament doctrine of
   wisdom on the one hand, and the Stoic collections on the other, then
   passing beyond the Alexandrian and Evangelic gnomes up to the Didache,
   the Pauline tables of domestic duties, the Sibylline sayings,
   Phocylides, the Neopythagorean rules, and to the gnomes of the
   enigmatic Sextus, is still an unfulfilled task. The moral rules of the
   Pharisaic Rabbis should also be included.

   [176] Herm. Mand. I. has merely fixed the Monotheistic confession:
   proton pa'nton pi'steuson, o'ti heis esti`n o theo`s, o ta` pa'nta
   kti'sas kai` katarti'sas, k.t.l. See Praed. Petri in Clem. Strom. VI.
   6. 48: VI. 5. 39: Aristides gives in c. 2. of his Apology the preaching
   of Jesus Christ: but where he wishes to give a short expression of
   Christianity he is satisfied with saying that Christians are those who
   have found the one true God. See, e. g., c. 15 "Christians have . . . .
   found the truth .... They know and believe in God, the creator of
   heaven and of earth, by whom all things consist, and from whom all
   things come, who has no other god beside him, and from whom they have
   received commandments which they have written in their hearts,
   commandments which they observe in faith and in expectation of the
   world to come." It is interesting to note how Origen, Comm. in Joh.
   XXXII 9, has brought the Christological Confession into approximate
   harmony with that of Hermas First, Mand. I. is verbally repeated and
   then it is said: chre` de` kai` pisteu'ein, o'ti ku'rios Iesous
   Christo`s kai` pase te teri` autou kata` te`n theoteta kai` te`n
   anthropo'teta; alethei'a dei` de` kai` eis to` a'gion pisteu'ein
   pneuma, kai` o'ti autexou'sioi o'ntes kolazo'metha me`n eph' hois
   amarta'nomen, timo'metha de` eph' hois eu prattomen.

   [177] Very instructive here is 2 Clem. ad Corinth. 20. 5: to mo'no theo
   aora'to, patri` tes alethei'as, to exapostei'lanti emin to`n sotera
   kai` archego`n tes aphtharsi'as, di' hou kai` ephane'rosen emin te`n
   ale'theian kai` te`n epoura'nion zoe'n, auto e do'xa. On the Holy
   Spirit see previous note.

   [178] They were quoted as e graphe`, ta` bibli'a, or with the formula o
   theo`s (ku'rios) le'gei. Also "Law and Prophets," "Law Prophets and
   Psalms." See the original of the first six books of the Apostolic
   Constitutions.

   [179] See the collection of passages in Patr. App. Opp. edit. Gebhardt.
   I. 2 p. 133, and the formula, Diogn. 11: aposto'lon ge'nomenos
   mathete`s gi`nomai dida'skalos ethnon, ta` paradothe'nta axi'os
   upereton ginome'nois alethei'as mathetais. Besides the Old Testament
   and the traditions about Jesus (Gospels), the Apocalyptic writings of
   the Jews, which were regarded as writings of the Spirit, were also
   drawn upon. Moreover, Christian letters and manifestoes proceeding from
   Apostles, prophets, or teachers, were read. The Epistles of Paul were
   early collected and obtained wide circulation in the first half of the
   second century but they were not Holy Scripture in the specific sense,
   and therefore their authority was not unqualified.

   [180] Barn. 5. 6, oi prophetai, apo` tou ku'riou echontes te`n cha'rin,
   eis auto`n eprophe'teusan. Ignat. ad Magn. 8. 2: cf. also Clem. Paedag.
   I. 7. 59: o ga`r auto`s houtos paidagogo`s to'te me`n "phobethe'se
   ku'rion to`n theo`n e'legen, emin de` "a`gape'seis ku'rion to`n theo`n
   sou" tarenesen. dia` touto kai` ente'lletai emin "pau'sasthe apo` ton
   e'rgon umon" ton talaion amartion, "ma'thete kalo`n poiein, e'kklinon
   apo` kakou kai` poi'eson agatho'n, ega'pesas dikaiosu'nen, emi'sesas
   anomi'an" au'te mou e ne'a diathe'ke palai`o kecharagme'ne gra'mmati.

   [181] See above §©5, p. 114 f.

   [182] See my edition of the Didache, Prolegg. p. 32 ff.; Rothe, "De
   disciplina arcani origine," 1841.

   [183] The earliest example is 1. Cor. XI. 1 f. It is different in 1
   Tim. III. 16 where already the question is about to` tes eusebei'as
   muste'rion: See Patr. App. Opp. I. 2. p. 134.

   [184] Father, son, and spirit: Paul; Matt. XXVIII. 19; 1 Clem. ad. Cor.
   58. 2, (see 2. 1. f.: 42. 3: 46. 6); Didache 7; Ignat. Eph. 9. 1; Magn.
   13. 1. 2.; Philad. inscr.; Mart. Polyc. 14. I. 2; Ascens. Isai. 8. 18:
   9. 27: 10. 4: 11. 32 ff.; Justin passim; Montan. ap. Didym. de trinit.
   411; Excerpta ex Theodot. 80; Pseudo Clem. de virg. 1. 13. Yet the
   omission of the Holy Spirit is frequent, as in Paul; or the Holy Spirit
   is identified with the Spirit of Christ. The latter takes place even
   with such writers as are familiar with the baptismal formula, Ignat. ad
   Magn. 15; kekteme'noi adia'kriton pneuma, o's estin Iesous Christo`s.

   [185] The formulæ run: "God who has spoken through the Prophets," or
   the "Prophetic Spirit," etc.

   [186] That should be assumed as certain in the case of the Egyptian
   Church, yet Caspari thinks he can shew that already Clement of
   Alexandria presupposes a symbol.

   [187] Also in the communities of Asia Minor (Smyrna); for a combination
   of Polyc. Ep. c. 2 with c. 7, proves that in Smyrna the paradothei`s
   lo'gos must have been something like the Roman Symbol, see Lightfoot on
   the passage; it cannot be proved that it was identical with it. See,
   further, how in the case of Polycarp the moral element is joined on to
   the dogmatic. This reminds us of the Didache and has its parallel even
   in the first homily of Aphraates.

   [188] See Caspari, Quellen z. Gesch. des Taufsymbols, III. p. 3. ff.,
   and Patr. App. Opp. 1. 2. pp. 115-142. The old Roman Symbol reads:
   Pisteu'o eis theo`n pate'ra pantokra'tora kai` eis Chrito`n Iesoun
   (to`n) uio`n autou to`n monogene, (on this word see Westcott's Excursus
   in his commentary on 1st John) to`n ku'rion emon to`n gennethe'nta ek
   pneu'matos agi'ou kai` Mari'as tes parthe'nou, to`n epi` Pontion
   Pila'tou staurothe'nta kai` taphe'nta; te tri'te eme'ra anasta'nta ek
   nekron, anaba'nta eis tou`s ouranou's, kathe'menon en dexia tou
   patro's, o'then e'rchetai krinai zontas kai` nekrou's; kai` eis pneuma
   a'gion, agi'an ekklisi'an, a'phesin amartion sarko`s ana'stasin, ame'n.
   To estimate this very important article aright we must note the
   following: (1) It is not a formula of doctrine, but of confession. (2)
   It has a liturgical form which is shewn in the rhythm and in the
   disconnected succession of its several members, and is free from
   everything of the nature polemic. (3) It tapers off into the three
   blessings, Holy Church, forgiveness of sin, resurrection of the body,
   and in this as well as in the fact that there is no mention of gnosis
   (ale'theia) kai` zoe` aio'nos, is revealed an early Christian
   untheological attitude. (4) It is worthy of note, on the other hand,
   that the birth from the Virgin occupies the first place, and all
   reference to the baptism of Jesus, also to the Davidic Sonship, is
   wanting. (5) It is further worthy of note, that there is no express
   mention of the death of Jesus, and that the Ascension already forms a
   special member (that is also found elsewhere, Ascens. Isaiah, c. 3. 13.
   ed. Dillmann. p. 13. Murator. Fragment, etc.). Finally, we should
   consider the want of the earthly Kingdom of Christ and the mission of
   the twelve Apostles, as well as, on the other hand, the purely
   religious attitude, no notice being taken of the new law. Zahn (Das
   Apostol. Symbolum, 1893) assumes, "That in all essential respects the
   identical baptismal confession which Justin learned in Ephesus about
   130, and Marcion confessed in Rome about 145, originated at latest
   somewhere about 120". In some "unpretending notes" (p. 37 ff.) he
   traces this confession back to a baptismal confession of the Pauline
   period ("it had already assumed a more or less stereotyped form in the
   earlier Apostolic period"), which, however, was somewhat revised, so
   far as it contained, for example, "of the house of David", with
   reference to Christ. "The original formula, reminding us of the Jewish
   soil of Christianity, was thus remodelled, perhaps about 70-120, with
   retention of the fundamental features so that it might appear to answer
   better to the need of candidates for baptism, proceeding more and more
   from the Gentiles. . . . This changed formula soon spread on all sides.
   It lies at the basis of all the later baptismal confessions of the
   Church, even of the East. The first article was slightly changed in
   Rome about 200-220". While up till then, in Rome as everywhere else, it
   had read pisteu'o eis e'na theo`n pantokra'tora, it was now changed in
   pisteu'o eis theo`n pete'ra pantokra'tora. This hypothesis, with regard
   to the early history of the Roman Symbol, presupposes that the history
   of the formation of the baptismal confession in the Church, in east and
   west, was originally a uniform one. This cannot be proved; besides, it
   is refuted by the facts of the following period. It presupposes
   secondly, that there was a strictly formulated baptismal confession
   outside Rome before the middle of the second century, which likewise
   cannot he proved; (the converse rather is probable, that the fixed
   formulation proceeded from Rome). Moreover, Zahn himself retracts
   everything again by the expression "more or less stereotyped form;" for
   what is of decisive interest here is the question, when and where the
   fixed sacred form was produced. Zahn here has set up the radical thesis
   that it can only have taken place in Rome between 200 and 220. But
   neither his negative nor his positive proof for a change of the Symbol
   in Rome at so late a period is sufficient. No sure conclusion as to the
   Symbol can be drawn from the wavering regulæ fidei of Irenæus and
   Tertullian, which contain the "unum"; further, the "unum" is not found
   in the western provincial Symbols, which, however, are in part earlier
   than the year 200. The Romish correction must therefore have been
   subsequently taken over in the provinces (Africa?). Finally, the
   formula theo`n pa'tera pantokra'tora beside the more frequent theo`n
   pantokra'tora, is attested by Irenæus, I. 10. 1, a decisive passage.
   With our present means we cannot attain to any direct knowledge of
   Symbol formation before the Romish Symbol. But the following
   hypotheses, which I am not able to establish here, appear to me to
   correspond to the facts of the case and to be fruitful: (1) There were,
   even in the earliest period, separate Kerygmata about God and Christ:
   see the Apostolic writings, Hermas, Ignatius, etc. (2) The Kerygma
   about God was the confession of the one God of creation, the almighty
   God. (3) The Kerygma about Christ had essentially the same historical
   contents everywhere, but was expressed in diverse forms: (a) in the
   form of the fulfilment of prophecy, (b) in the form kata` sa'kra, kata`
   pneuma, (c) in the form of the first and second advent, (d) in the
   form, kataba's-anaba's; these forms were also partly combined. (4) The
   designations "Christ", "Son of God" and "Lord"; further, the birth from
   the Holy Spirit, or kata` pneuma, the sufferings (the practice of
   exorcism contributed also to the fixing and naturalising of the formula
   "crucified under Pontius Pilate"), the death, the resurrection, the
   coming again to judgment, formed the stereotyped content of the Kerygma
   about Jesus. The mention of the Davidic Sonship, of the Virgin Mary, of
   the baptism by John, of the third day, of the descent into Hades, of
   the demonstratio veræ carnis post resurrectionem , of the ascension
   into heaven and the sending out of the disciples, were additional
   articles which appeared here and there. The sa'kra labo'n, and the
   like, were very early developed out of the forms (b) and (d). All this
   was already in existence at the transition of the first century to the
   second. (5) The proper contribution of the Roman community consisted in
   this, that it inserted the Kerygma about God and that about Jesus into
   the baptismal formula; widened the clause referring to the Holy Spirit,
   into one embracing Holy Church, forgiveness of sin, resurrection of the
   body; excluded theological theories in other respects; undertook a
   reduction all round, and accurately defined everything up to the last
   world. (6) The western regulæ fide do not fall back exclusively on the
   old Roman Symbol, but also on the earlier freer Kerygmata about God and
   about Jesus which were common to the east and west; not otherwise can
   the regulæ fide of Irenæus and Tertullian, for example, be explained.
   But the symbol became more and more the support of the regula. (7) The
   eastern confessions (baptismal symbols) do not fall back directly on
   the Roman Symbol, but were probably on the model of this symbol, made
   up from the provincial Kerygmata, rich in contents and growing ever
   richer, hardly, however, before the third century. (8) It cannot be
   proved, and it is not probable, that the Roman Symbol was in existence
   before Hermas, that is, about 135.

   [189] See the fragment in Euseb. H. E. III. 39, from the work of
   Papias.

   [190] Didache` ku'rion dia` ton ib' aposto'lon (Did. inscr.) is the
   most accurate expression (similarly 2. Pet. III. 2). Instead of this
   might be said simply o ku'rios (Hegesipp.). Hegesippus (Euseb. H. E.,
   IV. 22. 3: See also Steph. Gob.) comprehends the ultimate authorities
   under the formula: os o nomos keru'ssei kai` oi prophetai kai` o
   ku'rios; just as even Pseudo Clem. de Virg. I. 2: "Sicut ex lege ac
   prophetis et a domino nostro Jesu Christo didicimus." Polycarp (6. 3)
   says: katho`s auto`s enetei'lato kai` oi euangelisa'menoi emas
   apo'stoloi kai` oi prophetai oi prokeru'xantes te`n e'leusin tou
   kuri'ou emon. In the second Epistle of Clement (14. 2) we read: ta`
   bibli'a (O. T.) kai` oi apo'stoloi; to` euange'lion may also stand for
   o ku'rios (Ignat., Didache. 2 Clem. etc.). The Gospel, so far as it is
   described, is quoted as ta` apomnemoneu'mata t. aposto'lon (Justin,
   Tatian), or on the other hand, as ai kuriakai` graphai', (Dionys. Cor.
   in Euseb. H. E. IV. 23. 12: at a later period in Tertull. and Clem.
   Alex.). The words of the Lord, in the same way as the words of God, are
   called simply ta' lo'gia (kuriaka'). The declaration of Serapion at the
   beginning of the third century (Euseb., H. E. VI. 12. 3): emeis kai`
   Pe'tron kai` tou`s a'llous aposto'lous apodecho'metha os Christo'n, is
   an innovation in so far as it puts the words of the Apostles fixed in
   writing and as distinct from the words of the Lord, on a level with the
   latter. That is, while differentiating the one from the other, Serapion
   ascribes to the words of the apostles and those of the Lord equal
   authority. But the development which led to this position, had already
   begun in the first century. At a very early period there were read in
   the communities, beside the Old Testament, Gospels, that is collections
   of words of the Lord, which at the same time contained the main facts
   of the history of Jesus. Such notes were a necessity (Luke 1. 4: i'na
   epignos perii` hon kateche'thes lo'gon te`n aspha'leian), and though
   still indefinite and in many ways unlike, they formed the germ for the
   genesis of the New Testament. (See Weiss. Lehrb. d. Einleit in d. N. T.
   p. 21 ff.) Further, there were read Epistles and Manifestoes by
   apostles, prophets and teachers, but, above all, Epistles of Paul. The
   Gospels at first stood in no connection with these Epistles, however
   high they might be prized. But there did exist a connection between the
   Gospels and the ap' arches auto'ptais kai` upere'tais tou lo'gou, so
   far as these mediated the tradition of the Evangelic material, and on
   their testimony rests the Kerygma of the Church about the Lord as the
   Teacher, the crucified and risen One. Here lies the germ for the
   genesis of a canon which will comprehend the Lord and the Apostles, and
   will also draw in the Pauline Epistles. Finally, Apocalypses were read
   as Holy Scriptures.

   [191] Read, apart from all others, the canonical Gospels, the remains
   of the so-called Apocryphal Gospels, and perhaps the Shepherd of
   Hermas: see also the statements of Papias.

   [192] That Peter was in Antioch follows from Gal. II.; that he laboured
   in Corinth, perhaps before the composition of the first epistle to the
   Corinthians, is not so improbable as is usually maintained (1 Cor.;
   Dionys. of Corinth); that he was at Rome even is very credible. The
   sojourn of John in Asia Minor cannot, I think, be contested.

   [193] See how in the three early "writings of Peter" (Gospel,
   Apocalypse, Kerygma) the twelve are embraced in a perfect unity. Peter
   is the head and spokesman for them all.

   [194] See Papias and the Reliq. Presbyter. ap. Iren., collecta in Parr.
   Opp. I. 2, p. 105: see also Zahn, Forschungen. III., p. 156 f.

   [195] The Gentile-Christian conception of the significance of the
   twelve--a fact to be specially noted--was all but unanimous (see above
   Chap. II.): the only one who broke through it was Marcion. The writers
   of Asia Minor, Rome and Egypt, coincide in this point. Beside the Acts
   of the Apostles, which is specially instructive see 1 Clem. 42; Barn.
   5. 9. 8. 3: Didache inscr.; Hermas. Vis. III. 5, 11; Sim. IX. 15, 16,
   17, 25; Petrusev-Petrusapok. Præd. Petr. ap. Clem. Strom. VI. 6, 48;
   Ignat. ad Trall. 3; ad Rom. 4; ad Philad. 5; Papias; Polyc.; Aristides;
   Justin passim; inferences from the great work of Irenæus, the works of
   Tertull. and Clem. Alex.; the Valentinians. The inference that follows
   from the eschatological hope, that the Gospel has already been preached
   to the world, and the growling need of having a tradition mediated by
   eye-witnesses co-operated here, and out of the twelve who were in great
   part obscure, but who had once been authoritative in Jerusalem and
   Palestine, and highly esteemed in the Christian Diaspora from the
   beginning, though unknown, created a court of appeal which presented
   itself as not only taking a second rank after the Lord himself, but as
   the medium through which alone the words of the Lord became the
   possession of Christendom, as he neither preached to the nations nor
   left writings. The importance of the twelve in the main body of the
   Church may at any rate be measured by the facts, that the personal
   activity of Jesus was confined to Palestine, that he left behind him
   neither a confession nor a doctrine, and that in this respect the
   tradition tolerated no more corrections. Attempts which were made in
   this direction, the fiction of a semi-Gentile origin of Christ, the
   denial of the Davidic Sonship, the invention of a correspondence
   between Jesus and Abgarus, meeting of Jesus with Greeks, and much else,
   belong only in part to the earliest period, and remained as really
   inoperative as they were uncertain (according to Clem. Alex., Jesus
   himself is the Apostle to the Jews; the twelve are the Apostles to the
   Gentiles in Euseb. H. E. VI. 14). The notion about the helve Apostles
   evangelising the world in accordance with the commission of Jesus, is
   consequently to be considered as the means by which the Gentile
   Christians got rid of the inconvenient fact of the merely local
   activity of Jesus. (Compare how Justin expresses himself about the
   Apostles: their going out into all the world is to him one of the main
   articles predicted in the Old Testament, Apol. 1. 39; compare also the
   Apology of Aristides, c. 2, and the passage of similar tenor in the
   Ascension of Isaiah, where the "adventus XII. discipulorum" is regarded
   as one of the fundamental facts of salvation, c. 3. 13, ed. Dillmann,
   p. 13, and a passage such as Iren. fragm. XXIX. in Harvey II., p. 494,
   where the parable about the grain of mustard seed is applied to the
   lo'gos apoura'nios, and the twelve Apostles; the Apostles are the
   branches uph' hon kla'don skepasthe'ntes oi pa'ntes os o'rnea upo`
   kalia`n suneltho'nta mete'labon tes ex auton proerchome'nes edodi'mou
   kai` epourani'ou trophes Hippol., de Antichr. 61. Orig c. Cels. III.
   28.) This means, as it was empty of contents, was very soon to prove
   the very most convenient instrument for establishing ever new
   historical connections, and legitimising the status quo in the
   communities. Finally, the whole catholic idea of tradition was rooted
   in that statement which was already, at the close of the first century,
   formulated by Clement of Rome (c. 42): oi apo'stoloi emin
   euengeli'sthesan apo` tou kuri'ou Iesou Christou, Iesous o christo`s
   apr tou theou exepo'mphthe. o christo`s oun apo` tou theou, kai` oi
   apo'stoloi apo` tou Christou; ege'nonto oun ampho'tera euta'ktos ek
   thele'matos theou k.t.l. Here, as in all similar statements which
   elevate the Apostles into the history of revelation, the unanimity of
   all the Apostles is always presupposed, so that the statement of Clem.
   Alex. (Strom. VII., 17, 108: mi'a e pa'nton ge'gone ton aposto'lon
   o'sper didaskali'a ou'tos de` kai` e para'dosis; see Tertull., de
   præscr. 32: "Apostoli non diversa inter se docuerent," Iren. alii),
   contains no innovation, but gives expression to an old idea. That the
   twelve unitedly proclaimed one and the same message, that they
   proclaimed it to the world, that they were chosen to this vocation by
   Christ, that the communities possess the witness of the Apostles as
   their rule of conduct (Excerp. ex Theod. 25. o'sper upo` ton zodi'on e
   ge'nesis dioikeitai, ou'tos upo` ton aposto'lon e anage'nnesis are
   authoritative theses which can be traced back as far as we have any
   remains of Gentile-Christian literature. It was thereby presupposed
   that the unanimous kerygma of the twelve Apostles, which the
   communities possess as kano`n tes parado'seos (1 Clem. 7), was public
   and accessible to all. Yet the idea does not seem to have been
   everywhere kept at a distance, that besides the kerygma a still deeper
   knowledge was transmitted by the Apostles, or by certain Apostles, to
   particular Christians who were specially gifted. Of course we have no
   direct evidence of this; but the connection in which certain Gnostic
   unions stood at the beginning with the communities developing
   themselves to Catholicism, and inferences from utterances of later
   writers (Clem. Alex. Tertull.), make it probable that this conception
   was present in the communities here and there even in the age of the
   so-called Apostolic Fathers. It may be definitely said that the
   peculiar idea of tradition (theo's--christos--oi do'deka
   aposto'loi--ekklesi'ai) in the Gentile Churches is very old, but that
   it was still limited in its significance at the beginning, and was
   threatened (1) by a wider conception of the idea "Apostle" (besides,
   the fact is important, that Asia Minor and Rome were the very places
   where a stricter idea of "Apostle" made its appearance: See my Edition
   of the Didache, p. 117); (2) by free prophets and teachers moved by the
   Spirit, who introduced new conceptions and rules, and whose word was
   regarded as the word of God; (3) by the assumption, not always
   definitely rejected, that besides the public tradition of the kerygma
   there was a secret tradition. That Paul, as a rule, was not included in
   this high estimate of the Apostles is shewn by this fact, among others,
   that the earlier Apocryphal Acts of the Apostles are much less occupied
   with his person than with the rest of the Apostles. The features of the
   old legends which make the Apostles in their deeds, their fate, nay,
   even in appearance as far as possible equal to the person of Jesus
   himself, deserve special consideration, (see, for example, the descent
   of the Apostles into hell in Herm. Sim. IX. 16); for it is just here
   that the fact above established, that the activity of the Apostles was
   to make up for the want of the activity of Jesus himself among the
   nations, stands clearly out. (See Acta Johannis ed. Zahn, p. 246: o
   eklexa'menos emas eis apostole`n ethnon, o ekpe'mpsas emas eis te`n
   oikoume'nen theo's, o deixas eauto`n dia` ton apostolon, also the
   remarkable declaration of Origen about the Chronicle [Hadrian], that
   what holds good of Christ, is in that Chronicle transferred to Peter;
   finally we may recall to mind the visions in which an Apostolic
   suddenly appears as Christ.) Between the judgment of value: emeis tou's
   aposto'lous apodecho'metha os Christo`n, and those creations of fancy
   in which the Apostles appear as gods and demigods, there is certainly a
   great interval; but it can be proved that there are stages lying
   between the extreme points. It is therefore permissible to call to mind
   here the oldest Apocryphal Acts of the Apostles, although they may have
   originated almost completely in Gnostic circles (see also the Pistis
   Sophia which brings a metaphysical theory to the establishment of the
   authority of the Apostles, p. 11, 14, see Texte u. Unters. VII. 2. p.
   61 ff.). Gnosticism here, as frequently elsewhere, is related to common
   Christianity, as excess progressing to the invention of a myth with a
   tendency, to a historical theorem determined by the effort to maintain
   one's own position, (cf. the article from the kerygma of Peter in Clem.
   Strom. VI. 6, 48: Exelexa'men umas dodeka mathepa`s, k.t.l., the
   introduction to the basal writing of the first 6 books of the Apostolic
   Constitutions, and the introduction to the Egyptian ritual, kata`
   ke'leusi'n tou kuri'ou umon, k.o`.l.). Besides, it must be admitted
   that the origin of the idea of tradition and its connection with the
   twelve, is obscure: what is historically reliable here has still to be
   investigated; even the work of Seufert (Der Urspr. u. d. Bedeutung des
   Apostolats in der christl. Kirche der ersten zwei Jahrhunderte, 1887)
   has not cleared up the dark points. We will, perhaps, get more light by
   following the important hint given by Weizäcker (Apost. Age, p. 13 ff.)
   that Peter was the first witness of the resurrection, and was called
   such in the kerygma of the communities (see 1 Cor. XV. 5: Luke XXIV.
   34). The twelve Apostles are also further called oi peri` to`n Petro`n
   (Mrc. fin. in L. Ign. ad Smyrn. 3; cf. Luke VIII. 45; Acts. II. 14;
   Gal. I. 18 f; 1 Cor. XV. 5), and it is a correct historical
   reminiscence when Chrysostom says (Hom. in Joh. 88), o Pe'tros
   e'kkritos en ton aposto'lon kai` pto'ma ton matheton kai` koruphe' tou
   so'rou. Now, as Peter was really in personal relation with important
   Gentile-Christian communities, that which held good of him, the
   recognized head and spokesman of the twelve, was perhaps transferred to
   these. One has finally to remember that besides the appeal to the
   twelve there was in the Gentile Churches an appeal to Peter and Paul
   (but not for the evangelic kerygma), which has a certain historical
   justification; cf. Gal. II. 8; 1 Cor. I. 12 f., IX. 5; I Clem. Ign. ad
   Rom. 4, and the numerous later passages. Paul in claiming equality with
   Peter, though Peter was the head and mouth of the twelve and had
   himself been active in mission work, has perhaps contributed most
   towards spreading the authority of the twelve. It is notable how rarely
   we find any special appeal to John in the tradition of the main body of
   the Church. For the middle of the 2nd century, the authority of the
   twelve Apostles may be expressed in the following statements: (1) They
   were missionaries for the world; (2) They ruled the Church and
   established Church Offices; (3) They guaranteed the true doctrine, (a)
   by the tradition going back to them, (b) by writings; (4) They are the
   ideals of Christian life; (5) They are also directly mediators of
   salvation--though this point is uncertain.

   [196] See Didache`, c. 1-10, with parallel passages.

   [197] Cf., for example, the first epistle of Clement to the Corinthians
   with the Shepherd of Hermas. Both documents originated in Rome.

   [198] Compare how dogmatic and ethical elements are inseparably united
   in the Shepherd, in first and second Clement, as well as in Polycarp
   and Justin.

   [199] Note the hymnal parts of the Revelation of John, the great prayer
   with which the first epistle of Clement closes, the "carmen dicere
   Christo quasi deo" reported by Pliny, the eucharist prayer in the
   Didache`, the hymn 1 Tim. III. 16, the fragments from the prayers which
   Justin quotes, and compare with these the declaration of the anonymous
   writer in Euseb. H. E. V. 28. 5, that the belief of the earliest
   Christians in the Deity of Christ might be proved from the old
   Christian hymns and odes. In the epistles of Ignatius the theology
   frequently consists of an aimless stringing together of articles
   manifestly originating in hymns and the cultus.

   [200] The prophet and teacher express what the Spirit of God suggest to
   them. Their word is therefore God's word, and their writings, in so far
   as they apply to the whole of Christendom, are inspired, holy writings.
   Further, not only does Acts XV. 22 f. exhibit the formula; e'doxen to
   pneu'mati to agi'o kai` emin (see similar passages in the Acts), but
   the Roman writings also appeal to the Holy Spirit (1 Clem. 63. 2):
   likewise Barnabas, Ignatius, etc. Even in the controversy about the
   baptism of heretics a Bishop gave his vote with the formula "secundum
   motum animi mei et spiritus sancti" (Cypr. Opp. ed. Hartel. I. p. 457).

   [201] The so-called Chiliasm--the designation is unsuitable and
   misleading--is found wherever the Gospel is not yet Hellenised (see,
   for example, Barn. 4. 15; Hermas; 2 Clem.; Papias [Euseb. III. 39];
   Didache`, 10. 16; Apoc. Petri; Justin, Dial. 32, 51, 80, 82, 110, 139;
   Cerinthus), and must be regarded as a main element of the Christian
   preaching (see my article "Millenium" in the Encycl. Brit.). In it lay
   not the least of the power of Christianity in the first century, and
   the means whereby it entered the Jewish propaganda in the Empire and
   surpassed it. The hopes springing out of Judaism were at first but
   little modified, that is, only so far as the substitution of the
   Christian communities for the nation of Israel made modification
   necessary. In all else, even the details of the Jewish hopes of the
   future were retained, and the extra-canonical Jewish Apocalypses (Esra,
   Enoch, Baruch, Moses, etc.) were diligently read alongside of Daniel.
   Their contents were in part joined on to sayings of Jesus, and they
   served as models for similar productions (here, therefore, an enduring
   connection with the Jewish religion is very plain). In the Christian
   hopes of the future, as in the Jewish eschatology, may be distinguished
   essential and accidental, fixed and fluid elements To the former belong
   (1) the notion of a final fearful conflict with the powers of the world
   which is just about to break out to` te'leion ska'ndalon e'ngiken, (2)
   belief in the speedy return of Christ, (3) the conviction that after
   conquering the secular power (this was variously conceived, as God's
   Ministers, as "that which restrains"--2 Thess. II. 6, as a pure kingdom
   of Satan; see the various estimates in Justin, Melito, Irenæus and
   Hyppolytus), Christ will establish a glorious kingdom on the earth, and
   will raise the saints to share in that kingdom, and (4) that he will
   finally judge all men. To the fluid elements belong the notions of the
   Antichrist, or of the secular power culminating in the Antichrist, as
   well as notions about the place, the extent, and the duration of
   Christ's glorious kingdom. But it is worthy of special note, that
   Justin regarded the belief that Christ will set up his kingdom in
   Jerusalem, and that it will endure for 1000 years, as a necessary
   element of orthodoxy, though he confesses he knew Christians who did
   not share this belief, while they did not, like the pseudo-Christians,
   reject also the resurrection of the body (the promise of Montanus that
   Christ's kingdom would be let down at Pepuza and Tymion is a thing by
   itself, and answers to the other promises and pretensions of Montanus).
   The resurrection of the body is expressed in the Roman Symbol, while,
   very notably, the hope of Christ's earthly kingdom is not there
   mentioned, (see above, p. 157). The great inheritance which the Gentile
   Christian communities received from Judaism, is the eschatological
   hopes, along with the Monotheism assured by revelation and belief in
   providence. The law as a national law was abolished. The Old Testament
   became a new book in the hands of the Gentile Christians. On the
   contrary, the eschatological hopes in all their details, and with all
   the deep shadows which they threw on the state and public life, were at
   first received, and maintained themselves in wide circles pretty much
   unchanged, and only succumbed in some of their details just as in
   Judaism--to the changes which resulted from the constant change of the
   political situation. But these hopes were also destined in great
   measure to pass away after the settlement of Christianity on
   Græco-Roman soil. We may set aside the fact that they did not occupy
   the foreground in Paul, for we do not know whether this was of
   importance for the period that followed. But that Christ would set up
   the kingdom in Jerusalem, and that it would be an earthly kingdom with
   sensuous enjoyments--these and other notions contend, on the one hand,
   with the vigorous antijudaism of the communities, and on the other,
   with the moralistic spiritualism, in the pure carrying out of which the
   Gentile Christians, in the East at least, increasingly recognised the
   essence of Christianity. Only the vigorous world-renouncing enthusiasm
   which did not permit the rise of moralistic spiritualism and mysticism,
   and the longing for a time of joy and dominion that was born of it,
   protected for a long time a series of ideas which corresponded to the
   spiritual disposition of the great multitude of converts, only at times
   of special oppression. Moreover, the Christians, in opposition to
   Judaism, were, as a rule, instructed to obey magistrates, whose
   establishment directly contradicted the judgment of the state contained
   in the Apocalypses. In such a conflict, however, that judgment
   necessarily conquers at last, which makes as little change as possible
   in the existing forms of life. A history of the gradual attenuation and
   subsidence of eschatological hopes in the II.-IV. centuries can only be
   written in fragments. They have rarely--at best, by fits and
   starts--marked out the course. On the contrary, if I may say so, they
   only gave the smoke: for the course was pointed out by the abiding
   elements of the Gospel, trust in God and the Lord Christ, the
   resolution to a holy life, and a firm bond of brotherhood. The quiet,
   gradual change in which the eschatological hopes passed away, fell into
   the background, or lost important parts, was, on the other hand, a
   result of deep-reaching changes in the faith and life of Christendom.
   Chiliasm as a power was broken up by speculative mysticism, and on that
   account very much later in the West than in the East. But speculative
   mysticism has its centre in christology. In the earliest period, this,
   as a theory, belonged more to the defence of religion than to religion
   itself. Ignatius alone was able to reflect on that transference of
   power from Christ which Paul had experienced. The disguises in which
   the apocalyptic eschatological prophecies were set forth, belonged in
   part to the form of this literature, (in so far as one could easily be
   given the lie if he became too plain, or in so far as the prophet
   really saw the future only in large outline), partly it had to be
   chosen in order not to give political offence. See Hippol., comm. in
   Daniel (Georgiades, p. 49, 51: noein ophei'lomen ta` kata` kairo`n
   sumbai'nonta kai` eidotas siopan); by above all, Constantine, orat. ad.
   s. coetum 19, on some verses of Virgil which are interpreted in a
   Christian sense," but that none of the rulers in the capital might be
   able to accuse their author of violating the laws of the state with his
   poetry, or of destroying the traditional ideas of the procedure about
   the gods, he concealed the truth under a veil." That holds good also of
   the Apocalyptists and the poets of the Christian Sibylline sayings.

   [202] The hope of the resurrection of the body (1 Clem. 26. 3:
   anaste'seis te`n sa'rka mou tau'ten. Herm. Sim. V. 7. 2: ble'pe me'pote
   anabe epi` te`n kardi'an sou te`n sa'rka sou tau'ten phtharte`n einai.
   Barn. 5. 6 f.: 21. 1: 2 Clem. 1: kai` me' lege'to tis umon o'ti au'te e
   sa`rx ou kri'netai oude` ani'statai. Polyc. Ep. 7. 2: Justin, Dial. 80
   etc.,) finds its place originally in the hope of a share in the
   glorious kingdom of Christ. It therefore disappears or is modified
   wherever that hope itself falls into the background. But it finally
   asserted itself throughout and became of independent importance, in a
   new structure of eschatological expectations, in which it attained the
   significance of becoming the specific conviction of Christian faith.
   With the hope of the resurrection of the body was originally connected
   the hope of a happy life in easy blessedness, under green trees in
   magnificent fields with joyous feeding flocks, and flying angels
   clothed in white. One must read the Revelation of Peter, the Shepherd,
   or the Acts of Perpetua and Felicitas, in order to see how entirely the
   fancy of many Christians, and not merely of those who were uncultured,
   dwelt in a fairyland in which they caught sight now of the Ancient of
   Days, and now of the Youthful Shepherd, Christ. The most fearful
   delineations of the torments of Hell formed the reverse side to this.
   We now know, through the Apocalypse of Peter, how old these
   delineations are.

   [203] The perfect knowledge of the truth and eternal life are connected
   in the closest way (see p. 144, note 1), because the Father of truth is
   also Prince of life (see Diognet. 12: oude` ga'r xoe` a'neu gno'seos
   oude` gnosis asphale`s a'neu zoes alethous; dio` plesion eka'teron
   pephu'teutai, see also what follows). The classification is a Hellenic
   one, which has certainly penetrated also into Palestinian Jewish
   theology. It may be reckoned among the great intuitions, which in the
   fulness of the times, united the religious and reflective minds of all
   nations. The Pauline formula, "Where there is forgiveness of sin, there
   also is life and salvation", had for centuries no distinct history. But
   the formula, "Where there is truth, perfect knowledge, there also is
   eternal life", has had the richest history in Christendom from the
   beginning. Quite apart from John, it is older than the theology of the
   Apologists (see, for example, the Supper prayer in the Didache, 9. 10,
   where there is no mention of the forgiveness of sin, but thanks are
   given, upe`r tes gno'seos kai` pi'steos kai` athanasi'as hes egno'risen
   emin o theo`s dia` Iesou, or upe`r tes zoes kai` gno'seos, and 1 Clem.
   36. 2: dia` tou'to ethe'lesen o despo'tes tes athana'tou gno'seos emas
   geu'sasthai). It is capable of a very manifold content, and has never
   made its way in the Church without reservations, but so far as it has
   we may speak of a hellenising of Christianity. This is shewn most
   clearly in the fact that the athanasi'a, identical with aphtharsi'a and
   zoe` aio'nios, as is proved by their being often interchanged,
   gradually supplanted the basilei'a tou theou (christou) and thrust it
   out of the sphere of religious intuition and hope into that of
   religious speech. It should also be noted at the same time, that in the
   hope of eternal life which is bestowed with the knowledge of the truth,
   the resurrection of the body is by no means with certainty included. It
   is rather added to it (see above) from another series of ideas.
   Conversely, the words zoe`n aio'nion were first added to the words
   sarko`s ana'stasin in the western Symbols at a comparatively late
   period, while in the prayers they are certainly very old.

   [204] Even the assumption of such a remission is fundamentally in
   contradiction with moralism; but that solitary remission of sin was not
   called in question, was rather regarded as distinctive of the new
   religion, and was established by an appeal to the omnipotence and
   special goodness of God, which appears just in the calling of sinners.
   In this calling, grace as grace is exhausted (Barn. 5. 9; 2 Clem. 2.
   4-7). But this grace itself seems to be annulled, inasmuch as the sins
   committed before baptism were regarded as having been committed in a
   state of ignorance (Tertull. de bapt. I.: delicta pristinæ cæcitatis),
   ou account of which it seemed worthy of God to forgive them, that is,
   to accept the repentance which followed on the ground of the new
   knowledge. So considered, everything, in point of fact, amounts to the
   gracious gift of knowledge, and the memory of the saying, "Jesus
   receiveth sinners", is completely obscured. But the tradition of this
   saying and many like it, and above all, the religious instinct, where
   it was more powerfully stirred, did not permit a consistent development
   of that moralistic conception. See for this, Hermas. Sim. V. 7. 3:
   peri` ton prote'ron agnoema'ton to theo mono dunato`n i'asin dounai;
   autou ga`r esti pasa exousi'a. Præd. Petri ap. Clem. Strom. VI. 6. 48:
   o'sa en agnoi'a tis umon epoi'esen me` eedo`s saphos to`n theo`n, ea`n
   epignou`s metanoe'se, ta'nta auto aphethe'setai ta` amarte'mata.
   Aristides, Apol. 17: "The Christians offer prayers (for the unconverted
   Greeks) that they may be converted from their error. But when one of
   them is converted he is ashamed before the Christians of the works
   which he has done. And he confesses to God, saying: I have done these
   things in ignorance.' And he cleanses his heart, and his sins are
   forgiven him, because he had done them in ignorance, in the earlier
   period when he mocked and jeered at the true knowledge of the
   Christians." Exactly the same in Tertull. de pudic. 10. init. The
   statement of this same writer (1. c. fin), "Cessatio delicti radix est
   veniæ, ut venia sit pænitentiæ fructus", is a pregnant expression of
   the conviction of the earliest Gentile Christians.

   [205] This idea appears with special prominence in the Epistle of
   Barnabas (see 6. II. 14); the new formation (anaplassein) results
   through the forgiveness of sin. In the moralistic view the forgiveness
   of sin is the result of the renewal that is spontaneously brought about
   on the ground of knowledge shewing itself in penitent feeling.

   [206] Barn. 2. 6, and my notes on the passage.

   [207] James I. 25.

   [208] Hermas. Sim. VIII. 3. 2; Justin Dial. II. 43; Praed. Petri in
   Clem., Strom. I. 29. 182; II. 15. 68.

   [209] Didache, c I., and my notes on the passage (Prolegg. p. 45 f.).

   [210] The concepts epangeli'a, gnosis, no'mos, form the Triad on which
   the later catholic conception of Christianity is based, though it can
   he proved to have been in existence at an earlier period. That pi'stis
   must everywhere take the lead was undoubted, though we must not think
   of the Pauline idea of pi'stis. When the Apostolic Fathers reflect upon
   faith, which, however, happens only incidentally, they mean a holding
   for true of a sum of holy traditions, and obedience to them, along with
   the hope that their consoling contents will yet be fully revealed. But
   Ignatius speaks like a Christian who knows what he possesses in faith
   in Christ, that is, in confidence in him. In Barn. I.: Polyc. Ep. 2, we
   find "faith, hope love"; in Ignatius, "faith and love". Tertullian, in
   an excellent exposition, has shewn how far patience is a temper
   corresponding to Christian faith (see besides the Epistle of James).

   [211] See Lipsius De Clementis. R. ep ad. Cor. priore disquis. 1855. It
   would be in point of method inadmissible to conclude from the fact that
   in 1 Clem. Pauline formulæ are relatively most faithfully produced,
   that Gentile Christianity generally understood Pauline theology at
   first, but gradually lost this understanding in the course of two
   generations.

   [212] Formally: tere'sate te`n sa'rka agne`n kai` te`n sphragida
   a'spilon (2 Clem. 8. 6.)

   [213] Hermas (Mand. IV. 3) and Justin presuppose it. Hermas of course
   sought and found a way of meeting the results of that idea which were
   threatening the Church with decimation; but he did not question the
   idea itself. Because Christendom is a community of saints which has in
   its midst the sure salvation, all its members--this is the necessary
   inference--must lead a sinless life.

   [214] The formula, "righteousness by faith alone," was really repressed
   in the second century; but it could not he entirely destroyed: see my
   Essay, "Gesch. d. Seligkeit allein durch den Glauben in der alten K."
   Ztsch. f. Theol, u. Kirche. I. pp. 82-105.

   [215] The only thorough discussion of the use of the Old Testament by
   an Apostolic Father, and of its authority, that we possess, is Wrede's
   "Untersuchungen zum 1 Clementsbrief" (1891). Excellent preliminary
   investigations, which, however, are not everywhere quite reliable, may
   be found in Hatch's Essays in Biblical Greek, 1889. Hatch has taken up
   again the hypothesis of earlier scholars, that there were very probably
   in the first and second centuries systematised extracts from the Old
   Testament (see pp. 203-214). The hypothesis is not yet quite establised
   (see Wrede, above work, p. 65), but yet it is hardly to be rejected.
   The Jewish catechetical and missionary instruction in the Diaspora
   needed such collections, and their existence seem to be proved by the
   Christian Apologies and the Sybilline books.

   [216] It is an extremely important fact that the words of the Lord were
   quoted and applied in their literal sense (that is chiefly for the
   statement of Christian morality) by Ecclesiastical authors, almost
   without exception. up to and inclusive of Justin. It was different with
   the theologians of the age, that is the Gnostics, and the Fathers from
   Irenæus.

   [217] Justin was not the first to do so, for it had already been done
   by the so-called Barnabas (see especially c. 13) and others. On the
   proofs from prophecy see my Texte und Unters. Bd. I. 3. pp. 56-74. The
   passage in the Praed. Petri (Clem. Strom. VI. 15. 128) is very
   complete: Emeis anapti'xantes ta`s bi'blous a`s ei'chomen ton
   propheton, a` me`n dia` parabolon a` de` dia` ainigma'ton e de`
   authentiko; kai` autolexei' to`n Christo`n Iesoun onomazo'nton, eu`rmen
   kai` te`n parousi'an autou kai` to`n thanaton kai` to`n stauro`n kai`
   ta`s loipa's kola'seis pa'sas, o`sas epoi'esan auto oi Ioudaioi, kai`
   te`n e'gersin kai` te`n eis ouranou`s ana'lepsin pro` tou Hierso'luma
   krithenai, katho`s ege'grapto tauta pa'nta a` e'dei auto`n pathein kai`
   met' auto`n a` e'stai; tauta oun epigno'ntes episteu'samen to theo dia`
   ton gegramme'non eis auto`n. With the help of the Old Testament the
   teachers dated back the Christian religion to the beginning of the
   human race, and joined the preparations for the founding of the
   Christian community with the creation of the world. The Apologists were
   not the first to do so, for Barnabas and Hermas, and before these,
   Paul, the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and others had already
   done the same. This was undoubtedly to the cultured classes one of the
   most impressive articles in the missionary preaching. The Christian
   religion in this way got a hold which the others--with the exception of
   the Jewish--lacked. But for that very reason, we must guard against
   turning it into a formula, that the Gentile Christians had comprehended
   the Old Testament essentially through the scheme of prediction and
   fulfilment. The Old Testament is certainly the book of predictions, but
   for that very reason the complete revelation of God which needs no
   additions and excludes subsequent changes. The historical fulfilment
   only proves to the world the truth of those revelations. Even the
   scheme of shadow and reality is yet entirely out of sight. In such
   circumstances the question necessarily arises, as to what independent
   meaning and significance Christ's appearance could have, apart from
   that confirmation of the Old Testament. But, apart from the Gnostics, a
   surprisingly long time passed before this question was raised, that is
   to say, it was not raised till the time of Irenæus.

   [218] See Didache`, 8.

   [219] See the Revelation of John II. 9: III. 9; but see also the "Jews"
   in the Gospels of John and Peter. The latter exonerates Pilate almost
   completely, and makes the Jews and Herod responsible for the
   crucifixion.

   [220] See Barn. 9. 4. In the second epistle of Clement the Jews are
   called: "oi dokountes e'chein theo`n," cf. Præd. Petri in Clem. Strom.
   VI. 5. 41: mede` kata` Ioudai'ous se'besthe; kai` ga`r ekeinoi mo'noi
   oio'menoi to`n theo`n gigno'skein ouk epi'stantai, latreu'ontes
   ange'lois kai` archange'lois, meni` kai` sele'ne, kai` ea`n me` sele'ne
   phane, sa'bbaton ouk agousi to` leko'menon proton, oude` geomeni'an
   a'gousin, oude` a'zuma, oude` eorte'n, oude` mega'len eme'ran. (Cf.
   Diognet. 34.) Even Justin does not judge the Jews more favourably than
   the Gentiles, but less favourably; see Apol. I. 37, 39, 43, 44, 47, 53,
   60. On the other hand, Aristides (Apol. c. 14, especially in the Syrian
   text) is much more friendly disposed to the Jews and recognises them
   more. The words of Pionius against and about the Jews in the "Acta
   Pionii," c. 4, are very instructive.

   [221] Barn. 4. 6. f.: 14. 1. f. The author of Præd. Petri must have had
   a similar view of the matter.

   [222] Justin in the Dialogue with Trypho.

   [223] Barn. 9. f. It is a thorough misunderstanding of Barnabas'
   position towards the Old Testament to suppose it possible to pass over
   his expositions, c. 6-10, as oddities and caprices, and put them aside
   as indifferent or unmethodical. There is nothing here unmethodical, and
   therefore nothing arbitrary. Barnabas' strictly spiritual idea of God,
   and the conviction that all (Jewish) ceremonies are of the devil,
   compel his explanations. These are so little ingenious conceits to
   Barnabas that, but for them, he would have been forced to give up the
   Old Testament altogether. The account, for example, of Abraham having
   circumcised his slaves would have forced Barnabas to annul the whole
   authority of the Old Testament if he had not succeeded in giving it a
   particular interpretation. He does this by combining other passages of
   Genesis with the narrative, and then finding in it no longer
   circumcision, but a prediction of the crucified Christ.

   [224] Barn 9. 6: all' ereis; kai` me`n perite'tmetai o lao`s eis
   sphragida.

   [225] See the expositions of Justin in the Dial. (especially, 16, 18,
   20, 30, 40-46); Von Engelhardt, "Christenthum Justin's," p. 429. ff.
   Justin has the three estimates side by side. (1) That the ceremonial
   law was a pædagogic measure of God with reference to a stiff-necked
   people prone to idolatry. (2) That it--like circumcision--was to make
   the people conspicuous for the execution of judgment, according to the
   Divine appointment. (3) That in the ceremonial legal worship of the
   Jews is exhibited the special depravity and wickedness of the nation.
   But Justin conceived the Decalogue as the natural law of reason, and
   therefore definitely distinguished it from the ceremonial law.

   [226] See Ztschr. für K. G, I., p. 330 f.

   [227] This is the unanimous opinion of all writers of the
   post-Apostolic age. Christians are the true Israel; and therefore all
   Israel's predicates of honour belong to them. They are the twelve
   tribes, and therefore Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are the Fathers of the
   Christians. This idea, about which there was no wavering, cannot
   everywhere be traced back to the Apostle Paul. The Old Testament men of
   God were in certain measure Christians. See Ignat. Magn. 8. 2: oi
   prophetai kata` Christo`n Iesoun e'zesan.

   [228] God was naturally conceived and represented as corporeal by
   uncultured Christians, though not by these alone, as the later
   controversies prove (e.g., Orig. contra Melito; see also Tertull. De
   anima). In the case of the cultured, the idea of a corporeality of God
   may be traced back to Stoic influences; in the case of the uncultured,
   popular ideas co-operated with the sayings of the Old Testament
   literally understood, and the impression of the Apocalyptic images.

   [229] See Joh. IV. 22; emeis proskunoumen o` oi'damen. I Clem. 59. 3.
   4; Herm. Mand. I.; Præd. Petri in Clem. Strom. VI. 5. 9.: ginoskete
   o'ti heis theo`s estin o's arche`n pa'nton epoi'esen, kai` te'lous
   exousi'an e'chon. Aristides Apol. 15 (Syr.): "The Christians know and
   believe in God, the creator of heaven and of earth." Chap. 16:
   "Christians as men who know God, pray to him for things which it
   becomes him to give and them to receive." (Similarly Justin.) From very
   many old Gentile Christian writings we hear it as a cry of joy. "We
   know God the Almighty; the night of blindness is past" (see, e.g., 2
   Clem. c. 1). God is despo'tes, a designation which is very frequently
   used (it is rare in the New Testament). Still more frequently do we
   find ku'rios. As the Lord and Creator, God is also called the Father
   (of the world) so 1 Clem. 19. 2: o pate`r kai` kti'stes tou su'mpantos
   ko'smou. 35. 3: demiourgo`s kai` pater ton aio'non. This use of the
   name Father for the supreme God was, as is well known, familiar to the
   Greeks, but the Christians alone were in earnest with the name. The
   creation out of nothing was made decidedly prominent by Hermas, see
   Vis. I. 1. 6, and my notes on the passage. In the Christian Apocrypha,
   in spite of the vividness of the idea of God, the angels play the same
   rôle as in the Jewish, and as in the current Jewish speculations.
   According to Hermas, e.g., all God's actions are mediated by special
   angels, nay, the Son of God himself is represented by a special angel,
   viz., Michael, and works by him. But outside the Apocalypses there
   seems to have been little interest in the good angels.

   [230] See, for example, 1 Clem. 20.

   [231] This is frequent in the Apologists; see also Diogn. 10. 2: but
   Hermas, Vis. II. 4. I (see also Cels. ap. Orig. IV. 23) says: dia` te`n
   ekklesi'an o ko'smos katerti'sthe (cf. I. 1. 6. and my notes on the
   passage). Aristides (Apol. 16) declares it as his conviction that "the
   beautiful things," that is, the world, are maintained only for the sake
   of Christians; see, besides, the words (I. c.); "I have no doubt, that
   the earth continues to exist (only) on account of the prayers of the
   Christians." Even the Jewish Apocalyptists wavered between the formulæ,
   that the world was created for the sake of man, and for the sake of the
   Jewish nation. The two are not mutually exclusive. The statement in the
   Eucharistic prayer of Didache, 9. 3, e'ktisas ta` pa'nta e'neken tou
   ono'matos sou, is singular.

   [232] God is named the Father, (1) in relation to the Son (very
   frequent), (2) as Father of the world (see above), (3) as the merciful
   one who has proved his goodness, declared his will, and called
   Christians to be his sons (1 Clem. 23. 1; 29, 1; 2 Clem. 1. 4; 8. 4;
   10. 1; 14. 1; see the index to Zahn's edition of the Ignatian Epistles;
   Didache. 1. 5; 9. 2. 3; 10. 2.) The latter usage is not very common; it
   is entirely wanting, for example, in the Epistle of Barnabas. Moreover,
   God is also called pete`r tes alethei'as, as the source of all truth (2
   Clem. 3. 1: 20, 5: theo`s t. alethei'as). The identity of the Almighty
   God of creation with the merciful God of redemption is the tacit
   presupposition of all declarations about God, in the case of both the
   cultured and the uncultured. It is also frequently expressed (see,
   above all, the Pastoral Epistles), most frequently by Hermas (Vis. I.
   3. 4), so far as the declaration about the creation of the world is
   there united in the closest way with that about the creation of the
   Holy Church. As to the designation of God in the Roman Symbol, as the
   "Father Almighty," that threefold exposition just given may perhaps
   allow it.

   [233] The present dominion of evil demons, or of one evil demon, was
   just as generally presupposed as man's need of redemption, which was
   regarded as a result of that dominion. The conviction that the world's
   course (the politei'a en to kosmo: the Latins afterwards used the word
   Sæculum) is determined by the devil, and that the dark one (Barnabas)
   has dominion, comes out most prominently where eschatological hopes
   obtain expression. But where salvation is thought of as knowledge and
   immortality, it is ignorance and frailty from which men are to be
   delivered. We may here also assume with certainty that these, in the
   last instance, were traced back by the writers to the action of demons.
   But it makes a very great difference whether the judgment was ruled by
   fancy which saw a real devil everywhere active, or whether, in
   consequence of theoretic reflection, it based the impression of
   universal ignorance and mortality on the assumption of demons who have
   produced them. Here again we must note the two series of ideas which
   intertwine and struggle with each other in the creeds of the earliest
   period; the traditional religious series, resting on a fanciful view of
   history--it is essentially identical with the Jewish Apocalyptic: see,
   for example, Barn. 4--and the empiric moralistic (see 2 Clem. 1. 2-7,
   as a specially valuable discussion, or Præd. Petri in Clem. Strom. VI.
   5, 39, 40), which abides by the fact that men have fallen into
   ignorance, weakness and death (2 Clem. 1. 6: o bi'os emon o'los a'llo
   oude`n en ei me` tha'natos). But, perhaps, in no other point, with the
   exception of the ana'stasis sarko`s, has the religious conception
   remained so tenacious as in this, and it decidedly prevailed,
   especially in the epoch with which we are now dealing. Its tenacity may
   be explained, among other things, by the living impression of the
   polytheism that surrounded the communities on every side. Even where
   the national gods were looked upon as dead idols--and that was perhaps
   the rule, see Præd. Petri, I. c.; 2 Clem. 3. 1; Didache, 6--one could
   not help assuming that there were mighty demons operative behind them,
   as otherwise the frightful power of idolatry could not be explained.
   But, on the other hand, even a calm reflection and a temper unfriendly
   to all religious excess must have welcomed the assumption of demons who
   sought to rule the world and man. For by means of this assumption,
   which was wide-spread even among the Greeks, humanity seemed to be
   unburdened, and the presupposed capacity for redemption could therefore
   be justified in its widest range. From the assumption that the need of
   redemption was altogether due to ignorance and mortality, there was but
   one step, or little more than one step, to the assumption that the need
   of redemption was grounded in a condition of man for which he was not
   responsible, that is, in the flesh. But this step, which would have led
   either to dualism (heretical Gnosis) or to the abolition of the
   distinction between natural and moral, was not taken within the main
   body of the Church. The eschatological series of ideas with its thesis
   that death, evil and sin entered into humanity at a definite historical
   moment, when the demons took possession of the world, drew a limit
   which was indeed overstepped at particular points, but was in the end
   respected. We have therefore the remarkable fact that, on the one hand,
   early Christian (Jewish) eschatology called forth and maintained a
   disposition in which the Kingdom of God and that of the world (Kingdom
   of the devil) were felt to be absolutely opposed (practical dualism),
   while, on the other hand, it rejected theoretic dualism. Redemption
   through Christ, however, was conceived in the eschatological
   Apocalyptic series of ideas as essentially something entirely in the
   future, for the power of the devil was not broken, but rather increased
   (or it was virtually broken in believers and increased in unbelievers)
   by the first advent of Christ, and therefore the period between the
   first and second advent of Christ belongs to houtos o aio'n (see Barn.
   2. 4; Herm. Sim. I; 2. Clem. 6. 3: e'stin de` houtos o aio`n kai` o
   me'llon du'o echthroi'; houtos le'gei moichei'an kai` phthora`n kai`
   philargouri'an kai` apa'ten, ekeinos de` tou'tois aposta'ssetai; Ignat.
   Magn. 5. 2). For that very reason, the second coming of Christ must, as
   a matter of course, be at hand, for only through it could the first
   advent get its full value. The painful impression that nothing had been
   outwardly changed by Christ's first advent (the heathen, moreover,
   pointed this out in mockery to the suffering Christians), must be
   destroyed by the hope of his speedy coming again. But the first advent
   had its independent significance in the series of ideas which regarded
   Christ as redeeming man from ignorance and mortality; for the knowledge
   was already given and the gift of immortality could only of course be
   dispensed after this life was ended, but then immediately. The hope of
   Christ's return was therefore a superfluity, but was not felt or set
   aside as such, because there was still a lively expectation of Christ's
   earthly Kingdom.

   [234] No other name adhered to Christ so firmly as that of ku'rios: see
   a specially clear evidence of this, Novatian de trinit. 30, who argues
   against the Adoptian and Modalistic heretics thus: "Et in primis illud
   retorquendum in istos, qui duorum nobis deorum controversiam facere
   præsumunt. Scriptum est, quod negare non possunt: "Quoniam unus est
   dominus." De Christo ergo quid sentiunt? Dominum esse, aut ilium omnino
   non esse? Sed dominum illum omnino non dubitant. Ergo si vera est
   illorum ratiocinatio, jam duo sunt domini." On ku'rios = despotes, see
   above, p. 119, note.

   [235] Specially instructive examples of this are found in the Epistle
   of Barnabas and the second Epistle of Clement. Clement (Ep. 1) speaks
   only of faith in God.

   [236] See 1 Clem. 59--61. Didache', c. 9. 10. Yet Novatian (de trinit.
   14) exactly reproduces the old idea, "Si homo tantummodo Christus, cur
   homo in orationibus mediator invocatur, cum invocatio hominis ad
   præstandam salutem inefficax judicetur." As the Mediator, High Priest,
   etc., Christ is of course always and every-where invoked by the
   Christians, but such invocations are one thing and formal prayer
   another. The idea of the congruence of God's will of salvation with the
   revelation of salvation which took place through Christ, was further
   continued in the idea of the congruence of this revelation of salvation
   with the universal preaching of the twelve chosen Apostles (see above,
   p. 162 ff.), the root of the Catholic principle of tradition. But the
   Apostles never became "oi ku'rioi," though the concepts didache`,
   (lo'gos) ku'riou, didache` (ke'rugma) ton aposto'lon were just as
   interchangeable as lo'gos theou and lo'gos christou. The full formula
   would be lo`gos theou dia` Iesou Christou dia` ton aposto'lon. But as
   the subjects introduced by ara are chosen and perfect media, religious
   usage permitted the abbreviation.

   [237] In the epistle of Barnabas "Jesus Christ" and "Christ" appear
   each once, but "Jesus" twelve times: in the Didache "Jesus Christ"
   once, "Jesus" three times. Only in the second half of the second
   century, if I am not mistaken, did the designation "Jesus Christ," or
   "Christ," become the current one, more and more crowding out the simple
   "Jesus." Yet the latter designation--and this is not
   surprising--appears to have continued longest in the regular prayers.
   It is worthy of note that in the Shepherd there is no mention either of
   the name Jesus or of Christ. The Gospel of Peter also says o ku'rios
   where the other Gospels use these names.

   [238] See 1 Clem. 64: o theo`s, o eklexa'menos to`n ku'rion Iesoun
   Christo`n kai` emas di' autou eis lao`n periou'sion don. k.t.l. (It is
   instructive to note that wherever the idea of election is expressed,
   the community is immediately thought of, for in point of fact the
   election of the Messiah has no other aim than to elect or call the
   community; Barn. 3. 6: o lao`s o'n etoi'masen en to egapemo'no autou.)
   Herm. Sim. V. 2: eklexa'menos doulo'n tina pisto` kai` eua'reston. V.
   6. 5. Justin, Dial. 48: me` arneisthai o'ti outo's estin o Christo`s,
   ea`n phai'netai os a'nthropos ex anthro'pon gennethei`s kai` ekloge
   geno'menos eis to` Christo`n einai apodeiknu'etai.

   [239] See Barn. 14. 5: Iesous eis touto etoimasthe, i'na . . . . emas
   lutrosa'menos ek tou sko'tous dia'thetai en emin diathe'ken lo'go. The
   same word concerning the Church, 1. c. 3. 6. and 5. 7: auto`s eauto
   to`n lao`n to`n kaino`n etoima'zon. 14. 6.

   [240] "Angel" is a very old designation for Christ (see Justin's Dial.)
   which maintained itself up to the Nicean controversy, and is expressly
   claimed for him in Novatian's treatise "de trinit." 11. 25 ff. (the
   word was taken from Old Testament passages which were applied to
   Christ). As a rule, however, it is not to be understood as a
   designation of the nature, but of the office of Christ as such, though
   the matter was never very clear. There were Christians who used it as a
   designation of the nature, and from the earliest times we find this
   idea contradicted. (See the Apoc. Sophoniæ, ed Stern, 1886, IV.
   fragment, p. 10: "He appointed no Angel to come to us, nor Archangel,
   nor any power, but he transformed himself into a man that he might come
   to us for our deliverance." Cf. the remarkable parallel, ep. ad. Diagn.
   7. 2: . . . . ou, katha'per a'n tis eika'seien a`nthropos, upere'ten
   tina` pe'mpsas e` a'ngelon e` a'rchonta e` tina ton diepo'nton ta`
   epi'geia e` tina ton pepisteume'non ta`s en ouranois dioike'seis, all'
   auto`n to`n techni'ten kai` demiourgo`n ton o'lon, k.t.l.) Yet it never
   got the length of a great controversy, and as the Logos doctrine
   gradually made way, the designation "Angel" became harmless and then
   vanished.

   [241] Pais (after Isaiah): this designation, frequently united with
   Iesous and with the adjectives a'gios and egapeme'nos (see Barn. 3. 6:
   4. 3: 4. 8: Valent. ap. Clem. Alex, Strom. VI. 6. 52, and the Ascensio
   Isaiæ), seems to have been at the beginning a usual one. It sprang
   undoubtedly from the Messianic circle of ideas, and at its basis lies
   the idea of election. It is very interesting to observe how it was
   gradually put into the background and finally abolished. It was kept
   longest in the liturgical prayers: see 1 Clem. 59. 2; Barn. 61: 9. 2;
   Acts iii. 13. 26; iv. 27. 30; Didache, 9. 2. 3; Mart. Polyc. 14. 20;
   Act. Pauli et Theclæ, 17. 24; Sibyl. I. v. 324, 331, 364; Diogn. 8, 9,
   10: o agapeto`s pais, 9. I; also Ep. Orig. ad Afric. init; Clem. Strom.
   VII. 1. 4: o monogene`s pais, and my note on Barn. 6. 1. In the Didache
   (9. 2) Jesus as well as David is in one statement called "Servant of
   God." Barnabas, who calls Christ the "Beloved," uses the same
   expression for the Church (4. 1. 9); see also Ignat. ad Smyrn. inscr.

   [242] See the old Roman Symbol and Acts X. 42; 2 Tim. IV. 1; Barn. 7.
   2; Polyc. Ep. 2. 1; 2 Clem. 2. 1; Hegesipp. in Euseb., H. E. III. 20 6:
   Justin Dial. 118.

   [243] There could of course be no doubt that Christ meant the
   "anointed" (even Aristides Apol. 2 fin., if Nestle's correction is
   right, Justin's Apol. 1. 4 and similar passages do not justify doubt on
   that point). But the meaning and the effect of this anointing was very
   obscure. Justin says (Apol. II. 6): Christo`s me`n kata` to`
   kechristhai kai` kosmesai ta pa'nta di' autou to`n theo`n le'getai, and
   therefore (see Dial. 76 fin.) finds in this designation an expression
   of the cosmic significance of Christ.

   [244] See the Apologists Apost. K. O. (Texte v. Unters. II. 5. p. 25),
   proorontas tou`s lo'gous tou didaska'lou emon, ibid., p. 28: o'te
   etesen o didaska'los to`n a'rton, ibid. p. 30: proe'legen, o'te
   edi'daskn. Apost. Constit. (original writing) III. 6: auto`s o
   dida'skalos emon kai` ku'rios. III. 7: o ku'rios kai` dida'skalos emon
   heipen. III. 19: III. 20: V. 12: 1 Clem. 13. 1 . . . . ton lo'gon tou
   ku'riou Iesou, ou`s ela'kesen dida'skon. Polyc. Ep. 2: mnemoneu'ontes
   hon eipen o kuri'os dida'skon. Ptolem. ad Floram. 5: e didaskalia tou
   soteros.

   [245] The baptismal formula, which had been naturalised everywhere in
   the communities at this period, preserved it above all. The addition of
   i'dios, proto'pokos is worthy of notice. Monogene's (= the only
   begotten and also the beloved) is not common; it is found only in John,
   in Justin, in the Symbol of the Romish Church, and in Mart. Polyc.
   (Diogn. 10. 3).

   [246] The so-called second Epistle of Clement begins with the words:
   Adelphoi', ou'tos dei emas phronein peri` Iesou, os peri` theou, os
   peri` kritou zo'nton kai` nekron, (this order in which the Judge
   appears as the higher is also found in Barn. 7. 2), kai` ou dei emas
   mikra` phronein peri` tes soteri'as emon; en tho ga`r phronein emas
   mikra` peri` autou, mikra` kai' elrizomen labein. This argumentation
   (see also the following verses up to II. 7) is very instructive; for it
   shews the grounds on which the phronein peri` autou os peri` theou was
   based. H. Schultz, (L. v. d. Gottheit Christi, p. 25 f.) very correctly
   remarks: "In the second Epistle of Clement, and in the Shepherd, the
   Christological interest of the writer ends in obtaining the assurance,
   through faith in Christ as the world-ruling King and Judge, that the
   community of Christ will receive a glory corresponding to its moral and
   ascetic works.

   [247] Pliny in his celebrated letter (96), speaks of a "Carmen dicere
   Christo quasi deo" on the part of the Christians. Hermas has no doubt
   that the Chosen Servant, after finishing his work, will be adopted as
   God's Son, and therefore has been destined from the beginning, eis
   exousi'an mega'len kai` kuriu'teta (Sim. V. 6. 1). But that simply
   means that he is now in a Divine sphere, and that one must think of him
   as of God. But there was no unanimity beyond that. The formula says
   nothing about the nature or constitution of Jesus. It might indeed
   appear from Justin's dialogue that the direct designation of Jesus as
   theo's (not as o theo's) was common in the communities; but not only
   are there some passages in Justin him-self to be urged against this,
   but also the testimony of other writers. Theo's, even without the
   article, was in no case a usual designation for Jesus. On the contrary,
   it was always quite definite occasions which led them to speak of
   Christ as of a God. In the first place there were Old Testament
   passages such as Ps. XLV. 8: CX. 1 f., etc., which, as soon as they
   were interpreted in relation to Christ, led to his getting the
   predicate theo's. These passages, with many others taken from the Old
   Testament, were used in this way by Justin. Yet it is very well worth
   noting, that the author of the Epistle of Barnabas avoided this
   expression, in a passage which must have suggested it. (12, 10, 11 on
   Ps. CX. 4.) The author of the Didache calls him "o theo's Da'bid" on
   the basis of the above psalm. It is manifestly therefore in liturgical
   formulæ of exalted paradox, or living utterances of religious feeling
   that Christ is called God. See Ignat. ad Rom. 6. 3; epitre'psate' moi
   mimete`n einai tou pathous tou theou mou (the mon here should be
   observed); ad Eph. 1. 1: anazopure'santes en ai'mati theou: Tatian
   Orat. 13: dia'konos tou pepontho'tos theou. As to the celebrated
   passage 1 Clem. ad Cor. 2, 10: ta` pathe'mata autou, (the autou refers
   to theo's) we may perhaps observe that that o theo's stands far apart.
   However, such a consideration is hardly in place. The passages just
   adduced shew that precisely the union of suffering (blood, death) with
   the concept "God"--and only this union--must have been in Christendom
   from a very early period; see Acts XX. 28 . . . te`n ekklesi'an tou
   theou e`n periepoie'sato dia` tou ai'matos tou idi'ou, and from a later
   period, Melito, Fragm. (in Routh Rel., Sacra I. 122): o theo`s
   pe'ponthen upo` dexia's Israeliti'dos, Anonym. ap. Euseb. H. E. V. 28.
   11; o eu'splanchnos theo's kai` kurio's emon Iesous Christo`s ouk
   ebou'leto apole'sthai ma'rtura ton idi'on pathema'ton; Test. XII.
   Patriarch. (Levi 4): epi` to pa'thei tou upsi'stou; Tertull. de carne
   5; "passiones dei," ad Uxor II. 3: "sanguine dei." Tertullian also
   speaks frequently of the crucifying of God, the flesh of God, the death
   of God. (See Lightfoot, Clem. of Rome, p. 400 sq.) These formulæ were
   first subjected to examination in the Patripassian controversy. They
   were rejected by Athanasius, for example, in the fourth century (cf.
   Apollin. II. 13. 14. Opp. I. p. 758); pos oun gegra'phate o'ti theo's o
   dia` sa'rkos patho`n kai` a`nasta's, . . . . oudamou de` haima theou
   di'cha sarko`s paradedo'kasin ai graphai` e` theo`n dia` sarko`s
   patho'nta kai` anasta'nta. They continued in use in the west and became
   of the utmost significance in the christological controversies of the
   fifth century. It is not quite certain whether there is a "theologia
   Christi" in such passages as Tit. II. 13: 2 Pet. I. 1 (see the
   controversies on Rom. IX. 5). Finally, theo's and Christus were often
   interchanged in religious discourse (see above). In the so-called
   second Epistle of Clement (c. 1. 4) the dispensing of light, knowledge,
   is traced back to Christ. It is said of him that, like a Father, he has
   called us children, he has delivered us, he has called us into
   existence out of non-existence, and in this God himself is not thought
   of. Indeed he is called (2. 2. 3) the hearer of prayer and controller
   of history; but immediately thereon a saying of the Lord is introduced
   as a saying of God (Matt. IX. 13). On the contrary, Isaiah XXIX. 13, is
   quoted 3. 5) as a declaration of Jesus, and again (13. 4) a saying of
   the Lord with the formula: le'gei o theo's. It is Christ who pitied us
   (3. 1: 16. 2); he is described simply as the Lord who hath called and
   redeemed us (5. 1: 8. 2: 9. 5: etc.). Not only is there frequent
   mention of the entlai (enta'lmata) of Christ, but 6, 7 (see 14. 1)
   speak directly of a poiein to` the'lema tou Christo`u. Above all, in
   the entire first division (up to 9. 5) the religious situation is for
   the most part treated as if it were something essentially between the
   believer and Christ. On the other hand, (10. 1) the Father is he who
   calls (see also 16. 1), who brings salvation (9. 7), who accepts us as
   sons (9. 10: 16. 1); he has given us promises (11. 1. 6. 7); we expect
   his kingdom, nay, the day of his appearing (12. 1 f.: 6. 9: 9. 6: 11.
   7: 12. 1). He will judge the world, etc.; while in 17. 4 we read of the
   day of Christ's appearing, of his kingdom and of his function of Judge,
   etc. Where the preacher treats of the relation of the community to God,
   where he describes the religious situation according to its
   establishment or its consummation, where he desires to rule the
   religious and moral conduct, he introduces, without any apparent
   distinction, now God himself, and now Christ. But this religious view,
   in which acts of God coincide with acts of Christ, did not, as will be
   shewn later on, influence the theological speculations of the preacher.
   We have also to observe that the interchanging of God and Christ is not
   always an expression of the high dignity of Christ, but, on the
   contrary, frequently proves that the personal significance of Christ is
   misunderstood, and that he is regarded only as the dependent revealer
   of God. All this shews that there cannot have been many passages in the
   earliest literature where Christ was roundly designated theo's. It is
   one thing to speak of the blood (death, suffering) of God, and to
   describe the gifts of salvation brought by Christ as gifts of God, and
   another thing to set up the proposition that Christ is a God (or God).
   When, from the end of the second century, one began to look about in
   the earlier writings for passages en hois theologeitai o christo's,
   because the matter had become a subject of controversy, one could,
   besides the Old Testament, point only to the writings of authors from
   the time of Justin, (to apologists and controversialists) as well as to
   Psalms and odes (see the Anonymn. in Euseb. H. E. V. 28. 4-6). In the
   following passages of the Ignatian Epistles "theo's" appears as a
   designation of Christ; he is called o theo`s emon in Ephes. inscript;
   Rom. inscr. bis 3. 2; Polyc. 8. 3; Eph. 1. 1, aima theou; Rom. 6. 3,
   to` pa'thos tou theou mou; Eph. 7. 2, e99 sarki` geno'menos theo's, in
   another reading, en anthro'po theo's, Smyrn. I. 1., I. Chr. o theo's o
   ou'tos umas pophi'sas. The latter passage, in which the relative clause
   must he closely united with "theo's,"; seems to form the transition to
   the three passages (Trail. 7. I; Smyrn. 6. 1; 10. 1), in which Jesus is
   called theos without addition. But these passages are critically
   suspicious, see Lightfoot in loco. In the same way the "deus Jesus
   Christus" in Polyc. Ep. 12. 2, is suspicious, and indeed in both parts
   of the verse. In the first, all Latin codd. have "dei filius," and in
   the Greek codd. of the Epistle, Christ is nowhere called theo's. We
   have a keen polemic against the designation of Christ as theo's in
   Clem. Rom. Homil. XVI. 15 sq.; O Pe'tros apekri'the; o ku'rios emon
   ou'te theou`s einai ephthe'nxato para` to`n kti'santa ta` pa'nta ou'te
   eauto`n theo`n einai anego'reusen, uio`n de` theou tou ta` pa'nta
   diakosme'santos to`n eipo'nta auto`n eulo'gos emaka'risen kai` o Si'mon
   apekri'nato; ou dokei soi oun to`n apo` theo`n einai; kai` o Pe'tros
   e'phe; pos touto einai du'natai, phra'son emin, touto ga`r emeis eipein
   soi ou duna'metha o`ti me` ekou'samen par' autou.

   [248] On the further use of the word theo's in antiquity, see above,
   §©8, p. 120 f.; the formula "theo's ek theou" for Augustus, even 24
   years before Christ's birth; on the formula "dominus ac deus," see John
   XX. 28; the interchange of these concepts in many passages beside one
   another in the anonymous writer (Euseb. II. E. V. 28. 11.) Domitian
   first allowed himself to be called "dominus ac deus." Tertullian Apol.
   10. 11, is very instructive as to the general situation in the second
   century. Here are brought forward the different causes which then moved
   men, the cultured and the uncultured, to give to this or that
   personality the predicate of Divinity. In the third century the
   designation of "domus ac deus noster" for Christ was very common,
   especially in the west. (See Cyprian, Pseudo-Cyprian, Novatian; in the
   Latin Martyrology a Greek o ku'rios is also frequently so translated.)
   But only at this time had the designation come to be in actual use even
   for the Emperor. It seems at first sight to follow from the statements
   of Celsus (in Orig. c. Cels. III. 22-43) that this Greek had and
   required a very strict conception of the Godhead; but his whole work
   shews how little that was really the case. The reference to these facts
   of the history of the time is not made with the view of discovering the
   "theologia Christi" itself in its ultimate roots--these roots lie
   elsewhere, in the person of Christ and Christian experience; but that
   this experience, before any technical reflection, had so easily and so
   surely substituted the new formula instead of the idea of Messiah, can
   hardly be explained without reference to the general religious ideas of
   the time.

   [249] The combination of theo`s and sote'r in the Pastoral Epistles is
   very important. The two passages in the New Testament in which perhaps
   a direct "theologia Christi" may be recognised, contain likewise the
   concept sote`r; see Tit. II. 13; prosdecho'menoi te`n makari'an elpi'da
   kai` epipha'neian tes do'xes tou mega'lou theou kai` soteros emon
   Christou Iesou (cf. Abbot, Journal of the Society of Bibl. Lit., and
   Exeg. 1881. June. p. 3 sq.): 2 Pet. I. 1: en dikaiosune tou theou emon
   kai` soteros. I. Chr. In both cases the emon should be specially
   noted., Besides, theo`s sote'r is also an ancient formula.

   [250] A very ancient formula ran "theo`s kai` theo`s uio`s," see Cels.
   ap. Orig II. 30; Justin, frequently: Alterc. Sim. et Theoph. 4, etc.
   The formula is equivalent to theo`s monogene's (see Joh. I. 18).

   [251] Such conceptions are found side by side in the same writer. See,
   for example, the second Epistle of Clement, and even the first.

   [252] See §©6, p. 120. The idea of a theopoie'sis was as common as that
   of the appearances of the gods. In wide circles, however, philosophy
   had long ago naturalised the idea of the lo'gos tou theou. But now
   there is no mistaking a new element everywhere. In the case of the
   Christologies which include a kind of theopiie'sis, it is found in the
   fact that the deified Jesus was to be recognised not as a Demigod or
   Hero, but as Lord of the world, equal in power and honour to the Deity.
   In the case of those Christologies which start with Christ as the
   heavenly spiritual being, it is found in the belief in an actual
   incarnation. These two articles, as was to be expected, presented
   difficulties to the Gentile Christians and the latter more than the
   former.

   [253] This is usually overlooked. Christological doctrinal conceptions
   are frequently constructed by a combination of particular passages, the
   nature of which does not permit of combination. But the fact that there
   was no universally recognised theory about the nature of Jesus till
   beyond the middle of the second century, should not lead us to suppose
   that the different theories were anywhere declared to be of equal
   value, etc., therefore more or less equally valid; on the contrary,
   everyone, so far as he had a theory at all, included his own in the
   revealed truth. That they had not yet come into conflict is accounted
   for, on the one hand, by the fact that the different theories ran up
   into like formulæ, and could even frequently be directly carried over
   into one another; and on the other hand, by the fact that their
   representatives appealed to the same authorities. But we must, above
   all, remember that conflict could only arise after the enthusiastic
   element, which also had a share in the formation of Christology, had
   been suppressed, and problems were felt to be such, that is, after the
   struggle with Gnosticism, or even during that struggle.

   [254] Both were clearly in existence in the Apostolic age.

   [255] Only one work has been preserved entire which gives clear
   expression to the Adoptian Christology, viz., the Shepherd of Hermas
   (see Sim. V. and IX. 1. 12). According to it, the Holy Spirit--it is
   not certain whether he is identified with the chief Archangel--is
   regarded as the pre-existent Son of God, who is older than creation,
   nay, was God's counsellor at creation. The Redeemer is the virtuous man
   (sa'rx) chosen by God, with whom that Spirit of God was united. As he
   did not defile the Spirit, but kept him constantly as his companion,
   and carried out the work to which the Deity had called him, nay, did
   more than he was commanded, he was in virtue of a Divine decree adopted
   as a son and exalted to mega'le exousia kai` kurio'tes. That this
   Christology is set forth in a book which enjoyed the highest honour and
   sprang from the Romish community, is of great significance. The
   representatives of this Christology, who in the third century were
   declared to be heretics, expressly maintained that it was at one time
   the ruling Christology at Rome and had been handed down by the
   Apostles. (Anonym. H. E. V. 28. 3, concerning the Artemonites: phasi`
   tou`s me`n prote'rous a'pantas kai' autou`s tou`s aposto'lous
   pareilephe'nai te kai` dedidache'nai tauta, a' nun houtoi le'gousi,
   kai` teteresthai te`n ale'theia tou keru'gmatos me'chri ton chro'non
   tou Bi'ktoros . . . apo` de` tou diado'chou autou Zephuri'nou
   parakechara'chthai te`n ale'theian.) This assertion, though
   exaggerated, is not incredible after what we find in Hermas. It cannot,
   certainly, be verified by a superficial examination of the literary
   monuments preserved to us, but a closer investigation shews that the
   Adoptian Christology must at one time have been very widespread, that
   it continued here and there undisturbed up to the middle of the third
   century (see the Christology in the Acta Archelai. 49. 50), and that it
   continued to exercise great influence even in the fourth and fifth
   centuries (see Book II. c. 7). Something similar is found even in some
   Gnostics, e.g., Valentinus himself (see Iren. I. 11. 1: kai` to`n
   Christo`n de` ouk apo` ton en to plero'mati aio'non probeblesthai,
   alla` upo` tes metro`s, e'xo de` genome'nes, kata` te`n gno'men ton
   kreitto'non apokekuesthai meta` skias tino's. Kai` touton me'n, a'te
   a'rrena upa'rchonta, apoko`psanta uph' eautou te`n skia`n, anadramein
   eis to` ple'roma. The same in the Exc. ex Theodot §§©22, 23, 32, 33),
   and the Christology of Basilides presupposes that of the Adoptians.
   Here also belongs the conception which traces back the genealogy of
   Jesus to Joseph. The way in which Justin (Dialogues 48, 49, 87 ff.)
   treats the history of the baptism of Jesus, against the objection of
   Trypho that a pre-existent Christ would not have needed to be filled
   with the Spirit of God. is instructive. It is here evident that Justin
   deals with objections which were raised within the communities
   themselves to the pre-existence of Christ, on the ground of the account
   of the baptism In point of fact, this account (it had, according to
   very old witnesses, see Resch, Agrapha Christi, p. 307, according to
   Justin; for example, Dial. 88, 103, the wording: a'ma to anabenai
   auto`n apo` tou potamou tou Iorda'nou, tes phones autou lechthei'ses
   uio's mou ei su', ego` se'meron gege'nneka' se; see the Cod. D. of
   Luke. Clem. Alex. etc.) forms the strongest foundation of the Adoptian
   Christology, and hence it is exceedingly interesting to see how one
   compounds with it from the second to the fifth century, an
   investigation which deserves a special monograph. But, of course, the
   edge was taken off the report by the assumption of the miraculous birth
   of Jesus from the Holy Spirit, so that the Adoptians in recognising
   this, already stood with one foot in the camp of their opponents. It is
   now instructive to see here how the history of the baptism, which
   originally formed the beginning of the proclamation of Jesus' history,
   is suppressed in the earliest formulæ, and therefore also in the Romish
   Symbol, while the birth from the Holy Spirit is expressly stated. Only
   in Ignatius (ad Smyrn. I: cf. ad Eph. 18. 2) is the baptism taken into
   account in the confession; but even he has given the event a turn by
   which it has no longer any significance for Jesus himself (just as in
   the case of Justin, who concludes from the resting of the Spirit in his
   fulness upon Jesus, that there will be no more prophets among the Jews,
   spiritual gifts being rather communicated to Christians; compare also
   the way in which the baptism of Jesus is treated in John I.). Finally,
   we must point out that in the Adoptian Christology the parallel between
   Jesus and all believers who have the Spirit and are Sons of God, stands
   out very clearly. (Cf. Herm. Sim. V. with Maud. III. V. 1: X. 2: most
   important is Sim. V. 6. 7.) But this was the very thing that endangered
   the whole view. Celsus, I. 57, addressing Jesus, asks; "If thou sayest
   that every man whom Divine Providence allows to be born (this is of
   course a formulation for which Celsus alone is responsible) is a son of
   God, what advantage hast thou then over others?" We can see already in
   the Dialogue of Justin the approach of the later great controversy,
   whether Christ is Son of God kata` gno'men or kata` phu'sin, that is,
   had a pre-existence: "kai' ga`r eisi tines, he says, apo` tou imete'rou
   ge'nous omologountes auto`n Christo`n einai, a'nthropon de` ex
   anthro'pon geno'menon apophaino'menoi, hois ou sunti'themai" (c. 48).

   [256] This Christology, which may be traced back to the Pauline, but
   which can hardly have its point of departure in Paul alone, is found
   also in the Epistle to the Hebrews and in the writings of John,
   including the Apocalypse, and is represented by Barnabas, I and 2
   Clem., Ignatius, Polycarp, the author of the Pastoral Epistles, the
   Authors of Præd. Petri, and the Altercatio Jasonis et Papisci, etc. The
   Classic formulation is in 2 Clem. 9. 5: Christo`s o ku'rios o so'sas
   emas o`n me`n to` proton pnethma ege'neto sa`rx kai` oo'tos emas
   eka'lesen. According to Barnabas (5. 3), the pre-existent Christ is
   panto`s tou kosmou ku'rios; to him God said, apo` kataboles ko`smou,
   "Let us make man, etc." He is (5. 6) the subject and goal of all Old
   Testament revelation. He is ouchi` uio`s anthro'pou all: uio`s tou
   theou, topo de` en sarki` phanerothei's (12. 10); the flesh is merely
   the veil of the Godhead, without which man could not have endured the
   light (5. 10). According to 1 Clement, Christ is to` skeptron tes
   melagosu'nes tou theou (16. 2), who, if he had wished, could have
   appeared on earth en ko'mpo alazonei'as; he is exalted far above the
   angels (32), as he is the Son of God (pathe'mata tou theou, 2. 1); he
   hath spoken through the Holy Spirit in the Old Testament (22. 1). It is
   not certain whether Clement understood Christ under the lo'gos
   megalosu'nes tou theou (27. 4). According to 2 Clem., Christ and the
   Church are heavenly spiritual existences which have appeared in the
   last times. Gen. 1. 27 refers to their creation (c. 14; see my note on
   the passage: We learn from Origen that a very old Theologoumenon
   identified Jesus with the ideal of Adam, the Church with that of Eve.
   Similar ideas about Christ are found in Gnostic Jewish Christians); one
   must think about Christ as about God (I. 1). Ignatius writes (Eph. 7.
   2): Eis, iatro's estin sarkiko's te kai` pneumatiko's, genneto`s kai`
   age'nnetos, en sarki` geno'menos theo`s, en thana'to zoe` alethine',
   kai` ek Mari'as kai` ek theou, proton pathetos kai` to'te apathe's
   Iesous Christo`s o ku'rios emon. As the human predicates stand here
   first, it might appear as though, according to Ignatius, the man Jesus
   became God (o theo's emon, Cf. Eph. inscr.: 18. 2). In point of fact,
   he regards Jesus as Son of God only by his birth from the Spirit; but
   on the other hand, Jesus is aph' eno`s patro's proelthon (Magn. 7. 2),
   is lo'gos theou' (Magn. 8. 2), and when Ignatius so often emphasises
   the truth of Jesus' history against Docetism (Trall. 9. for example),
   we must assume that he shares the thesis with the Gnostics that Jesus
   is by nature a spiritual being. But it is well worthy of notice that
   Ignatius, as distinguished from Barnabas and Clement, really gives the
   central place to the historical Jesus Christ, the Son of God and the
   Son of Mary, and his work. The like is found only in Irenæus. The
   pre-existence of Christ is presupposed by Polycarp. (Ep. 7. 1); but,
   like Paul, he strongly emphasises a real exaltation of Christ (2. 1).
   The author of Præd. Petri calls Christ the lo'gos (Clem. Strom. I. 29,
   182). As Ignatius calls him this also, as the same designation is found
   in the Gospel, Epistles, and Apocalypse of John (the latter a Christian
   adaptation of a Jewish writing), in the Act. Joh. (see Zahn, Acta Joh.
   p. 220), finally, as Celsus (II. 31) says quite generally, "The
   Christians maintain that the Son of God is at the same time his
   incarnate Word," we plainly perceive that this designation for Christ
   was not first started by professional philosophers (see the Apologists,
   for example, Tatian, Orat. 5, and Melito Apolog. fragm. in the Chron.
   pasch. p. 483, ed. Dindorf: Christo`s o'n theou lo'gos pro' aio'non).
   We do not find in the Johannine writings such a Logos speculation as in
   the Apologists, but the current expression is taken up in order to shew
   that it has its truth in the appearing of Jesus Christ. The ideas about
   the existence of a Divine Logos were very widely spread; they were
   driven out of philosophy into wide circles. The Author of the Alterc.
   Jas. et Papisci conceived the phrase in Gen. I. 1, enarche, as
   equivalent to en uio (christo) Jerome, Quæst. hebr. in Gen. p. 3; see
   Tatian Orat. 5: theo`s en en arche te`n de` arche`n lo'gou du'namin
   pareile'phamen. Ignatius (Eph. 3) also called Christ e gno'me tou
   patro's (Eph. 17: e gnosis tou theou); that is a more fitting
   expression than lo'gos. The subordination of Christ as a heavenly being
   to the Godhead is seldom or never carefully emphasised, though it
   frequently comes plainly into prominence. Yet the author of the second
   Epistle of Clement does not hesitate to place the pre-existent Christ
   and the pre-existent Church on one level, and to declare of both that
   God created them (c. 14). The formulæ phanerousthai en sarki', or
   gi'gnesthai sa'rx, are characteristic of this Christology. It is worthy
   of special notice that the latter is found in all those New Testament
   writers who have put Christianity in contrast with the Old Testament
   religions, and proclaimed the conquest of that religion by the
   Christian, viz., Paul, John, and the author of the Epistle to the
   Hebrews.

   [257] Hermas, for example, does this (therefore Link; Christologie des
   Hermas, and Weizsäcker, Gott. Gel. Anz. 1886, p. 830, declare his
   Christology to be directly pneumatic): Christ is then identified with
   this Holy Spirit (see Acta Archel. 50), similarly Ignatius (ad Magn.
   15): kekteme'noi adia'kriton pneuma, os estin Iesous Christo`s, This
   formed the transition to Gnostic conceptions on the one hand, to
   pneumatic Christology on the other. But in Hermas the real substantial
   thing in Jesus is the sa'rx.

   [258] Passages may indeed be found in the earliest Gentile Christian
   literature in which Jesus is designated Son of God, independently of
   his human birth and before it (so in Barnabas, against Zahn), but they
   are not numerous. Ignatius very clearly deduces the predicate "Son"
   from the birth in the flesh. Zahn, Marcellus, p. 216 ff.

   [259] The distinct designation "theopoi'esis" is not found, though that
   may be an accident. Hermas has the thing itself quite distinctly, (see
   Epiph. c. Alog. H. 51. 18: nomi'zontes apo` Mari'as kai` deuro
   Christo`n auto`n kaleisthai kai' uio`n theou, kai` einai me`n pro'teron
   psilo`n a'nthropon, kata` prokope`n de` eilephe'nai te`n tou uiou tou
   theou prosegori'an). The stages of the prokope` were undoubtedly the
   birth, baptism and resurrection. Even the adherents of the pneumatic
   Christology could not at first help recognising that Jesus, through his
   exaltation, got more than he originally possessed. Yet in their case
   this conception was bound to become rudimentary, and it really did so.

   [260] The settlement with Gnosticism prepared a still always uncertain
   end for this naive Docetism. Apart from Barn 5. 12, where it plainly
   appears, we have to collect laboriously the evidences of it which have
   not accidentally either perished or been concealed. In the communities
   of the second century there was frequently no offence taken at Gnostic
   docetism (see the Gospel of Peter, Clem. Alex., Adumbrat. in Joh. Ep.
   I. c. 1. [Zahn, Forsch. z. Gesch. des N. T.-lichen Kanons, III p. 87];
   "Fertur ergo in traditionibus, quoniam Johannes ipsum corpus, quod erat
   extrinsecus, tangens manum suam in profunda misisse et duritiam carnis
   nullo modo reluctatam esse, sed locum manui præbuisse discipuli." Also
   Acta Joh. p. 209, ed. Zahn). In spite of all his polemic against
   "do'kesis" proper, one can still perceive a "moderate docetism" in
   Clem. Alex., to which indeed certain narratives in the Canonical
   Gospels could not but lead. The so-called Apocryphal literature
   (Apocryphal Gospels and Acts of Apostles), lying on the boundary
   between heretical and common Christianity, and preserved only in scanty
   fragments and extensive alterations, was, it appears, throughout
   favourable to Docetism. But the later recensions attest that it was
   read in wide circles.

   [261] Even such a formulation as we find in Paul (e.g., Rom. I. 3 f.
   kata` sa'rka--kata` pneuma) does not seem to have been often repeated
   (yet see 1 Clem. 32. 2). It is of value to Ignatius only, who has
   before his mind the full Gnostic contrast. But even to him we cannot
   ascribe any doctrine of two natures: for this requires as its
   presupposition, the perception that the divinity and humanity are
   equally essential and important for the personality of the Redeemer
   Christ. Such insight, however, presupposes a measure and a direction of
   reflection which the earliest period did not possess. The expression
   "du'o ousi'ai Christou" first appears in a fragment of Melito, whose
   genuineness is not, however, generally recognised (see my Texte u.
   Unters. I. 1. 2. p. 257). Even the definite expression for Christ,
   theo`s o`n omou te kai` a'nthropos, was fixed only in consequence of
   the Gnostic controversy.

   [262] Hermas (Sim. V. 6. 7) describes the exaltation of Jesus thus:
   i'na kai` e sa'rx au'te, douleu'sasa to pneu'mari ame'mptos, sche
   to'pon tina` kataske'no'seos, kai` me` doxe to`n mistho`n tes doulei'as
   autes apololeke'nai. The point in question is a reward of grace which
   consists in a position of rank (see Sim. V. 6. 1). The same thing is
   manifest from the statements of the later Adoptians. (Cf. the teaching
   of Paul Samosata.)

   [263] Barnabas, e.g., conceives it as a veil (5. 10: ei ga`r me' elthen
   en sarki', oud' a'n pos oi a'nthropoi eso'thesan ble'pontes auto'n;
   o'te to`n me'llonta me` einai e'lion emble'pontes ouk ischu'sousin eis
   ta`s aktinas autou antophthalmesai). The formulation of the Christian
   idea in Celsus is instructive (c. Cels. VI. 69): "Since God is great
   and not easily accessible to the view, he put his spirit in a body
   which is like our own, and sent it down in order that we might be
   instructed by it." To this conception corresponds the formula:
   e'rchesthai (phanerousthai) en sarki' (Barnabas, frequently; Polyc. Ep.
   7. 1). But some kind of transformation must also have been thought of
   (see 2 Clem. 9. 5, and Celsus IV. 18: "Either God, as these suppose, is
   really transformed into a mortal body ..." Apoc. Sophon. ed Stern. 4
   fragm. p. 10; "He has transformed himself into a man who comes to us to
   redeem us"). This conception might grow out of the formula sa'rx
   ege'neto (Ignat. ad Eph. 7. 2 is of special importance here). One is
   almost throughout here satisfied with the sa'rx of Christ, that is the
   alethei'a tes sarko's, against the heretics (so Ignatius, who was
   already antignostic in his attitude). There is very seldom any mention
   of the humanity of Jesus. Barnabas (12), the author of the Didache (c.
   10. 6. See my note on the passage), and Tatian questioned the Davidic
   Sonship of Jesus, which was strongly emphasised by Ignatius; nay,
   Barnabas even expressly rejects the designation "Son of Man" (12. 10;
   i'de pa'lin Iesous, ouchi` uio`s anthro'pou alla` uio`s tou theou,
   tu'po de` en sarki` phanerothei's). A docetic thought, however, lies in
   the assertion that the spiritual being Christ only assumed human flesh,
   however, much the reality of the flesh may be emphasised. The passage 1
   Clem. 49. 6, is quite unique: to` haima autou e'doken upe`r emon Iesous
   Christo`s . . . kai` te`n sa'rka upe`r tes sarko`s emon kai` te`n
   psuche`n upo`r ton psuchon e'mon. One would fain believe this an
   interpolation; the same idea is first found in Irenæus. (V. 1. 1).

   [264] Even Hermas does not speak of Jesus as a'nthropos (see Link).
   This designation was used by the representatives of the Adoptian
   Christology only after they had expressed their doctrine antithetically
   and developed it to a theory, and always with a certain reservation.
   The "a'nthropos Christo`s Iesous" in 1 Tim. II. 5 is used in a special
   sense. The expression a'nthropos for Christ appears twice in the
   Ignatian Epistles (the third passage Smyrn. 4. 2: autou me
   endunamountos tou telei'ou anthropou genome'nou, apart from the
   genome'nou, is critically suspicious, as well as the fourth, Eph. 7. 2;
   see above), in both passages, however, in connections which seem to
   modify the humanity; see Eph. 20. 1: oikonomi'a eis to`n kaino`n
   a'nthropon Iesoun Christo'n; Eph. 20. 2: to uio anthro'pou kai` uio
   theou.

   [265] See above p. 185, note; p. 189, note. We have no sure evidence
   that the later so-called Modalism (Monarchianism) had representatives
   before the last third of the second century; yet the polemic of Justin,
   Dial. 128. seems to favour the idea, (the passage already presupposes
   controversies about the personal independence of the pre-existent
   pneumatic being of Christ beside God; but one need not necessarily
   think of such controversies within the communities; Jewish notions
   might be meant, and this, according to Apol. 1. 63, is the more
   probable). The judgment is therefore so difficult, because there were
   numerous formulæ in practical use which could be so understood, as if
   Christ was to be completely identified with the God-head itself (see
   Ignat. ad Eph. 7. 2, besides Melito in Otto. Corp. Apol. IX. p. 419,
   and Noëtus in the Philos. IX. 10, p. 448). These formula may, in point
   of fact, have been so understood, here and there, by the rude and
   uncultivated. The strongest again is presented in writings whose
   authority was always doubtful: see the Gospel of the Egyptians (Epiph.
   H. 62. 2), in which must have stood a statement somewhat to this
   effect: to`n auto`n einai pate'ra, to`n auto`n einai uio`n, to`n auto`n
   einai a'gion pneuma, and the Acta Joh. (ed. Zahn, p. 220 f., 240 f.: o
   agatho`s emon theo`s o eu'splanchnos, o elee'mon, o a'gios, o
   katharo's, o ami'antos, o mo'nos, o heis, o ameta'bletos, o
   eilikrine's, o a'dolos, o me` orgizo'menos, o pases emin legome'nes e`
   nooume'nes prosegori'as ano'teros kai` upselo'teros emon theo`s
   Iesous). In the Act. Joh. are found also prayers with the address thee`
   Iesou Christe' (pp. 242, 247). Even Marcion and in part the
   Montanists--both bear witness to old traditions--put no value on the
   distinction between God and Christ; cf. the Apoc. Sophon. A witness to
   a naive Modalism is found also in the Acta Pionii 9: "Quem deum colis?
   Respondit: Christum. Polemon (judex): Quid ergo? iste alter est? [the
   co-defendant Christians had immediately before confessed God the
   Creator]. Respondit: Non; sed ipse quem et ipsi paullo ante confessi
   sunt; cf. c. 16. Yet a reasoned Modalism may perhaps he assumed here.
   See also the Martyr Acts; e.g., Acta Petri, Andrae, Pauli et Dionysiæ 1
   (Ruinart, p. 205): emeis oi Christo`n to`n basile'a e'chomen, o'ti
   alethino`s theo's estin kai` poiete`s ouranou kai` ges kai` thala'sses.
   "Oportet me magis deo vivo et vero, regi sæculorum omnium Christo,
   sacrificium offerre." Act. Nicephor. 3 (p. 285). I take no note of the
   Testament of the twelve Patriarchs, out of which one can, of course,
   beautifully verify the strict Modalistic, and even the Adoptian
   Christology. But the Testamenta are not a primitive or Jewish Christian
   writing which Gentile Christians have revised, but a Jewish writing
   christianised at the end of the second century by a Catholic of
   Modalistic views. But he has given us a very imperfect work, the
   Christology of which exhibits many contradictions. It is instructive to
   find Modalism in the theology of the Simonians, which was partly formed
   according to Christian ideas; see Irenæus I. 23, 1: "hic igitur a
   multis quasi deus glorificatus est, et docuit semetipsunr esse qui
   inter Judæos quidem quasi filius apparuerit, in Samaria autem quasi
   pater descenderit in reliquis vero gentibus quasi Spiritus Sanctus
   adventaverit.

   [266] That is a very important fact which clearly follows from the
   Shepherd, Even the later school of the Adoptians in Rome, and the later
   Adoptians in general, were forced to assume a divine hypostasis beside
   the Godhead, which of course sensibly threatened their Christology. The
   adherents of the pneumatic Christology partly made a definite
   distinction between the pre-existent Christ and the Holy Spirit (see,
   e.g., 1 Clem. 22. 1), and partly made use of formulæ from which one
   could infer an identity of the two. The conceptions about the Holy
   Spirit were still quite fluctuating: whether he is a power of God, or
   personal; whether he is identical with the pre-existent Christ, or is
   to be distinguished from him; whether he is the servant of Christ
   (Tatian Orat. 13); whether he is only a gift of God to believers, or
   the eternal Son of God, was quite uncertain. Hermas assumed the latter,
   and even Origen (de princip. præf. c. 4) acknowledges that it is not
   yet decided whether or not the Holy Spirit is likewise to be regarded
   as God's Son. The baptismal formula prevented the identification of the
   Holy Spirit with the pre-existent Christ, which so readily suggested
   itself. But so far as Christ was regarded as a pneuma, his further
   demarcation from the angel powers was quite uncertain, as the Shepherd
   of Hermas proves (though see 1 Clem. 36). For even Justin, in a
   passage, no doubt, in which his sole purpose was to shew that the
   Christians were not a'theoi, could venture to thrust in between God,
   the on and the Spirit, the good angels as beings who were worshipped
   and adored by the Christians (Apol I. 6 [if the text be genuine and not
   an interpolation]; see also the Suppl. of Athanagoras). Justin, and
   certainly most of those who accepted a pre-existence of Christ,
   conceived of it as a real pre-existence. Justin was quite well
   acquainted with the controversy about the independent quality of the
   power which proceeded from God. To him it is not merely, "Sensus,
   motus, affectus dei," but a "personalis substantia" (Dial. 128).

   [267] See the remarkable narrative about the cross in the fragment of
   the Gospel of Peter, and in Justin, Apol. I. 55.

   [268] We must, above all things, be on our guard here against
   attributing dogmas to the churches, that is to say, to the writers of
   this period. The difference in the answers to the question, How far and
   by what means Jesus procured salvation? was very great, and the
   majority undoubtedly never at all raised the question, being satisfied
   with recognising Jesus as the revealer of God's saving will (Didache,
   10. 2: eucharistoume'n soi, pa'ter a'gie, uper tou agi'ou ono'mato's
   sou, ou kaeske'nosas en tais kardi'as emon kai` upe'r tes gno'seos kai`
   pi'steos ai' athanasi'as, hes egno'risas emin dia` Iesou tou taidos
   sou), without reflecting on the fact that this saving will was already
   revealed in the Old Testament. There is nowhere any mention of saving
   work of Christ in the whole Didache--nay, even the Kerygma about him is
   not taken notice of. The extensive writing of Hermas shews that this is
   not an accident. There is absolutely no mention here of the birth,
   death, resurrection, etc., of Jesus, although the author in Sim. V. had
   an occasion for mentioning them. He describes the work of Jesus as (1)
   preserving the people whom God had chosen, (2) purifying the people
   from sin, (3) pointing out the path of life and promulgating the Divine
   law (cc. 5. 6). This work however, seems to have been performed by the
   whole life and activity of Jesus; even to the purifyng of sin the
   author has only added the words; (kai` auto`s ta`s amarti'as auton
   ekatha'rise) polla` kopia'sas kai` pollou`s ko'pou`s entleko's (Sim. V.
   6. 2). But we must further note that Hermas held the proper and
   obligatory work of Jesus to be only the preservation of the chosen
   people (from demons in the last days, and at the end), while in the
   other two articles he saw a performance in excess of his duty, and
   wished undoubtedly to declare therewith, that the purifying from sin
   and the giving of the law are not, strictly speaking, integral parts of
   the Divine plan of salvation, but are due to the special goodness of
   Jesus (this idea is explained by Moralism). Now, as Hermas and others
   saw the saving activity of Jesus in his whole labours, others saw
   salvation given and assured in the moment of Jesus' entrance into the
   world, and in his personality as a spiritual being become flesh. This
   mystic conception, which attained such wide-spread recognition later
   on, has a representative in Ignatius, if one can at all attribute
   clearly conceived doctrines to this emotional confessor. That something
   can be declared of Jesus, kata` pneuma and kata` sa'rka--this is the
   mystery on which the significance of Jesus seems to Ignatius
   essentially to rest, but how far is not made clear. But the pa'thos
   (haima, stauro's) and anasta'sis of Jesus are to the same writer of
   great significance, and by forming paradoxical formulæ of worship, and
   turning to account reminiscences of Apostolic sayings, he seems to wish
   to base the whole salvation brought by Christ on his suffering and
   resurrection (see Lightfoot on Eph. inscr. Vol. II, p. 25). In this
   connection also, he here and there regards all articles of the Kerygma
   as of fundamental significance. At all events, we have in the Ignatian
   Epistles the first attempt in the post-Apostolic literature to connect
   all the theses of the Kerygma about Jesus as closely as possible with
   the benefits which he brought. But only the will of the writer is plain
   here, all else is confused, and what is mainly felt is that the attempt
   to conceive the blessings of salvation as the fruit of the sufferings
   and resurrection, has deprived them of their definiteness and
   clearness. In proof we may adduce the following: If we leave out of
   account the passages in which Ignatius speaks of the necessity of
   repentance for the Heretics, or the Heathen, and the possibility that
   their sins may be forgiven (Philad. 3. 2: 8. 1; Smyrn. 4. 1: 5. 3; Eph.
   10. 1), there remains only one passage in which the forgiveness of sin
   is mentioned, and that only contains a traditional formula (Smyrn. 7.
   1: sa'rx Iesou Christou, e upe'r ton amartion emon pathousa). The same
   writer, who is constantly speaking of the pa'thos and anasta'sis of
   Christ, has nothing to say to the communities to which he writes, about
   the forgiveness of sin. Even the concept "sin," apart from the passages
   just quoted, appears only once, viz., Eph. 14. 2: oudei`s pi'stin
   epangello'menos amarta'nei. Ignatius has only once spoken to a
   community about repentance (Smyrn. 9. 1). It is characteristic that the
   summons to repentance runs exactly as in Hermas and 2 Clem., the
   conclusion only being peculiarly Ignatian. It is different with
   Barnabas, Clement and Polycarp. They (see 1 Clem. 7. 4: 12. 7: 21. 6:
   49. 6: Barn. 5. 1 ff.) place the forgiveness of sin procured by Jesus
   in the foreground, connect it most definitely with the death of Christ,
   and in some passages seem to have a conception of that connection,
   which reminds us of Paul. But this just shews that they are dependent
   here on Paul (or on 1st Peter), and on a closer examination we perceive
   that they very imperfectly understand Paul, and have no independent
   insight into the series of ideas which they reproduce. That is
   specially plain in Clement. For, in the first place, he everywhere
   passes over the resurrection (he mentions it only twice, once as a
   guarantee of our own resurrection, along with the Phoenix and other
   guarantees, 24. 1; and then as a means whereby the Apostles were
   convinced that the kingdom of God will come, 42. 3). In the second
   place, he in one passage declares that the cha'ris metanoi'as was
   communicated to the world through the shedding of Christ's blood (7.
   4.). But this transformation of the a'phosis amartion into cha'ris
   metanoi'as plainly shews that Clement had merely taken over from
   tradition the special estimate of the death of Christ as procuring
   salvation; for it is meaningless to deduce the cha'ris metanoi'as from
   the blood of Christ. Barnabas testifies more plainly that Christ
   behoved to offer the vessel of his spirit as a sacrifice for our sins
   (4. 3: 5. 1), nay, the chief aim of his letter is to harmonise the
   correct understanding of the cross, the blood, and death of Christ in
   connection with baptism, the forgiveness of sin, and sanctification
   (application of the idea of sacrifice). He also unites the death and
   resurrection of Jesus (5. 6: auto`s de` i'na katarge'se to`n tha'naton
   kai` te`n ek nekron ana'stasin dei'xe, oti en sarki` e'dei auto`n
   phanerothenai, upe'meinen, i'na kai` tois patra'sin te`n epangeli'an
   apodo kai` auto`s eauto to`n lao`n to`n kaino`n etoima'zon, epidei'xe,
   tes ges o'n, o'tr te'n ona'stasig auto`s poie'sas krinei): but the
   significance of the death of Christ is for him, at bottom, the fact
   that it is the fulfilment of prophecy. But the prophecy is related,
   above all, to the significance of the tree, and so Barnabas on one
   occasion says with admirable clearness (5, 13); auto`s de` ethe'lesen
   ou'to pathein; e'dei ga`r i'na epi` xu'lou pa'the. The notion which
   Barnabas entertains of the sa'rx of Christ suggests the supposition
   that he could have given up all reference to the death of Christ, if it
   had not been transmitted as a fact and predicted in the Old Testament.
   Justin shews still less certainty. To him also, as to Ignatius, the.
   cross (the death) of Christ is a great--nay, the greatest mystery, and
   he sees all things possible in it (see Apol. 1. 35, 55). He knows,
   further, as a man acquainted with the Old Testament, how to borrow from
   it very many points of view for the significance of Christ's death,
   (Christ the sacrifice, the Paschal lamb; the death of Christ the means
   of redeeming men; death as the enduring of the curse for us; death as
   the victory over the devil; see Dial. 44, 90, 91, 111, 134). But in the
   discussions which set forth in a more intelligible way the significance
   of Christ, definite facts from the history have no place at all, and
   Justin nowhere gives any indication of seeing in the death of Christ
   more than the mystery of the Old Testament, and the confirmation of its
   trustworthiness. On the other hand, it cannot be mistaken that the idea
   of an individual righteous man being able effectively to sacrifice
   himself for the whole, in order through his voluntary death to deliver
   them from evil, was not unknown to antiquity. Origen (c. Celsum 1. 31)
   has expressed himself on this point in a very instructive way. The
   purity and voluntariness of him who sacrifices himself are here the
   main things. Finally, we must be on our guard against supposing that
   the expressions soteri'a, apolu'trosis and the like, were as a rule
   related to the deliverance from sin. In the superscription of the
   Epistle from Lyons, for example, (Euseb. H E. V. I. 3: oi aute`n tes
   apolutro'seos emin pi'stin kai` elpida e'chontes) the future redemption
   is manifestly to be understood by apolu'trosis.

   [269] On the Ascension, see my edition of the Apost. Fathers I. 2, p.
   138. Paul knows nothing of an Ascension, nor is it mentioned by
   Clement, Ignatius, Hermas, or Polycarp. In no case did it belong to the
   earliest preaching. Resurrection and sitting at the right hand of God
   are frequently united in the formulæ (Eph. I. 20: Acts. II. 32 ff.)
   According to Luke XXIV. 51, and Barn. 15. 9, the ascension into heaven
   took place on the day of the resurrection (probably also according to
   Joh. XX. 17; see also the fragment of the Gosp. of Peter), and is
   hardly to he thought of as happening but once. (Joh. III. 13: VI. 62;
   see also Rom. X. 6 f.; Eph. IV. 9 f.; I Pet. III. 19 f.; very
   instructive for the origin of the notion), According to the
   Valentinians and Ophites, Christ ascended into heaven 18 months after
   the resurrection (Iren. I. 3. 2: 30. 14); according to the Ascension of
   Isaiah, 545 days (ed. Dillmann, pp. 43, 57 etc.); according to Pistis
   Sophia 11 years after the resurrection. The statement that the
   Ascension took place 40 days after the resurrection is first found in
   the Acts of the Apostles. The position of the anele'mphthe en do'xe, in
   the fragment of an old Hymn, 1 Tim. III. 16, is worthy of note, in so
   far as it follows the o'phthe ange'lois. ekeru'chthe en e'thnesin,
   episteu'the en ko'smo. Justin speaks very frequently of the Ascension
   into heaven (see also Aristides). It is to him a necessary part of the
   preaching about Christ. On the descent into hell, see the collection of
   passages in my edition of the Apost. Fathers, III. p. 232. It is
   important to note that it is found already in the Gospel of Peter
   (eke'ruxas tois koimome'nois; nai'), and that even Marcion recognised
   it (in Iren. I. 27. 3), as well as the Presbyter of Irenæus (IV. 27.
   2), and Ignatius (ad Magn. 9. 3); see also Celsus in Orig. II. 43. The
   witnesses to it are very numerous; sec Huidekoper, "The belief of the
   first three centuries concerning Christ's mission to the under-world."
   New York, 1876.

   [270] See the Pastoral Epistles, and the Epistles of Ignatius and
   Polycarp.

   [271] The "facts" of the history of Jesus were handed down to the
   following period as mysteries predicted in the Old Testament, but the
   idea of sacrifice was specially attached to the death of Christ,
   certainly without any closer definition. It is very noteworthy that in
   the Romish baptismal confession, the Davidic Sonship of Jesus, the
   baptism, the descent into the under-world, and the setting up of a
   glorious Kingdom on the earth, are not mentioned. These articles do not
   appear even in the parallel confessions which began to be formed. The
   hesitancy that yet prevailed here with regard to details is manifest
   from the fact, for example, that instead of the formula "Jesus was born
   of (ek) Mary," is found the other, "He was born through (dia`) Mary,"
   (see Justin, Apol. I. 22, 31-33, 54, 63; Dial. 23, 43, 45, 48, 54, 57,
   63, 66, 75, 85, 87, l00, 105, 120, 127). Iren. (I. 7. 2) and Tertull.
   (de carne 20) first contested the di`a against the Valentinians.

   [272] This was strongly emphasised; see my remarks on Barn. 2. 3. The
   Jewish cultus is often brought very close to the heathen by Gentile
   Christian writers. Præd. Petri (Clem. Strom. VI. 5. 41): kainos to`n
   theo`n dia` tou Psristou sebo'metha. The statement in Joh. IV. 24:
   pneuma o theo`s, kai` tou`s proskunountas auto`n en pneu'mati kai'
   alethei'a dei proskunein, was for long the guiding principle for the
   Christian worship of God.

   [273] Ps. LI. 19 is thus opposed to the ceremonial system (Barn. 2.
   10). Polycarp consumed by fire is (Mart. 14. 1) compared to a krio`s
   epi'semos ek mega'lou poimni'ou eis prosphora'n, olokau'toma dekto`n to
   theo atoimasme'non.

   [274] See Barn. 6. 15: 16. 7-9; Tatian Orat. 15; Ignat. ad Eph. 9. 15;
   Herm. Mand. V. etc. The designation of Christians as priests is not
   often found.

   [275] Justin, Apol. 1. 9: Dial. 117: O'ti me`n oun kai` euchai kai`
   eucharisti'ai, upo' ton axi'on gino'menai, te'leiai mo'nai kai`
   eua'restoi eisi to theo thusi'ai, kai` auto's phemi; see also still the
   later Fathers; Clem. Strom. VII. 6. 31: emeis di' euches timomen to`n
   theo`n, kai` tau'ten te`n thusi'an ari'sten, kai` agiota'ten meta`
   dikaiosu'nes anape'mpomen to dikai'o lo'go; Iren. III. 18. 3. Ptolem.
   ad Floram. 3: prosphora`s prosphe'rein prose'taxen emin o sote'r, alla`
   ouchi' ta`s di' alo'gon zo'on e` tou'ton ton thomiama'ton alla` dia`
   pneumatikon ai'non kai` doxon kai` eucharisti'as kai` dia` tes eis
   toi`s plesi'on koinoni'as kai` e?poii'as.

   [276] The Jewish regulations about fastings, together with the Jewish
   system of sacrifice were rejected; but on the other hand, in virtue of
   words of the Lord, fasts were looked upon as a necessary accompaniment
   of prayer, and definite arrangements were already made for them (see
   Barn. 3; Didache 8; Herm. Sim. V. 1. ff. The fast is to have a special
   value from the fact that whatever one saved by means of it, is to be
   given to the poor (see Hermas and Aristides, Apol. 15; "And if any one
   among the Christians is poor and in want, and they have not overmuch of
   the means of life, they fast two or three days, in order that they may
   provide those in need with the food they require"). The statement of
   James I. 27: threskei'a kathara` kai` ami'antos para` to the'o kai`
   patri` au'te esti'n, episke'ptesthai orpha'nous kai` che'ras en te
   thli'psei auton, was again and again inculcated in diverse phraseology
   (Polycarp. Ep. 4, called the Widows thusiaste'rion of the community).
   Where moralistic views preponderated, as in Hermas and 2 Clement, good
   works were already valued in detail; prayers, fasts, alms appeared
   separately, and there was already introduced, especially under the
   influence of the so-called deutero-canonical writings of the Old
   Testament, the idea of a special meritoriousness of certain
   performances in fasts and alms (see 2 Clem. 16. 4). Still, the idea of
   the Christian moral life as a whole occupied the foreground (see
   Didache, cc. 1-5), and the exhortations to love God and one's
   neighbour, which, as exhortations to a moral life, were brought forward
   in every conceivable relation, supplemented the general summons to
   renounce the world, just as the official diaconate of the churches
   originating in the cultus prevented the decomposition of them into a
   society of ascetics.

   [277] For details, see below in the case of the Lord's Supper. It is
   specially important that even charity, through its union with the
   cultus, appeared as sacrificial worship (see e.g., Polyc. Ep. 4. 3).

   [278] The idea of sacrifice adopted by the Gentile Christian
   communities was that which was expressed in individual prophetic
   sayings and in the Psalms, a spiritualising of the Semitic Jewish
   sacrificial ritual, which, however, had not altogether lost its
   original features. The entrance of Greek ideas of sacrifice cannot be
   traced before Justin. Neither was there as yet any reflection as to the
   connection of the sacrifice of the Church with the sacrifice of Christ
   upon the cross.

   [279] See my Texte und Unters. z. Gesch. d. Altchristl. Lit .II. 1. 2,
   p. 88 ff., p. 137 ff.

   [280] There neither was a "doctrine" of Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
   nor was there any inner connection presupposed between these holy
   actions. They were here and there placed together as actions by the
   Lord.

   [281] Melito, Fragm. XII. (Otto. Corp. Apol. IX. p. 418). Du'o suneste
   ta` a'phesin amartema'ton parecho'mena, pa'thos dia` Christo'n kai`
   ba'ptisma.

   [282] There is no sure trace of infant baptism in this epoch; personal
   faith is a necessary condition (see Hermas, Vis. III. 7. 3; Justin,
   Apol. 1. 61). "Prius est prædicare posterius tinguere" (Tertull. "de
   bapt." 14).

   [283] On the basis of repentance. See Præd. Petri in Clem. Strom. VI.
   5. 43, 48.

   [284] See especially the second Epistle of Clement; Tertull. "de bapt."
   15: "Felix aqua quæ semel abluit, qum ludibrio pecatoribus non est.

   [285] The sinking and rising in baptism, and the immersion, were
   regarded as significant but not indispensable symbols (see Didache. 7).
   The most important passages for baptism are Didache 7: Barn. 6. 11: 11.
   1. 11 (the connection in which the cross of Christ is here placed to
   the water is important; the tertium comp. is that forgiveness of sin is
   the result of both); Herm. Vis. III. 3, Sim. IX. 16, Mand. IV. 3
   (ete'ra meta'noia ouk e'stin ei me` ekei'ne, o'te eis u'dor kate'bemen
   kai` ela'bomen a'phesin amartion emon ton prote'ron); 2 Clem. 6. 9: 7.
   6: 8. 6. Peculiar is Ignat. ad. Polyc. 6. 2: to` ba'ptisma umon mene'to
   os o'pla. Specially important is Justin, Apol I. 61. 65. To this also
   belong many passages from Tertullian's treatise "de bapt."; a Gnostic
   baptismal hymn in the third pseudo-Solomonic ode in the Pistis Sophia,
   p. 131, ed. Schwartze; Marcion's baptismal formula in Irenæus I. 21. 3.
   It clearly follows from the seventh chapter of the Didache that its
   author held that the pronouncing of the sacred names over the baptised
   and over the water was essential, but that immersion was not; see the
   thorough examination of this passage by Schaff. "The oldest church
   manual called the teaching of the twelve Apostles" pp. 29-57. The
   controversy about the nature of John's baptism in its relation to
   Christian baptism is very old in Christendom; see also Tertull. "de
   bapt." 10. Tertullian sees in John's baptism only a baptism to
   repentance, not to forgiveness.

   [286] In Hermas and 2 Clement. The expression probably arose from the
   language of the mysteries: see Appuleius, "de Magia," 55: "Sacrorum
   pleraque initia in Græcia participavi. Eorum quædam signa et monumenta
   tradita mihi a sacerdotibus sedulo conservo." Ever since the Gentile
   Christians conceived baptism (and the Lord's Supper) according to the
   mysteries, they were of course always surprised by the parallel with
   the mysteries themselves. That begins with Justin. Tertullian, "de
   bapt." 5, says: "Sed enim nationes extraneæ, ab omni intellectu
   spiritalium potestatum eadem efficacia idolis suis subministrant. Sed
   viduis aquis sibi mentiuntur. Nam et sacris quibusdam per lavacrum
   initiantur, Isidis alicujus aut Mithræ; ipsos etiam deos suos
   lavationibus efferunt. Ceterum villas, domos, templa totasque urbes
   aspergine circumlatæ aqua expiant passim. Certe ludis Apollinaribus et
   Eleusiniis tinguuntur, idque se in regenerationem et impunitatem
   periuriorum suorum agere præsumunt. Item penes veteres, quisquis se
   homicidio infecerat, purgatrices aquas explorabat." De praescr., 40:
   "Diabolus ipsas quoque res sacramentorum divinorum idolorum mysteriis
   æmulatur. Tingit et ipse quosdam, utique credentes et fideles suos;
   expositionem delictorum de lavacro repromittit, et si adhuc memini,
   Mithras signat illic in frontibus milites suos, celebrat et panis
   oblationem et imaginem resurrectionis inducit . . . . summum pontificem
   in unius nuptiis statuit, habet et virgines, habet et continentes." The
   ancient notion that matter has a mysterious influence on spirit came
   very early into vogue in connection with baptism. We see that from
   Tertullian's treatise on baptism and his speculations about the power
   of the water (c. 1 ff.). The water must, of course have been first
   consecrated for this purpose (that is, the demons must be driven out of
   it). But then it is holy water with which the Holy Spirit is united,
   and which is able really to cleanse the soul. See Hatch, "The influence
   of Greek ideas, etc.," p. 19. The consecration of the water is
   certainly very old: though we have no definite witnesses from the
   earliest period. Even for the exorcism of the baptised before baptism I
   know of no earlier witness than the Sentent. LXXXVII. episcoporum
   (Hartel. Opp. Cypr. I. p. 450, No. 37: "primo per mantis impositionem
   in exorcismo, secundo per baptismi regenerationem").

   [287] Justin is the first who does so (I. 61). The word comes from the
   Greek mysteries. On Justin's theory of baptism, see also I. 62. and Von
   Engelhardt, "Christenthum Justin's," p. 102 f.

   [288] Paul unites baptism and the communication of the Spirit: but they
   were very soon represented apart, see the accounts in the Acts of the
   Apostles, which are certainly very obscure because the author has
   evidently never himself observed the descent of the Spirit, or anything
   like it. The ceasing of special manifestations of the Spirit in and
   after baptism, and the enforced renunciation of seeing baptism
   accompanied by special shocks, must be regarded as the first stage in
   the sobering of the churches.

   [289] The idea of the whole transaction of the Supper as a sacrifice is
   plainly found in the Didache, (c. 14), in Ignatius, and above all in
   Justin (I. 65 f.). But even Clement of Rome presupposes it, when (in
   cc. 40-44) he draws a parallel between bishops and deacons and the
   Priests and Levites of the Old Testament, describing as the chief
   function of the former (44. 4) prosphe'rein ta` dora. This is not the
   place to enquire whether the first celebration had, in the mind of its
   founder, the character of a sacrificial meal; but, certainly, the idea,
   as it was already developed at the time of Justin, had been created by
   the churches. Various reasons tended towards seeing in the Supper a
   sacrifice. In the first place, Malachi I. 11, demanded a solemn
   Christian sacrifice: see my notes on Didache, 14. 3. In the second
   place, all prayers were regarded as sacrifice, and therefore the solemn
   prayers at the Supper must be specially considered as such. In the
   third place, the words of institution touto poieite, contained a
   command with regard to a definite religious action. Such an action,
   however, could only be represented as a sacrifice, and this the more
   that the Gentile Christians might suppose that they had to understand
   poiein in the sense of thu'ein. In the fourth place, payments in kind
   were necessary for the "agapæ" connected with the Supper, out of which
   were taken the bread and wine for the Holy celebration; in what other
   aspect could these offerings in the worship be regarded than as
   prosphorai' for the purpose of a sacrifice? Yet the spiritual idea so
   prevailed that only the prayers were regarded as the thusi'a proper,
   even in the case of Justin (Dial. 117). The elements are only dora,
   prosphorai', which obtain their value from the prayers in which thanks
   are given for the gifts of creation and redemption as well as for the
   holy meal, and entreaty is made for the introduction of the community
   into the Kingdom of God (see Didache, 9. 10). Therefore, even the
   sacred meal itself is called eucharisti'a (Justin, Apol. I. 66: e
   trophe` au'te kalheitai par' emin eucharisti'a. Didache 9. 1: Ignat.,
   because it is trophe` eucharistetheisa. It is a mistake to suppose that
   Justin already understood the body of Christ to be the object of
   poiein, and therefore thought of a sacrifice of this body (I. 66). The
   real sacrificial act in the Supper consists rather, according to
   Justin, only in the eucharisti'an poiein, whereby the koino`s a'rtos
   becomes the a'rtos tes eucharisti'as. The sacrifice of the Supper in
   its essence, apart from the offering of alms, which in the practice of
   the Church was closely united with it, is nothing but a sacrifice of
   prayer: the sacrificial act of the Christian here also is nothing else
   than an act of prayer (see Apol. I. 13, 65-67; Dial. 28, 29, 41, 70,
   116-118).

   [290] Justin lays special stress on this purpose. On the other hand, it
   is wanting in the Supper prayers of the Didache, unless c. 9. 2 be
   regarded as an allusion to it.

   [291] The designation thusi'a is first found in the Didache, c. 14.

   [292] The Supper was regarded as a "Sacrament" in so far as a blessing
   was represented in its holy food. The conception of the nature of this
   blessing as set forth in John VI. 27-58, appears to have been the most
   common. It may be traced back to Ignatius, ad Eph. 20. 2: e'na a'rton
   klontes o's estin pha'rmakon athanasi'as, anti'dotos tou me` atothanein
   alla` zen en Iesou Christou dia` panto's. Cf. Didache, 10. 3: emin
   echari'so pneumatike`n trophe`n kai` poto`n kai` zoe`n aio'nion; also
   10. 21: eucharistoume'n soi upe`r tes gnoseos kai` pi'steos kai`
   athanasi'as. Justin Apol. I. 66: ek tes trophes tau'tes haima kai`
   sa'rkes kata` metabole`n tre'phontai emon (kata` metabole'n, that is,
   the holy food, like all nourishment, is completely transformed into our
   flesh; but what Justin has in view here is most probably the body of
   the resurrection. The expression, as the context shews, is chosen for
   the sake of the parallel to the incarnation). Iren. IV. 18. 5: V. 2. 2
   f. As to how the elements are related to the body and blood of Christ,
   Ignatius seems to have expressed himself in a strictly realistic way in
   several passages, especially ad. Smyr. 7. 1: eucharisti'as kai`
   proseuches ape'chontai dia` to` me` omologein, te`n eucharisti'an
   sa'rka einei tou soteros emon Iesou Christou, te`n upe`r ton amartion
   emon pathousan. But many passages shew that Ignatius was far from such
   a conception, and rather thought as John did. In Trall. 8, faith is
   described as the flesh, and love as the blood of Christ; in Rom. 7, in
   one breath the flesh of Christ is called the bread of God, and the
   blood aga'pe a'phthartos. In Philad. 1, we read: haima I Chr. e'tis
   esti`n chara` aio'nios kai` para'monos. In Philad. 5, the Gospel is
   called the flesh of Christ, etc. Hofling is therefore right in saying
   (Lehre v. Opfer, p. 39): "The Eucharist is to Ignatius sa'rx of Christ,
   as a visible Gospel, a kind of Divine institution attesting the content
   of pi'stis, viz., belief in the sa'rx pathousa, an institution which is
   at the same time, to the community, a means of representing and
   preserving its unity in this belief." On the other hand, it cannot be
   mistaken that Justin (Apol. I. 66) presupposed the identity,
   miraculously produced by the Logos, of the consecrated bread and the
   body he had assumed. In this we have probably to recognise an influence
   on the conception of the Supper, of the miracle represented in the
   Greek Mysteries: Ouch os koino`n a'rton oude` koino`n po'ma tauta
   lamba'nomen, all' o'n tro'pon dia` lo'gou theou sarkopoietheis Iesous
   Christo`s o sote`r emon kai` sa'rka kai` aima uper soteri'as emon
   e'schen, ou'tos kai` te`n di' euches lo'gou tou par' autou
   eucharistetheisan trophe'n, ex hei aima kai` sa'rkes kata` metabole`n
   tre'phontai emon, ekei'nou tou sarkopoiethe'ntos Iesou kai` sa'rka kai`
   haima thdida'chthemen einai (See Von Otto on the passage). In the Texte
   u. Unters. VII. 2. p. 117 ff., I have shewn that in the different
   Christian circles of the second century, water and only water was often
   used in the Supper instead of wine, and that in many regions this
   custom was maintained up to the middle of the third century (see Cypr.
   Ep. 63). I have endeavoured to make it further probable that even
   Justin in his Apology describes a celebration of the Lord's Supper with
   bread and water. The latter has been contested by Zahn, "Bread and wine
   in the Lord's Supper, in the early Church," 1892, and Jülicher, Zur
   Gesch. der Abendmahisfeier in der aeltesten Kirche (Abhandl. f.
   Weiszäcker, 1892, p. 217 ff.).

   [293] Ignatius calls the thank-offering the flesh of Christ, but the
   concept "flesh of Christ" is for him itself a spiritual one. On the
   contrary, Justin sees in the bread the actual flesh of Christ, but does
   not connect it with the idea of sacrifice. They are thus both as yet
   far from the later conception. The numerous allegories which are
   already attached to the Supper (one bread, equivalent to one community;
   many scattered grains bound up in the one bread, equivalent to the
   Christians scattered abroad in the world, who are to be gathered
   together into the Kingdom of God; one altar, equivalent to one assembly
   of the community, excluding private worship, etc.), cannot as a group
   be adduced here.

   [294] Cf. for the following my arguments in the larger edition of the
   "Teaching of the Apostles" Chap. 5, (Texte u. Unters. II. 1. 2). The
   numerous recent enquiries (Loening, Loofs, Réville etc.) will be found
   referred to in Sohm's Kirchenrecht. Vol. I. 1892, where the most
   exhaustive discussions are given.

   [295] That the bishops and deacons were, primarily, officials connected
   with the cultus is most clearly seen from 1 Clem. 40-44, but also from
   the connection in which the 14th Chap. of the Didache stands with the
   15th (see the oun 15.1), to which Hatch in conversation called my
   attention. The philoxeni'a and the intercourse with other communities
   (the fostering of the "unitas") belonged, above all, to the affairs of
   the Church. Here, undoubtedly, from the beginning lay an important part
   of the bishop's duties. Ramsay ("The Church in the Roman Empire," p.
   361 ff.) has emphasised this point exclusively, and therefore
   one-sidedly. According to him, the monarchical Episcopate sprang from
   the officials who were appointed ad hoc and for a time, for the purpose
   of promoting intercourse with other churches.

   [296] Sohm (in the work mentioned above) seeks to prove that the
   monarchical Episcopate originated in Rome and is already presupposed by
   Hermas. I hold that the proof for this has not been adduced, and I must
   also in great part reject the bold statements which are fastened on to
   the first Epistle of Clement. They may be comprehended in the
   proposition which Sohm, p. 158, has placed at the head of his
   discussion of the Epistle. "The first Epistle of Clement makes an epoch
   in the history of the organisation of the Church. It was destined to
   put an end to the early Christian constitution of the Church."
   According to Sohm (p. 165), another immediate result of the Epistle was
   a change of constitution in the Romish Church, the introduction of the
   monarchical Episcopate. That, however, can only be asserted, not
   proved; for the proof which Sohm has endeavoured to bring from
   Ignatius' Epistle to the Romans and the Shepherd of Hermas, is not
   convincing.

   [297] See, above all, 1 Clem. 42, 44, Acts of the Apostles, Pastoral
   Epistles, etc.

   [298] This idea is Romish. See Book II. chap 11. C.

   [299] We must remember here that besides the teachers, elders and
   deacons, the ascetics (virgins, widows, celibates, abstinentes) and the
   martyrs (confessors) enjoyed a special respect in the Churches, and
   frequently laid hold of the government and leading of them. Hermas
   enjoins plainly enough the duty of esteeming the confessors higher than
   the presbyters (Vis. III. 1. 2). The widows were soon entrusted with
   diaconal tasks connected with the worship, and received a corresponding
   respect. As to the limits of this, there was, as we can gather from
   different passages, much disagreement. One statement in Tertullian
   shews that the confessors had special claims to be considered in the
   choice of a bishop (adv. Valent. 4: "Speraverat Episcopatum Valentinus,
   quia et ingenio poterat et eloquio. Sed alium ex martyrii prærogativa
   loci potitum indignatus de ecclesia authenticæ regulæ abrupit"). This
   statement is strengthened by other passages; see Tertull. de fuga; 11:
   "Hoc sentire et facere omnem servum dei oportet, etiam minor's loci, ut
   maioris fieri possit, si quern gradum in persecutionis tolerantia
   ascenderit"; see Hippol. in the Arab. canons, and also Achelis, Texte
   u. Unters. VI. 4. pp. 67, 220: Cypr. Epp. 38. 39. The way in which
   confessors and ascetics, from the end of the second century, attempted
   to have their say in the leading of the Churches, and the respectful
   way in which it was sought to set their claims aside, shew that a
   special relation to the Lord, and therefore a special right with regard
   to the community, was early acknowledged to these people, on account of
   their archievements. On the transition of the old prophets and teachers
   into wandering ascetics, later into monks, see the Syriac
   Pseudo-Clementine Epistles, "de virginitate," and my Abhandl. i. d.
   Sitzungsberichten d. K. Pr. Akad. d. Wissensch. 1891, p. 361 ff.

   [300] See Weizsäcker. Gött. Gel. Anz. 1886, No. 21, whose statements I
   can almost entirely make my own.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER IV

  THE ATTEMPTS OF THE GNOSTICS TO CREATE AN APOSTOLIC DOGMATIC, AND A CHRISTIAN
  THEOLOGY; OR, THE ACUTE SECULARISING OF CHRISTIANITY.

   § I. The Conditions for the Rise of Gnosticism.

   The Christian communities were originally unions for a holy life on the
   ground of a common hope, which rested on the belief that the God who
   has spoken by the Prophets has sent his Son Jesus Christ, and through
   him revealed eternal life, and will shortly make it manifest.
   Christianity had its roots in certain facts and utterances, and the
   foundation of the Christian union was the common hope, the holy life in
   the Spirit according to the law of God, and the holding fast to those
   facts and utterances. There was, as the foregoing chapter will have
   shewn, no fixed Didache beyond that. [301] There was abundance of
   fancies, ideas, and knowledge, but these had not yet the value of being
   the religion itself. Yet the belief that Christianity guarantees the
   perfect knowledge, and leads from one degree of clearness to another,
   was in operation from the very beginning. This conviction had to be
   immediately tested by the Old Testament, that is, the task was imposed
   on the majority of thinking Christians, by the circumstances in which
   the Gospel had been proclaimed to them, of making the Old Testament
   intelligible to themselves, in other words, of using this book as a
   Christian book, and of finding the means by which they might be able to
   repel the Jewish claim to it, and refute the Jewish interpretation of
   it. This task would not have been imposed, far less solved, if the
   Christian communities in the Empire had not entered into the
   inheritance of the Jewish propaganda, which had al-ready been greatly
   influenced by foreign religions (Babylonian and Persian, see the Jewish
   Apocalypses), and in which an extensive spiritualising of the Old
   Testament religion had already taken place. This spiritualising was the
   result of a philosophic view of religion, and this philosophic view was
   the outcome of a lasting influence of Greek philosophy and of the Greek
   spirit generally on Judaism. In consequence of this view, all facts and
   sayings of the Old Testament in which one could not find his way were
   allegorised. "Nothing was what it seemed, but was only the symbol of
   something invisible. The history of the Old Testament was here
   sublimated to a history of the emancipation of reason from passion." It
   describes, however, the beginning of the historical development of
   Christianity, that as soon as it wished to give account of itself, or
   to turn to advantage the documents of revelations which were in its
   possession, it had to adopt the methods of that fantastic syncretism.
   We have seen above that those writers who made a diligent use of the
   Old Testament had no hesitation in making use of the allegorical
   method. That was required not only by the inability to understand the
   verbal sense of the Old Testament, presenting diverging moral and
   religious opinions, but, above all, by the conviction that on every
   page of that book Christ and the Christian Church must be found. How
   could this conviction have been maintained unless the definite concrete
   meaning of the documents had been already obliterated by the Jewish
   philosophic view of the Old Testament?

   This necessary allegorical interpretation, however, brought into the
   communities an intellectual philosophic element, gno'sis, which was
   perfectly distinct from the Apocalyptic dreams, in which were beheld
   angel hosts on white horses, Christ with eyes as a flame of fire,
   hellish beasts, conflict and victory." [302] In this gno'sis, which
   attached itself to the Old Testament, many began to see the specific
   blessing which was promised to mature faith, and through which it was
   to attain perfection. What a wealth of relations, hints, and intuitions
   seemed to disclose itself, as soon as the Old Testament was considered
   allegorically, and to what extent had the way been prepared here by the
   Jewish philosophic teachers! From the simple narratives of the Old
   Testament had already been developed a theosophy, in which the most
   abstract ideas had acquired reality, and from which sounded forth the
   Hellenic canticle of the power of the Spirit over matter and
   sensuality, and of the true home of the soul. Whatever in this great
   adaptation still remained obscure and unnoticed, was now lighted up by
   the history of Jesus, his birth, his life, his sufferings and triumph.
   The view of the Old Testament as a document of the deepest wisdom,
   transmitted to those who knew how to read it as such, unfettered the
   intellectual interest which would not rest until it had entirely
   transferred the new religion from the world of feelings, actions and
   hopes, into the world of Hellenic conceptions, and transformed it into
   a metaphysic. In that exposition of the Old Testament which we find,
   for example, in the so-called Barnabas, there is already concealed an
   important philosophic, Hellenic element, and in that sermon which bears
   the name of Clement (the so-called second Epistle of Clement),
   conceptions such as that of the Church, have already assumed a bodily
   form and been joined in marvellous connections, while, on the contrary,
   things concrete have been transformed into things invisible.

   But once the intellectual interest was unfettered, and the new religion
   had approximated to the Hellenic spirit by means of a philosophic view
   of the Old Testament, how could that spirit be prevented from taking
   complete and immediate possession of it, and where, in the first
   instance, could the power be found that was able to decide whether this
   or that opinion was incompatible with Christianity? This Christianity,
   as it was, unequivocally excluded all polytheism, and all national
   religions existing in the Empire. It opposed to them the one God, the
   Saviour Jesus, and a spiritual worship of God. But at the same time it
   summoned all thoughtful men to knowledge by declaring itself to be the
   only true religion, while it appeared to be only a variety of Judaism.
   It seemed to put no limits to the character and extent of the
   knowledge, least of all to such knowledge as was able to allow all that
   was transmitted to remain, and at the same time abolish it by
   transforming it into mysterious symbols. That really was the method
   which every one must and did apply who wished to get from Christianity
   more than practical motives and super earthly hopes. But where was the
   limit of the application? Was not the next step to see in the Evangelic
   records also new material for spiritual interpretations, and to
   illustrate from the narratives there, as from the Old Testament, the
   conflict of the spirit with matter, of reason with sensuality? Was not
   the conception, that the traditional deeds of Christ were really the
   last act in the struggle of those mighty spiritual powers whose
   conflict is delineated in the Old Testament, at least as evident as the
   other, that those deeds were the fulfilment of mysterious promises? Was
   it not in keeping with the consciousness possessed by the new religion
   of being the universal religion, that one should not be satisfied with
   mere beginnings of a new knowledge, or with fragments of it, but should
   seek to set up such knowledge in a complete and systematic form, and so
   to exhibit the best and universal system of life as also the best and
   universal system of knowledge of the world? Finally, did not the free
   and yet so rigid forms in which the Christian communities were
   organised, the union of the mysterious with a wonderful publicity, of
   the spiritual with significant rites (baptism and the Lord's Supper),
   invite men to find here the realisation of the ideal which the Hellenic
   religious spirit was at that time seeking, viz., a communion which, in
   virtue of a Divine revelation, is in possession of the highest
   knowledge, and therefore leads the holiest life; a communion which does
   not communicate the knowledge by discourse, but by mysterious
   efficacious consecrations and by revealed dogmas? These questions are
   thrown out here in accordance with the direction which the historical
   progress of Christianity took. The phenomenon called Gnosticism gives
   the answer to them. [303]

   § 2. The Nature of Gnosticism.

   The Catholic Church afterwards claimed as her own those writers of the
   first century (60-160) who were content with turning speculation to
   account only as a means of spiritualising the Old Testament, without,
   however, attempting a systematic reconstruction of tradition. But all
   those who in the first century undertook to furnish Christian practice
   with the foundation of a complete systematic knowledge, she declared
   false Christians, Christians only in name. Historical enquiry cannot
   accept this judgment. On the contrary, it sees in Gnosticism a series
   of undertakings, which in a certain way is analogous to the Catholic
   embodiment of Christianity, in doctrine, morals, and worship. The great
   distinction here consists essentially in the fact that the Gnostic
   systems represent the acute secularising or hellenising of
   Christianity, with the rejection of the Old Testament; [304] while the
   Catholic system, on the other hand, represents a gradual process of the
   same kind with the conservation of the Old Testament. The traditional
   religion on being, as it were, suddenly required to recognise itself in
   a picture foreign to it, was yet vigorous enough to reject that
   picture; but to the gradual, and one might say indulgent remodelling to
   which it was subjected, it offered but little resistance, nay, as a
   rule, it was never conscious of it. It is therefore no paradox to say
   that Gnosticism, which is just Hellenism, has in Catholicism obtained
   half a victory. We have, at Ieast, the same justification for that
   assertion--the parallel may be permitted--as we have for recognising a
   triumph of 18th century ideas in the first Empire, and a continuance,
   though with reservations, of the old regime.

   From this point of view the position to be assigned to the Gnostics in
   the history of dogma, which has hitherto been always misunderstood, is
   obvious. They were, in short, the Theologians of the first century.
   [305] They were the first to transform Christianity into a system of
   doctrines (dogmas). They were the first to work up tradition
   systematically. They undertook to present Christianity as the absolute
   religion, and therefore placed it in definite opposition to the other
   religions, even to Judaism. But to them the absolute religion, viewed
   in its contents, was identical with the result of the philosophy of
   religion for which the support of a revelation was to be sought. They
   are therefore those Christians who, in a swift advance, attempted to
   capture Christianity for Hellenic culture, and Hellenic culture for
   Christianity, and who gave up the Old Testament in order to facilitate
   the conclusion of the covenant between the two powers, and make it
   possible to assert the absoluteness of Christianity.--But the
   significance of the Old Testament in the religious history of the world
   lies just in this, that, in order to be maintained at all, it required
   the application of the allegoric method, that is, a definite proportion
   of Greek ideas, and that, on the other hand, it opposed the strongest
   barrier to the complete hellenising of Christianity. Neither the
   sayings of Jesus, nor Christian hopes, were at first capable of forming
   such a barrier. If, now, the majority of Gnostics could make the
   attempt to disregard the Old Testament, that is a proof that, in wide
   circles of Christendom, people were at first satisfied with an
   abbreviated form of the Gospel, containing the preaching of the one
   God, of the resurrection and of continence,--a law and an ideal of
   practical life. [306] In this form, as it was realised in life, the
   Christianity which dispensed with "doctrines" seemed capable of union
   with every form of thoughtful and earnest philosophy, because the
   Jewish foundation did not make its appearance here at all. But the
   majority of Gnostic undertakings may also be viewed as attempts to
   transform Christianity into a theosophy, that is, into a revealed
   metaphysic and philosophy of history, with a complete disregard of the
   Jewish Old Testament soil on which it originated, through the use of
   Pauline ideas, [307] and under the influence of the Platonic spirit.
   Moreover, comparison is possible between writers such as Barnabas and
   Ignatius, and the so-called Gnostics, to the effect of making the
   latter appear in possession of a completed theory, to which fragmentary
   ideas in the former exhibit a striking affinity.

   We have hitherto tacitly presupposed that in Gnosticism the Hellenic
   spirit desired to make itself master of Christianity, or more correctly
   of the Christian communities. This conception may be, and really is
   still contested. For according to the accounts of later opponents, and
   on these we are almost exclusively dependent here, the main thing with
   the Gnostics seems to have been the reproduction of Asiatic
   Mythologoumena of all kinds, so that we should rather have to see in
   Gnosticism a union of Christianity with the most remote Oriental cults
   and their wisdom. But with regard to the most important Gnostic systems
   the words hold true, "The hands are the hands of Esau, but the voice is
   the voice of Jacob." There can be no doubt of the fact, that the
   Gnosticism which has become a factor in the movement of the history of
   dogma, was ruled in the main by the Greek spirit, and determined by the
   interests and doctrines of the Greek philosophy of religion, [308]
   which doubtless had already assumed a syncretistic character. This fact
   is certainly concealed by the circumstance that the material of the
   speculations was taken now from this, and now from that Oriental
   religious philosophy, from astrology and the Semitic cosmologies. But
   that is only in keeping with the stage which the religious development
   had reached among the Greeks and Romans of that time. [309] The
   cultured, and these primarily come into consideration here, no longer
   had a religion in the sense of a national religion, but a philosophy of
   religion. They were, however, in search of a religion, that is, a firm
   basis for the results of their speculations, and they hoped to obtain
   it by turning themselves towards the very old Oriental cults, and
   seeking to fill them with the religious and moral knowledge which had
   been gained by the Schools of Plato and of Zeno. The union of the
   traditions and rites of the Oriental religions, viewed as mysteries,
   with the spirit of Greek philosophy is the characteristic of the epoch.
   The needs, which asserted themselves with equal strength, of a complete
   knowledge of the All, of a spiritual God, a sure and therefore very old
   revelation, atonement and immortality, were thus to be satisfied at one
   and the same time. The most sublimated spiritualism enters here into
   the strangest union with a crass superstition based on Oriental cults.
   This superstition was supposed to insure and communicate the spiritual
   blessings. These complicated tendencies now entered into Christianity.

   We have accordingly to ascertain and distinguish in the prominent
   Gnostic schools, which, in the second century on Greek soil, became an
   important factor in the history of the Church, the Semitic-cosmological
   foundations, the Hellenic philosophic mode of thought, and the
   recognition of the redemption of the world by Jesus Christ. Further, we
   have to take note of the three elements of Gnosticism, viz., the
   speculative and philosophical, the mystic element connection with
   worship, and the practical, ascetic. The close connection in which
   these three elements appear, [310] the total transformation of all
   ethical into cosmological problems, the upbuilding of a philosophy of
   God and the world on the basis of a combination of popular Mythologies,
   physical observations belonging to the Oriental (Babylonian) religious
   philosophy, and historical events, as well as the idea that the history
   of religion is the last act in the drama-like history of the
   Cosmos--all this is not peculiar to Gnosticism, but rather corresponds
   to a definite stage of the general development. It may, however, be
   asserted that Gnosticism anticipated the general development, and that
   not only with regard to Catholicism, but also with regard to
   Neoplatonism, which represents the last stage in the inner history of
   Hellenism. [311] The Valentinians have already got as far as
   Jamblichus. The name Gnosis, Gnostics, describes excellently the aims
   of Gnosticism, in so far as its adherents boasted of the absolute
   knowledge, and faith in the Gospel was transformed into a knowledge of
   God, nature and history. This knowledge, however, was not regarded as
   natural, but in the view of the Gnostics was based on revelation, was
   communicated and guaranteed by holy consecrations, and was accordingly
   cultivated by reflection supported by fancy. A mythology of ideas was
   created out of the sensuous mythology of any Oriental religion, by the
   conversion of concrete forms into speculative and moral ideas, such as
   "Abyss," "Silence," "Logos," "Wisdom," "Life," while the mutual
   relation and number of these abstract ideas were determined by the data
   supplied by the corresponding concretes. Thus arose a philosophic
   dramatic poem similar to the Platonic, but much more complicated, and
   therefore more fantastic, in which mighty powers, the spiritual and
   good, appear in an unholy union with the material and wicked, but from
   which the spiritual is finally delivered by the aid of those kindred
   powers which are too exalted to be ever drawn down into the common. The
   good and heavenly which has been drawn down into the material, and
   therefore really non-existing, is the human spirit, and the exalted
   power who delivers it is Christ. The Evangelic history as handed down
   is not the history of Christ, but a collection of allegoric
   representations of the great history of God and the world. Christ has
   really no history. His appearance in this world of mixture and
   confusion is his deed, and the enlightenment of the spirit about itself
   is the result which springs out of that deed. This enlightenment itself
   is life. But the enlightenment is dependent on revelation, asceticism
   and surrender to those mysteries which Christ founded, in which one
   enters into præsens numen and which in mysterious ways promote the
   process of raising the spirit above the sensual. This rising above the
   sensual is, however, to be actively practised. Abstinence therefore, as
   a rule, is the watchword. Christianity thus appears here as a
   speculative philosophy which redeems the spirit by enlightening it,
   consecrating it, and instructing it in the right conduct of life. The
   Gnosis is free from the rationalistic interest in the sense of natural
   religion. Because the riddles about the world which it desires to solve
   are not properly intellectual, but practical, because it desires to be
   in the end gnosis soteri'as, it removes into the region of the
   supra-rational the powers which are supposed to confer vigour and life
   on the human spirit. Only a ma'thesis, however, united with mustagogi'a
   resting on revelation leads thither, not an exact philosophy. Gnosis
   starts from the great problem of this world, but occupies itself with a
   higher world, and does not wish to be an exact philosophy, but a
   philosophy of religion. Its fundamental philosophic doctrines are the
   following: (1) The indefinable, infinite nature of the Divine primeval
   Being exalted above all thought. (2) Matter as opposed to the Divine
   Being, and therefore having no real being, the ground of evil. (3) The
   fulness of divine potencies, sons, which are thought of partly as
   powers, partly as real ideas, partly as relatively independent beings,
   presenting in gradation the unfolding and revelation of the Godhead,
   but at the same time rendering possible the transition of the higher to
   the lower. (4) The Cosmos as a mixture of matter with divine sparks,
   which has arisen from a descent of the latter into the former, or, as
   some say, from the perverse, or at least merely permitted undertaking
   of a subordinate spirit. The Demiurge, therefore, is an evil,
   intermediate, or weak, but penitent being; the best thing therefore in
   the world is aspiration. (5) The deliverance of the spiritual element
   from its union with matter, or the separation of the good from the
   world of sensuality by the Spirit of Christ which operates through
   knowledge, asceticism, and holy consecration: thus originates the
   perfect Gnostic, the man who is free from the world, and master of
   himself, who lives in God and prepares himself for eternity. All these
   are ideas for which we find the way prepared in the philosophy of the
   time, anticipated by Philo, and represented in Neoplatonism as the
   great final result of Greek philosophy. It lies in the nature of the
   case that only some men are able to appropriate the Christianity that
   is comprehended in these ideas, viz., just as many as are capable of
   entering into this kind of Christianity, those who are spiritual. The
   others must be considered as non-partakers of the Spirit from the
   beginning, and therefore excluded from knowledge as the profanum
   vulgus. Yet some--the Valentinians, for example--made a distinction in
   this vulgus, which can only be discussed later on, because it is
   connected with the position of the Gnostics towards Jewish Christian
   tradition.

   The later opponents of Gnosticism preferred to bring out the fantastic
   details of the Gnostic systems, and thereby created the prejudice that
   the essence of the matter lay in these. They have thus occasioned
   modern expounders to speculate about the Gnostic speculations in a
   manner that is marked by still greater strangeness. Four observations
   shew how unhistorical and unjust such a view is, at least with regard
   to the chief systems. (1) The great Gnostic schools, wherever they
   could, sought to spread their opinions. But it is simply incredible
   that they should have expected of all their disciples, male and female,
   an accurate knowledge of the details of their system. On the contrary,
   it may be shewn that they often contented themselves with imparting
   consecration, with regulating the practical life of their adherents,
   and instructing them in the general features of their system. [312] (2)
   We see how in one and the same school--for example, the
   Valentinian--the details of the religious metaphysic were very various
   and changing. (3) We hear but little of conflicts between the various
   schools. On the contrary, we learn that the books of doctrine and
   edification passed from one school to another. [313] (4) The fragments
   of Gnostic writings which have been preserved, and this is the most
   important consideration of the four, shew that the Gnostics devoted
   their main strength to the working out of those religious, moral,
   philosophical and historical problems which must engage the thoughtful
   of all times. [314] We only need to read some actual Gnostic document,
   such as the Epistle of Ptolemæus to Flora, or certain paragraphs of the
   Pistis Sophia, in order to see that the fantastic details of the
   philosophic poem can only, in the case of the Gnostics themselves, have
   had the value of liturgical apparatus, the construction of which was
   not of course matter of indifference, but hardly formed the principle
   interest. The things to be proved and to be confirmed by the aid of
   this or that very old religious philosophy, were certain religious and
   moral fundamental convictions, and a correct conception of God, of the
   sensible, of the creator of the world, of Christ, of the Old Testament,
   and the evangelic tradition. Here were actual dogmas. But how the grand
   fantastic union of all the factors was to be brought about, was, as the
   Valentinian school shews, a problem whose solution was ever and again
   subjected to new attempts. [315] No one to-day can in all respects
   distinguish what to those thinkers was image and what reality, or in
   what degree they were at all able to distinguish image from reality,
   and in how far the magic formulæ of their mysteries were really objects
   of their meditation. But the final aim of their endeavours, the faith
   and knowledge of their own hearts which they instilled into their
   disciples, the practical rules which they wished to give them, and the
   view of Christ which they wished to confirm them in, stand out with
   perfect clearness. Like Plato, they made their explanation of the world
   start from the contradiction between sense and reason, which the
   thoughtful man observes in himself. The cheerful asceticism, the powers
   of the spiritual and the good which were seen in the Christian
   communities, attracted them and seemed to require the addition of
   theory to practice. Theory without being followed by practice had long
   been in existence, but here was the as yet rare phenomenon of a moral
   practice which seemed to dispense with that which was regarded as
   indispensable, viz., theory. The philosophic life was already there;
   how could the philosophic doctrine be wanting, and after what other
   model could the latent doctrine be reproduced than that of the Greek
   religious philosophy? [316] That the Hellenic spirit in Gnosticism
   turned with such eagerness to the Christian communities and was ready
   even to believe in Christ in order to appropriate the moral powers
   which it saw operative in them, is a convincing proof of the
   extraordinary impression which these communities made. For what other
   peculiarities and attractions had they to offer to that spirit than the
   certainty of their conviction (of eternal life), and the purity of
   their life? We hear of no similar edifice being erected in the second
   century on the basis of any other Oriental cult--even the Mithras cult
   is scarcely to be mentioned here--as the Gnostic was on the foundation
   of the Christian. [317] The Christian communities, however, together
   with their worship of Christ, formed the real solid basis of the
   greater number and the most important of the Gnostic systems, and in
   this fact we have, on the very threshold of the great conflict, a
   triumph of Christianity over Hellenism. The triumph lay in the
   recognition of what Christianity had already performed as a moral and
   social power. This recognition found expression in bringing the highest
   that one possessed as a gift to be consecrated by the new religion, a
   philosophy of religion whose end was plain and simple, but whose means
   were mysterious and complicated.

   § 3. History of Gnosticism and the forms in which it appeared.

   In the previous section we have been contemplating Gnosticism as it
   reached its prime in the great schools of Basilides and Valentinus, and
   those related to them, [318] at the close of the period we are now
   considering, and became an important factor in the history of dogma.
   But this Gnosticism had (1) preliminary stages, and (2) was always
   accompanied by a great number of sects, schools and undertakings which
   were only in part related to it, and yet, reasonably enough, were
   grouped together with it.

   To begin with the second point, the great Gnostic schools were flanked
   on the right and left by a motley series of groups which at their
   extremities can hardly be distinguished from popular Christianity on
   the one hand, and from the Hellenic and the common world on the other.
   [319] On the right were communities such as the Encratites, which put
   all stress on a strict asceticism, in support of which they urged the
   example of Christ, but which here and there fell into dualistic ideas.
   [320] There were, further, whole communities which, for decennia, drew
   their views of Christ from books which represented him as a heavenly
   spirit who had merely assumed an apparent body. [321] There were also
   individual teachers who brought forward peculiar opinions without
   thereby causing any immediate stir in the Churches. [322] On the left
   there were schools such as the Carpocratians, in which the philosophy
   and communism of Plato were taught, the son of the founder and second
   teacher Epiphanes honoured as a God (at Cephallenia), as Epicurus was
   in his school, and the image of Jesus crowned along with those of
   Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle. [323] On this left flank are, further,
   swindlers who take their own way, like Alexander of Abonoteichus,
   magicians, soothsayers, sharpers and jugglers, under the sign-board of
   Christianity, deceivers and hypocrites who appear using mighty words
   with a host of unintelligible formulæ, and take up with scandalous
   ceremonies in order to rob men of their money and women of their
   honour. [324] All this was afterwards called "Heresy" and "Gnosticism,"
   and is still so called. [325] And these names may be retained, if we
   will understand by them nothing else than the world taken into
   Christianity, all the manifold formations which resulted from the first
   contact of the new religion with the society into which it entered. To
   prove the existence of that left wing of Gnosticism is of the greatest
   interest for the history of dogma, but the details are of no
   consequence. On the other hand, in the aims and undertakings of the
   Gnostic right, it is just the details that are of greatest
   significance, because they shew that there was no fixed boundary
   between what one may call common Christian and Gnostic Christian. But
   as Gnosticism, in its contents, extended itself from the Encratites and
   the philosophic interpretation of certain articles of the Christian
   proclamation as brought forward without offence by individual teachers
   in the communities, to the complete dissolution of the Christian
   element by philosophy, or the religious charlatanry of the age, so it
   exhibits itself formally also in a long series of groups which
   comprised all imaginable forms of unions. There were churches, ascetic
   associations, mystery cults, strictly private philosophic schools,
   [326] free unions for edification, entertainments by Christian
   charlatans and deceived deceivers, who appeared as magicians and
   prophets, attempts at founding new religions after the model and under
   the influence of the Christian, etc. But, finally, the thesis that
   Gnosticism is identical with an acute secularising of Christianity in
   the widest sense of the word, is confirmed by the study of its own
   literature. The early Christian production of Gospel and Apocalypses
   was indeed continued in Gnosticism, yet so that the class of "Acts of
   the Apostles" was added to them, and that didactic, biographic and
   "belles lettres" elements were received into them, and claimed a very
   important place. If this makes the Gnostic literature approximate to
   the profane, that is much more the case with the scientific theological
   literature which Gnosticism first produced. Dogmatico-philosophic
   tracts, theologico-critical treatises, historical investigations and
   scientific commentaries on the sacred books, were, for the first time
   in Christendom, composed by the Gnostics, who in part occupied the
   foremost place in the scientific knowledge, religious earnestness and
   ardour of the age. They form in every respect the counterpart to the
   scientific works which proceeded from the contemporary philosophic
   schools. Moreover, we possess sufficient knowledge of Gnostic hymns and
   odes, songs for public worship, didactic poems, magic formulæ, magic
   books, etc., to assure us that Christian Gnosticism took possession of
   a whole region of the secular life in its full breadth, and thereby
   often transformed the original forms of Christian literature into
   secular. [327] If, however, we bear in mind how all this at a later
   period was gradually legitimised in the Catholic Church, philosophy,
   the science of the sacred books, criticism and exegesis, the ascetic
   associations, the theological schools, the mysteries, the sacred
   formulæ, the superstition, the charlatanism, all kinds of profane
   literature, etc., it seems to prove the thesis that the victorious
   epoch of the gradual hellenising of Christianity followed the abortive
   attempts at an acute hellenising.

   The traditional question as to the origin and development of
   Gnosticism, as well as that about the classification of the Gnostic
   systems, will have to be modified in accordance with the foregoing
   discussion. As the different Gnostic systems might be contemporary, and
   in part were undoubtedly contemporary, and as a graduated relation
   holds good only between some few groups, we must, in the
   classification, limit ourselves essentially to the features which have
   been specified in the foregoing paragraph, and which coincide with the
   position of the different groups to the early Christian tradition in
   its connection with the Old Testament religion, both as a rule of
   practical life, and of the common cultus. [328]

   As to the origin of Gnosticism, we see how, even in the earliest
   period, all possible ideas and principles foreign to Christianity force
   their way into it, that is, are brought in under Christian rules, and
   find entrance, especially in the consideration of the Old Testament.
   [329] We might be satisfied with the observation that the manifold
   Gnostic systems were produced by the increase of this tendency. In
   point of fact we must admit that in the present state of our sources,
   we can reach no sure knowledge beyond that. These sources, however,
   give certain indications which should not be left unnoticed. If we
   leave out of account the two assertions of opponents, that Gnosticism
   was produced by demons [330] and--this, however, was said at a
   comparatively late period--that it originated in ambition and
   resistance to the ecclesiastical office, the episcopate, we find in
   Hegesippus, one of the earliest writers on the subject, the statement
   that the whole of the heretical schools sprang out of Judaism or the
   Jewish sects; in the later writers, Irenæus, Tertullian and Hippolytus,
   that these schools owe most to the doctrines of Pythagoras, Plato,
   Aristotle, Zeno, etc. [331] But they all agree in this, that a definite
   personality, viz., Simon the Magician, must be regarded as the original
   source of the heresy. If we try it by these statements of the Church
   Fathers, we must see at once that the problem in this case is
   limited--certainly in a proper way. For after Gnosticism is seen to be
   the acute secularising of Christianity the only question that remains
   is, how are we to account for the origin of the great Gnostic schools,
   that is, whether it is possible to indicate their preliminary stages.
   The following may be asserted here with some confidence: Long before
   the appearance of Christianity, combinations of religion had taken
   place in Syria and Palestine, [332] especially in Samaria, in so far,
   on the one hand, as the Assyrian and Babylonian religious philosophy,
   together with its myths, as well as the Greek popular religion with its
   manifold interpretations, had penetrated as far as the eastern shore of
   the Mediterranean, and been accepted even by the Jews; and, on the
   other hand, the Jewish Messianic idea had spread and called forth
   various movements. [333] The result of every mixing of national
   religions, however, is to break through the traditional, legal and
   particular forms. [334] For the Jewish religion syncretism signified
   the shaking of the authority of the Old Testament by a qualitative
   distinction of its different parts, as also doubt as to the identity of
   the supreme God with the national God. These ferments were once more
   set in motion by Christianity. We know that in the Apostolic age there
   were attempts in Samaria to found new religions, which were in all
   probability influenced by the tradition and preaching concerning Jesus.
   Dositheus, Simon Magus, Cleobius, and Menander appeared as Messiahs or
   bearers of the God-head, and proclaimed a doctrine in which the Jewish
   faith was strangely and grotesquely mixed with Babylonian myths,
   together with some Greek additions. The mysterious worship, the
   breaking up of Jewish particularism, the criticism of the Old
   Testament,--which for long had had great difficulty in retaining its
   authority in many circles, in consequence of the widened horizon and
   the deepening of religious feeling,--finally, the wild syncretism,
   whose aim, however, was a universal religion, all contributed to gain
   adherents for Simon. [335] His enterprise appeared to the Christians as
   a diabolical caricature of their own religion, and the impression made
   by the success which Simonianism gained by a vigorous propaganda even
   beyond Palestine into the West, supported this idea. [336] We can
   therefore understand how, afterwards, all heresies were traced back to
   Simon. To this must be added that we can actually trace in many Gnostic
   systems the same elements which were prominent in the religion
   proclaimed by Simon (the Babylonian and Syrian), and that the new
   religion of the Simonians, just like Christianity, had afterwards to
   submit to be transformed into a philosophic, scholastic doctrine. [337]
   The formal parallel to the Gnostic doctrines was therewith established.
   But even apart from these attempts at founding new religions,
   Christianity in Syria, under the influence of foreign religions and
   speculation on the philosophy of religion, gave a powerful impulse to
   the criticism of the law and the prophets which had already been
   awakened. In consequence of this, there appeared, about the transition
   of the first century to the second, a series of teachers who, under the
   impression of the Gospel, sought to make the Old Testament capable of
   furthering the tendency to a universal religion, not by allegorical
   interpretation, but by a sifting criticism. These attempts were of very
   different kinds. Teachers such as Cerinthus clung to the notion that
   the universal religion revealed by Christ was identical with undefiled
   Mosaism, and therefore maintained even such articles as circumcision
   and the Sabbath commandment, as well as the earthly kingdom of the
   future. But they rejected certain parts of the law, especially, as a
   rule, the sacrificial precepts, which were no longer in keeping with
   the spiritual conception of religion. They conceived the creator of the
   world as a subordinate being distinct from the supreme God, which is
   always the mark of a syncretism with a dualistic tendency; introduced
   speculations about Æons and angelic powers, among whom they placed
   Christ, and recommended a strict asceticism. When, in their
   Christology, they denied the miraculous birth, and saw in Jesus a
   chosen man on whom the Christ, that is, the Holy Spirit, descended at
   the baptism, they were not creating any innovation, but only following
   the earliest Palestinian tradition. Their rejection of the authority of
   Paul is explained by their efforts to secure the Old Testament as far
   as possible for the universal religion. [338] There were others who
   rejected all ceremonial commandments as proceeding from the devil, or
   from some intermediate being, but yet always held firmly that the God
   of the Jews was the supreme God. But alongside of these stood also
   decidedly anti-Jewish groups, who seem to have been influenced in part
   by the preaching of Paul. They advanced much further in the criticism
   of the Old Testament, and perceived the impossibility of saving it for
   the Christian universal religion. They rather connected this religion
   with the cultus-wisdom of Babylon and Syria, which seemed more adapted
   for allegorical interpretations, and opposed this formation to the Old
   Testament religion. The God of the Old Testament appears here at best
   as a subordinate Angel of limited power, wisdom and goodness. In so far
   as he was identified with the creator of the world, and the creation of
   the world itself was regarded as an imperfect or an abortive
   undertaking, expression was given both to the anti-Judaism and to that
   religious temper of the time which could only value spiritual blessing
   in contrast with the world and the sensuous. These systems appeared
   more or less strictly dualistic, in proportion as they did or did not
   accept a slight co-operation of the supreme God in the creation of man;
   and the way in which the character and power of the world-creating God
   of the Jews was conceived, serves as a measure of how far the several
   schools were from the Jewish religion and the Monism that ruled it. All
   possible conceptions of the God of the Jews, from the assumption that
   he is a being supported in his undertakings by the supreme God, to his
   identification with Satan, seem to have been exhausted in these
   schools. Accordingly, in the former case, the Old Testament was
   regarded as the revelation of a subordinate God, in the latter as the
   manifestation of Satan, and therefore the ethic--with occasional use of
   Pauline formulæ--always assumed an antinomian form compared with the
   Jewish law, in some cases antinomian even in the sense of libertinism.
   Correspondingly, the anthropology exhibits man as bipartite, or even
   tripartite, and the Christology is strictly docetic and anti-Jewish.
   The redemption by Christ is always, as a matter of course, related only
   to that element in humanity which has an affinity with the Godhead.
   [339]

   It is uncertain whether we should think of the spread of these
   doctrines in Syria in the form of a school, or of a cultus; probably it
   was both. From the great Gnostic systems as formed by Basilides and
   Valentinus they are distinguished by the fact that they lack the
   peculiar philosophic, that is Hellenic, element, the speculative
   conversion of angels and /Eons into real ideas, etc. We have almost no
   knowledge of their effect. This Gnosticism has never directly been a
   historical factor of striking importance, and the great question is
   whether it was so indirectly. [340] That is to say, we do not know
   whether this Syrian Gnosticism was, in the strict sense, the
   preparatory stage of the great Gnostic schools, so that the schools
   should be regarded as an actual reconstruction of it. But there can be
   no doubt that the appearance of the great Gnostic schools in the
   Empire, from Egypt to Gaul, is contemporaneous with the vigorous
   projection of Syrian cults westwards, and therefore the assumption is
   suggested, that the Syrian Christian syncretism was also spread in
   connection with that projection, and underwent a change corresponding
   to the new conditions. We know definitely that the Syrian Gnostic,
   Cerdo, came to Rome, wrought there, and exercised an influence on
   Marcion. But no less probable is the assumption that the great Hellenic
   Gnostic schools arose spontaneously, in the sense of having been
   independently developed out of the elements to which undoubtedly the
   Asiatic cults also belonged, without being influenced in any way by
   Syrian syncretistic efforts. The conditions for the growth of such
   formations were nearly the same in all parts of the Empire. The great
   advance lies in the fact that the religious material as contained in
   the Gospel, the Old Testament, and the wisdom connected with the old
   cults, was philosophically, that is scientifically, manipulated by
   means of allegory, and the aggregate of mythological powers translated
   into an aggregate of ideas. The Pythagorean and Platonic, more rarely
   the Stoic philosophy, were compelled to do service here. Great Gnostic
   schools, which were at the same time unions for worship, first enter
   into the clear light of history in this form, (see previous section),
   and on the conflict with these, surrounded as they were by a multitude
   of dissimilar and related formations, depends the progress of the
   development. [341]

   We are no longer able to form a perfectly clear picture of how these
   schools came into being, or how they were related to the Churches. It
   lay in the nature of the case that the heads of the schools, like the
   early itinerant heretical teachers, devoted attention chiefly, if not
   exclusively, to those who were already Christian, that is, to the
   Christian communities. [342] From the Ignatian Epistles, the Shepherd
   of Hermas (Vis. III. 7. 1: Sim. VIII. 6. 5: IX. 19. and especially 22),
   and the Didache (XI. I. 2) we see that those teachers who boasted of a
   special knowledge and sought to introduce "strange" doctrines, aimed at
   gaining the entire churches. The beginning, as a rule, was necessarily
   the formation of conventicles. In the first period therefore, when
   there was no really fixed standard for warding off the foreign
   doctrines--Hermas is unable even to characterise the false
   doctrines--the warnings were commonly exhausted in the exhortation:
   kollasthe tois agi'ois, o'ti oi kollo'menoi autois agiasthe'sontai,
   ["connect yourselves with the saints, because those who are connected
   with them shall be sanctified"]. As a rule, the doctrines may really
   have crept in unobserved, and those gained over to them may for long
   have taken part in a two-fold worship, the public worship of the
   churches, and the new consecration. Those teachers must of course have
   assumed a more aggressive attitude who rejected the Old Testament. The
   attitude of the Church, when it enjoyed competent guidance, was one of
   decided opposition towards unmasked or recognised false teachers. Yet
   Irenæus' account of Cerdo in Rome shews us how difficult it was at the
   beginning to get rid of a false teacher. [343] For Justin, about the
   year 150, the Marcionites, Valentinians, Basilideans and Saturninians
   are groups outside the communities, and undeserving of the name
   "Christians." [344] There must therefore have been at that time, in
   Rome and Asia Minor at least, a really perfect separation of those
   schools from the Churches (it was different in Alexandria).
   Notwithstanding, this continued to be the region from which those
   schools obtained their adherents. For the Valentinians recognised that
   the common Christians were much better than the heathen, that they
   occupied a middle position between the "pneumatic" and the "hylic," and
   might look forward to a kind of salvation. This admission, as well as
   their conforming to the common Christian tradition, enabled them to
   spread their views in a remarkable way, and they may not have had any
   objection in many cases, to their converts remaining in the great
   Church. But can this community have perceived, everywhere and at once,
   that the Valentinian distinction of "psychic" and "pneumatic" is not
   identical with the scriptural distinction of children and men in
   understanding? Where the organisation of the school (the union for
   worship) required a long time of probation, where degrees of connection
   with it were distinguished, and a strict asceticism demanded of the
   perfect, it followed of course that those on the lower stage should not
   be urged to a speedy break with the Church. [345] But after the
   creation of the catholic confederation of churches, existence was made
   more and more difficult for these schools. Some of them lived on
   somewhat like our freemason-unions; some, as in the East, became actual
   sects (confessions), in which the wise and the simple now found a
   place, as they were propagated by families. In both cases they ceased
   to be what they had been at the beginning. From about 210 they ceased
   to be a factor of the historical development, though the Church of
   Constantine and Theodosius was alone really able to suppress them.

   § 4. The most important Gnostic Doctrines.

   We have still to measure and compare with the earliest tradition those
   Gnostic doctrines which, partly at once and partly in the following
   period, became important. Once more, however, we must expressly refer
   to the fact that the epoch-making significance of Gnosticism for the
   history of dogma must not be sought chiefly in the particular
   doctrines, but rather in the whole way in which Christianity is here
   conceived and transformed. The decisive thing is the conversion of the
   Gospel into a doctrine, into an absolute philosophy of religion, the
   transforming of the disciplina Evangelii into an asceticism based on a
   dualistic conception, and into a practice of mysteries. [346] We have
   now briefly to shew, with due regard to the earliest tradition, how far
   this transformation was of positive or negative significance for the
   following period, that is, in what respects the following development
   was anticipated by Gnosticism, and in what respects Gnosticism was
   disavowed by this development. [347]

   (1) Christianity, which is the only true and absolute religion,
   embraces a revealed system of doctrine (positive).

   (2) This doctrine contains mysterious powers, which are communicated to
   men by initiation (mysteries).

   (3) The revealer is Christ (positive), but Christ alone, and only in
   his historical appearance--no Old Testament Christ (negative); this
   appearance is itself redemption: the doctrine is the announcement of it
   and of its presuppositions (positive). [348]

   (4) Christian doctrine is to be drawn from the Apostolic tradition,
   critically examined. This tradition lies before us in a series of
   Apostolic writings, and in a secret doctrine derived from the Apostles
   (positive). [349]

   As exoteric it is comprehended in the regula fidei [350] (positive), as
   esoteric it is propagated by chosen teachers. [351]

   (5) The documents of revelation (Apostolic writings), just because they
   are such, must be interpreted by means of allegory, that is, their
   deeper meaning must be extracted in this way (positive). [352]

   (6) The following may be noted as the main points in the Gnostic
   conception of the several parts of the regula fide:

   (a) The difference between the supreme God and the creator of the
   world, and therewith the opposing of redemption and creation, and
   therefore the separation of the Mediator of revelation from the
   Mediator of creation. [353]

   (b) The separation of the supreme God from the God of the Old
   Testament, and therewith the rejection of the Old Testament, or the
   assertion that the Old Testament contains no revelations of the supreme
   God, or at least only in certain parts. [354]

   (c) The doctrine of the independence and eternity of matter.

   (d) The assertion that the present world sprang from a fall of man, or
   from an undertaking hostile to God, and is therefore the product of an
   evil or intermediate being. [355]

   (e) The doctrine that evil is inherent in matter and therefore is a
   physical potence. [356]

   (f) The assumption of Æons, that is, real powers and heavenly persons
   in whom is unfolded the absoluteness of the Godhead. [357]

   (g) The assertion that Christ revealed a God hitherto unknown.

   (h) The doctrine that in the person of Jesus Christ--the Gnostics saw
   in it redemption, but they reduced the person to the physical
   nature--the heavenly Æon, Christ, and the human appearance of that Æon
   must be clearly distinguished, and a "distincte agere" ascribed to
   each. Accordingly, there were some, such as Basilides, who acknowledged
   no real union between Christ and the man Jesus, whom, besides, they
   regarded as an earthly man. Others, e.g., part of the Valentinians,
   among whom the greatest differences prevailed,--see Tertull. adv.
   Valent. 39--taught that the body of Jesus was a heavenly psychical
   formation, and sprang from the womb of Mary only in appearance.
   Finally, a third party, such as Saturninus, declared that the whole
   visible appearance of Christ was a phantom, and therefore denied the
   birth of Christ. [358] Christ separates that which is unnaturally
   united, and thus leads everything back again to himself; in this
   redemption consists (full contrast to the notion of the
   anakephalai'osis.

   (i) The conversion of the ekklesi'a (it was no innovation to regard the
   heavenly Church as an Æon) into the college of the pneumatic, who
   alone, in virtue of their psychological endowment, are capable of
   Gnosis and the divine life, while the others, likewise in virtue of
   their constitution, as hylic perish. The Valentinians, and probably
   many other Gnostics also, distinguished between pneumatic, psychic and
   hylic. They regarded the psychic as capable of a certain blessedness,
   and of a corresponding certain knowledge of the supersensible, the
   latter being obtained through Pistis, that is, through Christian faith.
   [359]

   (k) The rejection of the entire early christian eschatology, especially
   the second coming of Christ, the resurrection of the body, and Christ's
   Kingdom of glory on the earth; and, in connection with this, the
   assertion that the deliverance of the spirit from the sensuous can be
   expected only from the future, while the spirit enlightened about
   itself already possesses immortality, and only awaits its introduction
   into the pneumatic pleroma. [360]

   In addition to what has been mentioned here, we must finally fix our
   attention on the ethics of Gnosticism. Like the ethics of all systems
   which are based on the contrast between the sensuous and spiritual
   elements of human nature, that of the Gnostics took a twofold
   direction. On the one hand, it sought to suppress and uproot the
   sensuous, and thus became strictly ascetic (imitation of Christ as
   motive of asceticism; [361] Christ and the Apostles represented as
   ascetics); [362] on the other hand, it treated the sensuous element as
   indifferent, and so became libertine, that is, conformed to the world.
   The former was undoubtedly the more common, though there are credible
   witnesses to the latter; the frequentissimum collegium in particular,
   the Valentinians, in the days of Irenæus and Tertullian, did not
   vigorously enough prohibit a lax and world-conforming morality; [363]
   and among the Syrian and Egyptian Gnostics there were associations
   which celebrated the most revolting orgies. [364] As the early
   Christian tradition summoned to a strict renunciation of the world and
   to self-control, the Gnostic asceticism could not but make an
   impression at the first; but the dualistic basis on which it rested
   could not fail to excite suspicion as soon as one was capable of
   examining it. [365]

   Literature.--The writings of Justin (his syntagma against heresies has
   not been preserved), Irenæus, Tertullian, Hippolytus, Clement of
   Alexandria, Origen, Epiphanius, Philastrius and Theodoret; cf. Volkmar,
   Die Quellen der Ketzergeschichte, 1885.

   Lipsius, Zur Quellenkritik des Epiphanios, 1875; also Die Quellen der
   altesten Ketzergeschichte, 1875.

   Harnack, Zur Quellenkritik d. Gesch. Gnostic, 1873 (continued i. D.
   Ztschr. f. d. hist. Theol. 1874, and in Der Schrift de Apellis gnosi
   monarch. 1874).

   Of Gnostic writings we possess the book Pistis Sophia, the writings
   contained in the Coptic Cod. Brucianus, and the Epistle of Ptolemy to
   Flora; also numerous fragments, in connection with which Hilgenfeld
   especially deserves thanks, but which still require a more complete
   selecting and a more thorough discussion (see Grabe, Spicilegium T. I.
   II. 1700. Heinrici, Die Valentin. Gnosis, u. d. H. Schrift, 1871).

   On the (Gnostic) Apocryphal Acts of the Apostles, see Zahn, Acta Job.
   1880, and the great work of Lipsius, Die apokryphen Apostelgeschichten,
   I. Vol., 1883; II. Vol., 1887. (See also Lipsius, Quellen d. röm.
   Petrussage, 1872.)

   Neander, Genet. Entw. d. vornehmsten gnostischen Systeme, 1818.

   Matter, Hist. crit. du gnosticisme, 2 Vols., 1828.

   Baur, Die Christl. Gnosis, 1835.

   Lipsius, Der Gnosticismus, in Ersch. und Gruber's Allg. Encykl. 71 Bd.
   1860.

   Moeller, Geschichte d. Kosmologie i. d. Griech. K. bis auf Origenes.
   1860.

   King, The Gnostics and their remains, 1873.

   Mansel, The Gnostic heresies, 1875.

   Jacobi, Art. "Gnosis" in Herzog's Real Encykl. 2nd Edit.

   Hilgenfeld, Die Ketzergeschichte des Urchristenthums, 1884, where the
   more recent special literature concerning individual Gnostics is
   quoted.

   Lipsius, Art. "Valentinus" in Smith's Dictionary of Christian
   Biography.

   Harnack, Art. "Valentinus" in the Encykl. Brit.

   Harnack, Pistis Sophia in the Texte und Unters. VII. 2. Carl Schmidt,
   Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex Brucianus
   (Texte und Unters. VIII. 1. 2).

   Joël, Blicke in die Religionsgeschichte zu Anfang des 2 Christl.
   Jahrhunderts, 2 parts, 188o, 1883.

   Renan, History of the Origins of Christianity. Vols. V. VI. VII.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [301] We may consider here once more the articles which are embraced in
   the first ten chapters of the recently discovered Didache` ton
   aposto'lon, after enumerating and describing which, the author
   continues (11. 1): o`s a`n oun eltho'n dida'xe umas tauta pa'nta ta`
   proeireme'na, de'xasthe auto'n.

   [302] It is a good tradition which designates the so-called Gnosticism
   simply as Gnosis, and yet uses this word also for the speculations of
   non Gnostic teachers of antiquity (e.g., of Barnabas). But the
   inferences which follow have not been drawn. Origen says truly (c.
   Celsus III. 12): "As men, not only the labouring and serving classes,
   but also many from the cultured classes of Greece, came to see
   something honourable in Christianity, sects could not fail to arise,
   not simply from the desire for controversy and contradiction, but
   because several scholars endeavoured to penetrate deeper into the truth
   of Christianity. In this way sects arose which received their names
   from men who indeed admired Christianity in its essence, but from many
   different causes had arrived at different conceptions of it."

   [303] The majority of Christians in the second century belonged no
   doubt to the uncultured classes and did not seek abstract knowledge,
   nay, were distrustful of it; see the lo'gos alethe's of Celsus,
   especially III. 44, and the writings of the Apologists. Yet we may
   infer from the treatise of Origen against Celsus, that the number of
   "Christiani rudes" who cut themselves off from theological and
   philosophic knowledge, was about the year 240 a very large one; and
   Tertullian says (Adv. Prax. 3): "Simplices quique, ne dixerim
   imprudentes et idiotæ, quæ major semper credentium pars est," cf. de
   jejun. 11: "Major pars imperitorum apud gloriosissimam multitudinem
   psychicorum."

   [304] Overbeck (Stud. z. Gesch. d. alten Kirche. p. 184) has the merit
   of having first given convincing expression to this view of Gnosticism.

   [305] The ability of the prominent Gnostic teachers has been recognised
   by the Church Fathers: see Hieron. Comm. in Osee. II. to, Opp. VI. 1:
   "Nullus potest hæresim struere, nisi qui ardens ingenii est et habet
   dona naturæ quæ a deo artifice sunt creata: talis fait Valentinus,
   talis Marcion, quos doctissimos legimus, talis Bardesanes, cujus etiam
   philosophi admirantur ingenium." It is still more important to see how
   the Alexandrian theologians (Clement and Origen) estimated the exegetic
   labours of the Gnostics and took account of them. Origen undoubtedly
   recognised Herakleon as a prominent exegete, and treats him most
   respectfully even where he feels compelled to differ from him. All
   Gnostics cannot, of course, be regarded as theologians. In their
   totality they form the Greek society with a Christian name.

   [306] Otherwise the rise of Gnosticism cannot at all be explained.

   [307] Cf. Bigg, "The Christian Platonists of Alexandria," p. 83:
   "Gnosticism was in one respect distorted Paulinism"

   [308] Joel, "Blick in die Religionsgesch." Vol I. pp. 101-170, has
   justly emphasised the Greek character of Gnosis, and insisted on the
   significance of Platonism for it. "The Oriental element did not always
   in the case of the Gnostics originate at first hand, but had already
   passed through a Greek channel."

   [309] The age of the Antonines was the flourishing period of
   Gnosticism. Marquardt (Römische Staatsverwaltung, vol. 3, p. 81) says
   of this age: "With the Antonines begins the last period of the Roman
   religious development, in which two new elements enter into it. These
   are the Syrian and Persian deities, whose worship at this time was
   prevalent not only in the city of Rome, but in the whole empire, and at
   the same time Christianity, which entered into conflict with all
   ancient tradition, and in this conflict exercised a certain influence
   even on the Oriental forms of worship.

   [310] It is a special merit of Weingarten (Histor. Ztschr. Bd. 45.
   1881. p. 441 f.) and Koffmane (De Gnosis nach ihrer Tendenz und
   Organisation, 1881) to have strongly emphasised the mystery character
   of Gnosis, and in connection with that, its practical aims. Koffmane,
   especially, has collected abundant material for proving that the
   tendency of the Gnostics was the same as that of the ancient mysteries,
   and that they thence borrowed their organisation and discipline. This
   fact proves the proposition that Gnosticism was an acute hellenising of
   Christianity. Koffmane has, however, undervalued the union of the
   practical and speculative tendency in the Gnostics, and, in the effort
   to obtain recognition for the mystery character of the Gnostic
   communities, has overlooked the fact that they were also schools. The
   union of mystery-cultus and school is just, however, their
   characteristic. In this also they prove themselves the forerunners of
   Neoplatonism and the Catholic Church. Moehler in his programme of 1831
   (Urspr. d. Gnosticismus Tübingen), vigorously emphasised the practical
   tendency of Gnosticism, though not in a convincing way. Hackenschmidt
   (Anfänge des katholischen Kirchenbegriffs, p. 83 f.) has judged
   correctly.

   [311] We have also evidence of the methods by which ecstatic visions
   were obtained among the Gnostics: see the Pistis Sophia, and the
   important role which prophets and Apocalypses played in several
   important Gnostic communities (Barcoph and Barcabbas, prophets of the
   Basilideans; Martiades and Marsanes among the Ophites; Philumene in the
   case of Apelles; Valentinian prophecies; Apocalypses of Zostrian,
   Zoroaster, etc.). Apocalypses were also used by some under the names of
   Old Testament men of God and Apostles.

   [312] See Koffmane, beforementioned work, p. 5 f.

   [313] See Fragm. Murat. V. 81 f.; Clem. Strom. VII. 17. 108; Orig. Hom.
   34. The Marcionite Antitheses were probably spread among other Gnostic
   sects. The Fathers frequently emphasise the fact that the Gnostics were
   united against the Church: Tertullian de præscr. 42: "Et hoc est, quod
   schismata apud hæreticos fere non sunt, quia cum Sint, non parent.
   Schisma est enim unitas ipsa." They certainly also delight in
   emphasising the contradictions of the different schools; but they
   cannot point to any earnest conflict of these schools with each other.
   We know definitely that Bardasanes argued against the earlier Gnostics,
   and Ptolemæus against Marcion.

   [314] See the collection, certainly not complete, of Gnostic fragments
   by Grabe (Spicileg.) and Hilgenfeld (Ketzergeschichte). Our books on
   the history of Gnosticism take far too little notice of these fragments
   as presented to us, above all, by Clement and Origen, and prefer to
   keep to the doleful accounts of the Fathers about the "Systems,"
   (better in Heinrici: Valent. Gnosis, 1871). The vigorous efforts of the
   Gnostics to understand the Pauline and Johannine ideas, and their in
   part surprisingly rational and ingenious solutions of intellectual
   problems, have never yet been systematically estimated. Who would
   guess, for example, from what is currently known of the system of
   Basilides, that, according to Clement, the following proceeds from him,
   (Strom. IV. 12. 18): os auto's phesin o Basilei'des, e`n me'ros ek tou
   legome'nou thele'matos tou theou upeile'phamen, to` egapeke'nai
   a'panta. o'ti lo'gon aposo'zousi pro`s to` pan a'panta; e'teron de` to`
   medeno`s epithumein, kai` to` tri'ton misei'n mede` e'n? and where do
   we find, in the period before Clement of Alexandria, faith in Christ
   united with such spiritual maturity and inner freedom as in Valentinus,
   Ptolemæus and Heracleon?

   [315] Testament of Tertullian (adv. Valent. 4) shews the difference
   between the solution of Valentinus, for example, and his disciple
   Ptolemæus. "Ptolemæus nomina et numeros Æonum distinxit in personales
   substantias, sed extra deum determinatas, quas Valentinus in ipsa summa
   divinitatis ut sensus et affectus motus incluserat." It is, moreover,
   important that Tertullian himself should distinguish this so clearly.

   [316] There is nothing here more instructive than to hear the judgments
   of the cultured Greeks and Romans about Christianity, as soon as they
   have given up the current gross prejudices. They shew with admirable
   clearness the way in which Gnosticism originated. Galen says (quoted by
   Gieseler, Church Hist. 1. 1. 4): "Hominum plerique orationem
   demonstrativam continuam mente assequi nequeunt, quare indigent, ut
   instituantur parabolis. Veluti nostro tempore videmus, homines illos,
   qui Christiani vocantur, fidem suam e parabolis petiisse. Hi tamen
   interdum talia faciunt, qualia qui vere philosophantur. Nam quod mortem
   contemnunt, id quidem omnes ante oculos habemus; item quod verecundia
   quadam ducti ab usu rerum venerearam abhorrent. Sunt enim inter eos
   feminas et viri, qui per totam vitam a concubitu abstinuerint; sunt
   etiam qui in animis regendis coërcendisque et in accerrimo honestatis
   studio eo progressi sint, ut nihil cedant vere philosophantibus."
   Christians, therefore, are philosophers without philosophy. What a
   challenge for them to produce such, that is to seek out the latent
   philosophy! Even Celsus could not but admit a certain relationship
   between Christians and philosophers. But as he was convinced that the
   miserable religion of the Christians could neither include nor endure a
   philosophy, he declared that the moral doctrines of the Christians were
   borrowed from the philosophers (I. 4). In course of his presentation
   (V. 65: VI. 12, 15-19, 42: VII. 27-35) he deduces the most decided
   marks of Christianity, as well as the most important sayings of Jesus
   from (misunderstood) statements of Plato and other Greek philosophers.
   This is not the place to shew the contradictions in which Celsus was
   involved by this. But it is of the greatest significance that even this
   intelligent man could only see philosophy where he saw something
   precious. The whole of Christianity from its very origin appeared to
   Celsus (in one respect) precisely as the Gnostic systems appear to us,
   that is, these really are what Christianity as such seemed to Celsus to
   be. Besides, it was constantly asserted up to the fifth century that
   Christ had drawn from Plato's writings. Against those who made this
   assertion, Ambrosius (according to Augustine, Ep. 31. C. 8) wrote a
   treatise, which unfortunately is no longer in existence.

   [317] The Simonian system at most might be named, on the basis of the
   syncretistic religion founded by Simon Magus. But we know little about
   it, and that little is uncertain. Parallel attempts are demonstrable in
   the third century on the basis of various "revealed" fundamental ideas
   (e ek logi'on philosophi'a).

   [318] Among these I reckon those Gnostics whom Irenæus (I. 29-31) has
   portrayed, as well as part of the so-called Ophites, Peratæ, Sethites
   and the school of the Gnostic Justin (Hippol. Philosoph. V. 6-28).
   There is no reason for regarding them as earlier or more Oriental than
   the Valentinians, as is done by Hilgenfeld against Baur, Möller, and
   Gruber (the Ophites, 1864). See also Lipsius, "Ophit. Systeme," i. d.
   Ztschr. f. wiss. Theol. 1863. IV. 1864, I. These schools claimed for
   themselves the name Gnostic (Hippol. Philosoph V. 6). A part of them,
   as is specially apparent from Orig. c. Celsus. VI., is not to be
   reckoned Christian. This motley group is but badly known to us through
   Epiphanius, much better through the original Gnostic writings preserved
   in the Coptic language. (Pistis Sophia and the works published by Carl
   Schmidt. Texte u. Unters. Bd. VIII.) Yet these original writings
   belong, for the most part, to the second half of the third century (see
   also the important statements of Porphyry in the Vita Plotini. c. 16),
   and shew a Gnosticism burdened with an abundance of wild speculations,
   formulæ, mysteries, and ceremonial. However, from these very monuments
   it becomes plain that Gnosticism anticipated Catholicism as a ritual
   system (see below).

   [319] On Marcion, see the following Chapter.

   [320] We know that from the earliest period (perhaps we might refer
   even to the Epistle to the Romans) there were circles of ascetics in
   the Christian communities who required of all, as an inviolable law,
   under the name of Christian perfection, complete abstinence from
   marriage, renunciation of possessions, and a vegetarian diet. (Clem.
   Strom. III. 6. 49: upo` diabo'lou tau'ten paradi'dothsai dogmati'zousi,
   mimeisthai d' autou`s oi mega'lauchoi' phasi to`n ku'rion me'te
   ge'manta, me'te ti en to ko'smo ktesa'menon mallon para` tou`s a'llous
   nenoeke'nai to` euange'lion kaucho'menoi--Here then, already, imitation
   of the poor life of Jesus, the "Evangelic" life, was the watchword.
   Tatian wrote a book, peri` tou kata` to`n sotera katartismou, that is,
   on perfection according to the Redeemer: in which he set forth the
   irreconcilability of the worldly life with the Gospel). No doubt now
   existed in tht; Churches that abstinence from marriage, from wine and
   flesh, and from possessions, was the perfect fulfilling of the law of
   Christ (basta'zein o'lon to`n zugo`n tou ku'riou). But in wide circles
   strict abstinence was deduced from a special charism, all boastfulness
   was forbidden, and the watchword given out: o'son du'nasai agneu'seis,
   which may be understood as a compromise with the worldly life as well
   as a reminiscence of a freer morality (see my notes on Didache, c. 6:
   11, 11 and Prolegg. p. 42 ff.). Still, the position towards asceticism
   yielded a hard problem, the solution of which was more and more found
   in distinguishing a higher and a lower though sufficient morality, yet
   repudiating the higher morality as soon as it claimed to be the alone
   authoritative one. On the other hand, there were societies of Christian
   ascetics who persisted in applying literally to all Christians the
   highest demands of Christ, and thus arose, by secession, the
   communities of the Encratites and Severians. But in the circumstances
   of the time even they could not but be touched by the Hellenic mode of
   thought, to the effect of associating a speculative theory with
   asceticism, and thus approximating to Gnosticism. This is specially
   plain in Tatian, who connected himself with the Encratites, and in
   consequence of the severe asceticism which he prescribed, could no
   longer maintain the identity of the supreme God and the creator of the
   world (see the fragments of his later writings in the Corp. Apol. ed.
   Otto. T. VI.). As the Pauline Epistles could furnish arguments to
   either side, we see some Gnostics, such as Tatian himself, making
   diligent use of them, while others, such as the Severians, rejected
   them. (Euseb. H. E. IV. 29, 5, and Orig. c. Cels. V. 65). The Encratite
   controversy was, on the one hand, swallowed up by the Gnostic, and on
   the other hand, replaced by the Montanistic. The treatise written in
   the days of Marcus Aurelius by a certain Musanus (where?) which
   contains warnings against joining the Encratites (Euseb. H. E. VI. 28)
   we unfortunately no longer possess.

   [321] See Eusebius, H. E. VI. 12. Docetic elements are apparent even in
   the fragment of the Gospel of Peter recently discovered.

   [322] Here, above all, we have to remember Tatian, who in his highly
   praised Apology had already rejected altogether the eating of flesh (c.
   23) and set up very peculiar doctrines about the spirit, matter, and
   the nature of man (c. 12 ff.). The fragments of the Hypotyposes of
   Clem. of Alex. show how much one had to bear in some rural Churches at
   the end of the second century.

   [323] See Clem. Strom. III. 2. 5; Epipha'nes, uio`s Karpokra'tous,
   e'zese ta` pa'nta e'te eptakai'deka kai' theo`s en Same tes
   Kephalleni'as teti'metai, e'ntha auto iero`n rhuton li'thon, bomoi',
   teme'ne, mouseion, okodo'metai' te kai' kathie'rotai, kai` sunio'ntes
   eis to` iero`n oi Kaphallenes kata` noumeni'an gene'thlion apothe'osin
   thu'ousin Epipha'nei, ppe'ndousi te kai` euochountai kai' u'mnoi
   le'gontai. Clement's quotations from the writings of Epiphanes shew him
   to be a pure Platonist: the proposition that property is theft is found
   in him. Epiphanes and his father, Carpocrates, were the first who
   attempted to amalgamate Plato's State with the Christian ideal of the
   union of men with each other. Christ was to them, therefore, a
   philosophic Genius like Plato, see Irenæus. I. 25. 5: "Gnosticos autem
   se vocant, etiam imagines, quasdam quidem depictas, quasdam autem et de
   reliqua materia fabricatas habent et eas coronant, et proponent eas cum
   imaginibus mundi philosophorum, videlicet cum imagine Pythagoræ et
   Platonis et Aristotelis et reliquorum, et reliquam observationem circa
   eas similiter ut gentes faciunt."

   [324] See the "Gnostics" of Hermas, especially the false prophet whom
   he portrays, Maud XI., Lucian's Peregrinus, and the Marcus, of whose
   doings Irenæus (I. 13 ff.) gives such an abominable picture. To
   understand how such people were able to obtain a following so quickly
   in the Churches, we must remember the respect in which the "prophets"
   were held (see Didache XI.). If one had once given the impression that
   he had the Spirit, he could win belief for the strangest things, and
   could allow himself all things possible (see the delineations of Celsus
   in Orig. c. Cels. VII. 9. 11). We hear frequently of Gnostic prophets
   and prophetesses: see my notes on Herm. Mand. XI. 1. and Didache XI. 7.
   If an early Christian element is here preserved by the Gnostic schools,
   it has undoubtedly been hellenised and secularised as the reports shew.
   But that the prophets altogether were in danger of being secularised is
   shewn in Didache XI. In the case of the Gnostics the process is again
   only hastened.

   [325] The name Gnostic originally attached to schools which had so
   named themselves. To these belonged above all, the so-called Ophites,
   but not the Valentinians or Basilideans.

   [326] Special attention should be given to this form, as it became in
   later times of the very greatest importance for the general development
   of doctrine in the Church. The sect of Carpocrates was a school. Of
   Tatian, Irenæus says (I. 28. 1): Tati'anos Ioustinou akroate`s gegono's
   . . . . meta` de` te`n ekei'nou marturi'an aposta`s tes ekklesi'as,
   oie'mati didaska'lou eparthei`s . . . . i'dion charaktera didaskalei'ou
   suneste'sato. Rhodon (in Euseb. H. E. V. 13. 4) speaks of a Marcionite
   diaaskaleion. Other names were: "Collegium" (Tertull. ad Valent. 1);
   "Secta," the word had not always a bad meaning; ai'resis, ekklesi'a
   (Clem. Strom. VII. 16. 98; on the other hand, VII. 15. 92: Tertull. de
   præscr. 42: plerique nec Ecclesias habent); thi'asos (Iren. I. 13, 4,
   for the Marcosians), sunagoge', su'stema, diatribe', ai athro'pinai
   sunelu'seis, factiuncula, congregatio, conciliabulum, conventiculum.
   The mystery-organisation most clearly appears in the Naassenes of
   Hippolytus, the Marcosians of Irenæus, and the Elkasites of Hippolytus,
   as well as the Coptic-Gnostic documents that have been preserved. (See
   Koffmane, above work, pp. 6-22).

   [327] The particulars here belong to church history. Overbeck ("Ueber
   die Anfänge der patristischen Litteratur" in d. hist. Ztschr. N. F. Bd.
   XII. p. 417 ff.) has the merit of being the first to point out the
   importance, for the history of the Church, of the forms of literature
   as they were gradually received in Christendom. Scientific, theological
   literature has undoubtedly its origin in Gnosticism. The Old Testament
   was here, for the first time, systematically and also in part
   historically criticised; a selection was here made from the primitive
   Christian literature; scientific commentaries were here written on the
   sacred hooks (Basilides and especially the Valentinians, see
   Heracleon's comm. on the Gospel of John [in Origen]; the Pauline
   Epistles were also technically expounded; tracts were here composed on
   dogmatico-philosophic problems (for example, peri` dikaiosu'nes--teri`
   prosphuous psuches--ethika`--peri` enkratei'as e peri` eunouchi'as),
   and systematic doctrinal systems already constructed (as the Basilidean
   and Valentinian); the original form of the Gospel was here first
   transmuted into the Greek form of sacred novel and biography (see,
   above all, the Gospel of Thomas, which was used by the Marcosians and
   Naassenes, and which contained miraculous stories from the childhood of
   Jesus); here, finally, psalms, odes and hymns were first composed (see
   the Acts of Lucius, the psalms of Valentinus, the psalms of Alexander
   the disciple of Valentinus, the poems of Bardesanes). Irenæus,
   Tertullian and Hippolytus have indeed noted that the scientific method
   of interpretation followed by the Gnostics, was the same as that of the
   philosophers (e.g., of Philo). Valentinus, as is recognised even by the
   Church Fathers, stands out prominent for his mental vigour and
   religious imagination; Heracleon for his exegetic theological ability;
   Ptolemy for his ingenious criticism of the Old Testament and his keen
   perception of the stages of religious development (see his Epistle to
   Flora in Epiphanius, hær. 33. c. 7). As a specimen of the language of
   Valentinus one extract from a homily may suffice (in Clem. Strom. IV.
   13. 89). Ap' arches atha'natoi' este kai` te'kna zoes este aioni'as,
   kai` to`n tha'naton ethe'lete meri'sasthai eis eautou's, i'na
   dapane'site auto`n kai` analo'sete, kai` apotha'ne' o tha'natos en umin
   kai` di' umon, o'tan ga`r to`n me`n ko'smon lu'ete, autoi de` me`
   katlu'esthe, kurieu'ete tes kri'seos kai` tes phthoras apa'ses.
   Basilides falls into the background behind Valentinus and his school.
   Yet the Church Fathers, when they wish to summarise the most important
   Gnostics, usually mention Simon Magus, Basilides, Valentinus, Marcion
   (even Apelles). On the relation of the Gnostics to the New Testament
   writings and to the New Testament, see Zahn, Gesch. des N. T.-lichen
   Kanons. I. 2. p. 718.

   [328] Baur's classification of the Gnostic systems, which rests on the
   observation of how they severally realised the idea of Christianity as
   the absolute religion in contrast to Judaism and Heathenism, is very
   ingenious and contains a great element of truth. But it is insufficient
   with reference to the whole phenomenon of Gnosticism, and has been
   carried out by Baur by violent abstractions.

   [329] The question, therefore, as to the time of the origin of
   Gnosticism as a complete phenomenon cannot be answered. The remarks of
   Hegesippus (Euseb. H. E. IV. 22) refer to the Jerusalem Church, and
   have not even for that the value of a fixed datum. The only important
   question here is the point of time at which the expulsion or secession
   of the schools and unions took place in the different national
   churches.

   [330] Justin Apol. 1. 26.

   [331] Hegesippus in Euseb. H. E. IV. 22, Iren. II. 14. 1 f., Tertull.
   de præscr. 7, Hippol. Philosoph. The Church Fathers have also noted the
   likeness of the cultus of Mithras and other deities.

   [332] We must leave the Essenes entirely out of account here, as their
   teaching, in all probability, is not to be considered syncretistic in
   the strict sense of the word, (see Lucius, "Der Essenismus," 1881,) and
   as we know absolutely nothing of a greater diffusion of it. But we need
   no names here, as a syncretistic, ascetic Judaism could and did arise
   everywhere in Palestine and the Diaspora.

   [333] Freudenthal's a Hellenistische Studien" informs us as to the
   Samaritan syncretism; see also Hilgenfeld's "Ketzergeschichte," p. 149
   ff. As to the Babylonian mythology in Gnosticism, see the statements in
   the elaborate article, "Manichäismus," by Kessler (Real-Encycl. für
   protest. Theol., 2 Aufl.).

   [334] Wherever traditional religions are united under the badge of
   philosophy a conservative syncretism is the result, because the
   allegoric method, that is, the criticism of all religion, veiled and
   unconscious of itself, is able to blast rocks and bridge over abysses.
   All forms may remain here under certain circumstances, but a new spirit
   enters into them. On the other hand, where philosophy is still weak,
   and the traditional religion is already shaken by another, there arises
   the critical syncretism in which either the gods of one religion are
   subordinated to those of another, or the elements of the traditional
   religion are partly eliminated and replaced by others. Here, also, the
   soil is prepared for new religious formations, for the appearance of
   religious founders.

   [335] It was a serious mistake of the critics to regard Simon Magus as
   a fiction, which, moreover, has been given up by Hilgenfeld
   (Ketzergeschichte, p. 163 ff.), and Lipsius (Apocr. Apostelgesch. II.
   1),--the latter, however, not decidedly. The whole figure as well as
   the doctrines attributed to Simon (see Acts of the Apostles, Justin,
   Irenæus, Hippolytus) not only have nothing improbable in them, but suit
   very well the religious circumstances which we must assume for Samaria.
   The main point in Simon is his endeavour to create a universal religion
   of the supreme God. This explains his success among the Samaritans and
   Greeks. He is really a counterpart to Jesus, whose activity can just as
   little have been unknown to him as that of Paul. At the same time it
   cannot be denied that the later tradition about Simon was the most
   confused and biassed imaginable, or that certain Jewish Christians at a
   later period may have attempted to endow the magician with the features
   of Paul in order to discredit the personality and teaching of the
   Apostle. But this last assumption requires a fresh investigation.

   [336] Justin. Apol. 1 26: Kai` schedo`n pa'ntes me`n Samareis, oli'goi
   de` kai` en a'llois e'thnesin, os to`n proton theo`n Si'mona
   omologountes, ekeinon kai` proskunousin (besides the account in the
   Philos. and Orig. c. Cels. 1. 57: VI. II). The positive statement of
   Justin that Simon came even to Rome (under Claudius) can hardly be
   refuted from the account of the Apologist himself, and therefore not at
   all. (See Renan, "Antichrist".)

   [337] We have it as such in the Me`ga'le Apo'phasis which Hippolytus
   (Philosoph. VI. 19. 20) made use of. This Simonianism may perhaps have
   related to the original, as the doctrines of the Christian Gnostics to
   the Apostolic preaching.

   [338] The Heretics opposed in the Epistle to the Colossians may belong
   to these. On Cerinthus, see Polycarp in Iren. III. 3. 2, Irenæus (I.
   26. 1: III. 11. I), Hippolytus and the redactions of the Syntagma,
   Cajus in Euseb. III. 28. 2, Hilgenfeld, Ketzergeschichte, p. 411 ff. To
   this category belong also the Ebionites and Elkasites of Epiphanius.
   (See Chap. 6.)

   [339] The two Syrian teachers, Saturninus and Cerdo, must in particular
   be mentioned here. The first (See Iren. I. 24. 1. 2, Hippolyt. and the
   redactions of the Syntagma) was not strictly speaking a dualist, and
   therefore allowed the God of the Old Testament to be regarded as an
   Angel of the supreme God, while at the same time he distinguished him
   from Satan. Accordingly, he assumed that the supreme God co-operated in
   the creation of man by angel powers--sending a ray of light, an image
   of light, that should be imitated as an example and enjoined as an
   ideal. But all men have not received the ray of light. Consequently,
   two classes of men stand in abrupt contrast with each other. History is
   the conflict of the two. Satan stands at the head of the one, the God
   of the Jews at the head of the other. The Old Testament is a collection
   of prophecies out of both camps. The truly good first appears in the
   Æon Christ, who assumed nothing cosmic, did not even submit to birth.
   He destroys the works of Satan (generation, eating of flesh), and
   delivers the men who have within them a spark of light. The Gnosis of
   Cerdo was much coarser. (Iren. I. 27. 1, Hippolyt. and the redactions.)
   He contrasted the good God and the God of the Old Testament as two
   primary beings. The latter he identified with the creator of the world.
   Consequently, he completely rejected the Old Testament and everything
   cosmic and taught that the good God was first revealed in Christ. Like
   Saturninus he preached a strict docetism; Christ had no body, was not
   born, and suffered in an unreal body. All else that the Fathers report
   of Cerdo's teaching has probably been transferred to him from Marcion,
   and is therefore very doubtful.

   [340] This question might perhaps be answered if we had the Justinian
   Syntagma against all heresies; but in the present condition of our
   sources it remains wrapped in obscurity. What may be gathered from the
   fragments of Hegesippus, the Epistles of Ignatius, the Pastoral
   Epistles and other documents, such as, for example, the Epistle of
   Jude, is in itself so obscure, so detached and so ambiguous that it is
   of no value for historical construction.

   [341] There are, above all, the schools of the Basilideans,
   Valentinians and Ophites. To describe the systems in their full
   development lies, in my opinion, outside the business of the history of
   dogma and might easily lead to the mistake that the systems as such
   were controverted, and that their construction was peculiar to
   Christian Gnosticism. The construction, as remarked above, is rather
   that of the later Greek philosophy, though it cannot be mistaken that,
   for us, the full parallel to the Gnostic systems first appears in those
   of the Neoplatonists. But only particular doctrines and principles of
   the Gnostics were really called in question their critique of the
   world, of providence, of the resurrection, etc.; these therefore are to
   be adduced in the next section. The fundamental features of an inner
   development can only be exhibited in the case of the most important,
   viz., the Valentinian school. But even here we must distinguish an
   Eastern and a Western branch. (Tertull. adv. Valent. I.: "Valentiniani
   frequentissimum plane collegium inter hæreticos." Iren. 1. I.; Hippol.
   Philos. VI. 35; Orig. Hom. II. 5 in Ezech. Lomm. XIV. p. 40: "Valentini
   robustissima secta".)

   [342] Tertull. de præscr. 42: "De verbi autem administratione quid
   dicam, cum hoc sit negotium illis, non ethnicos convertendi, sed
   nostros evertendi? Hanc magis gloriam captant, si stantibus ruinam, non
   si jacentibus elevationem operentur. Quoniam et ipsum opus eorum non de
   suo proprio ædificio venit, sed de veritatis destructione; nostra
   suffodiunt, ut sua ædificent. Adime illis legem Moysis et prophetas et
   creatorem deum, accusationem eloqui non habent." (See adv. Valent. I.
   init.) This is hardly a malevolent accusation. The philosophic
   interpretation of a religion will always impress those only on whom the
   religion itself has already made an impression.

   [343] Iren. III. 4. 2: Ke'rdon eis te`n ekklesi'an elthon kai`
   exomologou'menos, ou'tos diete'lese, pote` me`n lathrodidaskalon pote`
   de` pa'lin exomologou'menos, pote` de` elengo'menos eph' hois edi'daske
   kakos, kai` aphista'menos tes ton adelphon sunodi'as; see besides the
   valuable account of Tertull. de præscr. 30. The account of Irenæus (I.
   13) is very instructive as to the kind of propaganda of Marcus, and the
   relation of the women he deluded to the Church. Against actually
   recognised false teachers the fixed rule was to renounce all
   intercourse with them (2 Joh. 10. 11; Iren. ep. ad Florin on Polycarp's
   procedure, in Euseb. H. E. V. 20. 7; Iren. III. 3. 4). But how were the
   heretics to be surely known?

   [344] Among those who justly bore this name he distinguishes those of
   oi orthegno'menes kata` pa'nta christanoi' eisin (Dial. 80).

   [345] Very important is the description which Irenæus (III. 15. 2) and
   Tertullian have given of the conduct of the Valentinians as observed by
   themselves (adv. Valent. 1). "Valentiniani nihil magis curant quam
   occultare, quod prædicant; si tamen prædicant qui occultant. Custodiæ
   officium conscientiæ officium est (a comparison with the Eleusinian
   mysteries follows). Si bona fide quæras, concreto vultu, suspenso
   supercilio, Altum est, aiunt. Si subtiliter temptes per ambiguitates
   bilingues communem fidem adfirmant. Si scire to subostendas negant
   quidquid agnoscunt. Si cominus certes, tuam simplicitatem sua cæde
   dispergunt. Ne discipulis quidem propriis ante committunt quam suos
   fecerint. Habent artificium quo prius persuadeant quam edoceant." At a
   later period Dionysius of Alex. in Euseb. H. E. VII. 7, speaks of
   Christians who maintain an apparent communion with the brethren, but
   resort to one of the false teachers (cf. as to this Euseb. H. E. VI. 2.
   13). The teaching of Bardesanes influenced by Valentinus, who,
   moreover, was hostile to Marcionitism, was tolerated for a long time in
   Edessa (by the Christian kings), nay, was recognised. The Bardesanites
   and the "Palutians" (catholics) were differentiated only after the
   beginning of the third century.

   [346] There can be no doubt that the Gnostic propaganda was seriously
   hindered by the inability to organise and discipline Churches, which is
   characteristic of all philosophic systems of religion. The Gnostic
   organisation of schools and mysteries was not able to contend with the
   episcopal organisation of the Churches; see Ignat. ad Smyr. 6. 2;
   Tertull. de præscr. 41. Attempts at actual formation of Churches were
   not altogether wanting in the earliest period; at a later period they
   were forced on some schools. We have only to read Iren. III. 15. 2 in
   order to see that these associations could only exist by finding
   support in a Church. Irenæus expressly remarks that the Valentinians
   designated the Common Christians katholikoi' (communes) kai`
   ekklesiastikoi', but that they, on the other hand, complained that "we
   kept away from their fellowship without cause, as they thought like
   ourselves."

   [347] The differences between the Gnostic Christianity and that of the
   Church, that is, the later ecclesiastical theology, were fluid, if we
   observe the following points. (1) That even in the main body of the
   Church the element of knowledge was increasingly emphasised, and the
   Gospel began to be converted into a perfect knowledge of the world
   (increasing reception of Greek philosophy, development of pi'stis to
   gnosis. (2) That the dramatic eschatology began to fade away. (3) That
   room was made for docetic views, and value put upon a strict
   asceticism. On the other hand we must note: (i) That all this existed
   only in germ or fragments within the great Church during the
   flourishing period of Gnosticism. (2) That the great Church held fast
   to the facts fixed in the baptismal formula (in the Kerygma) and to the
   eschatological expectations, further, to the creator of the world as
   the supreme God, to the unity of Jesus Christ, and to the Old
   Testament, and therefore rejected dualism. (3) That the great Church
   defended the unity and equality of the human race, and therefore the
   uniformity and universal aim of the Christian salvation. (4) That it
   rejected every introduction of new, especially of Oriental,
   Mythologies, guided in this by the early Christian consciousness and a
   sure intelligence. A deeper, more thorough distinction between the
   Church and the Gnostic parties hardly dawned on the consciousness of
   either. The Church developed herself instinctively into an imperial
   Church, in which office was to play the chief role. The Gnostics sought
   to establish or conserve associations in which the genius should rule,
   the genius in the way of the old prophets or in the sense of Plato, or
   in the sense of a union of prophecy and philosophy. In the Gnostic
   conflict, at least at its close, the judicial priest fought with the
   virtuoso and overcame him.

   [348] The absolute significance of the person of Christ was very
   plainly expressed in Gnosticism (Christ is not only the teacher of the
   truth, but the manifestation of the truth), more plainly than where he
   was regarded as the subject of Old Testament revelation. The
   pre-existent Christ has significance in some Gnostic schools, but
   always a comparatively subordinate one. The isolating of the person of
   Christ, and quite as much the explaining away of his humanity, is
   manifestly out of harmony with the earliest tradition. But, on the
   other hand, it must not be denied that the Gnostics recognised
   redemption in the historical Christ: Christ personally procured it (see
   under 6. h.).

   [349] In this thesis, which may be directly corroborated by the most
   important Gnostic teachers, Gnosticism shews that it desires in thesi
   (in a way similar to Philo) to continue on the soil of Christianity as
   a positive religion. Conscious of being bound to tradition, it first
   definitely raised the question, What is Christianity? and criticised
   and sifted the sources for an answer to the question. The rejection of
   the Old Testament led it to that question and to this sifting. It may
   be maintained with the greatest probability, that the idea of a
   canonical collection of Christian writings first emerged among the
   Gnostics (see also Marcion). They really needed such a collection,
   while all those who recognised the Old Testament as a document of
   revelation, and gave it a Christian interpretation, did not at first
   need a new document, but simply joined on the new to the old, the
   Gospel to the Old Testament. From the numerous fragments of Gnostic
   commentaries on New Testament writings which have been preserved, we
   see that these writings then enjoyed canonical authority, while at the
   same period we hear nothing of such an authority nor of commentaries in
   the main body of Christendom (see Heinrici, "Die Valentinianische
   Gnosis, u. d. h. Schrift," 1871). Undoubtedly sacred writings were
   selected according to the principle of apostolic origin. This is proved
   by the inclusion of the Pauline Epistles in the collections of books.
   There is evidence of such having been made by the Naassenes, Peratæ,
   Valentinians, Marcion, Tatian and the Gnostic Justin. The collection of
   the Valentinians and the Canon of Tatian must have really coincided
   with the main parts of the later Ecclesiastical Canon. The later
   Valentinians accommodated themselves to this Canon, that is, recognised
   the books that had been added (Tertull. de præscr. 38). The question as
   to who first conceived and realised the idea of a Canon of Christian
   writings, Basilides, or Valentinus, or Marcion, or whether this was
   done by several at the same time, will always remain obscure, though
   many things favour Marcion. If it should even be proved that Basilides
   (see Euseb. H. E. IV. 7. 7) and Valentinus himself regarded the Gospels
   only as authoritative, yet the full idea of the Canon lies already in
   the fact of their making these the foundation and interpreting them
   allegorically. The question as to the extent of the Canon afterwards
   became the subject of an important controversy between the Gnostics and
   the Catholic Church. The Catholics throughout took up the position that
   their Canon was the earlier, and the Gnostic collection the corrupt
   revision of it (they were unable to adduce proof, as is attested by
   Tertullian's de præscr.). But the aim of the Gnostics to establish
   themselves on the uncorrupted apostolic tradition gathered from
   writings, was crossed by three tendencies, which, moreover, were all
   jointly operative in the Christian communities, and are therefore not
   peculiar to Gnosticism. (1) By faith in the continuance of prophecy, in
   which new things are always revealed by the Holy Spirit (the Basilidean
   and Marcionite prophets). (2) By the assumption of an esoteric secret
   tradition of the Apostles (see Clem. Strom. VII. 17. 106. 108; Hipp.
   Philos. VII. 20; Iren. I. 25. 5: III. 2. 1; Tertull. de præscr. 25. Cf.
   the Gnostic book, Pi'stis Sophi'a, which in great part is based on
   doctrines said to be imparted by Jesus to his disciples after his
   resurrection). (3) By the inability to oppose the continuous production
   of Evangelic writings, in other words, by the continuance of this kind
   of literature and the addition of Acts of the Apostles (Gospel of the
   Egyptians (?), other Gospels, Acts of John, Thomas, Philip, etc. We
   know absolutely nothing about the conditions under which these writings
   originated, the measure of authority which they enjoyed, or the way in
   which they gained that authority). In all these points which in
   Gnosticism hindered the development of Christianity to the "religion of
   a new book," the Gnostic schools shew that they stood precisely under
   the same conditions as the Christian communities in general (see above
   Chap. 3. § 2). If all things do not deceive us, the same inner
   development may be observed even in the Valentinian school as in the
   great Church, viz., the production of sacred Evangelic and Apostolic
   writings, prophecy and secret gnosis falling more and more into the
   background, and the completed Canon becoming the most important basis
   of the doctrine of religion. The later Valentinians (see Tertull. de
   præscr. and adv. Valent.) seem to have appealed chiefly to this Canon,
   and Tatian no less (about whose Canon, see my Texte u. Unters. I. 1. 2.
   pp. 213-218). But finally we must refer to the fact that it was the
   highest concern of the Gnostics to furnish the historical proof of the
   Apostolic origin of their doctrine by an exact reference to the links
   of the tradition (see Ritschl, Entstehung der altkath. Kirche. 2nd ed.
   p. 338 f.). Here again it appears that Gnosticism shared with
   Christendom the universal presupposition that the valuable thing is the
   Apostolic origin (see above p. 160 f.), but that it first created
   artificial chains of tradition, and that this is the first point in
   which it was followed by the Church: (see the appeals to the Apostolic
   Matthew, to Peter and Paul, through the mediation of "Glaukias" and
   "Theodas," to James and the favourite disciples of the Lord, in the
   case of the Naassenes, Ophites, Basilideans and Valentinians, etc.;
   see, further, the close of the Epistle of Ptolemy to Flora in Epistle
   H. 33. 7: Mathe'se exes kai` te`n tou'tou arche'n te kai` ge'nnesin,
   axioume'ne tes apostolikes parado'seos, e` ek diadoches kai` emeis
   pareile'phamen, meta` kairou [sic] kanoni'sai pa'ntas tou`s lo'gous te
   tou soteros didaskali'a, as well as the passages adduced under 2). From
   this it further follows that the Gnostics may have compiled their Canon
   solely according to the principle of Apostolic origin. Upon the whole
   we may see here how foolish it is to seek to dispose of Gnosticism with
   the phrase, "lawless fancies." On the contrary, the Gnostics purposely
   took their stand on the tradition--nay, they were the first in
   Christendom who determined the range, contents and manner of
   propagating the tradition. They are thus the first Christian
   theologians.

   [350] Here also we have a point of unusual historical importance. As we
   first find a new Canon among the Gnostics, so also among them (and in
   Marcion) we first meet with the traditional complex of the Christian
   Kerygma as a doctrinal confession (regula fide), that is, as a
   confession which, because it is fundamental, needs a speculative
   exposition, but is set forth by this exposition as the summary of all
   wisdom. The hesitancy about the details of the Kerygma only shews the
   general uncertainty which at that time prevailed. But again we see that
   the later Valentinians completely accommodated themselves to the later
   development in the Church (Tertull. adv. Valent. I.: "communem fidem
   adfirmant"), that is, attached themselves, probably even from the
   first, to the existing forms; while in the Marcionite Church a peculiar
   regula was set up by a criticism of the tradition. The regula, as a
   matter of course, was regarded as Apostolic. On Gnostic regulæ, see
   Iren. I. 21. 5, 31. 3: II. præf.: II. 19. 8: III. 11. 3: III. 16. 1. 5:
   Ptolem. ap. Epiph. h. 33. 7; Tertull. adv. Valent. 1. 4: de præscr. 42:
   adv. Marc. I. 1: IV. 5. 17; Ep. Petri ad Jacob in Clem. Hom. c. 1. We
   still possess, in great part verbatim, the regula of Apelles, in
   Epiphan. h. 44. 2. Irenæus (I. 7. 2) and Tertull. (de carne, 20) state
   that the Valentinian regula contained the formula, "gennethe'nta dia`
   Mari'as"; see on this, p. 205. In noting that the two points so
   decisive for Catholicism, the Canon of the New Testament and the
   Apostolic regula, were first, in the strict sense, set up by the
   Gnostics on the basis of a definite fixing and systematising of the
   oldest tradition, we may see that the weakness of Gnosticism here
   consisted in its inability to exhibit the publicity of tradition and to
   place its propagation in close connection with the organisation of the
   churches.

   [351] We do not know the relation in which the Valentinians placed the
   public Apostolic regula fide to the secret doctrine derived from one
   Apostle. The Church, in opposition to the Gnostics, strongly emphasised
   the publicity of all tradition. Yet afterwards, though with
   reservations, she gave a wide scope to the assumption of a secret
   tradition.

   [352] The Gnostics transferred to the Evangelic writings, and demanded
   as simply necessary, the methods which Barnabas and others used in
   expounding the Old Testament (see the samples of their exposition in
   Irenæus and Clement. Heinrici, l.c.). In this way, of course, all the
   specialities of the system may be found in the documents. The Church at
   first condemned this method (Tertull. de præcr. 17-19. 39; Iren. I. 8.
   9), but applied it herself from the moment in which she had adopted a
   New Testament Canon of equal authority with that of the Old Testament.
   However, the distinction always remained, that in the confrontation of
   the two Testaments with the views of getting proofs from prophecy, the
   history of Jesus described in the Gospels was not at first allegorised.
   Yet afterwards the Christological dogmas of the third and following
   centuries demanded a docetic explanation of many points in that
   history.

   [353] In the Valentinian, as well as in all systems not coarsely
   dualistic, the Redeemer Christ has no doubt a certain share in the
   constitution of the highest class of men, but only through complicated
   mediations. The significance which is attributed to Christ in many
   systems for the production or organisation of the upper world may be
   mentioned. In the Valentinian system there are several mediators. It
   may be noted that the abstract conception of the divine primitive Being
   seldom called forth a real controversy. As a rule, offence was taken
   only at the expression.

   [354] The Epistle of Ptolemy to Flora is very instructive here. If we
   leave out of account the peculiar Gnostic conception, we have
   represented in Ptolemy's criticism the later Catholic view of the Old
   Testament, as well as also the beginning of a historical conception of
   it. The Gnostics were the first critics of the Old Testament in
   Christendom. Their allegorical exposition of the Evangelic writings
   should be taken along with their attempts at interpreting the Old
   Testament literally and historically. It may be noted, for example,
   that the Gnostics were the first to call attention to the significance
   of the change of name for God in the Old Testament; see Iren. II. 35.
   3. The early Christian tradition led to a procedure directly the
   opposite. Apelles, in particular, the disciple of Marcion, exercised an
   intelligent criticism on the Old Testament; see my treatise, "de
   Apellis gnosi," p. 71 sq., and also Texte u. Unters. VI. 3, p. 111 ff.
   Marcion himself recognised the historical contents of the Old Testament
   as reliable and the criticism of most Gnostics only called in question
   its religious value.

   [355] Ecclesiastical opponents rightly put no value on the fact that
   some Gnostics advanced to Pan-Satanism with regard to the conception of
   the world, while others beheld a certain justitia civilis ruling in the
   world. For the standpoint which the Christian tradition had marked out,
   this distinction is just as much a matter of indifference as the other,
   whether the Old Testament proceeded from an evil, or from an
   intermediate being. The Gnostics attempted to correct the judgment of
   faith about the world and its relation to God, by an empiric view of
   the world. Here again they are by no means "visionaries", however
   fantastic the means by which they have expressed their judgment about
   the condition of the world, and attempted to explain that condition.
   Those, rather, are "visionaries" who give themselves up to the belief
   that the world is the work of a good and omnipotent Deity, however
   apparently reasonable the arguments they adduce. The Gnostic
   (Hellenistic) philosophy of religion at this point comes into the
   sharpest opposition to the central point of the Old Testament Christian
   belief, and all else really depends on this. Gnosticism is
   antichristian so far as it takes away from Christianity its Old
   Testament foundation, and belief in the identity of the creator of the
   world with the supreme God. That was immediately felt and noted by its
   opponents.

   [356] The ecclesiastical opposition was long uncertain on this point.
   It is interesting to note that Basilides portrayed the sin inherent in
   the child from birth in a way that makes one feel as though he were
   listening to Augustine (see the fragment from the 23rd book of the
   Exegetika', in Clem., Strom. VI. 12. 83). But it is of great importance
   to note how even very special later terminologies, dogmas, etc., of the
   Church, were in a certain way anticipated by the Gnostics. Some samples
   will be given below; but meanwhile we may here refer to a fragment from
   Apelles' Syllogisms in Ambrosius (de Parad. V. 28): "Si hominem non
   perfectum fecit deus, unusquisque autem per industriam propriam
   perfectionem sibi virtutis adsciscit: non ne videtur plus sibi homo
   adquirere, quam ei deus contulit?" One seems here to be transferred
   into the fifth century.

   [357] The Gnostic teaching did not meet with a vigorous resistance even
   on this point, and could also appeal to the oldest tradition. The
   arbitrariness in the number, derivation and designation of the Æons was
   contested. The aversion to barbarism also co-operated here, in so far
   as Gnosticism delighted in mysterious words borrowed from the Semites.
   But the Semitic element attracted as well as repelled the Greeks and
   Romans of the second century. The Gnostic terminologies within the Æon
   speculations were partly reproduced among the Catholic theologians of
   the third century; most important is it that the Gnostics have already
   made use of the concept "omoou'sios"; see Iren., I. 5. I: alla` to`
   me`n pneumatiko`n me` dedunesthai aute`n morphosai, epeide` omoou'sion
   uperche'n aute (said of the Sophia): L. 5. 4, kai` touton einai to`n
   kat' eiko'na kai` omoi'osin gegono'ta; kat' eiko'na me`n to`n uliko`n
   upa'rchein, paraple'sion me`n, all' ouch omoou'sion to theo kath'
   omoi'osin de` to`n psuchiko'n. I. 5. 5: to` de` ku'ema tes metro`s tes
   "Achamo'th," omoou'sion upa'rchon te metri's. In all these cases the
   word means "of one substance." It is found in the same sense in Clem.,
   Hom. 20. 7: see also Philos. VII. 22; Clem., Exc. Theod. 42. Other
   terms also which have acquired great significance in the Church since
   the days of Origen (e.g., age'nnetos) are found among the Gnostics, see
   Ep. Ptol. ad Floram, 5; and Bigg. (1. c. p. 58, note 3) calls attention
   to the appearance of tri'as in Excerpt. ex. Theod. § 80, perhaps the
   earliest passage.

   [358] The characteristic of the Gnostic Christology is not Docetism in
   the strict sense, but the doctrine of the two natures, that is, the
   distinction between Jesus and Christ, or the doctrine that the Redeemer
   as Redeemer was not a man. The Gnostics based this view on the inherent
   sinfulness of human nature, and it was shared by many teachers of the
   age without being based on any principle (see above, p. 196 f.). The
   most popular of the three Christologies briefly characterised above was
   undoubtedly that of the Valentinians. It is found, with great variety
   of details, in most of the nameless fragments of Gnostic literature
   that have been preserved, as well as in Apelles. This Christology might
   be accommodated to the accounts of the Gospels and the baptismal
   confession; (how far is shewn by the regula of Apelles, and that of the
   Valentinians may have run in similar terms). It was taught here that
   Christ had passed through Mary as a channel; from this doctrine
   followed very easily the notion of the Virginity of Mary, uninjured
   even after the birth--it was already known to Clem. Alex. (Strom. VII.
   16. 93). The Church also, later on, accepted this view. It is very
   difficult to get a clear idea of the Christology of Basilides, as very
   diverse doctrines were afterwards set up in his school as is shewn by
   the accounts. Among them is the doctrine, likewise held by others, that
   Christ in descending from the highest heaven took to himself something
   from every sphere through which he passed. Something similar is found
   among the Valentinians, some of whose prominent leaders made a very
   complicated phenomenon of Christ, and gave him also a direct relation
   to the demiurge. There is further found here the doctrine of the
   heavenly humanity, which was afterwards accepted by ecclesiastical
   theologians. Along with the fragments of Basilides the account of Clem.
   Alex. seems to me the most reliable. According to this, Basilides
   taught that Christ descended on the man Jesus at the baptism. Some of
   the Valentinians taught something similar: the Christology of Ptolemy
   is characterised by the union of all conceivable Christology theories.
   The different early Christian conceptions may be found in him.
   Basilides did not admit a real union between Christ and Jesus; but it
   is interesting to see how the Pauline Epistles caused the theologians
   to view the sufferings of Christ as necessarily based on the assumption
   of sinful flesh, that is, to deduce from the sufferings that Christ has
   assumed sinful flesh. The Basilidean Christology will prove to be a
   peculiar preliminary stage of the later ecclesiastical Christology. The
   anniversary of the baptism of Christ was to the Basilideans as the day
   of the epipha'neia, a high festival day (see Clem., Strom. I. 21. 146):
   they fixed it for the 6th (2nd) January. And in this also the Catholic
   Church has followed the Gnosis. The real docetic Christology as
   represented by Saturninus (and Marcion) was radically opposed to the
   tradition, and struck out the birth of Jesus, as well as the first 30
   years of his life. An accurate exposition of the Gnostic Christologies,
   which would carry us too far here, (see especially Tertull., de carne
   Christi,) would shew that a great part of the questions which occupy
   Church theologians till the present day were already raised by the
   Gnostics; for example, what happened to the body of Christ after the
   resurrection? (see the doctrines of Apelles and Hermogenes); what
   significance the appearance of Christ had for the heavenly and Satanic
   powers? what meaning belongs to his sufferings, although there was no
   real suffering for the heavenly Christ, but only for Jesus? etc. In no
   other point do the anticipations in the Gnostic dogmatic stand out so
   plainly; (see the system of Origen; many passages bearing on the
   subject will be found in the third and fourth volumes of this work, to
   which readers are referred). The Catholic Church has learned but little
   from the Gnostics, that is, from the earliest theologians in
   Christendom, in the doctrine of God and the world, but very much in
   Christology; and who can maintain that she has ever completely overcome
   the Gnostic doctrine of the two natures, nay, even Docetism? Redemption
   viewed in the historical person of Jesus, that is, in the appearance of
   a Divine being on the earth, but the person divided and the real
   history of Jesus explained away and made inoperative, is the signature
   of the Gnostic Christology--this, however, is also the danger of the
   system of Origen and those systems that are dependent on him (Docetism)
   as well as, in another way, the danger of the view of Tertullian and
   the Westerns (doctrine of two natures). Finally, it should be noted
   that the Gnosis always made a distinction between the supreme God and
   Christ, but that, from the religious position, it had no reason for
   emphasising that distinction. For to many Gnostics, Christ was in a
   certain way the manifestation of the supreme God himself, and therefore
   in the more popular writings of the Gnostics (see the Acta Johannis)
   expressions are applied to Christ which seem to identify him with God.
   The same thing is true of Marcion and also of Valentinus (see his
   Epistle in Clem., Strom. II. 20. 114: heis de` estin agatho's, hou
   pa'rousi'a e dia` tou uiou phane'rosis). This Gnostic estimate of
   Christ has undoubtedly had a mighty influence on the later Church
   development of Christology. We might say without hesitation that to
   most Gnostics Christ was a pneuma, omoou'sion to patri'. The details of
   the life, sufferings and resurrection of Jesus are found in many
   Gnostics transformed, complemented and arranged in the way in which
   Celsus (Orig., c. Cels. I. II.) required for an impressive and credible
   history. Celsus indicates how everything must have taken place if
   Christ had been a God in human form. The Gnostics in part actually
   narrate it so. What an instructive coincidence! How strongly the
   docetic view itself was expressed in the case of Valentinus, and how
   the exaltation of Jesus above the earthly was thereby to be traced hack
   to his moral struggle, is shewn in the remarkable fragment of a letter
   (in Clem., Strom. III. 7. 59): Pa'nta upomei'nas e`nkrate`s te`n
   theo'teta Iesous eirga'zeto. e`sthien ga`r kai` e'pien idi'os ouk
   apodidou`s ta` bro'mata, posau'te en auto tes enkratei'as du'namis,
   o'ste kai` me` phtharenai te`n trophe`n en auto epei` to`
   phthei'resthai auto`s ouk eichen. In this notion, however, there is
   more sense and historical meaning than in that of the later
   ecclesiastical aphtharto-docetism.

   [359] The Gnostic distinction of classes of men was connected with the
   old distinction of stages in spiritual understanding, but has its basis
   in a law of nature. There were again empirical and psychological
   views--they must have been regarded as very important, had not the
   Gnostics taken them from the traditions of the philosophic
   schools--which made the universalism of the Christian preaching of
   salvation appear unacceptable to the Gnostics. Moreover, the
   transformation of religion into a doctrine of the school, or into a
   mystery cult, always resulted in the distinction of the knowing from
   the profanum vulgus. But in the Valentinian assumption that the common
   Christians as psychical occupy an intermediate stage, and that they are
   saved by faith, we have a compromise which completely lowered the
   Gnosis to a scholastic doctrine within Christendom. Whether and in what
   way the Catholic Church maintained the significance of Pistis as
   contrasted with Gnosis, and in what way the distinction between the
   knowing (priests) and the laity was there reached will be examined in
   its proper place. It should be noted, however, that the Valentinian,
   Ptolemy, ascribes freedom of will to the psychic (which the pneumatic
   and hylic lack), and therefore has sketched by way of by-work a
   theology for the psychical beside that for the pneumatic, which
   exhibits striking harmonies with the exoteric system of Origen. The
   denial by Gnosticism of free will, and therewith of moral
   responsibility, called forth very decided contradiction. Gnosticism,
   that is, the acute hellenising of Christianity, was wrecked in the
   Church on free will, the Old Testament and eschatology.

   [360] The greatest deviation of Gnosticism from tradition appears in
   eschatology, along with the rejection of the Old Testament and the
   separation of the creator of the world from the supreme God. Upon the
   whole our sources say very little about the Gnostic eschatology. This,
   however, is not astonishing; for the Gnostics had not much to say on
   the matter, or what they had to say found expression in their doctrine
   of the genesis of the world, and that of redemption through Christ. We
   learn that the regula of Apelles closed with the words: ane'pte eis
   ourano`n o'then kai` heke, instead of o'then e'rchetai krinai zontas
   kai` nekrou's. We know that Marcion, who may already he mentioned here,
   referred the whole eschatological expectations of early Christian times
   to the province of the god of the Jews, and we hear that Gnostics
   (Valentinians) retained the words sarkos ana'stasin, but interpreted
   them to mean that one must rise in this life, that is perceive the
   truth (thus the "resurrectio a mortuis", that is, exaltation above the
   earthly, took the place of the "resurrectio mortuorum"; see Iren. II.
   31. 2: Tertull., de resurr. carnis, 19). While the Christian tradition
   placed a great drama at the close of history, the Gnostics regard the
   history itself as the drama, which virtually closes with the (first)
   appearing of Christ. It may not have been the opinion of all Gnostics
   that the resurrection has already taken place, yet for most of them the
   expectations of the future seem to have been quite faint, and above all
   without significance. The life is so much included in knowledge, that
   we nowhere in our sources find a strong expression of hope in a life
   beyond (it is different in the earliest Gnostic documents preserved in
   the Coptic language), and the introduction of the spirits into the
   Pleroma appears very vague and uncertain. But it is of great
   significance that those Gnostics who, according to their premises,
   required a real redemption from the world as the highest good, remained
   finally in the same uncertainty and religious despondency with regard
   to this redemption, as characterised the Greek philosophers. A religion
   which is a philosophy of religion remains at all times fixed to this
   life, however strongly it may emphasise the contrast between the spirit
   and its surroundings, and however ardently it may desire redemption.
   The desire for redemption is unconsciously replaced by the thinker's
   joy in his knowledge, which allays the desire (Iren., III. 15. 2:
   "Inflatus est iste [scil. the Valentinian proud of knowledge] neque in
   coelo, neque in terra putat se esse, sed intra Pleroma introisse et
   complexum jam angelum suum, cum institorio et supercilio incedit
   gallinacei elationem habens . . . . Plurimi, quasi jam perfecti,
   semetipsos spiritales vocant, et se nosse jam dicunt eum qui sit intra
   Pleroma ipsorum refrigerii locum"). As in every philosophy of religion,
   an element of free thinking appears very plainly here also. The
   eschatological hopes can only have been maintained in vigour by the
   conviction that the world is of God. But we must finally refer to the
   fact that, even in eschatology, Gnosticism only drew the inferences
   from views which were pressing into Christendom from all sides, and
   were in an increasing measure endangering its hopes of the future.
   Besides, in some Valentinian circles, the future life was viewed as a
   condition of education, as a progress through the series of the (seven)
   heavens; i.e., purgatorial experiences in the future were postulated.
   Both afterwards, from the time of Origen, forced their way into the
   doctrine of the Church (purgatory, different ranks in heaven). Clement
   and Origen being throughout strongly influenced by the Valentinian
   eschatology.

   [361] See the passage Clem., Strom. III. 6, 49, which is given above,
   p. 239.

   [362] Cf. the Apocryphal Acts of Apostles and diverse legends of
   Apostles (e.g., in Clem. Alex.).

   [363] More can hardly be said: the heads of schools were themselves
   earnest men. No doubt statements such as that of Heracleon seem to have
   led to laxity in the lower sections of the collegium: omologi'an einai
   te`n me`n en te pi'stei kai` politei'a, te`n de` en phone; e me`n oun
   en phone omologia kai` epi` ton exousion gi'netai, e'n mo'nen
   omologi'an egountai einai oi polloi', ouch ugios du'nantai de` tau'ten
   te`n omologi'an kai` oi upokrisai` omologein.

   [364] See Epiph. h. 26, and the statements in the Coptic Gnostic works.
   (Schmidt, Texte u. Unters. VIII, I. 2, p. 566 ff.)

   [365] There arose in this way an extremely difficult theoretical
   problem, but practically a convenient occasion for throwing asceticism
   altogether overboard, with the Gnostic asceticism, or restricting it to
   easy exercises. This is not the place for entering into the details.
   Shibboleths, such as pheu'gete ou ta`s phu'seis alla` ta`s gno'mas ton
   kakhon, may have soon appeared. It may be noted here, that the
   asceticism with gained the victory in Monasticism was not really that
   which sprang from early Christian, but from Greek impulses, without, of
   course, being based on the same principle. Gnosticism anticipated the
   future even here. That could be much more clearly proved in the history
   of the worship. A few points which are of importance for the history of
   dogma may be mentioned here: (1) The Gnostics viewed the traditional
   sacred actions (Baptism and the Lord's Supper) entirely as mysteries,
   and applied to them the terminology of the mysteries (some Gnostics set
   them aside as psychic); but in doing so they were only drawing the
   inference from changes which were then in process throughout
   Christendom. To what extent the later Gnosticism in particular was
   interested in sacraments may he studied especially in the Pistis Sophia
   and the other Coptic works of the Gnostics, which Carl Schmidt has
   edited; see, for example, Pistis Sophia, p. 233. "Dixit Jesus ad suos
   mathe'tas: amen, dixi vobis, haud adduxi quidquam in ko'smon veniens
   nisi hunc ignem et hanc aquam et hoc vinum et hunc sanguinem." (2) They
   increased the holy actions by the addition of new ones, repeated
   baptisms (expiations), anointing with oil, sacrament of confirmation
   (apolu'trosis); see, on Gnostic sacraments, Iren. I. 20, and Lipsius,
   Apokr. Apostelgesch. I. pp. 336-343, and cf. the puknos metanoousi in
   the delineation of the Shepherd of Hermas. Mand XI. (3) Marcus
   represented the wine in the Lord's Supper as actual blood in
   consequence of the act of blessing: see Iren., I. 13. 2: pote'ria oi'no
   kakrame'na prospoiou'menos eucharistein. Kai` epi' ple'on ektei'non
   to`n lo'gon tes epikleseos, porphu'rea kai` eruthra` anaphai'nesthai
   poiei, os dokein te`n apo` ton upo`r ta` o'la cha'rin to` haima to`
   eautes sta'zein en ekei'no to poteri'o dia` tes epikle'seos autou, kai`
   uperimei'resthai tou`s paro'ntas ex ekei'n9;u geu'sasthai tou po'matos,
   i'na kai` eis autou`s epombre'se e dia` tou ma'gou tou'tou kleizome'ne
   cha'ris. Marcus was indeed a charlatan; but religious charlatanry
   afterwards became very earnest, and was certainly taken earnestly by
   many adherents of Marcus. The transubstantiation idea in reference to
   the elements in the mysteries is also plainly expressed in the Excerpt.
   ex. Theodot. § 82: kai` o a'rtos kai` to` e'laion agia'zetai te
   du'namei tou ono'matos ou ta` auta` o'nta kata` to` phaino'menon hoia
   ele'phthe, alla` duna'mei eis du'namin pneumatike'n metabe'bletai (that
   is, not into a new super-terrestrial material, not into the real body
   of Christ, but into a spiritual power) ou'tos kai` to` u'dor kai` to`
   exorkizo'menon kai` to` bapti'sma gino'menon ou mo'non chorei to`
   cheiron, alla` kai` agiasmo`n pposlamba'nei. Irenæus possessed a
   liturgical handbook of the Marcionites, and communicates many
   sacramental formulæ from it (I. c. 13 sq.). In my treatise on the
   Pistis Sophia (Texte u. Unters. VII. 2. pp. 59-94) I think I have shewn
   ("The common Christian and the Catholic elements of the Pistis Sophia")
   to what extent Gnosticism anticipated Catholicism as a system of
   doctrine and an institute of worship. These results have been
   strengthened by Carl Schmidt (Texte u. Unters. VIII. I. 2). Even
   purgatory, prayers for the dead, and many other things raised in
   speculative questions and definitely answered, are found in those
   Coptic Gnostic writings and are then met with again in Catholicism. One
   general remark may be permitted in conclusion. The Gnostics were not
   interested in apologetics, and that is a very significant fact. The
   pneuma in man was regarded by them as a supernatural principle, and on
   that account they are free from all rationalism and moralistic
   dogmatism. For that very reason they are in earnest with the idea of
   revelation, and do not attempt to prove it or convert its contests into
   natural truths. They did endeavour to prove that their doctrines were
   Christian, but renounced all proof that revelation is the truth (proofs
   from antiquity). One will not easily find in the case of the Gnostics
   themselves the revealed truth described as philosophy, or morality as
   the philosophic life. If we compare, therefore, the first and
   fundamental system of Catholic doctrine, that of Origen, with the
   system of the Gnostics, we shall find that Origen, like Basilides and
   Valentinus, was a philosopher of revelation, but that he had besides a
   second element which had its origin in apologetics.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER V

  MARCION'S ATTEMPT TO SET ASIDE THE OLD TESTAMENT FOUNDATION OF CHRISTIANITY,
  TO PURIFY TRADITION, AND TO REFORM CHRISTENDOM ON THE BASIS OF THE PAULINE
  GOSPEL.

   Marcion cannot be numbered among the Gnostics in the strict sense of
   the word. [366] For (1) he was not guided by any speculatively
   scientific, or even by an apologetic, but by a soteriological interest.
   [367] (2) He therefore put all emphasis on faith, not on Gnosis. [368]
   (3) In the exposition of his ideas he neither applied the elements of
   any Semitic religious wisdom, nor the methods of the Greek philosophy
   of religion. [369] (4) He never made the distinction between an
   esoteric and an exoteric form of religion. He rather clung to the
   publicity of the preaching, and endeavoured to reform Christendom, in
   opposition to the attempts at founding schools for those who knew and
   mystery cults for such as were in quest of initiation. It was only
   after the failure of his attempts at reform that he founded churches of
   his own, in which brotherly equality, freedom from all ceremonies, and
   strict evangelical discipline were to rule. [370] Completely carried
   away with the novelty, uniqueness and grandeur of the Pauline Gospel of
   the grace of God in Christ, Marcion felt that all other conceptions of
   the Gospel, and especially its union with the Old Testament religion,
   was opposed to, and a backsliding from, the truth. [371] He accordingly
   supposed that it was necessary to make the sharp antitheses of Paul,
   law and gospel, wrath and grace, works and faith, flesh and spirit, sin
   and righteousness, death and life, that is the Pauline criticism of the
   Old Testament religion, the foundation of his religious views, and to
   refer them to two principles, the righteous and wrathful god of the Old
   Testament, who is at the same time identical with the creator of the
   world, and the God of the Gospel, quite unknown before Christ, who is
   only love and mercy. [372] This Paulinism in its religious strength,
   but without dialectic, without the Jewish Christian view of history,
   and detached from the soil of the Old Testament, was to him the true
   Christianity. Marcion, like Paul, felt that the religious value of a
   statutory law with commandments and ceremonies, was very different from
   that of a uniform law of love. [373] Accordingly, he had a capacity for
   appreciating the Pauline idea of faith; it is to him reliance on the
   unmerited grace of God which is revealed in Christ. But Marcion shewed
   himself to be a Greek influenced by the religious spirit of the time,
   by changing the ethical contrast of the good and legal into the
   contrast between the infinitely exalted spiritual and the sensible
   which is subject to the law of nature, by despairing of the triumph of
   good in the world and, consequently, correcting the traditional faith
   that the world and history belong to God, by an empirical view of the
   world and the course of events in it, [374] a view to which he was no
   doubt also led by the severity of the early Christian estimate of the
   world. Yet to him systematic speculation about the final causes of the
   contrast actually observed, was by no means the main thing. So far as
   he himself ventured on such a speculation he seems to have been
   influenced by the Syrian Cerdo. The numerous contradictions which arise
   as soon as one attempts to reduce Marcion's propositions to a system,
   and the fact that his disciples tried all possible conceptions of the
   doctrine of principles, and defined the relation of the two Gods very
   differently, are the clearest proof that Marcion was a religious
   character, that he had in general nothing to do with principles, but
   with living beings whose power he felt, and that what he ultimately saw
   in the Gospel was not an explanation of the world, but redemption from
   the world, [375] --redemption from a world which even in the best that
   it can offer has nothing that can reach the height of the blessing
   bestowed in Christ. [376] Special attention may be called to the
   following particulars.

   1. Marcion explained the Old Testament in its literal sense and
   rejected every allegorical interpretation. He recognised it as the
   revelation of the creator of the world and the god of the Jews, but
   placed it, just on that account, in sharpest contrast to the Gospel. He
   demonstrated the contradictions between the Old Testament and the
   Gospel in a voluminous work (the ansitheseis). [377] In the god of the
   former book he saw a being whose character was stern justice, and
   therefore anger, contentiousness and unmercifulness. The law which
   rules nature and man appeared to him to accord with the characteristics
   of this god and the kind of law revealed by him, and therefore it
   seemed credible to him that this god is the creator and lord of the
   world (kotmokra'tor). As the law which governs the world is inflexible
   and yet, on the other hand, full of contradictions, just and again
   brutal, and as the law of the Old Testament exhibits the same features,
   so the god of creation was to Marcion a being who united in himself the
   whole gradations of attributes from justice to malevolence, from
   obstinacy to inconsistency. [378] Into this conception of the creator
   of the world, the characteristic of which is that it cannot be
   systematised, could easily be fitted the Syrian Gnostic theory which
   regards him as an evil being, because he belongs to this world and to
   matter. Marcion did not accept it in principle, [379] but touched it
   lightly and adopted certain inferences. [380] On the basis of the Old
   Testament and of empirical observation, Marcion divided men into two
   classes, good and evil, though he regarded them all, body and soul, as
   creatures of the demiurge. The good are those who strive to fulfil the
   law of the demiurge. These are outwardly better than those who refuse
   him obedience. But the distinction found here is not the decisive one.
   To yield to the promptings of Divine grace is the only decisive
   distinction, and those just men will shew themselves less susceptible
   to the manifestation of the truly good than sinners. As Marcion held
   the Old Testament to be a book worthy of belief, though his disciple,
   Apelles, thought otherwise, he referred all its predictions to a
   Messiah whom the creator of the world is yet to send, and who, as a
   war-like hero, is to set up the earthly kingdom of the "just" God.
   [381]

   2. Marcion placed the good God of love in opposition to the creator of
   the world. [382] This God has only been revealed in Christ. He was
   absolutely unknown before Christ,"Deus incognitus" was likewise a
   standing expression. They maintained against all attacks the religious
   position that, from the nature of the case, believers only can know
   God, and that this is quite sufficient (Tertull., I. 11.) and men were
   in every respect strange to him. [383] Out of pure goodness and mercy,
   for these are the essential attributes of this God who judges not and
   is not wrathful, he espoused the cause of those beings who were foreign
   to him, as he could not bear to have them any longer tormented by their
   just and yet malevolent lord. [384] The God of love appeared in Christ
   and proclaimed a new kingdom (Tertull., adv. Marc. III. 24. fin.).
   Christ called to himself the weary and heavy laden, [385] and
   proclaimed to them that he would deliver them from the fetters of their
   lord and from the world. He shewed mercy to all while he sojourned on
   the earth, and did in every respect the opposite of what the creator of
   the world had done to men. They who believed in the creator of the
   world nailed him to the cross. But in doing so they were unconsciously
   serving his purpose, for his death was the price by which the God of
   love purchased men from the creator of the world. [386] He who places
   his hope in the Crucified can now be sure of escaping from the power of
   the creator of the world, and of being translated into the kingdom of
   the good God. But experience shews that, like the Jews, men who are
   virtuous according to the law of the creator of the world, do not allow
   themselves to be converted by Christ; it is rather sinners who accept
   his message of redemption. Christ, therefore, rescued from the
   under-world, not the righteous men of the Old Testament (Iren. I. 27.
   3), but the sinners who were disobedient to the creator of the world.
   If the determining thought of Marcion's view of Christianity is here
   again very clearly shewn, the Gnostic woof cannot fail to be seen in
   the proposition that the good God delivers only the souls, not the
   bodies of believers. The antithesis of spirit and matter, appears here
   as the decisive one, and the good God of love becomes the God of the
   spirit, the Old Testament god the god of the flesh. In point of fact,
   Marcion seems to have given such a turn to the good God's attributes of
   love and incapability of wrath, as to make Him the apathetic,
   infinitely exalted Being, free from all affections. The contradiction
   in which Marcion is here involved is evident, because he taught
   expressly that the spirit of man is in itself just as foreign to the
   good God as his body. But the strict asceticism which Marcion demanded
   as a Christian, could have had no motive without the Greek assumption
   of a metaphysical contrast of flesh and Spirit, which in fact was also
   apparently the doctrine of Paul.

   3. The relation in which Marcion placed the two Gods, appears at first
   sight to be one of equal rank. [387] Marcion himself, according to the
   most reliable witnesses, expressly asserted that both were uncreated,
   eternal, etc. But if we look more closely we shall see that in
   Marcion's mind there can be no thought of equality. Not only did he
   himself expressly declare that the creator of the world is a
   self-contradictory being of limited knowledge and power, but the whole
   doctrine of redemption shews that he is a power subordinate to the good
   God. We need not stop to enquire about the details, but it is certain
   that the creator of the world formerly knew nothing of the existence of
   the good God, that he is in the end completely powerless against him,
   that he is overcome by him, and that history in its issue with regard
   to man is determined solely by its relation to the good God. The just
   god appears at the end of history, not as an independent being hostile
   to the good God, but as one subordinate to him, [388] so that some
   scholars, such as Neander, have attempted to claim for Marcion a
   doctrine of one principle, and to deny that he ever held the complete
   independence of the creator of the world, the creator of the world
   being simply an angel of the good God. This inference may certainly be
   drawn with little trouble, as the result of various considerations, but
   it is forbidden by reliable testimony. The characteristic of Marcion's
   teaching is just this, that as soon as we seek to raise his ideas from
   the sphere of practical considerations to that of a consistent theory,
   we come upon a tangled knot of contradictions. The theoretic
   contradictions are explained by the different interests which here
   cross each other in Marcion. In the first place, he was consciously
   dependent on the Pauline theology, and was resolved to defend
   everything which he held to be Pauline. Secondly, he was influenced by
   the contrast in which he saw the ethical powers involved. This contrast
   seemed to demand a metaphysical basis, and its actual solution seemed
   to forbid such a foundation. Finally, the theories of Gnosticism, the
   paradoxes of Paul, the recognition of the duty of strictly mortifying
   the flesh, suggested to Marcion the idea that the good God was the
   exalted God of the spirit, and the just god the god of the sensuous, of
   the flesh. This view, which involved the principle of a metaphysical
   dualism, had something very specious about it, and to its influence we
   must probably ascribe the fact that Marcion no longer attempted to
   derive the creator of the world from the good God. His disciples who
   had theoretical interests in the matter, no doubt noted the
   contradictions. In order to remove them, some of these disciples
   advanced to a doctrine of three principles, the good God, the just
   creator of the world, the evil god, by conceiving the creator of the
   world sometimes as an independent being, sometimes as one dependent on
   the good God. Others reverted to the common dualism, God of the spirit
   and God of matter. But Apelles, the most important of Marcion's
   disciples, returned to the creed of the one God (mi'a arche`), and
   conceived the creator of the world and Satan as his angels, without
   departing from the fundamental thought of the master, but rather
   following suggestions which he himself had given. [389] Apart from
   Apelles, who founded a Church of his own, we hear nothing of the
   controversies of disciples breaking up the Marcionite church. All those
   who lived in the faith for which the master had worked--viz., that the
   laws ruling in nature and history, as well as the course of common
   legality and righteousness, are the antitheses of the act of Divine
   mercy in Christ, and that cordial love and believing confidence have
   their proper contrasts in self-righteous pride and the natural religion
   of the heart,--those who rejected the Old Testament and clung solely to
   the Gospel proclaimed by Paul, and finally, those who considered that a
   strict mortification of the flesh and an earnest renunciation of the
   world were demanded in the name of the Gospel, felt themselves members
   of the same community, and to all appearance allowed perfect liberty to
   speculations about final causes.

   4. Marcion had no interest in specially emphasising the distinction
   between the good God and Christ, which according to the Pauline
   Epistles could not be denied. To him Christ is the manifestation of the
   good God himself. [390] But Marcion taught that Christ assumed
   absolutely nothing from the creation of the Demiurge, but came down
   from heaven in the 15th year of the Emperor Tiberius, and after the
   assumption of an apparent body, began his preaching in the synagogue of
   Capernaum. [391] This pronounced docetism which denies that Jesus was
   born, or subjected to any human process of development, [392] is the
   strongest expression of Marcion's abhorrence of the world. This
   aversion may have sprung from the severe attitude of the early
   Christians toward the world, but the inference which Marcion here
   draws, shews that this feeling was, in his case, united with the Greek
   estimate of spirit and matter. But Marcion's docetism is all the more
   remarkable that, under Paul's guidance, he put a high value on the fact
   of Christ's death upon the cross. Here also is a glaring contradiction
   which his later disciples laboured to remove. This much, however, is
   unmistakable, that Marcion succeeded in placing the greatness and
   uniqueness of redemption through Christ in the clearest light, and in
   beholding this redemption in the person of Christ, but chiefly in his
   death upon the cross.

   5. Marcion's eschatology is also quite rudimentary. Yet he assumed with
   Paul that violent attacks were yet in store for the Church of the good
   God on the part of the Jewish Christ of the future, the Antichrist. He
   does not seem to have taught a visible return of Christ, but, in spite
   of the omnipotence and goodness of God, he did teach a twofold issue of
   history. The idea of a deliverance of all men, which seems to follow
   from his doctrine of boundless grace, was quite foreign to him. For
   this very reason he could not help actually making the good God the
   judge, though in theory he rejected the idea, in order not to measure
   the will and acts of God by a human standard. Along with the
   fundamental proposition of Marcion, that God should be conceived only
   as goodness and grace, we must take into account the strict asceticism
   which he prescribed for the Christian communities, in order to see that
   that idea of God was not obtained from antinomianism. We know of no
   Christian community in the second century which insisted so strictly on
   renunciation of the world as the Marcionites. No union of the sexes was
   permitted. Those who were married had to separate ere they could be
   received by baptism into the community. The sternest precepts were laid
   down in the matter of food and drink. Martyrdom was enjoined; and from
   the fact that they were talai'poroi kai` misou'menoi in the world, the
   members were to know that they were disciples of Christ. [393] With all
   that, the early Christian enthusiasm was wanting.

   6. Marcion defined his position in theory and practice towards the
   prevailing form of Christianity, which, on the one hand, shewed
   throughout its connection with the Old Testament, and, on the other,
   left room for a secular ethical code, by assuming that it had been
   corrupted by Judaism, and therefore needed a reformation. [394] But he
   could not fail to note that this corruption was not of recent date, but
   belonged to the oldest tradition itself. The consciousness of this
   moved him to a historical criticism of the whole Christian tradition.
   [395] Marcion was the first Christian who undertook such a task. Those
   writings to which he owed his religious convictions, viz., the Pauline
   Epistles, furnished the basis for it. He found nothing in the rest of
   Christian literature that harmonised with the Gospel of Paul. But he
   found in the Pauline Epistles hints which explained to him this result
   of his observations. The twelve Apostles whom Christ chose did not
   understand him, but regarded him as the Messiah of the god of creation.
   [396] And therefore Christ inspired Paul by a special revelation, lest
   the Gospel of the grace of God should be lost through falsifications.
   [397] But even Paul had been understood only by few (by none?). His
   Gospel had also been misunderstood--nay, his Epistles had been
   falsified in many passages, [398] in order to make them teach the
   identity of the god of creation and the God of redemption. A new
   reformation was therefore necessary. Marcion felt himself entrusted
   with this commission, and the church which he gathered recognised this
   vocation of his to be the reformer. [399] He did not appeal to a new
   revelation such as he presupposed for Paul. As the Pauline Epistles and
   an authentic euange'lion kuri'ou were in existence, it was only
   necessary to purify these from interpolations, and restore the genuine
   Paulinism which was just the Gospel itself. But it was also necessary
   to secure and preserve this true Christianity for the future. Marcion,
   in all probability, was the first to conceive and, in great measure, to
   realise the idea of placing Christendom on the firm foundation of a
   definite theory of what is Christian--but not of basing it on a
   theological doctrine--and of establishing this theory by a fixed
   collection of Christian writings with canonical authority. [400] He was
   not a systematic thinker, but he was more; for he was not only a
   religious character, but at the same time a man with an organising
   talent, such as has no peer in the early Church. If we think of the
   lofty demands he made on Christians, and, on the other hand, ponder the
   results that accompanied his activity, we cannot fail to wonder.
   Wherever Christians were numerous about the year 160, there must have
   been Marcionite communities with the same fixed but free organisation,
   with the same canon and the same conception of the essence of
   Christianity, pre-eminent for the strictness of their morals and their
   joy in martyrdom. [401] The Catholic Church was then only in process of
   growth, and it was long ere it reached the solidity won by the
   Marcionite church through the activity of one man, who was animated by
   a faith so strong that he was able to oppose his conception of
   Christianity to all others as the only right one, and who did not
   shrink from making selections from tradition instead of explaining it
   away. He was the first who laid the firm foundation for establishing
   what is Christian, because, in view of the absoluteness of his faith,
   [402] he had no desire to appeal either to a secret evangelic
   tradition, or to prophecy, or to natural religion.

   Remarks.--The innovations of Marcion are unmistakable. The way in which
   he attempted to sever Christianity from the Old Testament was a bold
   stroke which demanded the sacrifice of the dearest possession of
   Christianity as a religion, viz., the belief that the God of creation
   is also the God of redemption. And yet this innovation was partly
   caused by a religious conviction, the origin of which must be sought
   not in heathenism, but on Old Testament and Christian soil. For the
   bold Anti-judaist was the disciple of a Jewish thinker, Paul, and the
   origin of Marcion's antinomianism may be ultimately found in the
   prophets. It will always be the glory of Marcion in the early history
   of the Church that he, the born heathen, could appreciate the religious
   criticism of the Old Testament religion as formerly exercised by Paul.
   The antinomianism of Marcion was ultimately based on the strength of
   his religious feeling, on his personal religion as contrasted with all
   statutory religion. That was also its basis in the case of the prophets
   and of Paul, only the statutory religion, which was felt to be a burden
   and a fetter, was different in each case. As regards the prophets, it
   was the outer sacrificial worship, and the deliverance was the idea of
   Jehovah's righteousness. In the case of Paul, it was the pharisaic
   treatment of the law, and the deliverance was righteousness by faith.
   To Marcion it was the sum of all that the past had described as a
   revelation of God: only what Christ had given him was of real value to
   him. In this conviction he founded a Church. Before him there was no
   such thing in the sense of a community firmly united by a fixed
   conviction, harmoniously organised, and spread over the whole world.
   Such a Church the Apostle Paul had in his mind's eye, but he was not
   able to realise it. That in the century of the great mixture of
   religion the greatest apparent paradox was actually realised--namely, a
   Paulinism with two Gods and without the Old Testament; and that this
   form of Christianity first resulted in a church which was based not
   only on intelligible words, but on a definite conception of the essence
   of Christianity as a religion, seems to be the greatest riddle which
   the earliest history of Christianity presents. But it only seems so.
   The Greek, whose mind was filled with certain fundamental features of
   the Pauline Gospel (law and grace), who was therefore convinced that in
   all respects the truth was there, and who on that account took pains to
   comprehend the real sense of Paul's statements, could hardly reach any
   other results than those of Marcion. The history of Pauline theology in
   the Church, a history first of silence, then of artificial
   interpretation, speaks loudly enough. And had not Paul really separated
   Christianity as religion from Judaism and the Old Testament? Must it
   not have seemed an inconceivable inconsistency, if he had clung to the
   special national relation of Christianity to the Jewish people, and if
   he had taught a view of history in which for pædagogic reasons indeed,
   the Father of mercies and God of all comfort had appeared as one so
   entirely different? He who was not capable of translating himself into
   the consciousness of a Jew, and had not yet learned the method of
   special interpretation, had only the alternative, if he was convinced
   of the truth of the Gospel of Christ as Paul had proclaimed it, of
   either giving up this Gospel against the dictates of his conscience, or
   striking out of the Epistles whatever seemed Jewish. But in this case
   the god of creation also disappeared, and the fact that Marcion could
   make this sacrifice proves that this religious spirit, with all his
   energy, was not able to rise to the height of the religious faith which
   we find in the preaching of Jesus.

   In basing his own position and that of his church on Paulinism, as he
   conceived and remodelled it, Marcion connected himself with that part
   of the earliest tradition of Christianity which is best known to us,
   and has enabled us to understand his undertaking historically as we do
   no other. Here we have the means of accurately indicating what part of
   this structure of the second century has come down from the Apostolic
   age and is really based on tradition, and what has not. Where else
   could we do that? But Marcion has taught us far more. He does not
   impart a correct understanding of early Christianity, as was once
   supposed, for his explanation of that is undoubtedly incorrect, but a
   correct estimate of the reliability of the traditions that were current
   in his day alongside of the Pauline. There can be no doubt that Marcion
   criticised tradition from a dogmatic stand-point. But would his
   undertaking have been at all possible if at that time a reliable
   tradition of the twelve Apostles and their teaching had existed and
   been operative in wide circles? We may venture to say no. Consequently,
   Marcion gives important testimony against the historical reliability of
   the notion that the common Christianity was really based on the
   tradition of the twelve Apostles. It is not surprising that the first
   man who clearly put and answered the question, "What is Christian?"
   adhered exclusively to the Pauline Epistles, and therefore found a very
   imperfect solution. When more than 1600 years later the same question
   emerged for the first time in scientific form, its solution had
   likewise to be first attempted from the Pauline Epistles, and therefore
   led at the outset to a one-sidedness similar to that of Marcion. The
   situation of Christendom in the middle of the second century was not
   really more favourable to a historical knowledge of early Christianity
   than that of the 18th century, but in many respects more unfavourable.
   Even at that time, as attested by the enterprise of Marcion, its
   results, and the character of the polemic against him, there were
   besides the Pauline Epistles no reliable documents from which the
   teaching of the twelve Apostles could have been gathered. The position
   which the Pauline Epistles occupy in the history of the world is,
   however, described by the fact that every tendency in the Church which
   was unwilling to introduce into Christianity the power of Greek
   mysticism, and was yet no longer influenced by the early Christian
   eschatology, learned from the Pauline Epistles a Christianity which, as
   a religion, was peculiarly vigorous. But that position is further
   described by the fact that every tendency which courageously disregards
   spurious traditions is compelled to turn to the Pauline Epistles,
   which, on the one hand, present such a profound type of Christianity,
   and on the other darken and narrow the judgment about the preaching of
   Christ himself by their complicated theology. Marcion was the first,
   and for a long time the only Gentile Christian who took his stand on
   Paul. He was no moralist, no Greek mystic, no Apocalyptic enthusiast,
   but a religious character, nay, one of the few pronouncedly typical
   religious characters whom we know in the early Church before Augustine.
   But his attempt to resuscitate Paulinism is the first great proof that
   the conditions under which this Christianity originated do not repeat
   themselves, and that therefore Paulinism itself must receive a new
   construction if one desires to make it the basis of a Church. His
   attempt is a further proof of the unique value of the Old Testament to
   early Christendom, as the only means at that time of defending
   Christian monotheism. Finally, his attempt confirms the experience that
   a religious community can only be founded by a religious spirit who
   expects nothing from the world.

   Nearly all ecclesiastical writers, from Justin to Origen, opposed
   Marcion. He appeared already to Justin as the most wicked enemy. We can
   understand this, and we can quite as well understand how the Church
   Fathers put him on a level with Basilides and Valentinus, and could not
   see the difference between them. Because Marcion elevated a better God
   above the god of creation, and consequently robbed the Christian God of
   his honour, he appeared to be worse than a heathen (Sentent. episc.
   LXXXVII., in Hartel's edition of Cyprian, I. p. 454; "Gentiles quamvis
   idola colant, tamen summum deum patrem creatorem cognoscunt et
   confitentur [!]; in hunc Marcion, blasphemat, etc."), as a blaspheming
   emissary of demons, as the first-born of Satan (Polyc., Justin,
   Irenæus). Because he rejected the allegoric interpretation of the Old
   Testament, and explained its predictions as referring to a Messiah of
   the Jews who was yet to come, he seemed to be a Jew (Tertull., adv.
   Marc. III.). Because he deprived Christianity of the apologetic proof
   (the proof from antiquity) he seemed to be a heathen and a Jew at the
   same time (see my Texte u. Unters. I. 3, p. 68; the antitheses of
   Marcion became very important for the heathen and Manichæan assaults on
   Christianity). Because he represented the twelve Apostles as unreliable
   witnesses, he appeared to be the most wicked and shameless of all
   heretics. Finally, because he gained so many adherents, and actually
   founded a church, he appeared to be the ravening wolf (Justin, Rhodon),
   and his church as the spurious church. (Tertull., adv. Marc. IV. 5.) In
   Marcion the Church Fathers chiefly attacked what they attacked in all
   Gnostic heretics, but here error shewed itself in its worst form. They
   learned much in opposing Marcion (see Bk. II.). For instance, their
   interpretation of the regula fidei and of the New Testament received a
   directly Antimarcionite expression in the Church. One thing, however,
   they could not learn from him, and that was how to make Christianity
   into a philosophic system. He formed no such system, but he has given a
   clearly outlined conception, based on historic documents, of
   Christianity as the religion which redeems the world.

   Literature.--All anti-heretical writings of the early Church, but
   especially Justin, Apol. I. 26, 58; Iren. I. 27; Tertull., adv. Marc.
   I-V.; de præscr.; Hippol., Philos.; Adamant., de recta in deum fidei;
   Epiph. h. 42; Ephr. Syr.; Esnik. The older attempts to restore the
   Marcionite Gospel and Apostolicum have been antiquated by Zahn's
   Kanonsgeschichte, l. c. Hahn (Regimonti, 1823) has attempted to restore
   the Antitheses. We are still in want of a German monograph on Marcion
   (see the whole presentation of Gnosticism by Zahn, with his Excursus,
   l. c.). Hilgenfeld, Ketzergesch. p. 316 f. 522 f.; cf. my work, Zur
   Quellenkritik des Gnosticismus, 1873; de Apelles Gnosis Monarchia,
   1874; Beiträge z. Gesch. der Marcionitischen Kirchen (Ztschr. f. wiss.
   Theol. 1876). Marcion's Commentar zum Evangelium (Ztschr. f. K. G. Bd.
   IV. 4). Apelles Syllogismen in the Texte u. Unters. VI. H. 3. Zahn, die
   Dialoge des Adamantius in the Ztschr. f. K-Gesch. IX. p. 193 ff.
   Meyboom, Marcion en de Marcionieten, Leiden, 1888.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [366] He belonged to Pontus and was a rich shipowner: about 139 he came
   to Rome already a Christian, and for a short time belonged to the
   church there. As he could not succeed in his attempt to reform it, he
   broke away from it about 144. He founded a church of his own and
   developed a very great activity. He spread his views by numerous
   journeys, and communities bearing his name very soon arose in every
   province of the Empire (Adamantius, de recta in deum fide, Origen, Opp.
   ed. Delarue I. p. 809: Epiph. h. 42. p. 668. ed. Oehler). They were
   ecclesiastically organised (Tertull., de præscr. 41, and adv. Marc. IV.
   5) and possessed bishops, presbyters, etc. (Euseb. H. E. IV. 15. 46: de
   Mart. Palæst. X. 2: Les Bas and Waddington, Inscript. Grecq. et Latines
   rec. en Grêce et en Asie Min. Vol. III. No. 2558). Justin (Apol. 1. 26)
   about 150 tells us that Marcion's preaching had spread kata` pan ge'nos
   anthro'pon, and by the year 155, the Marcionites were already numerous
   in Rome (Iren. III. 34). Up to his death, however, Marcion did not give
   up the purpose of winning the whole of Christendom, and therefore again
   and again sought connection with it (Iren. I. c.; Tertull., de præscr.
   30), likewise his disciples (see the conversation of Apelles with
   Rhodon in Euseb. H. E. V. 13. 5, and the dialogue of the Marcionites
   with Adamantius). It is very probable that Marcion had fixed the ground
   features of his doctrine, and had laboured for its propagation, even
   before he came to Rome. In Rome the Syrian Gnostic Cerdo had a great
   influence on him, so that we can even yet perceive, and clearly
   distinguish the Gnostic element in the form of the Marcionite doctrine
   transmitted to us.

   [367] "Sufficit," said the Marcionites, "unicum opsus deo nostro, quod
   hominem liberavit summa et præcipua bonitate sua" (Tertull. adv. Marc.
   I. 17).

   [368] Apelles, the disciple of Marcion, declared (Euseb. H. E. V. 13.
   5) sothe'sesthai tou`s epi' to`n estaurome'non elpiko'tas, mo'non ea`n
   en e'rgois agathois euri'skontai.

   [369] This is an extremely important point. Marcion rejected all
   allegories. (See Tertull., adv. Marc. II. 19. 21. 22: III. 5. 6. 14.
   19: IV. 15. 20: V. 1; Orig., Comment. in Matth. T. XV. 3 Opp. III. p.
   655: in. ep. ad. Rom. Opp. IV. p. 494 sq.: Adamant., Sect. I, Orig.
   Opp. I. pp. 808. 817; Ephr. Syrus. hymn. 36 Edit. Benedict, p. 520 sq.)
   and describes this method as an arbitrary one. But that simply means
   that he perceived and avoided the transformation of the Gospel into
   Hellenic philosophy. No philosophic formulæ are found in any of his
   statements that have been handed down to us. But what is still more
   important, none-of his early opponents have attributed to Marcion a
   system, as they did to Basilides and Valentinus. There can be no doubt
   that Marcion did not set up any system (the Armenian, Esnik, first
   gives a Marcionite system, but that is a late production, see my essay
   in the Ztschr. f. wiss. Theol. 1896. p. 80 f.). He was just as far from
   having any apologetic or rationalistic interest. Justin (Apol. I. 58)
   says of the Marcionites; apo'deixin medemi'an peri` hon le'gousin
   e'chousin, alla` alo'gos os upo` lu'kou a'rnes suneprasme'noi ktl.
   Tertullian again and again casts in the teeth of Marcion that he has
   adduced no proof. See I. 11 sq.: III. 2. 3. 4: IV. 11: "Subito
   Christus, subito et Johannes. Sic sunt omnia apud Marcionem, quæ suum
   et plenum habent ordinem apud creatorem." Rhodon (Euseb., H. E. V. 13.
   4) says of two prominent genuine disciples of Marcion: me` euri'okontes
   te`n diai'resin ton pragma'ton, os oude` ekeinos, duo` archa`s
   apephe'nanto psilos kai` anapodei'ktos. Of Apelles, the most important
   of Marcion's disciples who laid aside the Gnostic, borrows of his
   master, we have the words (l. c.): me` dein o'los exeta'zein to`n
   lo'gon, all' ekaston, os pepi'steuke, diame'nein. Sothe'sesthai ga`r
   tou`s eti' to`n estarome'non elpiko'tas apephai'neto, mo'non ea`n en
   e'rgois agathois euri'skontai . . . . to` de` pos e'sti mi'a arche',
   me` gino'skein e'legen, ou'to de` kineisthai mo'non . . . . me`
   epi'stasthai pos heis esti`n age'nnetos theo's, touto de` pisteu'ein.
   It was Marcion's purpose therefore to give all value to faith alone, to
   make it dependent on its own convincing power, and avoid all
   philosophic paraphrase and argument. The contrast in which he placed
   the Christian blessing of salvation, has in principle nothing in common
   with the contract in which Greek philosophy viewed the summum bonum.
   Finally, it may he pointed out that Marcion introduced no new elements
   Æons, Matter, etc.) into his evangelic views, and leant on no Oriental
   religious science. The later Marcionite speculations about matter (see
   the account of Esnik) should not be charged upon the master himself, as
   is manifest from the second book of Tertullian against Marcion. The
   assumption that the creator of the world created it out of a materia
   subjacens is certainly found in Marcion (see Tertull., 1. 15; Hippol.,
   Philos. X. 19); but he speculated no further about it, and that
   assumption itself was not rejected, for example, by Clem. Alex. (Strom.
   II. 16. 74: Photius on Clement's Hypotyposes). Marcion did not really
   speculate even about the good God; yet see Tertull., adv. Marc. I. 14.
   15: IV. 7: "Mundus ille superior"--"coelum tertium."

   [370] Tertull., de præscr. 41. sq.; the delineation refers chiefly to
   the Marcionites (see Epiph. h. 42. c. 3. 4, and Esnik's account) on the
   Church system of Marcion, see also Tertull., adv. Marc. I. 14, 21, 23,
   24, 28, 29: III. 1, 22: IV. 5, 34: V. 7, 10, 15, 18.

   [371] Marcion himself originally belonged to the main body of the
   Church, as is expressly declared by Tertullian and Epiphanius, and
   attested by one of his own letters.

   [372] Tertull., adv. Marc. I. 2. 19: "Separatio legis et evangelii
   proprium et principale opus est Marcionis . . . ex diversitate
   sententiarum utriusque instrumenti diversitatem quoque argumentatur
   deorum." II. 28, 29: IV. 1. 1. 6: "Dispares deos, alterum, judicem,
   ferum, bellipotentem; alterum mitem, placidum et tantummodo bonum atque
   optimum." Iren. I. 27. 2.

   [373] Marcion maintained that the good God is not to be feared.
   Tertull., adv. Marc. I. 27: "Atque adeo præ se ferunt Marcionitæ: quod
   deum suum omnino non timeant. Malus autem, inquiunt, timebitur; bonus
   autem diligitur." To the question why they did not sin if they did not
   fear their God, the Marcionites answered in the words of Rom. VI. 1. 2.
   (l. c.).

   [374] Tertull., adv. Marc. I. 2: II. 5.

   [375] See the passage adduced, p. 267, note 2, and Tertull., I. 19:
   "Immo inquiunt Marcionitæ, deus poster, etsi non ab initio, etsi non
   per conditionem, sed per semetipsum revelatus est in Christi Jesu." The
   very fact that different theological tendencies (schools) appeared
   within Marcionite Christianity and were mutually tolerant, proves that
   the Marcionite Church itself was not based on a formulated system of
   faith. Apelles expressly conceded different forms of doctrine in
   Christendom, on the basis of faith in the Crucified and a common holy
   ideal of life (see p. 268).

   [376] Tertull. I. 13. "Narem contrahentes impudentissimi Marcionitæ
   convertuntur ad destructionem operum creatoris. Nimirum, inquiunt,
   grande opus et dignum deo mundus?" The Marcionites (Iren. IV. 34. 1)
   put the question to their ecclesiastical opponents: "Quid novi attulit
   dominus veniens?" and therewith caused them no small embarrassment.

   [377] On these see Tertull. I. 19: II. 28. 29: IV. I. 4. 6: Epiph.;
   Hippol. Philos. VII. 30; the book was used by other Gnostics also (it
   is very probable that 1 Tim. VI. 20, an addition to the Epistle--refers
   to Marcion's Antitheses). Apelles, Marcion's disciple, composed a
   similar work under the title of "Syllogismi." Marcion's Antitheses,
   which may still in part be reconstructed from Tertullian, Epiphanius,
   Adamantius, Ephraem, etc., possessed canonical authority in the
   Marcionite church, and therefore took the place of the Old Testament.
   That is quite clear from Tertull., I. 19 (cf. IV. 1): Separatio legis
   et Evangelii proprium et principale opus est Marcionis, nec poterunt
   negare discipuli ejus, quod in summo (suo) instrumento habent, quo
   denique initiantur et indurantur in hanc hæresim.

   [378] Tertullian has frequently pointed to the contradictions in the
   Marcionite conception of the god of creation. These contradictions,
   however, vanish as soon as we regard Marcion's god from the point of
   view that he is like his revelation in the Old Testament.

   [379] The creator of the world is indeed to Marcion "malignus," but not
   "malus."

   [380] Marcion touched on it when he taught that the "visibilia"
   belonged to the god of creation, but the "invisibilia" to the good God
   (I. 16). He adopted the consequences, inasmuch as he taught docetically
   about Christ, and only assumed a deliverance of the human soul.

   [381] See especially the third book of Tertull. adv. Marcion.

   [382] "Solius bonitatis," "deus melior," were Marcion's standing
   expressions for him.

   [383] Marcion firmly emphasised this and appealed to passages in Paul;
   see Tertull. I. 11. 19. 23: "Scio dicturos, atqui hanc esse principalem
   et perfectam bonitatem, cum sine ullo debito familiaritatis in
   extraneos voluntaria et libera effunditur, secundum quam inimicos
   quoque nostros et hoc nomine jam extraneos deligere jubeamur." The
   Church Fathers therefore declared that Marcion's good God was a thief
   and a robber. See also Celsus, in Orig. VI. 53.

   [384] See Esnik's account, which, however, is to be used cautiously.

   [385] Marcion has strongly emphasised the respective passages in Luke's
   Gospel: see his Antitheses, and his comments on the Gospel as presented
   by Tertullian (1. IV).

   [386] That can be plainly read in Esnik, and must have been thought by
   Marcion himself, as he followed Paul (see Tertull., 1. V. and I. 11).
   Apelles also emphasised the death upon the cross. Marcion's conception
   of the purchase can indeed no longer be ascertained in its details. But
   see Adamant., de recta in deum fide, sect. I. It is one of his
   theoretic contradictions that the good God who is exalted above
   righteousness should yet purchase men.

   [387] Tertull. I. 6: "Marcion non negat creatorem deum esse."

   [388] Here Tertull., I. 27, 28, is of special importance; see also II.
   28; IV. 29 (on Luke XII. 41-46): IV. 30. Marcion's idea was this. The
   good God does not judge or punish; but He judges in so far as he keeps
   evil at a distance from Him: it remains foreign to Him. "Marcionitæ
   interrogati quid fiet peccatori cuique die illo? respondent abici ilium
   quasi ab oculis". "Tranquilitas est et mansuetudinis segregare
   solummodo et partem ejus cum infidelibus ponere". But what is the end
   of him who is thus rejected? "Ab igne, inquiunt, creatoris
   deprehendetur". We might think with Tertullian that the creator of the
   world would receive sinners with joy: but this is the god of the law
   who punishes sinners. The issue is twofold: the heaven of the good God,
   and the hell of the creator of the world. Either Marcion assumed with
   Paul that no one can keep the law, or he was silent about the end of
   the "righteous" because he had no interest in it. At any rate, the
   teaching of Marcion closes with an outlook in which the creator of the
   world can no longer be regarded as an independent god. Marcion's
   disciples (see Esnik) here developed a consistent theory: the creator
   of the world violated his own law by killing the righteous Christ, and
   was therefore deprived of all his power by Christ.

   [389] Schools soon arose in the Marcionite church, just as they did
   later on in the main body of Christendom (see Rhodon in Euseb., H. E.
   V. 13. 2-4). The different doctrines of principles which were here
   developed (two, three, four principles; the Marcionite Marcus's
   doctrine of two principles in which the creator of the world is an evil
   being, diverges furthest from the Master) explain the different
   accounts of the Church Fathers about Marcion's teaching. The only one
   of the disciples who really seceded from the Master was Appelles
   (Tertull., de præscr. 30). His teaching is therefore the more
   important, as it shews that it was possible to retain the fundamental
   ideas of Marcion without embracing dualism. The attitude of Apelles to
   the Old Testament is that of Marcion in so far as he rejects the book.
   But perhaps he somewhat modified the strictness of the Master. On the
   other hand, he certainly designated much in it as untrue and fabulous.
   It is remarkable that we meet with a highly honoured prophetess in the
   environment of Apelles: in Marcion's church we hear nothing of such,
   nay, it is extremely important as regards Marcion that he has never
   appealed to the Spirit and to prophets. The "sanctiores feminæ"
   (Tertull. V. 8) are not of this nature, nor can we appeals even to V.
   15. Moreover, it is hardly likely that Jerome ad Eph. III. 5, refers to
   Marcionites. In this complete disregard of early Christian prophecy,
   and in his exclusive reliance on literary documents, we see in Marcion
   a process of despiritualising, that is, a form of secularisation
   peculiar to himself. Marcion no longer possessed the early Christian
   enthusiasm as, for example, Hermas did.

   [390] Marcion was fond of calling Christ "Spiritus salutaris." From the
   treatise of Tertullian we can prove both that Marcion distinguished
   Christ from God, and that he made no distinction (see, for example, I.
   11, 14: II. 27: III. 8, 9, 11: IV. 7). Here again Marcion did not think
   theologically. What he regarded as specially important was that God has
   revealed himself in Christ, "per semetipsum." Later Marcionites
   expressly taught Patripassianism, and have on that account been often
   grouped with the Sabellians. But other Christologies also arose in
   Marcion's church, which is again a proof that it was not dependent on
   scholastic teaching, and therefore could take part in the later
   development of doctrines.

   [391] See the beginning of the Marcionite Gospel.

   [392] Tertullian informs us sufficiently about this. The body of Christ
   was regarded by Marcion merely as an "umbra", a "phantasma." His
   disciples adhered to this, but Apelles first constructed a "doctrine"
   of the body of Christ.

   [393] The strict asceticism of Marcion and the Marcionites is
   reluctantly acknowledged by the Church Fathers; see Tertull., de
   præscr. 30: "Sanctissimus magister"; I. 28, "carni imponit sanctitem."
   The strict prohibition of marriage: I. 29: IV. 11, 17, 29, 34, 38: V.
   7, 8, 15, 18; prohibition of food: 1. 14; cynical life: Hippol.,
   Philos. VII. 29; numerous martyrs: Euseb., H. E. V. 16. 21, and
   frequently elsewhere. Marcion named his adherents (Tertull. IV. 9 36)
   "suntalai'poroi kai` summisou'menoi." It is questionable whether
   Marcion himself allowed the repetition of baptism; it arose in his
   church. But this repetition is a proof that the prevailing conception
   of baptism was not sufficient for a vigorous religious temper.

   [394] Tertull. I. 20. "Aiunt, Marcionem non tam innovasse regulam
   separatione legis et evangelii quam retro adulteratam recurasse"; see
   the account of Epiphanius, taken from Hippolytus, about the appearance
   of Marcion in Rome (h. 42. 1. 2).

   [395] Here again we must remember that Marcion appealed neither to a
   secret tradition nor to the "Spirit," in order to appreciate the
   epoch-making nature of his undertaking.

   [396] In his estimate of the twelve Apostles Marcion took as his
   standpoint Gal. II. See Tertull. I. 20: IV. 3 (generally IV. 1-6), V.
   3; de præscr. 22, 23. He endeavoured to prove from this chapter that
   from a misunderstanding of the words of Christ, the twelve Apostles had
   proclaimed a different Gospel than that of Paul; they had wrongly taken
   the Father of Jesus Christ for the god of creation. It is not quite
   clear how Marcion conceived the inward condition of the Apostles during
   the lifetime of Jesus (see Tertull. III. 22: IV. 3, 39). He assumed
   that they were persecuted by the Jews as the preachers of a new God. It
   is probable, therefore, that he thought of a gradual obscuring of the
   preaching of Jesus in the case of the primitive Apostles. They fell
   hack into Judaism; see Iren. III. 2. 2. "Apostolos admiscuisse ea quæ
   sunt legalia salvatoris verbis"; III, 12. 12: "Apostoli quæ sunt
   Judæorum sentientes scripserunt" etc.; Tertull. V. 3: "Apostolos vultis
   Judaismi magis adfines subintelligi." The expositions of Marcion in
   Tertull. IV. 9. 11, 13, 21, 24, 39: V. 13, shew that he regarded the
   primitive Apostles as out and out real Apostles of Christ.

   [397] The call of Paul was viewed by Marcion as a manifestation of
   Christ, of equal value with His first appearance and ministry; see the
   account of Esnik. "Then for the second time Jesus came down to the lord
   of the creatures in the form of his Godhead, and entered into judgment
   with him on account of his death . . . . And Jesus said to him:
   Judgment is between me and thee, let no one be judge but thine own laws
   . . . . hast thou not written in this thy law, that he who killeth
   shall die?' And he answered, I have so written' . . . . Jesus said to
   him, Deliver thyself therefore into my hands' . . . . The creator of
   the world said, Because I have slain thee I give thee a compensation,
   all those who shall believe on thee, that thou mayest do with them what
   thou pleasest.' Then Jesus left him and carried away Paul, and shewed
   him the price, and sent him to preach that we are bought with this
   price, and that all who believe in Jesus are sold by this just god to
   the good one." This is a most instructive account; for it shews that in
   the Marcionite schools the Pauline doctrine of reconciliation was
   transformed into a drama, and placed between the death of Christ and
   the call of Paul, and that the Pauline Gospel was based, not directly
   on the death of Christ upon the cross, but a theory of it converted
   into history. On Paul as the one apostle of the truth, see Tertull. I.
   20: III. 5, 14: IV. 2 sq.: IV. 34: V. I. As to the Marcionite theory
   that the promise to send the Spirit was fulfilled in the mission of
   Paul, an indication of the want of enthusiasm among the Marcionites,
   see the following page, note 2.

   [398] Marcion must have spoken ex professo in his Antitheses about the
   Judaistic corruptions of Paul's Epistles and the Gospel. He must also
   have known Evangelic writings bearing the names of the original
   Apostles, and have expressed himself about them (Tertull. IV. 1-6).

   [399] Marcion's self-consciousness of being a reformer, and the
   recognition of this in his church is still not understood, although his
   undertaking itself and the facts speak loud enough. (1) The great
   Marcionite church called itself after Marcion (Adamant., de recta in
   deum fide. I. 809; Epiph. h. 42, p. 668, ed. Oehler: Marki'on sou to`
   o'noma epike'klentai oi upo sou epateme'noi os seauto`n keru'xantos
   kai` ouchi' Christo'n. We possess a Marcionite inscription which
   begins: sunagoge` Markioniston). As the Marcionites did not form a
   school, but a church, it is of the greatest value for shewing the
   estimate of the master in this church, that its members called
   themselves by his name. (2) The Antitheses of Marcion had a place in
   the Marcionite canon (see above, p. 272). This canon therefore embraced
   a book of Christ, Epistles of Paul, and a book of Marcion, and for that
   reason the Antitheses were always circulated with the canon of Marcion.
   (3) Origen (in Luc. hom. 25. T. III. p. 962) reports as follows:
   "Denique in tantam quidam dilectionis audaciam proruperunt, ut nova
   quædam et inaudita super Paulo monstra confingerent. Alli enim aiunt,
   hoc quod scriptum est, sedere a dextris salvatoris et sinistris, de
   Paulo et de Marcione dici, quod Paulus sedet a dextris, Marcion sedet a
   sinistris. Porro alii legentes: Mittam vobis advocatum Spiritum
   veritatis, nolunt intelligere tertiam personam a patre et filio, sed
   Apostolum Paulum." The estimate of Marcion which appears here is
   exceedingly instructive. (4) An Arabian writer, who, it is true,
   belongs to a later period, reports that Marcionites called their
   founder "Apostolorum principem." (5) Justin, the first opponent of
   Marcion, classed him with Simon Magus and Menander; that is, with
   demonic founders of religion. These testimonies may suffice.

   [400] On Marcion's Gospel see the Introductions to the New Testament
   and Zahn's Kanonsgeschichte, Bd. I., p. 585 ff. and II., p. 409.
   Marcion attached no name to his Gospel, which, according to his own
   testimony, he produced from the third one of our Canon (Tertull., adv.
   Marc. IV. 2. 3. 4). He called it simply euange'lion (kuri'on), but held
   that it was the Gospel which Paul had in his mind when he spoke of his
   Gospel. The later Marcionites ascribed the authorship of the Gospel
   partly to Paul, partly to Christ himself, and made further changes in
   it. That Marcion chose the Gospel called after Luke should be regarded
   as a make-shift; for this Gospel, which is undoubtedly the most
   Hellenistic of the four Canonical Gospels, and therefore comes nearest
   to the Catholic conception of Christianity, accommodated itself in its
   traditional form but little better than the other three to Marcionite
   Christianity. Whether Marcion took it for a basis because in his time
   it had already been connected with Paul (or really had a connection
   with Paul), or whether the numerous narratives about Jesus as the
   Saviour of sinners led him to recognise in this Gospel alone a genuine
   kernel, we do not know.

   [401] The associations of the Encratites and the community founded by
   Apelles stood between the main body of Christendom and the Marcionite
   church. The description of Celsus (especially V. 61-64 in Orig.) shews
   the motley appearance which Christendom presented soon after the middle
   of the second century. He there mentions the Marcionites, and a little
   before (V. 59), the "great Church." It is very important that Celsus
   makes the main distinction consist in this, that some regarded their
   God as identical with the God of the Jews, whilst others again declared
   that "theirs was a different Deity, who is hostile to that of the Jews,
   and that it was he who had sent the Son." (V. 61.)

   [402] One might be tempted to comprise the character of Marcion's
   religion in the words, "The God who dwells in my breast can profoundly
   excite my inmost being. He who is throned above all my powers can move
   nothing outwardly." But Marcion had the firm assurance that God has
   done something much greater than move the world: he has redeemed men
   from the world, and given them the assurance of this redemption, in the
   midst of all oppression and enmity which do not cease.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHAPTER VI

  APPENDIX: THE CHRISTIANITY OF THE JEWISH CHRISTIANS.

   I. Original Christianity was in appearance Christian Judaism, the
   creation of a universal religion on Old Testament soil. It retained,
   therefore, so far as it was not hellenised, which never altogether took
   place, its original Jewish features. The God of Abraham, Isaac and
   Jacob was regarded as the Father of Jesus Christ, the Old Testament was
   the authoritative source of revelation, and the hopes of the future
   were based on the Jewish ones. The heritage which Christianity took
   over from Judaism shews itself on Gentile Christian soil, in fainter or
   distincter form, in proportion as the philosophic mode of thought
   already prevails, or recedes into the background. [403] To describe the
   appearance of the Jewish, Old Testament, heritage in the Christian
   faith, so far as it is a religious one, by the name Jewish
   Christianity, beginning at a certain point quite arbitrarily chosen,
   and changeable at will, must therefore necessarily lead to error, and
   it has done so to a very great extent. For this designation makes it
   appear as though the Jewish element in the Christian religion were
   something accidental, while it is rather the case that all
   Christianity, in so far as something alien is not foisted into it,
   appears as the religion of Israel perfected and spiritualised. We are
   therefore not justified in speaking of Jewish Christianity where a
   Christian community, even one of Gentile birth, calls itself the true
   Israel, the people of the twelve tribes, the posterity of Abraham; for
   this transfer is based on the original claim of Christianity and can
   only be forbidden by a view that is alien to it. Just as little may we
   designate Jewish Christian the mighty and realistic hopes of the future
   which were gradually repressed in the second and third centuries. They
   may be described as Jewish, or as Christian; but the designation Jewish
   Christian must be rejected; for it gives a wrong impression as to the
   historic right of these hopes in Christianity. The eschatological ideas
   of Papias were not Jewish Christian, but Christian; while, on the other
   hand, the eschatological speculations of Origen were not Gentile
   Christian, but essentially Greek. Those Christians who saw in Jesus the
   man chosen by God and endowed with the Spirit, thought about the
   Redeemer not in a Jewish Christian, but in a Christian manner. Those of
   Asia Minor who held strictly to the 14th of Nisan as the term of the
   Easter festival, were not influenced by Jewish Christian, but by
   Christian or Old Testament considerations. The author of the "Teaching
   of the Apostles," who has transferred the rights of the Old Testament
   priests with respect to the first fruits to the Christian prophets,
   shews himself by such transference not as a Jewish Christian, but as a
   Christian. There is no boundary here; for Christianity took possession
   of the whole of Judaism as religion, and it is therefore a most
   arbitrary view of history which looks upon the Christian appropriation
   of the Old Testament religion, after any point, as no longer Christian,
   but only Jewish Christian. Wherever the universalism of Christianity is
   not violated in favour of the Jewish nation, we have to recognise every
   appropriation of the Old Testament as Christian. Hence this proceeding
   could be spontaneously undertaken in Christianity, as was in fact done.

   2. But the Jewish religion is a national religion, and Christianity
   burst the bonds of nationality, though not for all who recognised Jesus
   as Messiah. This gives the point at which the introduction of the term
   "Jewish Christianity" is appropriate. [404] It should be applied
   exclusively to those Christians who really maintained in their whole
   extent, or in some measure, even if it were to a minimum degree, the
   national and political forms of Judaism and the observance of the
   Mosaic law in its literal sense, as essential to Christianity, at least
   to the Christianity of born Jews, or who, though rejecting these forms,
   nevertheless assumed a prerogative of the Jewish people even in
   Christianity (Clem., Homil. XI. 26: ea`n o allo'phulos to`n no'mon
   pra'xe, Ioudaio's estin, me` pra'xas de' E'llen; "If the foreigner
   observe the law he is a Jew, but if not he is a Greek"). [405] To this
   Jewish Christianity is opposed, not Gentile Christianity, but the
   Christian religion, in so far as it is conceived as universalistic and
   anti-national in the strict sense of the term (Presupp. § 3), that is,
   the main body of Christendom in so far as it has freed itself from
   Judaism as a nation. [406]

   It is not strange that this Jewish Christianity was subject to all the
   conditions which arose from the internal and external position of the
   Judaism of the time; that is, different tendencies were necessarily
   developed in it, according to the measure of the tendencies (or the
   disintegrations) which asserted themselves in the Judaism of that time.
   It lies also in the nature of the case that, with one exception, that
   of Pharisaic Jewish Christianity, all other tendencies were accurately
   parallelled in the systems which appeared in the great, that is,
   anti-Jewish Christendom. They were distinguished from these, simply by
   a social and political, that is, a national element. Moreover, they
   were exposed to the same influences from without as the synagogue and
   as the larger Christendom, till the isolation to which Judaism as a
   nation, after severe reverses condemned itself, became fatal to them
   also. Consequently, there were besides Pharisaic Jewish Christians,
   ascetics of all kinds who were joined by all those over whom Oriental
   religious wisdom and Greek philosophy had won a commanding influence.
   (See above, p. 242 f.)

   In the first century these Jewish Christians formed the majority in
   Palestine, and perhaps also in some neighbouring provinces. But they
   were also found here and there in the West.

   Now the great question is whether this Jewish Christianity as a whole,
   or in certain of its tendencies, was a factor in the development of
   Christianity to Catholicism. This question is to be answered in the
   negative, and quite as much with regard to the history of dogma as with
   regard to the political history of the Church. From the stand-point of
   the universal history of Christianity, these Jewish Christian
   communities appear as rudimentary structures which now and again, as
   objects of curiosity, engaged the attention of the main body of
   Christendom in the East, but could not exert any important influence on
   it, just because they contained a national element.

   The Jewish Christians took no considerable part in the Gnostic
   controversy, the epoch-making conflict which was raised within the pale
   of the larger Christendom about the decisive question, whether and to
   what extent the Old Testament should remain a basis of Christianity,
   although they themselves were no less occupied with the question. [407]
   The issue of this conflict in favour of that party which recognised the
   Old Testament in its full extent as a revelation of the Christian God,
   and asserted the closest connection between Christianity and the Old
   Testament religion, was so little the result of any influence of Jewish
   Christianity, that the existence of the latter would only have rendered
   that victory more difficult unless it had already fallen into the
   background as a phenomenon of no importance. [408] How completely
   insignificant it was is shewn not only by the limited polemics of the
   Church Fathers, but perhaps still more by their silence, and the new
   import which the reproach of Judaising obtained in Christendom after
   the middle of the second century. In proportion as the Old Testament,
   in opposition to Gnosticism, became a more conscious and accredited
   possession in the Church, and at the same time, in consequence of the
   naturalising of Christianity in the world, the need of regulations,
   fixed rules, statutory enactments etc., appeared as indispensable, it
   must have been natural to use the Old Testament as a holy code of such
   enactments. This procedure was no falling away from the original
   anti-Judaic attitude, provided nothing national was taken from the
   book, and some kind of spiritual interpretation given to what had been
   borrowed. The "apostasy" rather lay simply in the changed needs. But
   one now sees how those parties in the Church, to which for any reason
   this progressive legislation was distasteful, raised the reproach of
   "Judaising," [409] and further, how conversely the same reproach was
   hurled at those Christians who resisted the advancing hellenising of
   Christianity, with regard, for example, to the doctrine of God,
   eschatology, Christology, etc. [410] But while this reproach is raised,
   there is nowhere shewn any connection between those described as
   Judaising Christians and the Ebionites. That they were identified
   off-hand is only a proof that "Ebionitism" was no longer known. That
   "Judaising" within Catholicism which appears, on the one hand, in the
   setting up of a Catholic ceremonial law (worship, constitution, etc.),
   and on the other, in a tenacious clinging to less hellenised forms of
   faith and hopes of faith, has nothing in common with Jewish
   Christianity, which desired somehow to confine Christianity to the
   Jewish nation. [411] Speculations that take no account of history may
   make out that Catholicism became more and more Jewish Christian. But
   historical observation, which reckons only with concrete quantities,
   can discover in Catholicism, besides Christianity, no element which it
   would have to describe as Jewish Christian. It observes only a
   progressive hellenising, and in consequence of this, a progressive
   spiritual legislation which utilizes the Old Testament, a process which
   went on for centuries according to the same methods which had been
   employed in the larger Christendom from the beginning. [412] Baur's
   brilliant attempt to explain Catholicism as a product of the mutual
   conflict and neutralising of Jewish and Gentile Christianity, (the
   latter, according to Baur, being equivalent to Paulinism) reckons with
   two factors, of which the one had no significance at all, and the other
   only an indirect effect, as regards the formation of the Catholic
   Church. The influence of Paul in this direction is exhausted in working
   out the universalism of the Christian religion, for a Greater than he
   had laid the foundation for this movement, and Paul did not realise it
   by himself alone. Placed on this height Catholicism was certainly
   developed by means of conflicts and compromises, not, however, by
   conflicts with Ebionitism, which was to all intents and purposes
   discarded as early as the first century, but as the result of the
   conflict of Christianity with the united powers of the world in which
   it existed, on behalf of its own peculiar nature as the universal
   religion based on the Old Testament. Here were fought triumphant
   battles, but here also compromises were made which characterise the
   essence of Catholicism as Church and as doctrine. [413]

   A history of Jewish Christianity and its doctrines does not therefore,
   strictly speaking, belong to the history of dogma, especially as the
   original distinction between Jewish Christianity and the main body of
   the Church lay, as regards its principle, not in doctrine, but in
   policy. But seeing that the opinions of the teachers in this Church
   regarding Jewish Christianity throw light upon their own stand-point,
   also that up till about the middle of the second century Jewish
   Christians were still numerous and undoubtedly formed the great
   majority of believers in Palestine, [414] and finally, that
   attempts--unsuccessful ones indeed--on the part of Jewish Christianity
   to bring Gentile Christians under its sway did not cease till about the
   middle of the third century, a short sketch may be appropriate here.
   [415]

   Justin vouches for the existence of Jewish Christians, and
   distinguishes between those who would force the law even on Gentile
   Christians and would have no fellowship with such as did not observe
   it, and those who considered that the law was binding only on people of
   Jewish birth and did not shrink from fellowship with Gentile Christians
   who were living without the law. How the latter could observe the law
   and yet enter into intercourse with those who were not Jews is involved
   in obscurity, but these he recognises as partakers of the Christian
   salvation and therefore as Christian brethren, though he declares that
   there are Christians who do not possess this large-heartedness. He also
   speaks of Gentile Christians who allowed themselves to be persuaded by
   Jewish Christians into the observance of the Mosaic law, and confesses
   that he is not quite sure of the salvation of these. This is all we
   learn from Justin, [416] but it is instructive enough. In the first
   place, we can see that the question is no longer a burning one: "Justin
   here represents only the interests of a Gentile Christianity whose
   stability has been secured." This has all the more meaning that in the
   Dialogue Justin has not in view an individual Christian community, or
   the communities of a province, but speaks as one who surveys the whole
   situation of Christendom. [417] The very fact that Justin has devoted
   to the whole question only one chapter of a work containing 142, and
   the magmanimous way in which he speaks, shew that the phenomena in
   question have no longer any importance for the main body of
   Christendom. Secondly, it is worthy of notice that Justin distinguishes
   two tendencies in Jewish Christianity. We observe these two tendencies
   in the Apostolic age (Presupp. § 3); they had therefore maintained
   themselves to his time. Finally, we must not overlook the circumstance
   that he adduces only the e'nnomos politei'a, "legal polity," as
   characteristic of this Jewish Christianity. He speaks only incidentally
   of a difference in doctrine, nay, he manifestly presupposes that the
   dida'gmata Christou, "teachings of Christ," are essentially found among
   them just as among the Gentile Christians; for he regards the more
   liberal among them as friends and brethren. [418]

   The fact that even then there were Jewish Christians here and there who
   sought to spread the e'nnomos politei'a among Gentile Christians has
   been attested by Justin and also by other contemporary writers. [419]
   But there is no evidence of this propaganda having acquired any great
   importance. Celsus also knows Christians who desire to live as Jews
   according to the Mosaic law (V. 61), but he mentions them only once,
   and otherwise takes no notice of them in his delineation of, and attack
   on, Christianity. We may perhaps infer that he knew of them only from
   hearsay, for he simply enumerates them along with the numerous Gnostic
   sects. Had this keen observer really known them he would hardly have
   passed them over, even though he had met with only a small number of
   them. [420] Irenæus placed the Ebionites among the heretical schools,
   [421] but we can see from his work that in his day they must have been
   all but forgotten in the West. [422] This was not yet the case in the
   East. Origen knows of them. He knows also of some who recognise the
   birth from the Virgin. He is sufficiently intelligent and acquainted
   with history to judge that the Ebionites are no school, but, as
   believing Jews, are the descendants of the earliest Christians, in fact
   he seems to suppose that all converted Jews have at all times observed
   the law of their fathers. But he is far from judging of them
   favourably. He regards them as little better than the Jews (Ioudaioi
   kai` oi oli'go diaphe'rontes auton Ebionaioi, "Jews and Ebionites who
   differ little from them"). Their rejection of Paul destroys the value
   of their recognition of Jesus as Messiah. They appear only to have
   assumed Christ's name, and their literal exposition of the Scripture is
   meagre and full of error. It is possible that such Jewish Christians
   may have existed in Alexandria, but it is not certain. Origen knows
   nothing of an inner development in this Jewish Christianity. [423] Even
   in Palestine, Origen seems to have occupied himself personally with
   these Jewish Christians, just as little as Eusebius. [424] They lived
   apart by themselves and were not aggressive. Jerome is the last who
   gives us a clear and certain account of them. [425] He, who associated
   with them, assures us that their attitude was the same as in the second
   century, only they seem to have made progress in the recognition of the
   birth from the Virgin and in their more friendly position towards the
   Church. [426] Jerome at one time calls them Ebionites and at another
   Nazarenes, thereby proving that these names were used synonymously.
   [427] There is not the least ground for distinguishing two clearly
   marked groups of Jewish Christians, or even for reckoning the
   distinction of Origen and the Church Fathers to the account of Jewish
   Christians themselves, so as to describe as Nazarenes those who
   recognised the birth from the Virgin and who had no wish to compel the
   Gentile Christians to observe the law, and the others as Ebionites.
   Apart from syncretistic or Gnostic Jewish Christianity, there is but
   one group of Jewish Christians holding various shades of opinion, and
   these from the beginning called themselves Nazarenes as well as
   Ebionites. From the beginning, likewise, one portion of them was
   influenced by the existence of a great Gentile Church which did not
   observe the law. They acknowledged the work of Paul and experienced in
   a slight degree influences emanating from the great Church. [428] But
   the gulf which separated them from that Church did not thereby become
   narrower. That gulf was caused by the social and political separation
   of these Jewish Christians, whatever mental attitude, hostile or
   friendly, they might take up to the great Church. This Church stalked
   over them with iron feet, as over a structure which in her opinion was
   full of contradictions throughout ("Semi-christiani"), and was
   disconcerted neither by the gospel of these Jewish Christians nor by
   anything else about them. [429] But as the Synagogue also vigorously
   condemned them, their position up to their extinction was a most tragic
   one. These Jewish Christians, more than any other Christian party, bore
   the reproach of Christ.

   The Gospel, at the time when it was proclaimed among the Jews, was not
   only law, but theology, and indeed syncretistic theology. On the other
   hand, the temple service and the sacrificial system had begun to lose
   their hold in certain influential circles. [430] We have pointed out
   above (Presupp. §§ I. 2. 5) how great were the diversities of Jewish
   sects, and that there was in the Diaspora, as well as in Palestine
   itself, a Judaism which, on the one hand, followed ascetic impulses,
   arid on the other, advanced to a criticism of the religious tradition
   without giving up the national claims. It may even be said that in
   theology the boundaries between the orthodox Judaism of the Pharisees
   and a syncretistic Judaism were of an elastic kind. Although religion,
   in those circles, seemed to be fixed in its legal aspect, yet on its
   theological side it was ready to admit very diverse speculations, in
   which angelic powers especially played a great rôle. [431] That
   introduced into Jewish monotheism an element of differentiation, the
   results of which were far-reaching. The field was prepared for the
   formation of syncretistic sects. They present themselves to us on the
   soil of the earliest Christianity, in the speculations of those Jewish
   Christian teachers who are opposed in the Epistle to the Colossians,
   and in the Gnosis of Cerinthus (see above, p. 247). Here cosmological
   ideas and myths were turned to profit. The idea of God was sublimated
   by both. In consequence of this, the Old Testament records were
   subjected to criticism, because they could not in all respects be
   reconciled with the universal religion which hovered before men's
   minds. This criticism was opposed to the Pauline in so far as it
   maintained, with the common Jewish Christians and Christendom as a
   whole, that the genuine Old Testament religion was essentially
   identical with the Christian. But while those common Jewish Christians
   drew from this the inference that the whole of the Old Testament must
   be adhered to in its traditional sense and in all its ordinances, and
   while the larger Christendom secured for itself the whole of the Old
   Testament by deviating from the ordinary interpretation, those
   syncretistic Jewish Christians separated from the Old Testament, as
   interpolations, whatever did not agree with their purer moral
   conceptions and borrowed speculations. Thus, in particular, they got
   rid of the sacrificial ritual and all that was connected with it by
   putting ablutions in their place. First the profanation, and afterwards
   the abolition of the temple worship after the destruction of Jerusalem,
   may have given another new and welcome impulse to this by coming to be
   regarded as its Divine confirmation (Presupp. § 2). Christianity now
   appeared as purified Mosaism. In these Jewish Christian undertakings we
   have undoubtedly before us a series of peculiar attempts to elevate the
   Old Testament religion into the universal one, under the impression of
   the person of Jesus; attempts, however, in which the Jewish religion,
   and not the Jewish people, was to bear the costs by curtailment of its
   distinctive features. The great inner affinity of these attempts with
   the Gentile Christian Gnostics has already been set forth. The firm
   partition wall between them, however, lies in the claim of these Jewish
   Christians to set forth the pure Old Testament religion, as well as in
   the national Jewish colouring which the constructed universal religion
   was always to preserve. This national colouring is shewn in the
   insistance upon a definite measure of Jewish national ceremonies as
   necessary to salvation, and in the opposition to the Apostle Paul,
   which united the Gnostic Judæo-Christians with the common type, those
   of the strict observance. How the latter were related to the former, we
   do not know, for the inner relations here are almost completely unknown
   to us. [432]

   Apart from the false doctrines opposed in the Epistle to the
   Colossians, and from Cerinthus, this syncretistic Jewish Christianity
   which aimed at making itself a universal religion meets us in tangible
   form only in three phenomena: [433] in the Elkesaites of Hippolytus and
   Origen; in the Ebionites with their associates of Epiphanius, sects
   very closely connected, in fact to be viewed as one party of manifold
   shades; [434] and in the activity of Symmachus. [435] We observe here a
   form of religion as far removed from that of the Old Testament as from
   the Gospel, subject to strong heathen influences, not Greek, but
   Asiatic, and scarcely deserving the name "Christian," because it
   appeals to a new revelation of God which is to complete that given in
   Christ. We should take particular note of this in judging of the whole
   remarkable phenomenon. The question in this Jewish Christianity is not
   the formation of a philosophic school, but to some extent the
   establishment of a kind of new religion, that is, the completion of
   that founded by Christ, undertaken by a particular person basing his
   claims on a revealed book which was delivered to him from heaven. This
   book which was to form the complement of the Gospel, possessed, from
   the third century, importance for all sections of Jewish Christians so
   far as they, in the phraseology of Epiphanius, were not Nazarenes.
   [436] The whole system reminds one of Samaritan Christian syncretism;
   [437] but we must be on our guard against identifying the two
   phenomena, or even regarding them as similar. These Elkesaite Jewish
   Christians held fast by the belief that Jesus was the Son of God, and
   saw in the "book" a revelation which proceeded from him. They did not
   offer any worship to their founder, [438] that is, to the receiver of
   the "book," and they were, as will be shewn, the most ardent opponents
   of Simonianism. [439]

   Alcibiades of Apamea, one of their disciples, came from the East to
   Rome about 220-230, and endeavoured to spread the doctrines of the sect
   in the Roman Church. He found the soil prepared, inasmuch as he could
   announce from the "book" forgiveness of sins to all sinful Christians,
   even the grossest transgressors, and such forgiveness was very much
   needed. Hippolytus opposed him, and had an opportunity of seeing the
   book and becoming acquainted with its contents. From his account and
   that of Origen we gather the following: (1) The sect is a Jewish
   Christian one, for it requires the no'mou politei'a (circumcision and
   the keeping of the Sabbath), and repudiates the Apostle Paul; but it
   criticises the Old Testament and rejects a part of it. (2) The objects
   of its faith are the "Great and most High God," the Son of God (the
   "Great King"), and the Holy Spirit (thought of as female); Son and
   Spirit appear as angelic powers. Considered outwardly, and according to
   his birth, Christ is a mere man, but with this peculiarity, that he has
   already been frequently born and manifested (polla'kis gennethe'nta
   kai` genno'menon pephene'nai kai` phu'esthai, alla'ssonta gene'seis
   kai` metensomatou'menon, cf. the testimony of Victorinus as to
   Symmachus). From the statements of Hippolytus we cannot be sure whether
   he was identified with the Son of God, [440] at any rate the assumption
   of repeated births of Christ shews how completely Christianity was
   meant to be identified with what was supposed to be the pure Old
   Testament religion. (3) The "book" proclaimed a new forgiveness of sin,
   which, on condition of faith in the "book" and a real change of mind,
   was to be bestowed on every one, through the medium of washings,
   accompanied by definite prayers which are strictly prescribed. In these
   prayers appear peculiar Semitic speculations about nature ("the seven
   witnesses: heaven, water, the holy spirits, the angels of prayer, oil,
   salt, earth"). The old Jewish way of thinking appears in the assumption
   that all kinds of sickness and misfortune are punishments for sin, and
   that these penalties must therefore be removed by atonement. The book
   contains also astrological and geometrical speculations in a religious
   garb. The main thing, however, was the possibility of a forgiveness of
   sin, ever requiring to be repeated, though Hippolytus himself was
   unable to point to any gross laxity. Still, the appearance of this sect
   represents the attempt to make the religion of Christian Judaism
   palatable to the world. The possibility of repeated forgiveness of sin,
   the speculations about numbers, elements, and stars, the halo of
   mystery, the adaptation to the forms of worship employed in the
   "mysteries," are worldly means of attraction which shew that this
   Jewish Christianity was subject to the process of acute secularization.
   The Jewish mode of life was to be adopted in return for these
   concessions. Yet its success in the West was of small extent and
   short-lived.

   Epiphanius confirms all these features, and adds a series of new ones.
   In his description, the new forgiveness of sin is not so prominent as
   in that of Hippolytus, but it is there. From the account of Epiphanius
   we can see that these syncretistic Judæo-Christian sects were at first
   strictly ascetic and rejected marriage as well as the eating of flesh,
   but that they gradually became more lax. We learn here that the whole
   sacrificial service was removed from the Old Testament by the
   Elkesaites and declared to be non-Divine, that is non-Mosaic, and that
   fire was consequently regarded as the impure and dangerous element, and
   water as the good one. [441] We learn further, that these sects
   acknowledged no prophets and men of God between Aaron and Christ, and
   that they completely adapted the Hebrew Gospel of Matthew to their own
   views. [442] In addition to this book, however, (the Gospel of the 12
   Apostles), other writings, such as Peri'odoi Pe'trou dia` Kle'mentos
   Anabathmoi` Iako'bou and similar histories of Apostles, were held in
   esteem by them. In these writings the Apostles were represented as
   zealous ascetics, and, above all, as vegetarians, while the Apostle
   Paul was most bitterly opposed. They called him a Tarsene, said he was
   a Greek, and heaped on him gross abuse. Epiphanius also dwells strongly
   upon their Jewish mode of life (circumcision, Sabbath), as well as
   their daily washings, [443] and gives some information about the
   constitution and form of worship of these sects (use of baptism: Lord's
   Supper with bread and water). Finally, Epiphanius gives particulars
   about their Christology. On this point there were differences of
   opinion, and these differences prove that there was no Christological
   dogma. As among the common Jewish Christians, the birth of Jesus from
   the Virgin was a matter of dispute. Further, some identified Christ
   with Adam, others saw in him a heavenly being (a'nothen o'n), a
   spiritual being, who was created before all, who was higher than all
   angels and Lord of all things, but who chose for himself the upper
   world; yet this Christ from above came down to this lower world as
   often as he pleased. He came in Adam, he appeared in human form to the
   patriarchs, and at last appeared on earth as a man with the body of
   Adam, suffered, etc. Others again, as it appears, would have nothing to
   do with these speculations, but stood by the belief that Jesus was the
   man chosen by God, on whom, on account of his virtue, the Holy
   Spirit--o`per esti'n o Christo's--descended at the baptism. [444]
   (Epiph. h. 30. 3, 14, 16). The account which Epiphanius gives of the
   doctrine held by these Jewish Christians regarding the Devil, is
   specially instructive (h. 30. 16): Du'o de` tinas sunistosin ek theou
   tetagme'nous, e'na me`n to`n Christo`n, e'na de` to`n dia'bolon. kai`
   to`n me`n Christo`n le'gousi tou me'llontos aionos eilephe'nai to`n
   kleron, to`n de` dia'bolon touton pepisteusthai on aiona, ek prostages
   dethen tou pantokra'toros kata` ai'tesin ekate'ron auton. Here we have
   a very old Semitico-Hebraic idea preserved in a very striking way, and
   therefore we may probably assume that in other respects also, these
   Gnostic Ebionites preserved that which was ancient. Whether they did so
   in their criticism of the Old Testament, is a point on which we must
   not pronounce judgment.

   We might conclude by referring to the fact that this syncretistic
   Jewish Christianity, apart from a well-known missionary effort at Rome,
   was confined to Palestine and the neighbouring countries, and might
   consider it proved that this movement had no effect on the history and
   development of Catholicism [445] were it not for two voluminous
   writings which still continue to be regarded as monuments of the
   earliest epoch of syncretistic Jewish Christianity. Not only did Baur
   suppose that he could prove his hypothesis about the origin of
   Catholicism by the help of these writings, but the attempt has recently
   been made on the basis of the Pseudo-Clementine Recognitions and
   Homilies, for these are the writings in question, to go still further
   and claim for Jewish Christianity the glory of having developed by
   itself the whole doctrine, worship and constitution of Catholicism, and
   of having transmitted it to Gentile Christianity as a finished product
   which only required to be divested of a few Jewish husks. [446] It is
   therefore necessary to subject these writings to a brief examination.
   Every-thing depends on the time of their origin, and the tendencies
   they follow. But these are just the two questions that are still
   unanswered. Without depreciating those worthy men who have earnestly
   occupied themselves with the Pseudo-Clementines, [447] it may be
   asserted, that in this region everything is as yet in darkness,
   especially as no agreement has been reached even in the question of
   their composition. No doubt such a result appears to have been pretty
   nearly arrived at as far as the time of composition is concerned, but
   that estimate (150-170, or the latter half of the second century) not
   only awakens the greatest suspicion, but can be proved to be wrong. The
   importance of the question for the history of dogma does not permit the
   historian to set it aside, while, on the other hand, the compass of a
   manual does not allow us to enter into an exhaustive investigation. The
   only course open in such circumstances is briefly to define one's own
   position.

   1. The Recognitions and Homilies, in the form in which we have them, do
   not belong to the second century, but at the very earliest to the first
   half of the third. There is nothing, however, to prevent our putting
   them a few decades later. [448]

   2. They were not composed in their present form by heretical
   Christians, but most probably by Catholics. Nor do they aim at forming
   a theological system, [449] or spreading the views of a sect. Their
   primary object is to oppose Greek polytheism, immoral mythology, and
   false philosophy, and thus to promote edification. [450]

   3. In describing the authors as Catholic, we do not mean that they were
   adherents of the theology of Irenæus or Origen. The instructive point
   here, rather, is that they had as yet no fixed theology, and therefore
   could without hesitation regard and use all possible material as means
   of edification. In like manner, they had no fixed conception of the
   Apostolic age, and could therefore appropriate motley and dangerous
   material. Such Christians, highly educated and correctly trained too,
   were still to be found, not only in the third century, but even later.
   But the authors do not seem to have been free from a bias, inasmuch as
   they did not favour the Catholic, that is the Alexandrian, apologetic
   theology which was in process of formation

   4. The description of the Pseudo-Clementine writings, naturally derived
   from their very form, as "edifying, didactic romances for the
   refutation of paganism," is not inconsistent with the idea that the
   authors at the same time did their utmost to oppose heretical
   phenomena, especially the Marcionite church and Apelles, together with
   heresy and heathenism in general, as represented by Simon Magus.

   5. The objectionable materials which the authors made use of were
   edifying for them, because of the position assigned therein to Peter,
   because of the ascetic and mysterious elements they contained, and the
   opposition offered to Simon, etc. The offensive features, so far as
   they were still contained in these sources, had already become
   unintelligible and harmless. They were partly conserved as such and
   partly removed.

   6. The authors are to be sought for perhaps in Rome, perhaps in Syria,
   perhaps in both places, certainly not in Alexandria.

   7. The main ideas are: (1) The monarchy of God. (2) the syzygies (weak
   and strong). (3) Prophecy (the true Prophet). (4) Stoical rationalism,
   belief in providence, good works, philanthropi'a, etc. = Mosaism. The
   Homilies are completely saturated with stoicism, both in their ethical
   and metaphysical systems, and are opposed to Platonism, though Plato is
   quoted in Hom. XV. 8, as Elle'non topho's tis (a wise man of the
   Greeks). In addition to these ideas we have also a strong hierarchical
   tendency. The material which the authors made use of was in great part
   derived from syncretistic Jewish Christian tradition, in other words,
   those histories of the Apostles were here utilised which Epiphanius
   reports to have been used by the Ebionites (see above). It is not
   probable, however, that these writings in their original form were in
   the hands of the narrators; the likelihood is that they made use of
   them in revised forms.

   8. It must be reserved for an accurate investigation to ascertain
   whether those modified versions which betray clear marks of Hellenic
   origin were made within syncretistic Judaism itself, or whether they
   are to be traced back to Catholic writers. In either case, they should
   not be placed earlier than about the beginning of the third century,
   but in all probability one or two generations later still.

   9. If we adopt the first assumption, it is most natural to think of
   that propaganda which, according to the testimony of Hippolytus and
   Origen, Jewish Christianity attempted in Rome in the age of Caracalla
   and Heliogabalus, through the medium of the Syrian, Alcibiades. This
   coincides with the last great advance of Syrian cults into the west,
   and is at the same time the only one known to us historically. But it
   is further pretty generally admitted that the immediate sources of the
   Pseudo-Clementines already presuppose the existence of Elkesaite
   Christianity. We should accordingly have to assume that in the West
   this Christianity made greater concessions to the prevailing type, that
   it gave up circumcision and accommodated itself to the Church system of
   Gentile Christianity, at the same time withdrawing its polemic against
   Paul.

   10. Meanwhile the existence of such a Jewish Christianity is not as yet
   proved, and therefore we must reckon with the possibility that the
   remodelled form of the Jewish Christian sources, already found in
   existence by the revisers of the Pseudo-Clementine Romances, was solely
   a Catholic literary product. In this assumption, which commends itself
   both as regards the aim of the composition and its presupposed
   conditions, we must remember that, from the third century onwards,
   Catholic writers systematically corrected, and to a great extent
   reconstructed, the heretical histories which were in circulation in the
   churches as interesting reading, and that the extent and degree of this
   reconstruction varied exceedingly, according to the theological and
   historical insight of the writer. The identifying of pure Mosaism with
   Christianity was in itself by no means offensive when there was no
   further question of circumcision. The clear distinction between the
   ceremonial and moral parts of the Old Testament, could no longer prove
   an offence after the great struggle with Gnosticism. [451] The strong
   insistance upon the unity of God, and the rejection of the doctrine of
   the Logos, were by no means uncommon in the beginning of the third
   century; and in the speculations about Adam and Christ, in the views
   about God and the world and such like, as set before us in the
   immediate sources of the Romances, the correct and edifying elements
   must have seemed to outweigh the objectionable. At any rate, the
   historian who, until further advised, denies the existence of a Jewish
   Christianity composed of the most contradictory elements, lacking
   circumcision and national hopes, and bearing marks of Catholic and
   therefore of Hellenic influence, judges more prudently than he who
   asserts, solely on the basis of Romances which are accompanied by no
   tradition and have never been the objects of assault, the existence of
   a Jewish Christianity accommodating itself to Catholicism which is
   entirely unattested.

   11. Be that as it may, it may at least be regarded as certain that the
   Pseudo-Clementines contribute absolutely nothing to our knowledge of
   the origin of the Catholic Church and doctrine, as they shew at best in
   their immediate sources a Jewish Christianity strongly influenced by
   Catholicism and Hellenism.

   12. They must be used with great caution even in seeking to determine
   the tendencies and inner history of syncretistic Jewish Christianity.
   It cannot be made out with certainty, how far back the first sources of
   the Pseudo-Clementines date, or what their original form and tendency
   were. As to the first point, it has indeed been said that Justin, nay,
   even the author of the Acts of the Apostles, presupposes them, and that
   the Catholic tradition of Peter in Rome and of Simon Magus are
   dependent on them (as is still held by Lipsius); but there is so little
   proof of this adduced that in Christian literature up to the end of the
   second century (Hegesippus?) we can only discover very uncertain traces
   of acquaintance with Jewish Christian historical narrative. Such
   indications can only be found to any considerable extent in the third
   century, and I do not mean to deny that the contents of the Jewish
   Christian histories of the Apostles contributed materially to the
   formation of the ecclesiastical legends about Peter. As is shewn in the
   Pseudo-Clementines, these histories of the Apostles especially opposed
   Simon Magus and his adherents (the new Samaritan attempt at a universal
   religion), and placed the authority of the Apostle Peter against them.
   But they also opposed the Apostle Paul, and seem to have transferred
   Simonian features to Paul, and Pauline features to Simon. Yet it is
   also possible that the Pauline traits found in the magician were the
   outcome of the redaction, in so far as the whole polemic against Paul
   is here struck out, though certain parts of it have been woven into the
   polemic against Simon. But probably the Pauline features of the
   magician are merely an appearance. The Pseudo-Clementines may to some
   extent be used, though with caution, in determining the doctrines of
   syncretistic Jewish Christianity. In connection with this we must take
   what Epiphanius says as our standard. The Pantheistic and Stoic
   elements which are found here and there must of course be eliminated.
   But the theory of the genesis of the world from a change in God himself
   (that is from a probole'), the assumption that all things emanated from
   God in antitheses (Son of God--Devil; heaven--earth; male--female; male
   and female prophecy), nay, that these antitheses are found in God
   himself (goodness, to which corresponds the Son of God--punitive
   justice, to which corresponds the Devil), the speculations about the
   elements which have proceeded from the one substance, the ignoring of
   freedom in the question about the origin of evil, the strict adherence
   to the unity and absolute causality of God, in spite of the dualism,
   and in spite of the lofty predicates applied to the Son of God--all
   this plainly bears the Semitic Jewish stamp.

   We must here content ourselves with these indications. They were meant
   to set forth briefly the reasons which forbid our assigning to
   syncretistic Jewish Christianity, on the basis of the
   Pseudo-Clementines, a place in the history of the genesis of the
   Catholic Church and its doctrine.

   Bigg, The Clementine Homilies (Studia Biblica et Eccles. II., p. 157
   ff.), has propounded the hypothesis that the Homilies are an Ebionitic
   revision of an older Catholic original (see p. 184: "The Homilies as we
   have it, is a recast of an orthodox work by a highly unorthodox
   editor." P. 175: "The Homilies are surely the work of a Catholic
   convert to Ebionitism, who thought he saw in the doctrine of the two
   powers the only tenable answer to Gnosticism. We can separate his
   Catholicism from his Ebionitism just as surely as his Stoicism"). This
   is the opposite of the view expressed by me in the text. I consider
   Bigg's hypothesis well worth examining, and at first sight not
   improbable; but I am not able to enter into it here.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [403] The attitude of the recently discovered "Teaching of the twelve
   Apostles" is strictly universalistic, and hostile to Judaism as a
   nation, but shews us a Christianity still essentially uninfluenced by
   philosophic elements. The impression made by this fact has caused some
   scholars to describe the treatise as a document of Jewish Christianity.
   But the attitude of the Didache is rather the ordinary one of
   universalistic early Christianity on the soil of the Græco-Roman world.
   If we describe this as Jewish Christian, then from the meaning which we
   must give to the words "Christian" and "Gentile Christian," we tacitly
   legitimise an undefined and undefinable aggregate of Greek ideas, along
   with a specifically Pauline element, as primitive Christianity, and
   this is perhaps not the intended, but yet desired, result of the false
   terminology. Now, if we describe even such writings as the Epistle of
   James and the Shepherd of Hermas as Jewish Christian, we therewith
   reduce the entire early Christianity, which is the creation of a
   universal religion on the soil of Judaism, to the special case of an
   indefinable religion. The same now appears as one of the particular
   values of a completely indeterminate magnitude. Hilgenfeld (Judenthum
   und Judenchristenthum, 1886; cf. also Ztschr. f. wiss. Theol. 1886 H.
   4.) advocates another conception of Jewish Christianity in opposition
   to the following account. Zahn. Gesch. des N.T.-lich. Kanons, II. p.
   668 ff. has a different view still.

   [404] Or even Ebionitism; the designations are to be used as
   synonymous.

   [405] The more rarely the right standard has been set up in the
   literature of Church history for the distinction of Jewish
   Christianity, the more valuable are those writings in which it is
   found. We must refer, above all, to Diestel, Geschichte des A. T. in
   der Christl. Kirche, p. 44, note 7.

   [406] See Theol. Lit. Ztg. 1883. Col. 409 f. as to the attempt of Joel
   to make out that the whole of Christendom up to the end of the first
   century was strictly Jewish Christian, and to exhibit the complete
   friendship of Jews and Christians in that period ("Blicke in die
   Religionsgesch." 2 Abth. 1883). It is not improbable that Christians
   like James, living in strict accordance with the law, were for the time
   being respected even by the Pharisees in the period preceding the
   destruction of Jerusalem But that can in no case have been the rule. We
   see from Epiph. h. 29. 9. and from the Talmud what was the custom at a
   later period.

   [407] There were Jewish Christians who represented the position of the
   great Church with reference to the Old Testament religion, and there
   were some who criticised the Old Testament like the Gnostics. Their
   contention may have remained as much an internal one as that between
   the Church Fathers and Gnostics (Marcion) did, so far as Jewish
   Christianity is concerned. Their may have been relations between
   Gnostic Jewish Christians and Gnostics not of a national Jewish type,
   in Syria and Asia Minor, though we are completely in the dark on the
   matter.

   [408] From the mere existence of Jewish Christians, those Christians
   who rejected the Old Testament might have argued against the main body
   of Christendom and put before it the dilemma: either Jewish Christian
   or Marcionite. Still more logical indeed was the dilemma: either
   Jewish, or Marcionite Christian.

   [409] So did the Montanists and Antimontanists mutually reproach each
   other with Judaising (see the Montanist writings of Tertullian). Just
   in the same way the arrangements as to worship and organisation, which
   were ever being more richly developed, were described by the freer
   parties as Judaising, because they made appeal to the Old Testament,
   though, as regards their contents, they had little in common with
   Judaism. But is not the method of claiming Old Testament authority for
   the regulations rendered necessary by circumstances nearly as old as
   Christianity itself? Against whom the lost treatise of Clement of
   Alexandria "kano'n ekklesiastiko`s e` pros tou`s Ioudai'zontas" (Euseb.
   H. E. VI. 13. 3.) was directed, we cannot tell. But as we read, Strom.,
   VI. 15. 125, that the Holy Scriptures are to be expounded according to
   the ekklesiastiko`s kano`n, and then find the following definition of
   the Canon: kano`n de` ekklesiastiko's e sunodi'a kai` sumphoni'a no'mou
   te kai` propheton te kata` te`n tou kuri'ou parousi'an paradidome'ne
   diathe'ke, we may conjecture that the Judaisers were those Christians
   who, in principle or to some extent, objected to the allegorical
   interpretation of the Old Testament. We have then to think either of
   Marcionite Christians or of "Chiliasts," that is, the old Christians
   who were still numerous in Egypt about the middle of the third century
   (see Dionys. Alex. in Euseb., H. E. VII. 24). In the first case, the
   title of the treatise would be paradoxical. But perhaps the treatise
   refers to the Quarto-decimans, although the expression kano`n
   ekklesiastiko's seems too ponderous for them (see, however, Orig.,
   Comm. in Matth. n. 76, ed. Delarue III., p. 895). Clement may possibly
   have had Jewish Christians before him. See Zahn, Forschungen, vol.
   III., p. 37 f.

   [410] Cases of this kind are everywhere, up to the fifth century, so
   numerous that they need not be cited. We may only remind the reader
   that the Nestorian Christology was described by its earliest and its
   latest opponents as Ebionitic.

   [411] Or were those western Christians Ebionitic who, in the fourth
   century, still clung to very realistic Chiliastic hopes, who, in fact,
   regarded their Christianity as consisting in these?

   [412] The hellenising of Christianity went hand in hand with a more
   extensive use of the Old Testament; for, according to the principles of
   Catholicism, every new article of the Church system must be able to
   legitimise itself as springing from revelation. But, as a rule, the
   attestation could only be gathered from the Old Testament, since
   religion here appears in the fixed form of a secular community. Now the
   needs of a secular community for outward regulations gradually became
   so strong in the Church as to require palpable ceremonial rules. But it
   cannot be denied that from a certain point of time, first by means of
   the fiction of Apostolic constitutions (see my edition of the Didache,
   Prolegg. p. 239 ff.), and then without this fiction, not, however, as a
   rule, without reservations, ceremonial regulations were simply taken
   over from the Old Testament. But this transference (see Bk. II.) takes
   place at a time when there can be absolutely no question of an
   influence of Jewish Christianity. Moreover, it always proves itself to
   be catholic by the fact that it did not in the least soften the
   traditional anti-Judaism. On the contrary, it attained its full growth
   in the age of Constantine. Finally, it should not be overlooked that at
   all times in antiquity certain provincial churches were exposed to
   Jewish influences, especially in the East and in Arabia, that they were
   therefore threatened with being Judaised, or with apostasy to Judaism,
   and that even at the present day certain Oriental Churches shew tokens
   of having once been subject to Jewish influences (see Serapion in
   Euseb. H. E. VI. 12. 1, Martyr. Pion., Epiph. de mens. et pond 15. 18;
   my Texte u. Unters. I. 3. p. 73 f., and Wellhausen, Skizzen und
   Vorarbeiten, Part. 3. p. 197 ff.; actual disputations with Jews do not
   seem to have been common, though see Tertull., adv. Jud. and Orig. c.
   Cels. I. 45, 49, 55: II. 31. Clement also keeps in view Jewish
   objections). This Jewish Christianity, if we like to call it so, which
   in some regions of the East was developed through an immediate
   influence of Judaism on Catholicism, should not, however, be confounded
   with the Jewish Christianity which is the most original form in which
   Christianity realised itself. This was no longer able to influence the
   Christianity which had shaken itself free from the Jewish nation (as to
   futile attempts, see below), any more than the protecting covering
   stripped from the new shoot can ever again acquire significance for the
   latter.

   [413] What is called the ever-increasing "legal" feature of Gentile
   Christianity and the Catholic Church is conditioned by its origin, in
   so far as its theory is rooted in that of Judaism spiritualised and
   influenced by Hellenism. As the Pauline conception of, the law never
   took effect, and a criticism of the Old Testament religion which is
   just law, neither understood nor ventured upon in the larger
   Christendom--the forms were not criticised, but the contents
   spiritualised--so the theory that Christianity is promise and spiritual
   law is to be regarded as the primitive one. Between the spiritual law
   and the national law there stand indeed ceremonial laws which, without
   being spiritually interpreted, could yet be freed from the national
   application. It cannot be denied that the Gentile Christian communities
   and the incipient Catholic Church were very careful and reserved in
   their adoption of such laws from the Old Testament, and that the later
   Church no longer observed this caution. But still it is only a question
   of degree, for there are many examples of that adoption in the earliest
   period of Christendom. The latter had no cause for hurry in utilizing
   the Old Testament so long as there was no external or internal policy,
   or so long as it was still in embryo. The decisive factor lies here
   again in enthusiasm and not in changing theories. The basis for these
   was supplied from the beginning. But a community of individuals under
   spiritual excitement builds on this foundation something different from
   an association which wishes to organise and assert itself as such on
   earth. (The history of Sunday is specially instructive here; see Zahn,
   Gesch. des Sonntags, 1878, as well as the history of the discipline of
   fasting, see Linsenmayr, Entwickelung der Kirchl. Fastendisciplin.
   1877, and Die Abgabe des Zehnten. In general, cf. Ritschl., Entstehung
   der Altkath. Kirche, 2 edit. pp. 312 ff. 331 ff. 1 Cor. IX. 9, may be
   noted).

   [414] Justin, Apol. I. 53, Dial. 47; Euseb., H. E. IV. 5; Sulpic. Sev.,
   Hist. Sacr. II. 31; Cyrill, Catech. XIV. 15. Important testimonies in
   Origen, Eusebius, Epiphanius and Jerome.

   [415] No Jewish Christian writings have been transmitted to us, even
   from the earliest period; for the Apocalypse of John which describes
   the Jews as a synagogue of Satan is not a Jewish Christian book (III. 9
   especially, shews that the author knows of only one covenant of God,
   viz., that with the Christians). Jewish Christian sources lie at the
   basis of our synoptic Gospels, but none of them in their present form
   is a Jewish Christian writing. The Acts of the Apostles is so little
   Jewish Christian, its author seemingly so ignorant of Jewish
   Christianity, at least so unconcerned with regard to it that to him the
   spiritualised Jewish law, or Judaism as a religion which he connects as
   closely as possible with Christianity, is a factor already completely
   detached from the Jewish people (see Overbeck's Commentar z.
   Apostelgesch. and his discussion in the Ztschr. f. wiss. Theol. 1872.
   p. 305 ff.). Measured by the Pauline theology we may indeed, with
   Overbeck, say of the Gentile Christianity, as represented by the Author
   of the Acts of the Apostles, that it already has germs of Judaism and
   represents a falling off from Paulinism; but these expressions are not
   correct, because they have at least the appearance of making Paulinism
   the original form of Gentile Christianity. But as this can neither be
   proved nor believed, the religious attitude of the Author of the Acts
   of the Apostles must have been a very old one in Christendom. The
   Judaistic element was not first introduced into Gentile Christianity by
   the opponents of Paul, who indeed wrought in the national sense, and
   there is even nothing to lead to the hypothesis that the common Gentile
   Christian view of the Old Testament and of the law should be conceived
   as resulting from the efforts of Paul and his opponents, for the
   consequent effect here would either have been null, or a strengthening
   of the Jewish Christian thesis. The Jewish element, that is the total
   acceptance of the Jewish religion sub specie aternitatis et Christi, is
   simply the original Christianity of the Gentile Christians itself
   considered as theory. Contrary to his own intention, Paul was compelled
   to lead his converts to this Christianity, for only for such
   Christianity was "the time fulfilled" within the empire of the world.
   The Acts of the Apostles gives eloquent testimony to the pressing
   difficulties which under such circumstances stand in the way of a
   historical understanding of the Gentile Christians in view of the work
   and the theology of Paul. Even the Epistle to the Hebrews is not a
   Jewish Christian writing; but there is certainly a peculiar state of
   things connected with this document. For, on the one hand, the author
   and his readers are free from the law, a spiritual interpretation is
   given to the Old Testament religion which makes it appear to be
   glorified and fulfilled in the work of Christ, and there is no mention
   of any prerogative of the people of Israel. But, on the other hand,
   because the spiritual interpretation, as in Paul, is here teleological,
   the author allows a temporary significance to the cultus as literally
   understood, and therefore by his criticism he conserves the Old
   Testament religion for the past, while declaring that it was set aside
   as regards the present by the fulfilment of Christ. The teleology of
   the author, however, looks at everything only from the point of view of
   shadow and reality, an antithesis which is at the service of Paul also,
   but which in his case vanishes behind the antithesis of law and grace.
   This scheme of thought which is to be traced back to a way of looking
   at things which arose in Christian Judaism, seeing that it really
   distinguishes between old and new, stands midway between the conception
   of the Old Testament religion entertained by Paul, and that of the
   common Gentile Christian as it is represented by Barnabas. The author
   of the Epistle to the Hebrews undoubtedly knows of a twofold convenant
   of God. But the two are represented as stages, so that the second is
   completely based on the first. This view was more likely to be
   understood by the Gentile Christians than the Pauline, that is, with
   some seemingly slight changes, to be recognised as their own. But even
   it at first fell to the ground, and it was only in the conflict with
   the Marcionites that some Church Fathers advanced to views which seem
   to be related to those of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Whether the
   author of this Epistle was a born Jew or a Gentile--in the former case
   he would far surpass the Apostle Paul in his freedom from the national
   claims--we cannot, at any rate, recognise in it a document containing a
   conception which still prizes the Jewish nationality in Christianity,
   nay, not even a document to prove that such a conception was still
   dangerous. Consequently, we have no Jewish Christian memorial in the
   New Testament at all, unless it be in the Pauline Epistles. But as
   concerns the early Christian literature outside the Canon, the
   fragments of the great work of Hegesippus are even yet by some
   investigators claimed for Jewish Christianity. Weizsäcker (Art.
   "Hegesippus" in Herzog's R. E. 2 edit.) has shewn how groundless this
   assumption is. That Hegesippus occupied the common Gentile Christian
   position is certain from unequivocal testimony of his own. If, as is
   very improbable, we were obliged to ascribe to him a rejection of Paul,
   we should have to refer to Euseb. H. E. IV. 29. 5. (Seuerianoi`
   blasphemountes Paulon to`n apo'stolon athetousin autou ta`s epistola`s
   mede` ta`s pra'xeis ton aposto'lon katadecho'menoi, but probably the
   Gospels; these Severians therefore, like Marcion, recognised the Gospel
   of Luke, but rejected the Acts of the Apostles), and Orig. c. Cels. V.
   65: (eisi` ga`r tines aire'seis ta`s Pau'lou epistola`s tou aposto'lou
   me` prosie'menai o'sper Ebionaioi ampho'teroi kai` oi kalou'menoi
   ?Snkratetai'). Consequently, our only sources of knowledge of Jewish
   Christianity in the post-Pauline period are merely the accounts of the
   Church Fathers and some additional fragments (see the collection of
   fragments of the Ebionite Gospel and that to the Hebrews in Hilgenfeld,
   Nov. Test. extra can. rec. fasc. IV. Ed. 2, and in Zahn, l. c. II. p.
   642 ff.). We know better, but still very imperfectly, certain forms of
   the syncretistic Jewish Christianity, from the Philosoph. of Hippolytus
   and the accounts of Epiphanius, who is certainly nowhere more
   incoherent than in the delineation of the Jewish Christians, because he
   could not copy original documents here, but was forced to piece
   together confused traditions with his own observations. See below on
   the extensive documents which are even yet, as they stand, treated as
   records of Jewish Christianity, viz., the Pseudo-Clementines. Of the
   pieces of writing whose Jewish Christian origin is controverted, in so
   far as they may be simply Jewish, I say nothing.

   [416] As to the chief localities where Jewish Christians were found,
   see Zahn, Kanonsgesch. II. p. 648 ff.

   [417] Dialogue 47.

   [418] Yet it should be noted that the Christians who, according to
   Dial. 48, denied the pre-existence of Christ and held him to be a man
   are described as Jewish Christians. We should read in the passage in
   question, as my recent comparison of the Parisian codex shews, apo` tou
   umete'rou ge'nous. Yet Justin did not make this a controversial point
   of great moment.

   [419] The so-called Barnabas is considerably older than Justin. In his
   Epistle (4. 6) he has in view Gentile Christians who have been
   converted by Jewish Christians, when he utters a warning against those
   who say o'ti a diathe'ke ekei'non (the Jews) kai` emon (estin). But how
   great the actual danger was cannot be gathered from the Epistle.
   Ignatius in two Epistles (ad Magn. 8-10: ad Philad. 6. 9) opposes
   Jewish Christian intrigues, and characterises them solely from the
   point of view that they mean to introduce the Jewish observance of the
   law. He opposes them with a Pauline idea (Magn. 8. 1: ei ga`r me'chri
   nun kata` no'mon, Ioudaismo`n zomen omologoumen cha'rin me`
   eilephe'nai), as well as with the common Gentile Christian assumption
   that the prophets themselves had already lived kata` Christo'n. These
   Judaists must be strictly distinguished from the Gnostics whom Ignatius
   elsewhere opposes (against Zahn, Ignat. v. Ant. p. 356 f.). The dangers
   from this Jewish Christianity cannot have been very serious, even if we
   take Magn. 11. 1, as a phrase. There was an active Jewish community in
   Philadelphia (Rev. III. 9), and so Jewish Christian plots may have
   continued longer there. At the first look it seems very promising that
   in the old dialogue of Aristo of Pella a Hebrew Christian, Jason, is
   put in opposition to the Alexandrian Jew, Papiscus. But as the history
   of the little book proves, this Jason must have essentially represented
   the common Christian and not the Ebionite conception of the Old
   Testament and its relation to the Gospel, etc.; see my Texte u. Unters.
   I. 1. 2. p. 115 ff.; I. 3. pp. 115-130. Testimony as to an apostasy to
   Judaism is occasionally though rarely given; see Serapion in Euseb., H.
   E. VI. 12, who addresses a book to one Domninus, ekpeptoko'ta para`
   to`n tou diogmou kairo`n apo` tes eis Christo`n pi'steos epi' te`n
   Ioudaike`n ethelothreskei'an; see also Acta Pionii, 13. 14. According
   to Epiphanius, de mens et pond. 14. 15, Acquila, the translator of the
   Bible, was first a Christian and then a Jew. This account is perhaps
   derived from Origen, and is probably reliable. Likewise according to
   Epiphanius (l. c. 17. 18), Theodotion was first a Marcionite and then a
   Jew. The transition from Marcionitism to Judaism (for extremes meet) is
   not in itself incredible.

   [420] It follows from c. Cels. II. 1-3, that Celsus could hardly have
   known Jewish Christians.

   [421] Iren. 26. 2: III. 11. 7: III. 15. 1, 21. 1: IV. 33. 4: V. 1. 3.
   We first find the name Ebionti, the poor, in Irenæus. We are probably
   entitled to assume that this name was given to the Christians in
   Jerusalem as early as the Apostolic age, that is, they applied it to
   themselves (poor in the sense of the prophets and of Christ, fit to be
   received into the Messianic kingdom). It is very questionable whether
   we should put any value on Epiph. h. 30. 17.

   [422] When Irenæus adduces as the points of distinction between the
   Church and the Ebionites, that besides observing the law and
   repudiating the Apostle Paul, the latter deny the Divinity of Christ
   and his birth from the Virgin and reject the New Testament Canon
   (except the Gospel of Matthew), that only proves that the formation of
   dogma has made progress in the Church. The less was known of the
   Ebionites from personal observation, the more confidently they were
   made out to be heretics who denied the Divinity of Christ and rejected
   the Canon. The denial of the Divinity of Christ and the birth from the
   Virgin was, from the end of the second century, regarded as the
   Ebionite heresy par excellence, and the Ebionites themselves appeared
   to the Western Christians, who obtained their information solely from
   the East, to be a school like those of the Gnostics, founded by a
   scoundrel named Ebion for the purpose of dragging down the person of
   Jesus to the common level. It is also mentioned incidentally, that this
   Ebion had commanded the observance of circumcision and the Sabbath; but
   that is no longer the main thing (see Tertull, de carne 14, 18, 24: de
   virg. vel. 6: de præscr. 10. 33; Hippol., Syntagma, [Pseudo-Tertull,
   11; Philastr. 37; Epiph. h. 30]; Hippol., Philos. VII. 34. The latter
   passage contains the instructive statement that Jesus by his perfect
   keeping of the law became the Christ). This attitude of the Western
   Christians proves that they no longer knew Jewish Christian communities
   Hence it is all the more strange that Hilgenfeld (Ketzergesch. p. 422
   ff.) has in all earnestness endeavoured to revive the Ebion of the
   Western Church Fathers.

   [423] See Orig. c. Cels. II. 1: V. 61, 65: de princip. IV. 22; hom. in
   Genes. III. 15 (Opp. II, p. 65): hom. in Jerem. XVII. 12 (III. p. 254):
   in Matth. T. XVI. 12 (III. p. 494), T. XVII. 12 (III. p. 733); cf. Opp.
   III. p. 895: hom. in Lc. XVII. (III. p. 952). That a portion of the
   Ebionites recognised the birth from the Virgin was according to Origen
   frequently attested. That was partly reckoned to them for righteousness
   and partly not, because they would not admit the pre-existence of
   Christ. The name "Ebionites" is interpreted as a nickname given them by
   the Church "beggarly" in the knowledge of scripture, and particularly
   of Christology.

   [424] Eusebius knows no more than Origen (H. E. III. 27) unless we
   specially credit him with the information that the Ebionites keep along
   with the Sabbath also the Sunday. What he says of Symmachus, the
   translator of the Bible, and an Ebionite, is derived from Origen (H. E.
   VI. 17). The report is interesting, because it declares that Symmachus
   wrote against Catholic Christianity, especially against the Catholic
   Gospel of Matthew (about the year 200). But Symmachus is to be classed
   with the Gnostics, and not with the common type of Jewish Christianity
   (see below). We have also to thank Eusebius (H. E. III. 5. 3) for the
   information that the Christians of Jerusalem fled to Pella, in Peræa,
   before the destruction of that city. In the following period the most
   important settlements of the Ebionites must have been in the countries
   east of the Jordan, and in the heart of Syria (see Jul. Afric. in
   Euseb., H. E. I. 7. 14: Euseb., de loc. hebr. in Lagarde, Onomast. p.
   301; Epiph., h. 29. 7: h. 30. 2). This fact explains how the bishops in
   Jerusalem and the coast towns of Palestine came to see very little of
   them. There was a Jewish Christian community in Beroea with which
   Jerome had relations (Jerom., de Vir. inl. 3).

   [425] Jerome correctly declares (Ep. ad. August. 122. C. 13, Opp. I. p.
   746), "(Ebionitæ) credentes in Christo propter hoc solum a patribus
   anathematizati sunt, quod legis cæremonias Christi evangelio
   miscuerunt, et sic nova confessa sunt, ut vetera non omitterent."

   [426] Ep. ad August. l. c.; Quid dicam de Hebionitis, qui Christianos
   esse se simulant? usque hodie per totas orientis synagogas inter Judæos
   (!) hæresis est, que dicitur Minæorum et a Pharisæis nunc usque
   damnatur, quos vulgo Nazaræos nuncupant, qui credunt in Christum filium
   dei natum de Virgine Maria et eum dicunt esse, qui sub pontio Pilato
   passus est et resurrexit, in quem et nos credimus; sed dum volunt et
   Judæi esse et Christiani, nec Judæi sunt nec Christiani." The
   approximation of the Jewish Christian conception to that of the
   Catholics shews itself also in their exposition of Isaiah IX. 1. f.
   (see Jerome on the passage). Bert we must not forget that there were
   such Jewish Christians from the earliest times. It is worthy of note
   that the name Nazarenes, as applied to Jewish Christians, is found in
   the Acts of the Apostles XXIV. 5, in the Dialogue of Jason and
   Papiscus, and then first again in Jerome.

   [427] Zahn, l. c. p. 648 ff. 668 ff. has not convinced me of the
   contrary, but I confess that Jerome's style of expression is not
   everywhere clear.

   [428] Zahn, (1. c.) makes a sharp distinction between the Nazarenes, on
   the one side, who used the Gospel of the Hebrews, acknowledged the With
   from the Virgin, and in fact the higher Christology to some extent, did
   not repudiate Paul, etc., and the Ebionites on the other, whom he
   simply identifies with the Gnostic Jewish Christians, if I am not
   mistaken. In opposition to this, I think I must adhere to the
   distinction as given above in the text and in the following: (1)
   Non-Gnostic, Jewish Christians (Nazarenes, Ebionites), who appeared in
   various shades, according to their doctrine and attitude to the Gentile
   Church, and whom, with the Church Fathers, we may appropriately
   classify as strict or tolerant (exclusive or liberal). (2) Gnostic or
   syncretistic Judæo-Christians who are also termed Ebionites.

   [429] This Gospel no doubt greatly interested the scholars of the
   Catholic Church from Clement of Alexandria onwards. But they have
   almost all contrived to evade the hard problem which it presented. It
   may be noted, incidentally, that the Gospel of the Hebrews, to judge
   from the remains preserved to us, can neither have been the model nor
   the translation of our Matthew, but a work independent of this, though
   drawing from the same sources, representing perhaps to some extent an
   earlier stage of the tradition. Jerome also knew very well that the
   Gospel of the Hebrews was not the original of the canonical Matthew,
   but he took care not to correct the old prejudice. Ebionitic
   conceptions, such as that of the female nature of the Holy Spirit, were
   of course least likely to convince the Church Fathers. Moreover, the
   common Jewish Christians hardly possessed a Church theology, because
   for them Christianity was something entirely different from the
   doctrine of a school. On the Gospel of the Hebrews, see Handmann (Texte
   u. Unters V. 3), Resch, Agrapha (1. c. V. 4), and Zahn, l. c. p. 642
   ff.

   [430] We have as yet no history of the sacrificial system and the views
   as to sacrifice in the Græco-Roman epoch of the Jewish Nation. It is
   urgently needed.

   [431] We may remind readers of the assumptions, that the world was
   created by angels, that the law was given by angels, and similar ones
   which are found in the theology of the Pharisees. Celsus (in Orig. I.
   26: V. 6) asserts generally that the Jews worshipped angels, so does
   the author of the Prædicatio Petri, as well as the apologist Aristides.
   Cf. Joël, Blicke in die Religionsgesch. I Abth., a book which is
   certainly to be used with caution (see Theol. Lit. Ztg. 1881. Coll. 184
   ff.).

   [432] No reliance can be placed on Jewish sources, or on Jewish
   scholars, as a rule. What we find in Joël, l. c. I. Abth. p. 101 ff. is
   instructive. We may mention Grätz, Gnosticismus und Judenthum
   (Krotoschin, 1846), who has called attention to the Gnostic elements in
   the Talmud, and dealt with several Jewish Gnostics and Antignostics, as
   well as with the book of Jezira. Grätz assumes that the four main
   dogmatic points in the book Jezira, viz., the strict unity of the
   deity, and, at the same time, the negation of the demiurgic dualism,
   the creation out of nothing with the negation of matter, the systematic
   unity of the world and the balancing of opposites, were directed
   against prevailing Gnostic ideas.

   [433] We may pass over the false teachers of the Pastoral Epistles, as
   they cannot be with certainty determined, and the possibility is not
   excluded that we have here to do with an arbitrary construction; see
   Holtzman, Pastoralbriefe, p. 150 f.

   [434] Orig. in Euseb. VI. 38; Hippol., Philos. IX. 13 ff., X. 29;
   Epiph., h. 30, also h. 19. 53; Method., Conviv. VIII. to. From the
   confused account of Epiphanius, who called the common Jewish Christians
   Nazarenes, the Gnostic type Ebionites and Sampsmi, and their Jewish
   forerunners Osseni, we may conclude, that in many regions where there
   were Jewish Christians they yielded to the propaganda of the Elkesaite
   doctrines, and that in the fourth century there was no other
   syncretistic Jewish Christianity besides the various shades of
   Elkesaites.

   [435] I formerly reckoned Symmachus, the translator of the Bible, among
   the common Jewish Christians; but the statements of Victorinus Rhetor
   on Gal. I. 19. II. 26 (Migne T. VIII. Col. 1155. 1162) shew that he has
   a close affinity with the Pseudo-Clementines, and is also to be classed
   with the Elkesaite Alcibiades. "Nam Jacobum apostolum Symmachiani
   faciunt quasi duodecimum et hunc secuntur, qui ad dominum nostrum Jesum
   Christum adjungunt Judaismi observationem, quamquam etiam Jesum
   Christum fatentur; dicunt enim eum ipsum Adam esse et esse animam
   generalem, et aliæ hujusmodi blasphemiæ." The account given by
   Eusebius, H. E. VI. 17 (probably on the authority of Origen, see also
   Demonstr. VII. 1) is important: Ton ge me`n ermecheuton auton de`
   tou'ton iste'on, Ebionai'on to`n Su'mmachon gegone'nai . . . . kai`
   upomne'mata de` tou Summa'chou eise'ti nun pheretai, en ois dokei pro`s
   to` katu` Matthaion apoteino'menos euange'lion te`n dedelome'nen
   ai'resin kratu'nein. Symmachus therefore adopted an aggressive attitude
   towards the great Church, and hence we may probably class him with
   Alcibiades who lived a little later. Common Jewish Christianity was no
   longer aggressive in the second century.

   [436] Wellhausen (l. c. Part III. p. 206) supposes that Elkesai is
   equivalent to Alexius. That the receiver of the "book" was a historical
   person is manifest from Epiphanius' account of his descendants (h. 19
   2: 53. 1). From Hipp. Philosoph. IX. 16, p. 468, it is certainly
   probable, though not certain, that the book was produced by the unknown
   author as early as the time of Trajan. On the other hand, the existence
   of the sect itself can be proved only at the beginning of the third
   century, and therefore we have the possibility of an ante-dating of the
   "book". This seems to have been Origen's opinion.

   [437] Epiph. (h. 53. 1) says of the Elkesaites: ou'te christianoi`
   upa'rchontei ou'te Ioudaioi ou'te E'llenes, alla` me'son aplos
   upa'rchontes. He pronounces a similar judgment as to the Samaritan
   sects (Simonians), and expressly (h. 30. 1) connects the Elkesaites
   with them.

   [438] The worship paid to the descendants of this Elkesai, spoken of by
   Epiphanius, does not, if we allow for exaggerations, go beyond the
   measure of honour which was regularly paid to the descendants of
   prophets and men of God in the East. Cf. the respect enjoyed by the
   blood relations of Jesus and Mohammed.

   [439] It the "book" really originated in the time of Trajan, then its
   production keeps within the frame-work of common Christianity, for at
   that time there were appearing everywhere in Christendom revealed books
   which contained new instructions and communications of grace. The
   reader may be reminded, for example, of the Shepherd of Hermas. When
   the sect declared that the "book" was delivered to Elkesai by a male
   and a female angel, each as large as a mountain, that these angels were
   the Son of God and the Holy Spirit, etc., we have, apart from the
   fantastic colouring, nothing extraordinary.

   [440] It may be assumed from Philos. X. 29 that, in the opinion of
   Hyppolytus, the Elkesaites identified the Christ from above with the
   Son of God, and assumed that this Christ appeared on earth in changing
   and purely human forms, and will appear again (auto`n de`
   metangizo'menon en so'masi pollois polla'kis kai` nun de` en to Iesou,
   omoi'os pote` me`n ek tou theou gegenesthai, pote` de` pneuma
   gegone'nai, pote` de` ek parthe'nou, pote` de` ou' kai` touton de`
   mete'peita aei` en so'mati metangi'zesthai kai` en pollois kata`
   kairou`s dei'knusthai). As the Elkesaites (see the account by
   Epiphanius) traced back the incarnations of Christ to Adam, and not
   merely to Abraham, we may see in this view of history the attempt to
   transform Mosaism into the universal religion. But the Pharisaic
   theology had already begun with these Adam speculations, which are
   always a sign that the religion in Judaism is feeling its limits too
   narrow. The Jews in Alexandria were also acquainted with these
   speculations.

   [441] In the Gospel of these Jewish Christians Jesus is made to say
   (Epiph. h. 30. 16) elthon katalusai ta`s thusias, kai` ea`n me`
   tau'sesthe tou thu'ei`n, ou pau'setai aph' umon e orge`. We see the
   essential progress of this Jewish Christianity within Judaism in the
   opposition in principle to the whole sacrificial service (vid. also
   Epiph., h. 19. 3).

   [442] On this new Gospel see Zahn, Kanongesch. II. p. 724.

   [443] It is incorrect to suppose that the lustrations were meant to
   take the place of baptism, or were conceived by these Jewish Christians
   as repeated baptisms. Their effect was certainly equal to that of
   baptism. But it is nowhere hinted in our authorities that they were on
   that account made equivalent to the regular baptism.

   [444] The characteristic here, as in the Gentile Christian Gnosis, is
   the division of the person of Jesus into a more or less indifferent
   medium, and into the Christ. Here the factor constituting his
   personality could sometimes be placed in that medium, and sometimes in
   the Christ spirit, and thus contradictory formulæ could not but arise.
   It is therefore easy to conceive how Epiphanius reproaches these Jewish
   Christians with a denial, sometimes of the Divinity, and sometimes of
   the humanity of Christ (see h. 30 14).

   [445] This syncretistic Judaism had indeed a significance for the
   history of the world, not, however, in the history of Christianity, but
   for the origin of Islam. Islam, as a religious system, is based partly
   on syncretistic Judaism (including the Zabians, so enigmatic in their
   origin), and, without questioning Mohammed's originality, can only be
   historically understood by taking this into account. I have endeavoured
   to establish this hypothesis in a lecture printed in MS. form, 1877.
   Cf. now the conclusive proofs in Wellhausen, 1. c. Part III. p.
   197-212. On the Mandeans, see Brandt, Die Mandäische Religion, 1889;
   (also Wellhausen in d. deutschen Lit. Ztg., 1890 No. I. Lagarde i. d.
   Gött. Gel. Anz., 1890, No. 10).

   [446] See Bestmann, Gesch. der Christ]. Sitte, Bd. II. 1 Part: Die
   judenchristliche Sitte, 1883; also, Theol. Lit. Ztg., 1883. Col. 269
   ff. The same author, Der Ursprung der Katholischen Christenthums und
   des Islams, 1884; also Theol. Lit. Ztg. 1884, Col. 291 ff.

   [447] See Schliemann, Die Clementinen, etc., 1844; Hilgenfeld, Die
   Clementinischen Recogn. u. Homil, 1848; Ritschl, in d. Allg.
   Monatschrift f. Wissensch. u. Litt., 1852. Uhlhorn, Die Homil. u.
   Recogn., 1854, Lehmann, Die Clement. Schriften, 1869; Lipsius, in d.
   Protest. K. Ztg., 1869, p. 477 ff.; Quellen der Romische Petrussage,
   1872. Uhlhorn, in Herzog's R. Encykl. (Clementinen) 2 Edit. III. p.
   286, admits: "There can be no doubt that the Clementine question still
   requires further discussion. It can hardly make any progress worth
   mentioning until we have collected better the material, and especially
   till we have got a corrected edition with an exhaustive commentary. The
   theory of the genesis, contents and aim of the pseudo-Clementine
   writings unfolded by Renan (Orig. T. VII. p. 74-l01) is essentially
   identical with that of German scholars. Langen (die Clemensromane,
   1890) has set up very bold hypotheses, which are based on the
   assumption that Jewish Christianity was an important church factor in
   the second century, and that the pseudo-Clementines are comparatively
   old writings.

   [448] There is no external evidence for placing the pseudo-Clementine
   writings in the second century. The oldest witness is Origen (IV. p.
   401, Lommatzsch); but the quotation: "Quoniam opera bona, quæ fiunt ab
   infidelibus, in hoc sæculo its prosunt," etc., is not found in our
   Clementines, so that Origen appears to have used a still older version.
   The internal evidence all points to the third century (canon,
   composition, theological attitude, etc.). Moreover, Zahn, (Gött. Gel.
   Anz. 1876. No. 45) and Lagarde have declared themselves in favour of
   this date; while Lipsius (Apokr. Apostelgesch. II. 1) and Weingarten
   (Zeittafeln, 3 Edit. p. 23) have recently expressed the same opinion.
   The Homilies presuppose (1) Marcion's Antitheses, (2) Apelles'
   Syllogisms, (3) perhaps Callistus' edict about penance (see III. 70)
   and writings of Hippolytus (see also the expression epi`skopos
   episko'pon. Clem. ep. ad Jacob I., which is first found in Tertull., de
   pudic. I.). (4) The most highly developed form of polemic against
   heathen mythology. (5) The complete development of church apologetics,
   as well as the conviction that Christianity is identical with correct
   and absolute knowledge. They further presuppose a time when there was a
   lull in the persecution of Christians, for the Emperor, though pretty
   often referred to, is never spoken of as a persecutor, and when the
   cultured heathen world was entirely disposed in favour of a eclectic
   monotheism. Moreover, the remarkable Christological statement in Hom.
   XVI. 15. 16. points to the third century, in fact probably even
   presupposes the theology of Origen; Cf. the sentence: tou patro`s to`
   me' gegennesthai estin, uiou de` to` gegennesthai lenneto`n de`
   agenne'to e' kai` autugenne'to ou sunkri'netai. Finally, the decided
   repudiation of the awakening of Christian faith by visions and dreams,
   and the polemic against these is also no doubt of importance for
   determining the date; see XVII. 14-19. Peter says, § 18: to` adida'ktos
   a'neu optasi'as kai` onei'ron mathein apoka'lupsi's estin, he had
   already learned that at his confession (Matt. XVI). The question, e'i
   tis di optasi'an pro`s didaskali'an sophisthenai du'natai, is answered
   in the negative, § 19.

   [449] This is also acknowledged in Koffmane, Die Gnosis, etc., p. 33.

   [450] The Homilies, as we have them, are mainly composed of the
   speeches of Peter and others. These speeches oppose polytheism,
   mythology and the doctrine of demons, and advocate monotheism, ascetic
   morality and rationalism. The polemic against Simon Magus almost
   appears as a mere accessory.

   [451] This distinction can also be shewn elsewhere in the Church of the
   third century. But I confess I do not know how Catholic circles got
   over the fact that, for example, in the third book of the Homilies many
   passages of the old Testament are simply characterised as untrue,
   immoral and lying. Here the Homilies remind one strongly of the
   Syllogisms of Apelles, the author of which, in other respects, opposed
   them in the interest of his doctrine of creating angels. In some
   passages the Christianity of the Homilies really looks like a
   syncretism composed of the common Christianity, the Jewish Christian
   Gnosticism, and the criticism of Apelles. Hom. VIII. 6-8 is also highly
   objectionable.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX I.

   On the Conception of Pre-existence.

   On account of the importance of the question, we may be here permitted
   to amplify a few hints given in Chap. II., § 4, and elsewhere, and to
   draw a clearer distinction between the Jewish and Hellenic conceptions
   of pre-existence.

   According to the theory held by the ancient Jews and by the whole of
   the Semitic nations, everything of real value that from time to time
   appears on earth has its existence in heaven. In other words, it exists
   with God, that is God possesses a knowledge of it; and for that reason
   it has a real being. But it exists beforehand with God in the same way
   as it appears on earth, that is with all the material attributes
   belonging to its essence. Its manifestation on earth is merely a
   transition from concealment to publicity (phanerousthai). In becoming
   visible to the senses, the object in question assumes no attribute that
   it did not already possess with God. Hence its material nature is by no
   means an inadequate expression of it, nor is it a second nature added
   to the first. The truth rather is that what was in heaven before is now
   revealing itself upon earth, without any sort of alteration taking
   place in the process. There is no assumptio naturæ novæ, and no change
   or mixture. The old Jewish theory of pre-existence is founded on the
   religious idea of the omniscience and omni-potence of God, that God to
   whom the events of history do not come as a surprise, but who guides
   their course. As the whole history of the world and the destiny of each
   individual are recorded on his tablets or books, so also each thing is
   ever present before him. The decisive contrast is between God and the
   creature. In designating the latter as "foreknown" by God, the primary
   idea is not to ennoble the creature, but rather to bring to light the
   wisdom and power of God. The ennobling of created things by attributing
   to them a pre-existence is a secondary result (see below).

   According to the Hellenic conception, which has become associated with
   Platonism, the idea of pre-existence is independent of the idea of God;
   it is based on the conception of the contrast between spirit and
   matter, between the infinite and finite, found in the cosmos itself. In
   the case of all spiritual beings, life in the body or flesh is at
   bottom an inadequate and unsuitable condition, for the spirit is
   eternal, the flesh perishable. But the pre-temporal existence, which
   was only a doubtful assumption as regards ordinary spirits, was a
   matter of certainty in the case of the higher and purer ones. They
   lived in an upper world long before this earth was created, and they
   lived there as spirits without the "polluted garment of the flesh." Now
   if they resolved for some reason or other to appear in this finite
   world, they cannot simply become visible, for they have no "visible
   form." They must rather "assume flesh," whether they throw it about
   them as a covering, or really make it their own by a process of
   transformation or mixture. In all cases--and here the speculation gave
   rise to the most exciting problems--the body is to them something
   inadequate which they cannot appropriate without adopting certain
   measures of precaution, but this process may indeed pass through all
   stages, from a mere seeming appropriation to complete union. The
   characteristics of the Greek ideas of pre-existence may consequently be
   thus expressed. First, the objects in question to which pre-existence
   is ascribed are meant to be ennobled by this attribute. Secondly, these
   ideas have no relation to God. Thirdly, the material appearance is
   regarded as something inadequate. Fourthly, speculations about
   phantasma, assumptio naturæ humanæ, transmutatio, mixtura, duæ naturæ,
   etc., were necessarily associated with these notions.

   We see that these two conceptions are as wide apart as the poles. The
   first has a religious origin, the second a cosmological and
   psychological; the first glorifies God, the second the created spirit.

   However, not only does a certain relationship in point of form exist
   between these speculations, but the Jewish conception is also found in
   a shape which seems to approximate still more to the Greek one.

   Earthly occurrences and objects are not only regarded as "foreknown" by
   God before being seen in this world, but the latter manifestation is
   frequently considered as the copy of the existence and nature which
   they possess in heaven, and which remains unalterably the same, whether
   they appear upon earth or not. That which is before God experiences no
   change. As the destinies of the world are recorded in the books, and
   God reads them there, it being at the same time a matter of
   indifference, as regards this knowledge of his, when and how they are
   accomplished upon earth, so the Tabernacle and its furniture, the
   Temple, Jerusalem, etc., are before God and continue to exist before
   him in heaven, even during their appearance on earth and after it.

   This conception seems really to have been the oldest one. Moses is to
   fashion the Temple and its furniture according to the pattern he saw on
   the Mount (Exod. XXV. 9. 40: XXVI. 30: XXVII. 8: Num. VIII. 4). The
   Temple and Jerusalem exist in heaven, and they are to be distinguished
   from the earthly Temple and the earthly Jerusalem; yet the ideas of a
   phanerousthai of the thing which is in heaven and of its copy appearing
   on earth, shade into one another and are not always clearly separated.

   The classing of things as original and copy was at first no more meant
   to glorify them than was the conception of a pre-existence they
   possessed within the knowledge of God. But since the view which in
   theory was true of everything earthly, was, as is naturally to be
   expected, applied in practice to nothing but valuable objects--for
   things common and ever recurring give no impulse to such
   speculations--the objects thus contemplated were ennobled, because they
   were raised above the multitude of the commonplace. At the same time
   the theory of original and copy could not fail to become a starting
   point for new speculations, as soon as the contrast between the
   spiritual and material began to assume importance among the Jewish
   people.

   That took place under the influence of the Greek spirit; and was
   perhaps also the simultaneous result of an intellectual or moral
   development which arose independently of that spirit. Accordingly, a
   highly important advance in the old ideas of pre-existence appeared in
   the Jewish theological literature belonging to the time of the
   Maccabees and the following decades. To begin with, these conceptions
   are now applied to persons, which, so far as I know, was not the case
   before this (individualism). Secondly, the old distinction of original
   and copy is now interpreted to mean that the copy is the inferior and
   more imperfect, that in the present æon of the transient it cannot be
   equivalent to the original, and that we must therefore look forward to
   the time when the original itself will make its appearance, (contrast
   of the material and finite and the spiritual).

   With regard to the first point, we have not only to consider passages
   in Apocalypses and other writings in which pre-existence is attributed
   to Moses, the patriarchs, etc., (see above, p. 102), but we must, above
   all, bear in mind utterances like Ps. CXXXIX. 15, 16. The individual
   saint soars upward to the thought that the days of his life are in the
   book of God, and that he himself was before God, whilst he was still
   unperfect. But, and this must not be overlooked, it was not merely his
   spiritual part that was before God, for there is not the remotest idea
   of such a distinction, but the whole man, although he is bsr.

   As regards the second point, the distinction between a heavenly and an
   earthly Jerusalem, a heavenly and an earthly Temple, etc., is
   sufficiently known from the Apocalypses and the New Testament. But the
   important consideration is that the sacred things of earth were
   regarded as objects of less value, instalments, as it were, pending the
   fulfilment of the whole promise. The desecration and subsequent
   destruction of sacred things must have greatly strengthened this idea.
   The hope of the heavenly Jerusalem comforted men for the desecration or
   loss of the earthly one. But this gave at the same time the most
   powerful impulse to reflect whether it was not an essential feature of
   this temporal state, that everything high and holy in it could only
   appear in a meagre and inadequate form. Thus the transition to Greek
   ideas was brought about. The fulness of the time had come when the old
   Jewish ideas, with a slightly mythological colouring, could amalgamate
   with the ideal creations of Hellenic philosophers.

   These, however, are also the general conditions which gave rise to the
   earliest Jewish speculations about a personal Messiah, except that, in
   the case of the Messianic ideas within Judaism itself, the adoption of
   specifically Greek thoughts, so far as I am able to see, cannot be made
   out.

   Most Jews, as Trypho testifies in Justin's Dialogue 49, conceived the
   Messiah as a man. We may indeed go a step further and say that no Jew
   at bottom imagined him otherwise; for even those who attached ideas of
   pre-existence to him, and gave the Messiah a supernatural background,
   never advanced to speculations about assumption of the flesh,
   incarnation, two natures and the like. They only transferred in a
   specific manner to the Messiah the old idea of pre-terrestrial
   existence with God, universally current among the Jews. Before the
   creation of the world the Messiah was hidden with God, and, when the
   time is fulfilled, he makes his appearance. This is neither an
   incarnation nor a humiliation, but he appears on earth as he exists
   before God, viz., as a mighty and just king, equipped with all gifts.
   The writings in which this thought appears most clearly are the
   Apocalypse of Enoch (Book of Similitudes, Chap. 46-49) and the
   Apocalypse of Esra (Chap. 12-14). Support to this idea, if anything
   more of the kind had been required, was lent by passages like Daniel
   VII. 13 f. and Micah, V. 1. Nowhere do we find in Jewish writings a
   conception which advances beyond the notion that the Messiah is the man
   who is with God in heaven; and who will make his appearance at his own
   time. We are merely entitled to say that, as the same idea was not
   applied to all persons with the same certainty, it was almost
   unavoidable that men's minds should have been led to designate the
   Messiah as the man from heaven. This thought was adopted by Paul (see
   below), but I know of no Jewish writing which gave clear expression to
   it.

   Jesus Christ designated himself as the Messiah, and the first of his
   disciples who recognised him as such were native Jews. The Jewish
   conceptions of the Messiah consequently passed over into the Christian
   community. But they received an impulse to important modifications from
   the living impression conveyed by the person and destiny of Jesus.
   Three facts were here of pre-eminent importance. First, Jesus appeared
   in lowliness, and even suffered death. Secondly, he was believed to be
   exalted through the resurrection to the right hand of God, and his
   return in glory was awaited with certainty. Thirdly, the strength of a
   new life and of an indissoluble union with God was felt issuing from
   him, and therefore his people were connected with him in the closest
   way.

   In some old Christian writings found in the New Testament and emanating
   from the pen of native Jews, there are no speculations at all about the
   pre-temporal existence of Jesus as the Messiah, or they are found
   expressed in a manner which simply embodies the old Jewish theory and
   is merely distinguished from it by the emphasis laid on the exaltation
   of Jesus after death through the resurrection. 1. Pet. I. 18 ff. is a
   classic passage: elutro'thete timi'o ai'mati o`s amnou amo'mou kai`
   aspi'lou Christou, proegnosme'nou me`n pro` kataboles ko'smou,
   phanerothe'ntos de` ep' escha'tou ton chro'non di' umas tou`s di' autou
   pistou`s eis theo`n to`n egei'ranta auto`n ek nekron kai` do'xan auto
   do'nta, o'ste te`n pi'stin umon kai` elpi'da einai eis theo'n. Here we
   find a conception of the pre-existence of Christ which is not yet
   affected by cosmological or psychological speculation, which does not
   overstep the boundaries of a purely religious contemplation, and which
   arose from the Old Testament way of thinking, and the living impression
   derived from the person of Jesus. He is "fore-known (by God) before the
   creation of the world," not as a spiritual being without a body, but as
   a Lamb without blemish and without spot; in other words, his whole
   personality together with the work which it was to carry out, was
   within God's eternal knowledge. He "was manifested in these last days
   for our sake," that is, he is now visibly what he already was before
   God. What is meant here is not an incarnation, but a revelatio.
   Finally, he appeared in order that our faith and hope should now be
   firmly directed to the living God, that God who raised him from the
   dead and gave him honour. In the last clause expression is given to the
   specifically Christian thought, that the Messiah Jesus was exalted
   after crucifixion and death; from this, however, no further conclusions
   are drawn.

   But it was impossible that men should everywhere rest satisfied with
   these utterances, for the age was a theological one. Hence the paradox
   of the suffering Messiah, the certainty of his glorification through
   the resurrection, the conviction of his specific relationship to God,
   and the belief in the real union of his Church with him did not seem
   adequately expressed by the simple formulæ proegnosme'nos,
   phanerothei's. In reference to all these points, we see even in the
   oldest Christian writings, the appearance of formulæ which fix more
   precisely the nature of his pre-existence, or in other words his
   heavenly existence. With regard to the first and second points there
   arose the view of humiliation and exaltation, such as we find in Paul
   and in numerous writings after him. In connection with the third point
   the concept "Son of God" was thrust into the fore-ground, and gave rise
   to the idea of the image of God (2 Cor. IV. 4; Col. I. 15; Heb. I. 2;
   Phil. II. 6). The fourth point gave occasion to the formation of
   theses, such as we find in Rom. VIII. 29: proto'tokon en pollois
   adelphois, Col. I. 18: proto'tokos ek ton nekron (Rev. I. 5), Eph. II.
   6: sune'geiren kai` suneka'thisen en tois epourani'ois en Christo
   Iesou, I. 4: o theo`s exele'xato emas en Christo pro` kataboles
   ko'smou, I. 22: o theo`s e'doken to`n Christo`n kephale`n upe`r pa'nta
   te ekklesi'a e'tis esti`n to` soma autou, etc. This purely religious
   view of the Church, according to which all that is predicated of Christ
   is also applied to his followers, continued a considerable time. Hermas
   declares that the Church is older than the world, and that the world
   was created for its sake (see above, p. 103), and the author of the
   so-called 2nd Epistle of Clement declares (Chap. 14) . . . . . . .
   e'sometha ek tes ekklesi'as tes pro'tes tes pneumatikes, tes pro`
   eli'ou kai` sele'nes ektisme'nes . . . . , ouk oi'omai de` umas
   agnoein, o'ti ekklesi'a zosa soma' estin Christou. le'gei ga`r e
   graphe'. Epoi'esen o theo`s to`n a'nthropon a'rsen kai` thelu. to`
   a'rsen esti`n o Christo's to` thelu e ekklesi'a. Thus Christ and his
   Church are inseparably connected. The latter is to be conceived as
   pre-existent quite as much as the former; the Church was also created
   before the sun and the moon, for the world was created for its sake.
   This conception of the Church illustrates a final group of utterances
   about the pre-existent Christ, the origin of which might easily be
   misinterpreted unless we bear in mind their reference to the Church. In
   so far as he is proegnosme'nos pro` kataboles ko'smou, he is the arche`
   tes kti'seos tou theou (Rev. III. 14), the proto'tokos pa'ses kti'seos,
   etc. According to the current conception of the time, these expressions
   mean exactly the same as the simple proegnosme'nos pro` kataboles
   ko'smou, as is proved by the parallel formulæ referring to the Church.
   Nay, even the further advance to the idea that the world was created by
   him (Cor. Col. Eph. Heb.) need not yet necessarily be a meta'basis eis
   a'llo ge'nos; for the beginning of things (arche') and their purpose
   form the real force to which their origin is due (principle arche').
   Hermas indeed calls the Church older than the world simply because "the
   world was created for its sake."

   All these further theories which we have quoted up to this time need in
   no sense alter the original conception, so long as they appear in an
   isolated form and do not form the basis of fresh speculations. They may
   be regarded as the working out of the original conception attaching to
   Jesus Christ proegnosme'nos pro` kataboles ko'smou, phanerothei's
   k.t.l.; and do not really modify this religious view of the matter.
   Above all, we find in them as yet no certain transition to the Greek
   view which splits up his personality into a heavenly and an earthly
   portion; it still continues to be the complete Christ to whom all the
   utterances apply. But, beyond doubt, they already reveal the strong
   impulse to conceive the Christ that had appeared as a divine being. He
   had not been a transitory phenomenon, but has ascended into heaven and
   still continues to live. This post-existence of his gave to the ideas
   of his pre-existence a support and a concrete complexion which the
   earlier Jewish theories lacked.

   We find the transition to a new conception in the writings of Paul. But
   it is important to begin by determining the relationship between his
   Christology and the views we have been hitherto considering. In the
   Apostle's clearest trains of thought everything that he has to say of
   Christ hinges on his death and resurrection. For this we need no
   proofs, but see, more

   especially Rom. I. 3 f.: peri` tou uiou autou, tou genome'nou ek
   spe'rmatos Dauei`d kata` sa'rka, ?tou oristhe'ntos uiou theou en
   duna'mei kata` pneuma agiosu'nes ex anasta'seos nekron, Iesou Christou
   tou kuri'ou emon. What Christ became and his significance for us now
   are due to his death on the cross and his resurrection. He condemned
   sin in the flesh and was obedient unto death. Therefore he now shares
   in the do'xa of God. The exposition in 1 Cor. XV. 45, also (o e'schatos
   Ada`m eis pneuma zoopoioun, all' ou proton to` pneumatiko`n alla` to`
   psuchiko'n, e'peita to` pneumatiko'n. o protos a'nthropos ek ges
   choiko's o deu'teros a'nthropos ex ouranou) is still capable of being
   understood as to its fundamental features, in a sense which agrees with
   the conception of the Messiah, as kat' exoche'n, the man from heaven
   who was hidden with God. There can be no doubt, however, that this
   conception, as already shewn by the formulæ in the passage just quoted,
   formed to Paul the starting-point of a speculation, in which the
   original theory assumed a completely new shape. The decisive factors in
   this transformation were the Apostle's doctrine of "spirit and flesh,"
   and the corresponding conviction that the Christ who is not be known
   "after the flesh," is a spirit, namely, the mighty spiritual being
   (pneuma zoopoioun), who has condemned sin in the flesh, and thereby
   enabled man to walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

   According to one of the Apostle's ways of regarding the matter, Christ,
   after the accomplishment of his work, became the pneuma zoopoioun
   through the resurrection. But the belief that Jesus always stood before
   God as the heavenly man, suggested to Paul the other view, that Christ
   was always a "spirit," that he was sent down by God, that the flesh is
   consequently something inadequate and indeed hostile to him, that he
   nevertheless assumed it in order to extirpate the sin dwelling in the
   flesh, that he therefore humbled himself by appearing, and that this
   humiliation was the deed he performed.

   This view is found in 2 Cor. VIII. 9: Iesous Christo`s di' umas
   epto'cheusen plou'sios o'n; in Rom. VIII. 3: o theo`s to`n eautou uio`n
   po'mpsas en omoio'mati sarko`s amarti'as kai` peri` amarti'as
   kate'krinen te`n amarti'an en te sarki'; and in Phil. II. 5 f.:
   Christos Iesous en morphe theou upa'rchon . . . . . eauto`n eke'nosen
   mo'rphen dou'lou labo'n, en omoio'mati anthro'pon geno'menos, kai`
   sche'mati eurethei`s os a'nthropos etapei'nosen eauto`n k.t.l. In both
   forms of thought Paul presupposes a real exaltation of Christ. Christ
   receives after the resurrection more than he ever possessed (to` o'noma
   to` upe`r pan o'noma). In this view Paul retains a historical
   interpretation of Christ, even in the conception of the pneuma
   Christo's. But whilst many passages seem to imply that the work of
   Christ began with suffering and death, Paul shews in the verses cited,
   that he already conceives the appearance of Christ on earth as his
   moral act, as a humiliation, purposely brought about by God and Christ
   himself, which reaches its culminating point in the death on the cross.
   Christ, the divine spiritual being, is sent by the Father from heaven
   to earth, and of his own free will he obediently takes this mission
   upon himself. He appears in the omoio'mati sarko`s amarti'as, dies the
   death of the cross, and then, raised by the Father, ascends again into
   heaven in order henceforth to act as the ku'rios zo'nton and nekron,
   and to become to his own people the principle of a new life in the
   spirit.

   Whatever we may think about the admissibility and justification of this
   view, to whatever source we may trace its origin and however strongly
   we may emphasise its divergencies from the contemporaneous Hellenic
   ideas, it is certain that it approaches very closely to the latter; for
   the distinction of spirit and flesh is here introduced into the concept
   of pre-existence, and this combination is not found in the Jewish
   notions of the Messiah.

   Paul was the first who limited the idea of pre-existence by referring
   it solely to the spiritual part of Jesus Christ, but at the same time
   gave life to it by making the pre-existing Christ (the spirit) a being
   who, even during his pre-existence, stands independently side by side
   with God.

   He was also the first to designate Christ's sa'rx as "assumpta," and to
   recognise its assumption as in itself a humiliation. To him the
   appearance of Christ was no mere phanerousthai, but a kenousthai,
   tapeinousthai, ptocheu'ein.

   These outstanding features of the Pauline Christology must have been
   intelligible to the Greeks, but, whilst embracing these, they put
   everything else in the system aside, Christo`s o ku'rios o so'sas emas,
   o`n me`n to` proton pneuma, ege'neto sa'rx kai` ou'tos emas eka'lesen,
   says 2 Clem. (9. 5), and that is also the Christology of 1 Clement,
   Barnabas and many other Greeks. From the sum total of Judæo-Christian
   speculations they only borrowed, in addition, the one which has been
   already mentioned: the Messiah as proegnosme'nos pro` kataboles ko'smou
   is for that very reason also e arche` tes kti'seos tou theou, that is
   the beginning, purpose and principle of the creation The Greeks, as the
   result of their cosmological interest, embraced this thought as a
   fundamental proposition. The complete Greek Christology then is
   expressed as follows: Christo`s, o so'sas emas, o`n me`n to` proton
   pneuma kai` pa'ses kti'seos arche`, ege'neto sa'rx kai` ou'tos emas
   eka'lesen. That is the fundamental, theological and philosophical creed
   on which the whole Trinitarian and Christological speculations of the
   Church of the succeeding centuries are built, and it is thus the root
   of the orthodox system of dogmatics; for the notion that Christ was the
   arche` pa'ses kti'seos necessarily led in some measure to the
   conception of Christ as the Logos. For the Logos had long been regarded
   by cultured men as the beginning and principle of the creation. [452]

   With this transition the theories concerning Christ are removed from
   Jewish and Old Testament soil, and also that of religion (in the strict
   sense of the word), and transplanted to the Greek one. Even in his
   pre-existent state Christ is an independent power existing side by side
   with God. The pre?existence does not refer to his whole appearance, but
   only to a part of his essence; it does not primarily serve to glorify
   the wisdom and power of the God who guides history, but only glorifies
   Christ, and thereby threatens the monarchy of God. [453] The appearance
   of Christ is now an "assumption of flesh," and immediately the
   intricate questions about the connection of the heavenly and spiritual
   being with the flesh simultaneously arise and are at first settled by
   the theories of a naive docetism. But the flesh, that is the human
   nature created by God, appears depreciated, because it was reckoned as
   something unsuitable for Christ, and foreign to him as a spiritual
   being. Thus the Christian religion was mixed up with the refined
   asceticism of a perishing civilization, and a foreign substructure
   given to its system of morality, so earnest in its simplicity. [454]
   But the most questionable result was the following. Since the predicate
   "Logos," which at first, and for a long time, coincided with the idea
   of the reason ruling in the cosmos, was considered as the highest that
   could be given to Christ, the holy and divine element, namely, the
   power of a new life, a power to be viewed and laid hold of in Christ,
   was transformed into a cosmic force and thereby secularised.

   In the present work I have endeavoured to explain fully how the
   doctrine of the Church developed from these premises into the doctrine
   of the Trinity and of the two natures. I have also shewn that the
   imperfect beginnings of Church doctrine, especially as they appear in
   the Logos theory derived from cosmology, were subjected to wholesome
   corrections--by the Monarchians, by Athanasius, and by the influence of
   biblical passages which pointed in another direction. Finally, the
   Logos doctrine received a form in which the idea was deprived of nearly
   all cosmical content. Nor could the Hellenic contrast of "spirit" and
   "flesh" become completely developed in Christianity, because the belief
   in the bodily resurrection of Christ, and in the admission of the flesh
   into heaven, opposed to the principle of dualism a barrier which Paul
   as yet neither knew nor felt to be necessary. The conviction as to the
   resurrection of the flesh proved the hard rock which shattered the
   energetic attempts to give a completely Hellenic complexion to the
   Christian religion.

   The history of the development of the ideas of pre-existence is at the
   same time the criticism of them, so that we need not have recourse to
   our present theory of knowledge which no longer allows such
   speculations. The problem of determining the significance of Christ
   through a speculation concerning his natures, and of associating with
   these the concrete features of the historical Christ, was originated by
   Hellenism. But even the New Testament writers, who appear in this
   respect to be influenced in some way by Hellenism, did not really
   speculate concerning the different natures, but, taking Christ's
   spiritual nature for granted, determined his religious significance by
   his moral qualities--Paul by the moral act of humiliation and obedience
   unto death, John by the complete dependence of Christ upon God and
   hence also by his obedience, as well as the unity of the love of Father
   and Son. There is only one idea of pre-existence which no empiric
   contemplation of history and no reason can uproot. This is identical
   with the most ancient idea found in the Old Testament, as well as that
   prevalent among the early Christians, and consists in the religious
   thought that God the Lord directs history. In its application to Jesus
   Christ, it is contained in the words we read in 1 Pet. I. 20:
   proegnosme'nou me`n pro` kataboles ko'smou, phanerothei`s de` di' umas
   tou`s di' autou pistou`s eis theo`n to`n egei'ranta auto`n ek nekron
   kai` do'xan auto do'nta, o'ste te`n pi'stin umon kai` elpi'da einai eis
   theo'n.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [452] These hints will have shewn that Paul's theory occupies a middle
   position between the Jewish and Greek ideas of pre-existence. In the
   canon, however, we have another group of writings which likewise gives
   evidence of a middle position with regard to the matter, I mean the
   Johannine writings. If we only possessed the prologue to the Gospel of
   John with its "en arche en o lo'gos" the "pa'nta di' autou ege'neto"
   and the "o lo'gos sa'rx ege'neto" we could indeed point to nothing but
   Hellenic ideas. But the Gospel itself, as is well known, contains very
   much that must have astonished a Greek, and is opposed to the
   philosophical idea of the Logos. This occurs even in the thought, "o
   lo'gos sa'rx ege'neto," which in itself is foreign to the Logos
   conception. Just fancy a proposition like the one in VI. 44, oudei`s
   du'natai elthein pro`s me, ea'n me` o pate`r o pe'mpsas me elku'se
   auto`n, or in V. 17. 21, engrafted on Philo's system, and consider the
   revolution it would have caused there. No doubt the prologue to some
   extent contains the themes set forth in the presentation that follows,
   but they are worded in such a way that one cannot help thinking the
   author wished to prepare Greek readers for the paradox he had to
   communicate to them, by adapting his prologue to their mode of thought.
   Under the altered conditions of thought which now prevail, the prologue
   appears to us the mysterious part, and the narrative that follows seems
   the portion that is relatively more intelligible. But to the original
   readers, if they were educated Greeks, the prologue must have been the
   part most easily understood. As nowadays a section on the nature of the
   Christian religion is usually prefixed to a treatise on dogmatics, in
   order to prepare and introduce the reader, so also the Johannine
   prologue seems to be intended as an introduction of this kind. It
   brings in conceptions which were familiar to the Greeks, in fact it
   enters into these more deeply than is justified by the presentation
   which follows; for the notion of the incarnate Logos is by no means the
   dominant one here. Though faint echoes of this idea may possibly be met
   with here and there in the Gospel--I confess I do not notice them--the
   predominating thought is essentially the conception of Christ as the
   Son of God, who obediently executes what the Father has shewn and
   appointed him. The works which he does are allotted to him, and he
   performs them in the strength of the Father. The whole of Christ's
   farewell discourses and the intercessory prayer evince no Hellenic
   influence and no cosmological speculation whatever, but shew the inner
   life of a man who knows himself to be one with God to a greater extent
   than any before him, and who feels the leading of men to God to be the
   task he had received and accomplished. In this consciousness he speaks
   of the glory he had with the Father before the world was (XVII. 4 f.:
   ego' se edo'xasa epi` tes ges to` e'rgon teleio'sas o de'dokas moi i'na
   poie'so· kai` nun do'xason me su', pa'ter, para` se'auto te do'xe e
   eichon pro` tou to`n ko'smon einai para` soi). With this we must
   compare verses like III. 13: oudei`s anabe'beken eis to`n ourano`n ei
   me` o ek tou ouranou kataba's, o uio`s tou anthro'pou, and III. 31: o
   a'nothen e`rcho'menos epa'no pa'nton estin. o o'n ek tes ges ek tes ges
   estin kai` ek tes ges lalei o ek tou ouranou ercho'menos epa'no pa'nton
   estin (see also I. 30: VI. 33, 38, 41 f. 50 f. 58, 62: VIII. 14, 58;
   XVII. 24). But though the pre-existence is strongly expressed in these
   passages, a separation of tneuma (lo'gos) and sa'rx in Christ is
   nowhere assumed in the Gospel except in the prologue. It is always
   Christ's whole personality to which every sublime attribute is
   ascribed. The same one who "can do nothing of himself" is also the one
   who was once glorious and will yet be glorified. This idea, however,
   can still be referred to the proegnosme'nos pro` kataboles ko'smou,
   although it gives a peculiar doxa with God to him who was foreknown of
   God, and the oldest conception is yet to be traced in many expressions,
   as, for example, I. 31: ka'go` ouk e'dein auto'n, all' i'na phanerothe'
   to Isra`el dia` touto elthon, V. 19: ou du'natai o uio`s poiein aph'
   eautou oude`n a'n me' ti ble'pe to`n pate'ra poiounta, V. 36: VIII. 38:
   a' ego` e'oraka para` to patri` lalo, VIII. 40: te`n ale'theian umin
   lela'leka e'n e'kousa para` tou theou, XII. 49: XV. 15: pa'nta a'
   e'kousa para` tou patro's mou e'gno'risa umin.

   [453] This is indeed counterbalanced in the fourth Gospel by the
   thought of the complete community of love between the Father and the
   Son, and the pre-existence and descent of the latter here also tend to
   the glory of God. In the sentence "God so loved the world," etc., that
   which Paul describes in Phil. II. becomes at the same time an act of
   God, in fact the act of God. The sentence "God is love" sums up again
   all individual speculations, and raises them into a new and most
   exalted sphere.

   [454] If it had been possible for speculation to maintain the level of
   the Fourth Gospel, nothing of that would have happened; but where were
   there theologians capable of this?
     __________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX II.

   Liturgy and the Origin of Dogma.

   The reader has perhaps wondered why I have made so little reference to
   Liturgy in my description of the origin of dogma. For according to the
   most modern ideas about the history of religion and the origin of
   theology, the development of both may be traced in the ritual. Without
   any desire to criticise these notions, I think I am justified in
   asserting that this is another instance of the exceptional nature of
   Christianity. For a considerable period it possessed no ritual at all,
   and the process of development in this direction had been going on, or
   been completed, a long time before ritual came to furnish material for
   dogmatic discussion.

   The worship in Christian Churches grew out of that in the synagogues,
   whereas there is no trace of its being influenced by the Jewish Temple
   service (Duchesne, Origines du Culte Chrétien, p. 45 ff.). Its oldest
   constituents are accordingly prayer, reading of the scriptures,
   application of scripture texts, and sacred song. In addition to these
   we have, as specifically Christian elements, the celebration of the
   Lord's Supper, and the utterances of persons inspired by the Spirit.
   The latter manifestations, however, ceased in the course of the second
   century, and to some extent as early as its first half. The religious
   services in which a ritual became developed were prayer, the Lord's
   Supper and sacred song. The Didache had already prescribed stated
   formulæ for prayer. The ritual of the Lord's Supper was determined in
   its main features by the memory of its institution. The sphere of
   sacred song remained the most unfettered, though here also, even at an
   early period--no later in fact than the end of the first and beginning
   of the second century--a fixed and a variable element were
   distinguished; for responsory hymns, as is testified by the Epistle of
   Pliny and the still earlier Book of Revelation, require to follow a
   definite arrangement. But the whole, though perhaps already fixed
   during the course of the second century, still bore the stamp of
   spirituality and freedom. It was really worship in spirit and in truth,
   and this and no other was the light in which the Apologists, for
   instance, regarded it. Ritualism did not begin to be a power in the
   Church till the end of the second century; though it had been
   cultivated by the "Gnostics" long before, and traces of it are found at
   an earlier period in some of the older Fathers, such as Ignatius.

   Among the liturgical fragments still preserved to us from the first
   three centuries two strata may de distinguished. Apart from the
   responsory hymns in the Book of Revelation, which can hardly represent
   fixed liturgical pieces, the only portions of the older stratum in our
   possession are the Lord's Prayer, originating with Jesus himself and
   used as a liturgy, together with the sacramental prayers of the
   Didache. These prayers exhibit a style unlike any of the liturgical
   formulæ of later times; the prayer is exclusively addressed to God, it
   returns thanks for knowledge and life; it speaks of Jesus the pais
   theou (Son of God) as the mediator; the intercession refers exclusively
   to the Church, and the supplication is for the gathering together of
   the Church, the hastening of the coming of the kingdom and the
   destruction of the world. No direct mention is made of the death and
   resurrection of Christ. These prayers are the peculiar property of the
   Christian Church. It cannot, however, be said that they exercised any
   important influence on the history of dogma. The thoughts contained in
   them perished in their specific shape; the measure of permanent
   importance they attained in a more general form, was not preserved to
   them through these prayers.

   The second stratum of liturgical pieces dates back to the great prayer
   with which the first Epistle of Clement ends, for in many respects this
   prayer, though some expressions in it remind us of the older type dia'
   tou egapeme'nou paido's sou Iesoun Christou, "through thy beloved son
   Jesus Christ"), already exhibits the characteristics of the later
   liturgy, as is shewn, for example, by a comparison of the liturgical
   prayer in the Constitutions of the Apostles (see Lightfoot's edition
   and my own). But this piece shews at the same time that the liturgical
   prayers, and consequently the liturgy also, sprang from those in the
   synagogue, for the similarity is striking. Here we find a connection
   resembling that which exists between the Jewish "Two Ways" and the
   Christian instruction of catechumens. If this observation is correct,
   it clearly explains the cautious use of historical and dogmatic
   material in the oldest liturgies--a precaution not to their
   disadvantage. As in the prayers of the synagogue, so also in Christian
   Churches, all sorts of matters were not submitted to God or laid bare
   before Him, but the prayers serve as a religious ceremony, that is, as
   adoration, petition and intercession. Su` ei o theo`s mo'nos kai`
   Iesous Christo`s o pais sou kai` emeis lao's sou kai` pro'bata tes
   nomes sou, (thou art God alone and Jesus Christ is thy son, and we are
   thy people and the sheep of thy pasture). In this confession, and
   expressive Christian modification of that of the synagogue, the whole
   liturgical ceremony is epitomised. So far as we can assume and
   conjecture from the scanty remains of Ante-Nicene liturgy, the
   character of the ceremony was not essentially altered in this respect.
   Nothing containing a specific dogma or theological speculation was
   admitted. The number of sacred ceremonies, already considerable in the
   second century, (how did they arise?) was still further increased in
   the third; but the accompanying words, so far as we know, expressed
   nothing but adoration, gratitude, supplication and intercession. The
   relations expressed in the liturgy became more comprehensive, copious
   and detailed; but its fundamental character was not changed. The
   history of dogma in the first three centuries is not reflected in their
   liturgy.
     __________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX III.

  NEOPLATONISM.

   The Historical Significance and Position of Neoplatonism.

   The political history of the ancient world ends with the Empire of
   Diocletian and Constantine, which has not only Roman and Greek, but
   also Oriental features. The history of ancient philosophy ends with the
   universal philosophy of Neoplatonism, which assimilated the elements of
   most of the previous systems, and embodied the result of the history of
   religion and civilisation in East and West. But as the Roman Byzantine
   Empire is at one and the same time a product of the final effort and
   the exhaustion of the ancient world, so also Neoplatonism is, on one
   side, the completion of ancient philosophy, and, on another, its
   abolition. Never before in the Greek and Roman theory of the world did
   the conviction of the dignity of man and his elevation above nature
   attain so certain an expression as in Neoplatonism; and never before in
   the history of civilisation did its highest exponents, notwithstanding
   all their progress in inner observation, so much undervalue the
   sovereign significance of real science and pure knowledge as the later
   Neoplatonists did. Judged from the stand-point of pure science, of
   empirical knowledge of the world, the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle
   marks a momentous turning-point, the post-Aristotelian a retrogression,
   the Neoplatonic a complete declension. But judging from the stand-point
   of religion and morality, it must be admitted that the ethical temper
   which Neoplatonism sought to beget and confirm was the highest and
   purest which the culture of the ancient world produced. This
   necessarily took place at the expense of science: for on the soil of
   polytheistic natural religions, the knowledge of nature must either
   fetter and finally abolish religion, or be fettered and abolished by
   religion. Religion and ethic, however, proved the stronger powers.
   Placed between these and the knowledge of nature, philosophy, after a
   period of fluctuation finally follows the stronger force. Since the
   ethical itself, in the sphere of natural religions, is unhesitatingly
   conceived as a higher kind of "nature," conflict with the empirical
   knowledge of the world is unavoidable. The higher "physics," for that
   is what religious ethics is here, must displace the lower or be itself
   displaced. Philosophy must renounce its scientific aspect, in order
   that man's claim to a supernatural value of his person and life may be
   legitimised.

   It is an evidence of the vigour of man's moral endowments that the only
   epoch of culture which we are able to survey in its beginnings, its
   progress, and its close, ended not with materialism, but with the most
   decided idealism. It is true that in its way this idealism also denotes
   a bankruptcy; as the contempt for reason and science, and these are
   contemned when relegated to the second place, finally leads to
   barbarism, because it results in the crassest superstition, and is
   exposed to all manner of imposture. And, as a matter of fact, barbarism
   succeeded the flourishing period of Neoplatonism. Philosophers
   themselves no doubt found their mental food in the knowledge which they
   thought themselves able to surpass; but the masses grew up in
   superstition, and the Christian Church, which entered on the
   inheritance of Neoplatonism, was compelled to reckon with that and come
   to terms with it. Just when the bankruptcy of the ancient civilisation
   and its lapse into barbarism could not have failed to reveal
   themselves, a kindly destiny placed on the stage of history barbarian
   nations, for whom the work of a thousand years had as yet no existence.
   Thus the fact is concealed, which, however, does not escape the eye of
   one who looks below the surface, that the inner history of the ancient
   world must necessarily have degenerated into barbarism of its own
   accord, because it ended with the renunciation of this world. There is
   no desire either to enjoy it, to master it, or to know it as it really
   is. A new world is disclosed for which everything is given up, and men
   are ready to sacrifice insight and understanding, in order to possess
   this world with certainty; and, in the light which radiates from the
   world to come, that which in this world appears absurd becomes wisdom,
   and wisdom becomes folly.

   Such is Neoplatonism. The pre-Socratic philosophers, declared by the
   followers of Socrates to be childish, had freed themselves from
   theology, that is the mythology of the poets, and constructed a
   philosophy from the observation of nature, without troubling themselves
   about ethics and religion. In the systems of Plato and Aristotle
   physics and ethics were to attain to their rights, though the latter no
   doubt already occupied the first place; theology, that is popular
   religion, continues to be thrust aside. The post-Aristotelian
   philosophers of all parties were already beginning to withdraw from the
   objective world. Stoicism, indeed, seems to fall back into the
   materialism that prevailed before Plato and Aristotle; but the ethical
   dualism which dominated the mood of the Stoic philosophers did not in
   the long run tolerate the materialistic physics; it sought and found
   help in the metaphysical dualism of the Platonists, and at the same
   time reconciled itself to the popular religion by means of allegorism,
   that is it formed a new theology. But it did not result in permanent
   philosophic creations. A one-sided development of Platonism produced
   the various forms of scepticism which sought to abolish confidence in
   empirical knowledge. Neoplatonism, which came last, learned from all
   schools. In the first place, it belongs to the series of
   post-Aristotelian systems and, as the philosophy of the subjective, it
   is the logical completion of them. In the second place, it rests on
   scepticism; for it also, though not at the very beginning, gave up both
   confidence and pure interest in empirical knowledge. Thirdly, it can
   boast of the name and authority of Plato; for in metaphysics it
   consciously went back to him and expressly opposed the metaphysics of
   the Stoics. Yet on this very point it also learned something from the
   Stoics; for the Neoplatonic conception of the action of God on the
   world, and of the nature and origin of matter, can only be explained by
   reference to the dynamic pantheism of the Stoics. In other respects,
   especially in psychology, it is diametrically opposed to the Stoa,
   though superior. Fourthly, the study of Aristotle also had an influence
   on Neoplatonism. That is shewn not only in the philosophic methods of
   the Neoplatonists, but also, though in a subordinate way, in their
   metaphysics. Fifthly, the ethic of the Stoics was adopted by
   Neoplatonism, but this ethic necessarily gave way to a still higher
   view of the conditions of the spirit. Sixthly and finally, Christianity
   also, which Neoplatonism opposed in every form (especially in that of
   the Gnostic philosophy of religion), seems not to have been entirely
   without influence. On this point we have as yet no details, and these
   can only be ascertained by a thorough examination of the polemic of
   Plotinus against the Gnostics.

   Hence, with the exception of Epicureanism, which Neoplatonism dreaded
   as its mortal enemy, every important system of former times was drawn
   upon by the new philosophy. But we should not on that account call
   Neoplatonism an eclectic system in the usual sense of the word. For in
   the first place, it had one pervading and all-predominating interest,
   the religious; and in the second place, it introduced into philosophy a
   new supreme principle, the super-rational, or the super-essential. This
   principle should not be identified with the "Ideas" of Plato or the
   "Form" of Aristotle. For as Zeller rightly says: "In Plato and
   Aristotle the distinction of the sensuous and the intelligible is the
   strongest expression for belief in the truth of thought; it is only
   sensuous perception and sensuous existence whose relative falsehood
   they presuppose; but of a higher stage of spiritual life lying beyond
   idea and thought, there is no mention. In Neoplatonism, on the other
   hand, it is just this super-rational element which is regarded as the
   final goal of all effort, and the highest ground of all existence; the
   knowledge gained by thought is only an intermediate stage between
   sensuous perception and the super-rational intuition; the intelligible
   forms are not that which is highest and last, but only the media by
   which the influences of the formless original essence are communicated
   to the world. This view therefore presupposes not merely doubt of the
   reality of sensuous existence and sensuous notions, but absolute doubt,
   aspiration beyond all reality. The highest intelligible is not that
   which constitutes the real content of thought, but only that which is
   presupposed and earnestly desired by man as the unknowable ground of
   his thought." Neoplatonism recognised that a religious ethic can be
   built neither on sense-perception nor on knowledge gained by the
   understanding, and that it cannot be justified by these; it therefore
   broke both with intellectual ethics and with utilitarian morality. But
   for that very reason, having as it were parted with perception and
   understanding in relation to the ascertaining of the highest truth, it
   was compelled to seek for a new world and a new function in the human
   spirit, in order to ascertain the existence of what it desired, and to
   comprehend and describe that of which it had ascertained the existence.
   But man cannot transcend his psychological endowment. An iron ring
   incloses him. He who does not allow his thought to be determined by
   experience falls a prey to fancy, that is thought which cannot be
   suppressed assumes a mythological aspect: superstition takes the place
   of reason, dull gazing at something incomprehensible is regarded as the
   highest goal of the spirit's efforts, and every conscious activity of
   the spirit is subordinated to visionary conditions artificially brought
   about. But that every conceit may not be allowed to assert itself, the
   gradual exploration of every region of knowledge according to every
   method of acquiring it, is demanded as a preliminary--the Neoplatonists
   did not make matters easy for themselves,--and a new and mighty
   principle is set up which is to bridle fancy, viz., the authority of a
   sure tradition. This authority must be superhuman, otherwise it would
   not come under consideration; it must therefore be divine. On divine
   disclosures, that is revelations, must rest both the highest
   super-rational region of knowledge and the possibility of knowledge
   itself. In a word, the philosophy which Neoplatonism represents, whose
   final interest is the religious, and whose highest object is the
   super-rational, must be a philosophy of revelation.

   In the case of Plotinus himself and his immediate disciples, this does
   not yet appear plainly. They still shew confidence in the objective
   presuppositions of their philosophy; and have, especially in
   psychology, done great work and created something new. But this
   confidence vanishes in the later Neoplatonists. Porphyry, be-fore he
   became a disciple of Plotinus, wrote a book peri` tes eklogi'on
   philosophi'as; as a philosopher he no longer required the "lo'gia". But
   the later representatives of the system sought for their philosophy
   revelations of the Godhead. They found them in the religious traditions
   and cults of all nations. Neoplatonism learned from the Stoics to rise
   above the political limits of nations and states, and to widen the
   Hellenic consciousness to a universally human one. The spirit of God
   has breathed throughout the whole history of the nations, and the
   traces of divine revelation are to be found everywhere. The older a
   religious tradition or cultus is, the more worthy of honour, the more
   rich in thoughts of God it is. Therefore the old Oriental religions are
   of special value to the Neoplatonists. The allegorical method of
   interpreting myths, which was practised by the Stoics in particular,
   was accepted by Neoplatonism also. But the myths, spiritually
   explained, have for this system an entirely different value from what
   they had for the Stoic philosophers. The latter adjusted themselves to
   the myths by the aid of allegorical explanation; the later
   Neoplatonists, on the other hand, (after a selection in which the
   immoral myths were sacrificed, see, e.g., Julian) regarded them as the
   proper material and sure foundation of philosophy. Neoplatonism claims
   to be not only the absolute philosophy, completing all systems, but at
   the same time the absolute religion, confirming and explaining all
   earlier religions. A rehabilitation of all ancient religions is aimed
   at (see the philosophic teachers of Julian and compare his great
   religious experiment); each was to continue in its traditional form,
   but at the same time each was to communicate the religious temper and
   the religious knowledge which Neoplatonism had attained, and each
   cultus is to lead to the high morality which it behoves man to
   maintain. In Neoplatonism the psychological fact of the longing of man
   for something higher, is exalted to the all-predominating principle
   which ex-plains the world. Therefore the religions, though they are to
   be purified and spiritualised, become the foundation of philosophy. The
   Neoplatonic philosophy therefore presupposes the religious syncretism
   of the third century, and cannot be understood without it. The great
   forces which were half unconsciously at work in this syncretism, were
   reflectively grasped by Neoplatonism. It is the final fruit of the
   developments resulting from the political, national and religious
   syncretism which arose from the undertakings of Alexander the Greek and
   the Romans.

   Neoplatonism is consequently a stage in the history of religion; nay,
   its significance in the history of the world lies in the fact that it
   is so. In the history of science and enlightenment it has a position of
   significance only in so far as it was the necessary transition stage
   through which humanity had to pass, in order to free itself from the
   religion of nature and the depreciation of the spiritual life, which
   oppose an insurmountable barrier to the highest advance of human
   knowledge. But as Neoplatonism in its philosophical aspect means the
   abolition of ancient philosophy, which, however, it desired to
   complete, so also in its religious aspect it means the abolition of the
   ancient religions which it aimed at restoring. For in requiring these
   religions to mediate a definite religious knowledge, and to lead to the
   highest moral disposition, it burdened them with tasks to which they
   were not equal, and under which they could not but break down. And in
   requiring them to loosen, if not completely destroy, the bond which was
   their only stay, namely, the political bond, it took from them the
   foundation on which they were built. But could it not place them on a
   greater and firmer foundation? Was not the Roman Empire in existence,
   and could the new religion not become dependent on this in the same way
   as the earlier religions had been dependent on the lesser states and
   nations? It might be thought so, but it was no longer possible. No
   doubt the political history of the nations round the Mediterranean, in
   their development into the universal Roman monarchy, was parallel to
   the spiritual history of these nations in their development into
   monotheism and a universal system of morals; but the spiritual
   development in the end far outstripped the political: even the Stoics
   attained to a height which the political development could only
   partially reach. Neoplatonism did indeed attempt to gain a connection
   with the Byzantine Roman Empire: one noble monarch, Julian, actually
   perished as a result of this endeavour: but even before this the
   profounder Neoplatonists discerned that their lofty religious
   philosophy would not bear contact with the despotic Empire, because it
   would not bear any contact with the "world" (plan of the founding of
   Platonopolis). Political affairs are at bottom as much a matter of
   indifference to Neoplatonism as material things in general. The
   idealism of the new philosophy was too high to admit of its being
   naturalised in the despiritualised, tyrannical and barren creation of
   the Byzantine Empire, and this Empire itself needed unscrupulous and
   despotic police officials, not noble philosophers. Important and
   instructive, therefore, as the experiments are, which were made from
   time to time by the state and by individual philosophers, to unite the
   monarchy of the world with Neoplatonism, they could not but be
   ineffectual.

   But, and this is the last question which one is justified in raising
   here, why did not Neoplatonism create an independent religious
   community? Since it had already changed the ancient religions so
   fundamentally, in its purpose to restore them; since it had attempted
   to fill the old naive cults with profound philosophic ideas, and to
   make them exponents of a high morality; why did it not take the further
   step and create a religious fellowship of its own? Why did it not
   complete and confirm the union of gods by the founding of a church
   which was destined to embrace the whole of humanity, and in which,
   beside the one ineffable Godhead, the gods of all nations could have
   been worshipped? Why not? The answer to this question is at the same
   time the reply to another, viz., Why did the christian church supplant
   Neoplatonism? Neoplatonism lacked three elements to give it the
   significance of a new and permanent religious system. Augustine in his
   confessions (Bk. VII. 18-21) has excellently described these three
   elements. First and above all, it lacked a religious founder; secondly,
   it was unable to give any answer to the question, how one could
   permanently maintain the mood of blessedness and peace; thirdly, it
   lacked the means of winning those who could not speculate. The "people"
   could not learn the philosophic exercises which it recommended as the
   condition of attaining the enjoyment of the highest good; and the way
   by which even the "people" can attain to the highest good was hidden
   from it. Hence these "wise and prudent" remained a school. When Julian
   attempted to interest the common uncultured man in the doctrines and
   worship of this school, his reward was mockery and scorn.

   Not as philosophy and not as a new religion did Neoplatonism become a
   decisive factor in history, but, if I may say so, as a frame of mind.
   [455] The feeling that there is an eternal highest good which lies
   beyond all outer experience and is not even the intelligible, this
   feeling, with which was united the conviction of the entire
   worthlessness of everything earthly, was produced and fostered by
   Neoplatonism. But it was unable to describe the contents of that
   highest being and highest good, and therefore it was here compelled to
   give itself entirely up to fancy and aesthetic feeling. Therefore it
   was forced to trace out "mysterious ways to that which is within,"
   which, however, led no-where. It transformed thought into a dream of
   feeling; it immersed itself in the sea of emotions; it viewed the old
   fabled world of the nations as the reflection of a higher reality, and
   transformed reality into poetry; but in spite of all these efforts it
   was only able, to use the words of Augustine, to see from afar the land
   which it desired. It broke this world into fragments; but nothing
   remained to it, save a ray from a world beyond, which was only an
   indescribable "something."

   And yet the significance of Neoplatonism in the history of our moral
   culture has been, and still is, immeasurable. Not only because it
   refined and strengthened man's life of feeling and sensation, not only
   because it, more than anything else, wove the delicate veil which even
   to-day, whether we be religious or irreligious, we ever and again cast
   over the offensive impression of the brutal reality, but, above all,
   because it begat the consciousness that the blessedness which alone can
   satisfy man is to be found somewhere else than in the sphere of
   knowledge. That man does not live by bread alone is a truth that was
   known before Neoplatonism; but it proclaimed the profounder truth,
   which the earlier philosophy had failed to recognise, that man does not
   live by knowledge alone. Neoplatonism not only had a propadeutic
   significance in the past, but continues to be, even now, the source of
   all the moods which deny the world and strive after an ideal, but have
   not power to raise themselves above esthetic feeling, and see no means
   of getting a clear notion of the impulse of their own heart and the
   land of their desire.

   Historical Origin of Neoplatonism.

   The forerunners of Neoplatonism were, on the one hand, those Stoics who
   recognise the Platonic distinction of the sensible and supersensible
   world, and on the other, the so-called Neopythagoreans and religious
   philosophers, such as Posidonius, Plutarch of Chæronea, and especially
   Numenius of Apamea. [456] Nevertheless, these cannot be regarded as the
   actual Fathers of Neoplatonism; for the philosophic method was still
   very imperfect in comparison with the Neoplatonic, their principles
   were uncertain, and the authority of Plato was not yet regarded as
   placed on an unapproachable height. The Jewish and Christian
   philosophers of the first and second centuries stand very much nearer
   the later Neoplatonism than Numenius. We would probably see this more
   clearly if we knew the development of Christianity in Alexandria in the
   second century, But, unfortunately, we have only very meagre fragments
   to tell us of this. First and above all, we must mention Philo. This
   philosopher who interpreted the Old Testament religion in terms of
   Hellenism had, in accordance with his idea of revelation, already
   maintained that the Divine Original Essence is supra-rational, that
   only ecstasy leads to Him, and that the materials for religious and
   moral knowledge are contained in the oracles of the Deity. The
   religious ethic of Philo, a combination of Stoic, Platonic,
   Neopythagorean and Old Testament gnomic wisdom, already bears the marks
   which we recognise in Neoplatonism. The acknowledgment that God was
   exalted above all thought was a sort of tribute which Greek philosophy
   was compelled to pay to the national religion of Israel, in return for
   the supremacy which was here granted to the former. The claim of
   positive religion to be something more than an intellectual conception
   of the universal reason was thereby justified. Even religious
   syncretism is already found in Philo; but it is something essentially
   different from the later Neoplatonic, since Philo regarded the Jewish
   cult as the only valuable one, and traced back all elements of truth in
   the Greeks and Romans to borrowings from the books of Moses.

   The earliest Christian philosophers, especially Justin and Athenagoras,
   likewise prepared the way for the speculations of the later
   Neoplatonists by their attempts, on the one hand, to connect
   Christianity with Stoicism and Platonism, and on the other, to exhibit
   it as supra-Platonic. The method by which Justin, in the introduction
   to the Dialogue with Trypho, attempts to establish the Christian
   knowledge of God, that is the knowledge of the truth, on Platonism,
   Scepticism and "Revelation," strikingly reminds us of the later methods
   of the Neoplatonists. Still more is one reminded of Neoplatonism by the
   speculations of the Alexandrian Christian Gnostics, especially of
   Valentinus and the followers of Basilides. The doctrines of the
   Basilidians(?) communicated by Hippolytus (Philosoph. VII. c. 20 sq.),
   read like fragments from the didactic writings of the Neoplatonists:
   Epei` oude`n en ouk u'le'm ouk ousi'a, ouk aou'sion, ouk aploun, ouk
   su'ntheton, ouk ano'eton, ouk anai'stheton, ouk a'nthropos . . . . . .
   ouk o`n theo`s anoe'tos, anaisthe'tos abou'los aproaire'tos, apathos,
   anepithume'tios ko'smon ethe'lese poiesai . . . . . . Ou'tos ouk o`n
   theo`s apoi`ese ko'smon ouk o'nta ex ouk o'nton, katabalo'menos kai`
   uposte'sas sperma ti e`n e'chon pasan en eauto tes tou ko'smou
   panstermi'an. Like the Neoplatonists, these Basilidians did not teach
   an emanation from the Godhead, but a dynamic mode of action of the
   Supreme Being. The same can be asserted of Valentinus who also places
   an unnamable being above all, and views matter not as a second
   principle, but as a derived product. The dependence of Basilides and
   Valentinus on Zeno and Plato is, besides, un-doubted. But the method of
   these Gnostics in constructing their mental picture of the world and
   its history was still an uncertain one. Crude primitive myths are here
   received, and naively realistic elements alternate with bold attempts
   at spiritualising. While therefore, philosophically considered, the
   Gnostic systems are very unlike the finished Neoplatonic ones, it is
   certain that they contained almost all the elements of the religious
   view of the world which we find in Neoplatonism.

   But were the earliest Neoplatonists really acquainted with the
   speculations of men like Philo, Justin, Valentinus and Basilides? Were
   they familiar with the Oriental religions, especially with the Jewish
   and the Christian? And, if we must answer these questions in the
   affirmative, did they really learn from these sources?

   Unfortunately, we cannot at present give certain, and still less
   detailed, answers to these questions. But, as Neoplatonism originated
   in Alexandria, as Oriental cults confronted every one there, as the
   Jewish philosophy was prominent in the literary market of Alexandria,
   and that was the very place where scientific Christianity had its
   headquarters, there can, generally speaking, be no doubt that the
   earliest Neoplatonists had some acquaintance with Judaism and
   Christianity. In addition to that, we have the certain fact that the
   earliest Neoplatonists had discussions with (Roman) Gnostics (see Carl
   Schmidt, Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache, pp. 603-665, and
   that Porphyry entered into elaborate controversy with Christianity. In
   comparison with the Neoplatonic philosophy, the system of Philo and the
   Gnostics appears in many respects an anticipation which had a certain
   influence on the former, the precise nature of which has still to be
   ascertained. But the anticipation is not wonderful, for the religious
   and philosophic temper which was only gradually produced on Greek soil,
   existed from the first in such philosophers as took their stand on the
   ground of a revealed religion of redemption. Iamblichus and his
   followers first answer completely to the Christian Gnostic schools of
   the second century; that is to say, Greek philosophy, in its immanent
   development, did not attain till the fourth century the position which
   some Greek philosophers who had accepted Christianity, had already
   reached in the second. The influence of Christianity--both Gnostic and
   Catholic--on Neoplatonism was perhaps very little at any time, though
   individual Neoplatonists since the time of Amelius employed Christian
   sayings as oracles, and testified their high esteem for Christ.

   Sketch of the History and Doctrines of Neoplatonism.

   Ammonius Saccas (died about 245), who is said to have been born a
   Christian, but to have lapsed into heathenism, is regarded as the
   founder of the Neoplatonic school in Alexandria. As he has left no
   writings, no judgment can be formed as to his teaching. His disciples
   inherited from him the prominence which they gave to Plato and the
   attempts to prove the harmony between the latter and Aristotle. His
   most important disciples were Origen the Christian, a second heathen
   Origen, Longinus, Herennius, and, above all, Plotinus. The latter was
   born in the year 205, at Lycopolis in Egypt, laboured from 224 in Rome,
   and found numerous adherents and admirers, among others the Emperor
   Galienus and his consort, and died in lower Italy about 270. His
   writings were arranged by his disciple Porphyry, and edited in six
   Enneads.

   The Enneads of Plotinus are the fundamental documents of Neoplatonism.
   The teaching of this philosopher is mystical, and, like all mysticism,
   it falls into two main portions. The first and theoretic part shews the
   high origin of the soul, and how it has departed from this its origin.
   The second and practical part points out the way by which the soul can
   again be raised to the Eternal and the Highest. As the soul with its
   longings aspires beyond all sensible things and even beyond the world
   of ideas, the Highest must be something above reason. The system
   therefore has three parts. I. The Original Essence. II. The world of
   ideas and the soul. III. The world of phenomena. We may also, in
   conformity with the thought of Plotinus, divide the system thus: A. The
   supersensible world (1. The Original Essence; 2. the world of ideas; 3.
   the soul). B. The world of phenomena. The Original Essence is the One
   in contrast to the many; it. is the Infinite and Unlimited in contrast
   to the finite; it is the source of all being, therefore the absolute
   causality and the only truly existing; but it is also the Good, in so
   far as everything finite is to find its aim in it and to flow back to
   it. Yet moral attributes cannot be ascribed to this Original Essence,
   for these would limit it. It has no attributes at all: it is a being
   without magnitude, without life, without thought; nay, one should not,
   properly speaking, even call it an existence; it is something above
   existence, above goodness, and at the same time the operative force
   without any substratum. As operative force the Original Essence is
   continually begetting something else, without itself being changed or
   moved or diminished. This creation is not a physical process, but an
   emanation of force; and because that which is produced has any
   existence only in so far as the originally Existent works in it, it may
   be said that Neoplatonism is dynamical Pantheism. Everything that has
   being is directly or indirectly a production of the "One." In this
   "One" everything so far as it has being, is Divine, and God is all in
   all. But that which is derived is not like the Original Essence itself.
   On the contrary, the law of decreasing perfection prevails in the
   derived. The latter is indeed an image and reflection of the Original
   Essence, but the wider the circle of creations extends the less their
   share in the Original Essence. Hence the totality of being forms a
   gradation of concentric circles which finally lose themselves almost
   completely in non-being, in so far as in the last circle the force of
   the Original Essence is a vanishing one. Each lower stage of being is
   connected with the Original Essence only by means of the higher stages;
   that which is inferior receives a share in the Original Essence only
   through the medium of these. But everything derived has one feature,
   viz., a longing for the higher; it turns itself to this so far as its
   nature allows it.

   The first emanation of the Original Essence is the Nous it is a
   complete image of the Original Essence and archetype of all existing
   things; it is being and thought at the same time, World of ideas and
   Idea. As image the Nov; is equal to the Original Essence, as derived it
   is completely different from it. What Plotinus understands by Nous is
   the highest sphere which the human spirit can reach (ko'smos noeto's)
   and at the same time pure thought itself.

   The soul which, according to Plotinus, is an immaterial substance like
   the Nous, [457] is an image and product of the immovable Nous. It is
   related to the Nous as the latter is to the Original Essence. It stands
   between the Nous and the world of phenomena. The Nous penetrates and
   enlightens it, but it itself already touches the world of phenomena.
   The Nous is undivided, the soul can also preserve its unity and abide
   in the Nous; but it has at the same time the power to unite itself with
   the material world and thereby to be divided. Hence it occupies a
   middle position. In virtue of its nature and destiny it belongs, as the
   single soul (soul of the world), to the supersensible world; but it
   embraces at the same time the many individual souls; these may allow
   themselves to be ruled by the Nous, or they may turn to the sensible
   and be lost in the finite.

   The soul, an active essence, begets the corporeal or the world of
   phenomena. This should allow itself to be so ruled by the soul that the
   manifold of which it consists may abide in fullest harmony. Plotinus is
   not a dualist like the majority of Christian Gnostics. He praises the
   beauty and glory of the world. When in it the idea really has dominion
   over matter, the soul over the body, the world is beautiful and good.
   It is the image of the upper world, though a shadowy one, and the
   gradations of better or worse in it are necessary to the harmony of the
   whole. But, in point of fact, the unity and harmony in the world of
   phenomena disappear in strife and opposition. The result is a conflict,
   a growth and decay, a seeming existence. The original cause of this
   lies in the fact that a substratum, viz., matter, lies at the basis of
   bodies. Matter is the foundation of each (to` ba'thos eka'stou e u'le);
   it is the obscure, the indefinite, that which is without qualities, the
   me` o'n. As devoid of form and idea it is the evil, as capable of form
   the intermediate.

   The human souls that are sunk in the material have been ensnared by the
   sensuous, and have allowed themselves to be ruled by desire. They now
   seek to detach themselves entirely from true being, and striving after
   independence fall into an unreal existence. Conversion therefore is
   needed, and this is possible, for freedom is not lost.

   Now here begins the practical philosophy. The soul must rise again to
   the highest on the same path by which it descended: it must first of
   all return to itself. This takes place through virtue, which aspires to
   assimilation with God and leads to Him. In the ethics of Plotinus all
   earlier philosophic systems of virtue are united and arranged in
   graduated order. Civic virtues stand lowest, then follow the purifying,
   and finally the deifying virtues. Civic virtues only adorn the life,
   but do not elevate the soul as the purifying virtues do; they free the
   soul from the sensuous and lead it back to itself and thereby to the
   Nous. Man becomes again a spiritual and permanent being, and frees
   himself from every sin, through asceticism. But he is to reach still
   higher; he is not only to be without sin, but he is to be "God." That
   takes place through the contemplation of the Original Essence, the One,
   that is through ecstatic elevation to Him. This is not mediated by
   thought, for thought reaches only to the Nous, and is itself only a
   movement. Thought is only a preliminary stage towards union with God.
   The soul can only see and touch the Original Essence in a condition of
   complete passivity and rest. Hence, in order to attain to this highest,
   the soul must subject itself to a spiritual "Exercise." It must begin
   with the contemplation of material things, their diversity and harmony,
   then retire into itself and sink itself in its own essence, and thence
   mount up to the Nous, to the world of ideas; but, as it still does not
   find the One and Highest Essence there, as the call always comes to it
   from there: "We have not made ourselves" (Augustine in the sublime
   description of Christian, that is Neoplatonic, exercises), it must, at
   it were, lose sight of itself in a state of intense concentration, in
   mute contemplation and complete forgetfulness of all things. It can
   then see God, the source of life, the principle of being, the first
   cause of all good, the root of the soul. In that moment it enjoys the
   highest and indescribable blessedness; it is itself, as it were,
   swallowed up by the deity and bathed in the light of eternity.

   Plotinus, as Porphyry relates, attained to this ecstatic union with God
   four times during the six years he was with him. To Plotinus this
   religious philosophy was sufficient; he did not require the popular
   religion and worship. But yet he sought their support. The Deity is
   indeed in the last resort only the Original Essence, but it manifests
   itself in a fulness of emanations and phenomena. The Nous is, as it
   were, the second God; the lo'goi which are included in it are gods; the
   stars are gods etc. A strict monotheism appeared to Plotinus a poor
   thing. The myths of the popular religion were interpreted by him in a
   particular sense, and he could justify even magic, soothsaying and
   prayer. He brought forward reasons for the worship of images, which the
   Christian worshippers of images subsequently adopted. Yet, in
   comparison with the later Neoplatonists, he was free from gross
   superstition and wild fanaticism. He cannot, in the remotest sense, be
   reckoned among the "deceivers who were themselves deceived," and the
   restoration of the ancient worship of the Gods was not his chief aim.

   Among his disciples the most important were Amelius and Porphyry.
   Amelius changed the doctrine of Plotinus in some points, and even made
   use of the prologue of the Gospel of John. Porphyry has the merit of
   having systematized and spread the teaching of his master, Plotinus. He
   was born at Tyre, in the year 233; whether he was for some time a
   Christian is uncertain; from 263-268 he was a pupil of Plotinus at
   Rome; before that he wrote the work peri` tes ek logi'on philosophi'as,
   which shews that he wished to base philosophy on revelation; he lived a
   few years in Sicily, (about 270) where he wrote his "fifteen books
   against the Christians"; he then returned to Rome, where he laboured as
   a teacher, edited the works of Plotinus, wrote himself a series of
   treatises, married in his old age, the Roman Lady Marcella, and died
   about the year 303. Porphyry was not an original, productive thinker,
   but a diligent and thorough investigator, characterized by great
   learning, by the gift of an acute faculty for philological and
   historical criticism, and by an earnest desire to spread the true
   philosophy of life, to refute false doctrines, especially those of the
   Christians, to ennoble man and draw him to that which is good. That a
   mind so free and noble surrendered itself entirely to the philosophy of
   Plotinus and to polytheistic mysticism, is a proof that the spirit of
   the age works almost irresistibly, and that religious mysticism was the
   highest possession of the time. The teaching of Porphyry is
   distinguished from that of Plotinus by the fact that it is still more
   practical and religious. The aim of philosophy, according to Porphyry,
   is the salvation of the soul. The origin and the guilt of evil lie not
   in the body, but in the desires of the soul. The strictest asceticism
   (abstinence from cohabitation, flesh and wine) is therefore required in
   addition to the knowledge of God. During the course of his life
   Porphyry warned men more and more decidedly against crude popular
   beliefs and immoral cults. "The ordinary notions of the Deity are of
   such a kind that it is more godless to share them than to neglect the
   images of the gods." But freely as he criticised the popular religions,
   he did not wish to give them up. He contended for a pure worship of the
   many gods, and recognised the right of every old national religion, and
   the religious duties of their professors. His work against the
   Christians is not directed against Christ, or what he regarded as the
   teaching of Christ, but against the Christians of his day, and against
   the sacred books which, according to Porphyry, were written by
   impostors and ignorant people. In his acute criticism of the genesis or
   what was regarded as Christianity in his day, he spoke bitter and
   earnest truths, and therefore acquired the name of the fiercest and
   most formidable of all the enemies of Christians. His work was
   destroyed (condemned by an edict of Theodosius II. and Valentinian, of
   the year 448), and even the writings in reply (by Methodius, Eusebius,
   Apollinaris, Philostorgius, etc.,) have not been preserved. Yet we
   possess fragments in Lactantius, Augustine, Macarius Magnes and others,
   which attest how thoroughly Porphyry studied the Christian writings and
   how great his faculty was for true historical criticism.

   Porphyry marks the transition to the Neoplatonism which subordinated
   itself entirely to the polytheistic cults, and which strove, above all,
   to defend the old Greek and Oriental religions against the formidable
   assaults of Christianity. Iamblichus, the disciple of Porphyry (died
   330), transformed Neoplatonism "from a philosophic theorem into a
   theological doctrine." The doctrines peculiar to Iamblichus can no
   longer be deduced from scientific, but only from practical motives. In
   order to justify superstition and the ancient cults, philosophy in
   Iamblichus becomes a theurgic mysteriosophy, spiritualism. Now appears
   that series of "Philosophers" in whose case one is frequently unable to
   decide whether they are deceivers or deceived, "decepti deceptores," as
   Augustine says. A mysterious mysticism of numbers plays a great role.
   That which is absurd and mechanical is surrounded with the halo of the
   sacramental; myths are proved by pious fancies and pietistic
   considerations with a spiritual sound; miracles, even the most foolish,
   are believed in and are performed. The philosopher becomes the priest
   of magic, and philosophy an instrument of magic. At the same time the
   number of Divine Beings is infinitely increased by the further action
   of unlimited speculation. But this fantastic addition which Iamblichus
   makes to the inhabitants of Olympus is the very fact which proves that
   Greek philosophy has here returned to mythology, and that the religion
   of nature was still a power. And yet no one can deny that, in the
   fourth century, even the noblest and choicest minds were found among
   the Neoplatonists. So great was the declension that this Neoplatonic
   philosophy was still the protecting roof for many influential and
   earnest thinkers, although swindlers and hypocrites also concealed
   themselves under this roof. In relation to some points of doctrine, at
   any rate, the dogmatic of Iamblichus marks an advance. Thus, the
   emphasis he lays on the idea that evil has its seat in the will, is an
   important fact; and in general the significance he assigns to the will
   is perhaps the most important advance in psychology, and one which
   could not fail to have great influence on dogmatic also (Augustine). It
   likewise deserves to be noted that Iamblichus disputed Plotinus'
   doctrine of the divinity of the human soul.

   The numerous disciples of Iamblichus (Aedesius, Chrysantius, Eusebius,
   Priscus, Sopater, Sallust and especially Maximus, the most celebrated)
   did little to further speculation; they occupied themselves partly with
   commenting on the writings of the earlier philosophers (particularly
   Themistius), partly as missionaries of their mysticism. The interests
   and aims of these philosophers are best shewn in the treatise "De
   mysteriis Ægyptiorum." Their hopes were strengthened when their
   disciple Julian, a man enthusiastic and noble, but lacking in
   intellectual originality, ascended the imperial throne, 361 to 363.
   This emperor's romantic policy of restoration, as he himself must have
   seen, had, however, no result, and his early death destroyed every hope
   of supplanting Christianity.

   But the victory of the Church in the age of Valentinian and Theodosius,
   unquestionably purified Neoplatonism. The struggle for dominion had led
   philosophers to grasp at and unite themselves with everything that was
   hostile to Christianity. But now Neoplatonism was driven out of the
   great arena of history. The Church and its dogmatic, which inherited
   its estate, received along with the latter superstition, polytheism,
   magic, myths and the apparatus of religious magic. The more firmly all
   this established itself in the Church and succeeded there, though not
   without finding resistance, the freer Neoplatonism becomes. It does not
   by any means give up its religious attitude or its theory of knowledge,
   but it applies itself with fresh zeal to scientific investigations and
   especially to the study of the earlier philosophers. Though Plato
   remains the divine philosopher, yet it may be noticed how, from about
   400, the writings of Aristotle were increasingly read and prized.
   Neoplatonic schools continue to flourish in the chief cities of the
   empire up to the beginning of the fifth century, and in this period
   they are at the same time the places where the theologians of the
   Church are formed. The noble Hypatia, to whom Synesius, her
   enthusiastic disciple, who was afterwards a bishop, raised a splendid
   monument, taught in Alexandria. But from the beginning of the fifth
   century ecclesiastical fanaticism ceased to tolerate heathenism. The
   murder of Hypatia put an end to philosophy in Alexandria, though the
   Alexandrian school maintained itself in a feeble form till the middle
   of the sixth century. But in one city of the East, removed from the
   great highways of the world, which had become a provincial city and
   possessed memories which the Church of the fifth century felt itself
   too weak to destroy, viz., in Athens, a Neoplatonic school continued to
   flourish. There, among the monuments of a past time, Hellenism found
   its last asylum. The school of Athens returned to a more strict
   philosophic method and to learned studies. But as it clung to religious
   philosophy and undertook to reduce the whole Greek tradition, viewed in
   the light of Plotinus' theory, to a comprehensive and strictly
   articulated system, a philosophy arose here which may be called
   scholastic. For every philosophy is scholastic which considers
   fantastic and mythological material as a noli me tangere, and treats it
   in logical categories and distinctions by means of a complete set of
   formulæ. But to these Neoplatonists the writings of Plato, certain
   divine oracles, the Orphic poems, and much else which were dated back
   to the dim and distant past, were documents of standard authority and
   inspired divine writings. They took from them the material of
   philosophy, which they then treated with all the instruments of
   dialectic.

   The most prominent teachers at Athens were Plutarch (died 433), his
   disciple Syrian (who, as an exegete of Plato and Aristotle, is said to
   have done important work, and who deserves notice also because he very
   vigorously emphasised the freedom of the will), but, above all, Proclus
   (411-485). Proclus is the great scholastic of Neoplatonism. It was he
   "who fashioned the whole traditional material into a powerful system
   with religious warmth and formal clearness, filling up the gaps and
   reconciling the contradictions by distinctions and speculations."
   "Proclus," says Zeller, "was the first who, by the strict logic of his
   system, formally completed the Neoplatonic philosophy and gave it, with
   due regard to all the changes it had undergone since the second
   century, that form in which it passed over to the Christian and
   Mohammedan middle ages. Forty-four years after the death of Proclus the
   school of Athens was closed by Justinian (in the year 529); but in the
   labours of Proclus it had completed its work, and could now really
   retire from the scene. It had nothing new to say; it was ripe for
   death, and an honourable end was prepared for it. The words of Proclus,
   the legacy of Hellenism to the Church and to the middle ages, attained
   an immeasurable importance in the thousand years which followed. They
   were not only one of the bridges by which the philosophy of the middle
   ages returned to Plato and Aristotle, but they determined the
   scientific method of the next thirty generations, and they partly
   produced, partly strengthened and brought to maturity the medieval
   Christian mysticism in East and West.

   The disciples of Proclus--Marinus, Asclepiodotus, Ammonius, Zenodotus,
   Isidorus, Hegias, Damascius--are not regarded as prominent. Damascius
   was the last head of the school at Athens. He, Simplicius, the masterly
   commentator on Aristotle, and five other Neoplatonists migrated to
   Persia after Justinian had issued the edict closing the school. They
   lived in the illusion that Persia, the land of the East, was the seat
   of wisdom, righteousness and piety. After a few years they returned
   with blasted hopes to the Byzantine kingdom.

   At the beginning of the sixth century Neoplatonism died out as an
   independent philosophy in the East; but almost at the same time, and
   this is no accident, it conquered new regions in the dogmatic of the
   Church through the spread of the writings of the pseudo-Dionysius; it
   began to fertilize Christian mysticism, and filled the worship with a
   new charm.

   In the West, where, from the second century, we meet with few attempts
   at philosophic speculation, and where the necessary conditions for
   mystical contemplation were wanting, Neoplatonism only gained a few
   adherents here and there. We know that the rhetorician, Marius
   Victorinus, (about 350) translated the writings of Plotinus. This
   translation exercised decisive influence on the mental history of
   Augustine, who borrowed from Neoplatonism the best it had, its
   psychology, introduced it into the dogmatic of the Church, and
   developed it still further. It may be said that Neoplatonism influenced
   the West at first only through the medium or under the cloak of
   ecclesiastical theology. Even Boethius--we can now regard this as
   certain--was a Catholic Christian. But in his mode of thought he was
   certainly a Neoplatonist. His violent death in the year 525, marks the
   end of independent philosophic effort in the West. This last Roman
   philosopher stood indeed almost completely alone in his century, and
   the philosophy for which he lived was neither original nor firmly
   grounded and methodically carried out.

   Neoplatonism and Ecclesiastical Dogmatic.

   The question as to the influence which Neoplatonism had on the history
   of the development of Christianity is not easy to answer; it is hardly
   possible to get a clear view of the relation between them. Above all,
   the answers will diverge according as we take a wider or a narrower
   view of so-called "Neoplatonism." If we view Neoplatonism as the
   highest and only appropriate expression for the religious hopes and
   moods which moved the nations of Græco-Roman Empire from the second to
   the fifth centuries, the ecclesiastical dogmatic which was developed in
   the same period may appear as a younger sister of Neoplatonism which
   was fostered by the elder one, but which fought and finally conquered
   her. The Neoplatonists themselves described the ecclesiastical
   theologians as intruders who appropriated Greek philosophy, but mixed
   it with foreign fables. Hence Porphyry said of Origen (in Euseb., H. E.
   VI. 19): "The outer life of Origen was that of a Christian and opposed
   to the law; but, in regard to his views of things and of the Deity, he
   thought like the Greeks, inasmuch as he introduced their ideas into the
   myths of other peoples." This judgment of Porphyry is at any rate more
   just and appropriate than that of the Church theologians about Greek
   philosophy, that it had stolen all its really valuable doctrines from
   the ancient sacred writings of the Christians. It is, above all,
   important that the affinity of the two sides was noted. So far, then,
   as both ecclesiastical dogmatic and Neoplatonism start from the feeling
   of the need of redemption, so far as both desire to free the soul from
   the sensuous, so far as they recognise the inability of man to attain
   to blessedness and a certain knowledge of the truth without divine help
   and without a revelation, they are fundamentally related. It must no
   doubt be admitted that Christianity itself was already profoundly
   affected by the influence of Hellenism when it began to outline a
   theology; but this influence must be traced back less to philosophy
   than to the collective culture and to all the conditions under which
   the spiritual life was enacted. When Neoplatonism arose ecclesiastical
   Christianity already possessed the fundamental features of its
   theology, that is, it had developed these, not by accident,
   contemporaneously and independent of Neoplatonism. Only by identifying
   itself with the whole history of Greek philosophy, or claiming to be
   the restoration of pure Platonism, was Neoplatonism able to maintain
   that it had been robbed by the church theology of Alexandria. But that
   was an illusion. Ecclesiastical theology appears, though our sources
   here are unfortunately very meagre, to have learned but little from
   Neoplatonism even in the third century, partly because the latter
   itself had not yet developed into the form in which the dogmatic of the
   church could assume its doctrines, partly because ecclesiastical
   theology had first to succeed in its own region, to fight for its own
   position and to conquer older notions intolerable to it. Origen was
   quite as independent a thinker as Plotinus; but both drew from the same
   tradition. On the other hand, the influence of Neoplatonism on the
   Oriental theologians was very great from the fourth century. The more
   the Church expressed its peculiar ideas in doctrines which, though
   worked out by means of philosophy, were yet unacceptable to
   Neoplatonism (the christological doctrines), the more readily did
   theologians in all other questions resign themselves to the influence
   of the latter system. The doctrines of the incarnation, of the
   resurrection of the body, and of the creation of the word, in time
   formed the boundary lines between the dogmatic of the Church and
   Neoplatonism; in all else ecclesiastical theologians and Neoplatonists
   approximated so closely that many among them were completely at one.
   Nay, there were Christian men, such as Synesius, for example, who in
   certain circumstances were not found fault with for giving a
   speculative interpretation of the specifically Christian doctrines. If
   in any writing the doctrines just named are not referred to, it is
   often doubtful whether it was composed by a Christian or a
   Neoplatonist. Above all, the ethical rules, the precepts of the right
   life, that is asceticism, were always similar. Here Neoplatonism in the
   end celebrated its greatest triumph. It introduced into the Church its
   entire mysticism, its mystic exercises, and even the magical ceremonies
   as expounded by Iamblichus. The writings of the pseudo-Dionysius
   contain a Gnosis in which, by means of the doctrines of lamblichus and
   doctrines like those of Proclus, the dogmatic of the Church is changed
   into a scholastic mysticism with directions for practical life and
   worship. As the writings of this pseudo-Dionysius were regarded as
   those of Dionysius the disciple of the Apostle, the scholastic
   mysticism which they taught was regarded as apostolic, almost as a
   divine science. The importance which these writings obtained first in
   the East, then from the ninth or the twelfth century also in the West,
   cannot be too highly estimated. It is impossible to explain them here.
   This much only may be said, that the mystical and pietistic devotion of
   to-day, even in the Protestant Church, draws its nourishment from
   writings whose connection with those of the pseudo-Areopagitic can
   still be traced through its various intermediate stages.

   In antiquity itself Neoplatonism influenced with special directness one
   Western theologian, and that the most important, viz., Augustine. By
   the aid of this system Augustine was freed from Manichaeism, though not
   completely, as well as from scepticism. In the seventh Book of his
   confessions he has acknowledged his indebtedness to the reading of
   Neoplatonic writings. In the most essential doctrines, viz., those
   about God, matter, the relation of God to the world, freedom and evil,
   Augustine always remained dependent on Neoplatonism; but, at the same
   time, of all theologians in antiquity he is the one who saw most
   clearly and shewed most plainly wherein Christianity and Neoplatonism
   are distinguished. The best that has been written by a Father of the
   Church on this subject, is contained in Chapters 9-21 of the seventh
   Book of his confessions.

   The question why Neoplatonism was defeated in the conflict with
   Christianity, has not as yet been satisfactorily answered by
   historians. Usually the question is wrongly stated. The point here is
   not about a Christianity arbitrarily fashioned, but only about Catholic
   Christianity and Catholic theology. This conquered Neoplatonism after
   it had assimilated nearly everything it possessed. Further, we must
   note the place where the victory was gained. The battle-field was the
   empire of Constantine, Theodosius and Justinian. Only when we have
   considered these and all other conditions are we entitled to enquire in
   what degree the specific doctrines of Christianity contributed to the
   victory, and what share the organisation of the Church had in it.
   Undoubtedly, however, we must always give the chief prominence to the
   fact that the Catholic dogmatic excluded polytheism in principle, and
   at the same time found a means by which it could represent the faith of
   the cultured mediated by science as identical with the faith of the
   multitude resting on authority.

   In the theology and philosophy of the middle ages mysticism was the
   strong opponent of rationalistic dogmatism; and, in fact, Platonism and
   Neoplatonism were the sources from which, in the age of the Renaissance
   and in the following two centuries, empiric science developed itself in
   opposition to the rationalistic dogmatism which disregarded experience.
   Magic, astrology, alchemy, all of which were closely connected with
   Neoplatonism, gave an effective impulse to the observation of nature
   and consequently to natural science, and finally prevailed over formal
   and barren rationalism. Consequently, in the history of science,
   Neoplatonism has attained a significance and performed services of
   which men like Iamblichus and Proclus never ventured to dream. In point
   of fact, actual history is often more wonderful and capricious than
   legends and fables.

   Literature.--The best and fullest account of Neoplatonism, to which I
   have been much indebted in preparing this sketch, is Zeller's Die
   Philosophie der Griechen, III. Theil, 2 Abtheilung (3 Auflage, 1881)
   pp. 419-865. Cf. also Hegel, Gesch. d. Philos. III. 3 ff. Ritter, IV.
   pp. 571-728: Ritter et Preller, Hist. phil. græc. et rom. § 531 ff. The
   Histories of Philosophy by Schwegler, Brandis, Brucker, Thilo,
   Strümpell, Ueberweg (the most complete survey of the literature is
   found here), Erdmann, Cousin, Prantl. Lewes. Further: Vacherot, Hist.
   de l'école d'Alexandria, 1846, 1851. Simon, Hist. de l'école
   d'Alexandria, 1845. Steinhart, articles "Neuplatonismus," "Plotin,"
   "Porphyrius," "Proklus " in Pauly, Realencyclop. des klass. Alterthums.
   Wagenmann, article "Neuplatonismus" in Herzog, Realencyklopädie f.
   protest. Theol. T. X. (2 Aufl.) pp. 519-529. Heinze, Lehre vom Logos,
   1872, p. 298 f. Richter, Neuplatonische Studien, 4 Hefte.

   Heigl, Der Bericht des Porphyrios über Origenes, 1835. Redepenning,
   Origenes I. p. 421 f. Dehaut, Essai historique sur la vie et la
   doctrine d'Ammonius Saccas, 1836. Kirchner, Die Philosophie des Plotin,
   1854. (For the biography of Plotinus, cf. Porphyry, Eunapius, Suidas;
   the latter also in particular for the later Neoplatonists.) Steinhart,
   De dialectica Plotini ratione, 1829, and Meletemata Plotiniana, 1840.
   Neander, Ueber die welthistorische Bedeutung des 9^ten Buchs in der
   2^ten Enneade des Plotinos, in the Adhandl. der Berliner Akademie,
   1843. p. 299 f. Valentiner, Plotin u. s. Enneaden, in the Theol. Stud.
   u. Kritiken, 1864, H. 1. On Porphyrius, see Fabricius, Bibl. gr. V. p.
   725 f. Wolff, Porph. de philosophia ex oraculis haurienda librorum
   reliquiæ, 1856. Müller, Fragmenta hist. gr. III. 688 f. Mai, Ep. ad
   Marcellam, 1816. Bernays, Theophrast. 1866. Wagenmann, Jahrbücher für
   Deutsche Theol. Th. XXIII. (1878) p. 269 f. Richter, Zeitschr. f.
   Philos. Th. LII. (1867) p. 30 f. Hebenstreit, de Iamblichi doctrina,
   1764. Harless, Das Buch von den ägyptischen Mysterien, 1858. Meiners,
   Comment. Societ. Götting. IV. p. 50 f. On Julian, see the catalogue of
   the rich literature in the Realencyklop. f. prot. Theol. Th. VII. (2
   Aufl.) p. 287; and Neumann, Juliani libr. c. Christ. quæ supersunt,
   1880. Hoche, Hypatia, in "Philologus," Th. XV. (1860) p. 435 f. Bach,
   De Syriano philosopho, 1862. On Proclus, see the Biography of Marinus
   and Freudenthal in "Hermes" Th. XVI. p. 214 f. On Boethius, cf.
   Nitzsch, Das System des Boëthius, 1860. Usener, Anecdoton Holderi,
   1877.

   On the relation of Neoplatonism to Christianity and its significance in
   the history of the world, cf. the Church Histories of Mosheim,
   Gieseler, Neander, Baur; also the Histories of Dogma by Baur and
   Nitzsch. Also Löffler, Der Platonismus, der Kirchenväter, 1782. Huber,
   Die Philosophie der Kirchenväter, 1859. Tzschirner, Fall des
   Heidenthums, 1829. Burckhardt, Die Zeit Constantin's des Grossen, p.
   155 f. Chastel, Hist. de la destruction du Paganisme dans l'empire
   d'Orient, 1850. Beugnot, Hist. de la destruction du Paganisme en
   Occident. 1835. E. v. Lasaulx, Der Untergang des Hellenismus, 1854.
   Bigg, The Christian Platonists of Alexandria, 1886. Réville, La
   réligion à Rome sous les Sévères, 1886. Vogt, Neuplatonismus und
   Christenthum, 1836. Ullmann, Einfluss des Christenthums auf Porphyrius,
   in Stud. und Krit., 1832.

   On the relation of Neoplatonism to Monasticism, cf. Keim, Aus dem
   Urchristenthum, 1178, p. 204 f. Carl Schmidt, Gnostische Schriften in
   Koptischer Sprache, 1892 (Texte u. Unters., VIII. 1. 2). See, further,
   the Monographs on Origen, the later Alexandrians, the three
   Cappadocians, Theodoret, Synesius, Marius Victorinus, Augustine,
   Pseudo-Dionysius, Maximus, Scotus Erigena and the Mediæval Mystics.
   Special prominence is due to Jahn, Basilius Plotinizans, 1838. Dorner,
   Augustinus, 1875. Bestmann, Qua ratione Augustinus notiones philos.
   Græcæ adhibuerit, 1877. Loesche, Augustinus Plotinizans, 1881.
   Volkmann, Synesios, 1869.

   On the after effects of Neoplatonism on Christian Dogmatic, see
   Ritschl, Theologie und Metaphysik. 2 Aufl. 1887.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [455] Excellent remarks on the nature of Neoplatonism may be found in
   Eucken, Gött. Gel. Anz., 1 März, 1884. p. 176 ff.: this sketch was
   already written before I saw them. "We find the characteristic of the
   Neoplatonic epoch in the effort to make the inward, which till then had
   had alongside of it an independent outer world as a contrast, the
   exclusive and all-determining element. The movement which makes itself
   felt here, outlasts antiquity and prepares the way for the modern
   period; it brings about the dissolution of that which marked the
   culminating point of ancient life, that which we are wont to call
   specifically classic. The life of the spirit, till then conceived as a
   member of an ordered world and subject to its laws, now freely passes
   beyond these bounds, and attempts to mould, and even to create, the
   universe from itself. No doubt the different attempts to realise this
   desire reveal, for the most part, a deep gulf between will and deed;
   usually ethical and religious requirements of the naive human
   consciousness must replace universally creative spiritual power, but
   all the insufficient and unsatisfactory elements of this period should
   not obscure the fact that, in one instance, it reached the height of a
   great philosophic achievement, in the case of Plotinus."

   [456] Plotinus, even in his lifetime, was reproached with having
   borrowed most of his system from Numenius. Porphyry, in his "Vita
   Plotini," defended him against this reproach.

   [457] On this sort of Trinity, see Bigg, "The Christian Platonists of
   Alexandria," p. 248 f.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1   [2]1:1

   Exodus

   [3]24:3   [4]25:9   [5]25:40   [6]26:30   [7]27:8

   Numbers

   [8]8:4

   1 Samuel

   [9]27:1-12

   Job

   [10]1880

   Psalms

   [11]2:2   [12]45:8   [13]51:19   [14]96:1-13   [15]110:1   [16]110:4
   [17]139:15-16

   Isaiah

   [18]7:1-25   [19]7:14   [20]7:14   [21]9:1   [22]29:13   [23]53:1-12

   Daniel

   [24]7:1-28   [25]7:13

   Micah

   [26]5:1

   Malachi

   [27]1:11

   Matthew

   [28]1:1-2:23   [29]5:1-48   [30]9:13   [31]16:1-28   [32]16:18
   [33]18:17   [34]19:17   [35]22:31   [36]24:36   [37]28:19   [38]28:19

   Mark

   [39]1:15   [40]5:18-19   [41]8:29   [42]10:45   [43]12:32-34
   [44]13:32

   Luke

   [45]1:4   [46]1:34-35   [47]8:45   [48]10:27-28   [49]12:41-46
   [50]24:26   [51]24:34   [52]24:34   [53]24:51

   John

   [54]1:1-51   [55]1:18   [56]1:30   [57]1:31   [58]3:13   [59]3:13
   [60]3:31   [61]4:2   [62]4:22   [63]4:24   [64]4:62   [65]5:17
   [66]5:21   [67]5:36   [68]6:1-71   [69]6:27-58   [70]6:33   [71]6:38
   [72]6:41   [73]6:44   [74]6:50   [75]6:58   [76]6:62   [77]8:14
   [78]8:38   [79]8:40   [80]8:58   [81]12:49   [82]15:15   [83]17:1-26
   [84]17:4   [85]17:24   [86]20:17   [87]20:28   [88]20:29   [89]32:9
   [90]88

   Acts

   [91]2:14   [92]2:32   [93]3:13   [94]10:42   [95]14:11   [96]15:22
   [97]19:5   [98]20:28   [99]24:5   [100]28:6   [101]28:31

   Romans

   [102]1:3   [103]1:3   [104]2:4   [105]3:1-8:39   [106]4   [107]4
   [108]5:1-21   [109]6   [110]6:1-2   [111]6:3   [112]6:3   [113]7
   [114]7:1-25   [115]8:1-39   [116]8:1-39   [117]8:3   [118]8:29
   [119]9:5   [120]10:6   [121]10:9   [122]13:1

   1 Corinthians

   [123]1:2   [124]1:12   [125]1:13   [126]3:2   [127]4:15   [128]9:5
   [129]9:9   [130]9:9   [131]10:4   [132]11:1   [133]11:10   [134]11:23
   [135]12:3   [136]12:3   [137]13:1-13   [138]15:1-11   [139]15:1-58
   [140]15:3   [141]15:5   [142]15:5   [143]15:5   [144]15:45

   2 Corinthians

   [145]4:4   [146]5:17   [147]8:9   [148]13:13

   Galatians

   [149]1:15   [150]1:15-16   [151]1:18   [152]1:22   [153]2:1-21
   [154]2:1-21   [155]2:8   [156]2:11   [157]3:16   [158]3:19
   [159]4:22-31   [160]4:26   [161]5:22

   Ephesians

   [162]1:1   [163]1:1   [164]1:4   [165]1:20   [166]1:22   [167]2:6
   [168]3   [169]3:5   [170]4:9   [171]7   [172]7   [173]7   [174]7
   [175]7:2   [176]9   [177]9   [178]10   [179]14   [180]14:2   [181]17
   [182]18   [183]19   [184]20   [185]20:1   [186]20:2

   Philippians

   [187]1:18   [188]2:5   [189]2:6   [190]2:9

   Colossians

   [191]1:15   [192]1:18   [193]269   [194]291   [195]409   [196]415
   [197]1155

   1 Timothy

   [198]2:5   [199]3:16   [200]3:16   [201]3:16   [202]6:20

   2 Timothy

   [203]4:1

   Titus

   [204]2:13   [205]2:13

   Hebrews

   [206]1:2   [207]10:25   [208]12:22   [209]13:16

   James

   [210]1:25   [211]1:27

   1 Peter

   [212]1:18   [213]1:20   [214]3:19

   2 Peter

   [215]1:1   [216]1:1   [217]3:2

   2 John

   [218]10:11

   Revelation

   [219]1:5   [220]2:3   [221]2:9   [222]2:9   [223]3:9   [224]3:9
   [225]3:14   [226]21:2

   4 Maccabees

   [227]5:24
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * auto`s eauto to`n lao`n to`n kaino`n etoima'zon: [228]1
     * i'na epignos perii` hon kateche'thes lo'gon te`n aspha'leian:
       [229]1
     * ku'rios: [230]1
     * o theo's: [231]1
     * ta` bibli'a: [232]1
     * chre` de` kai` pisteu'ein, o'ti ku'rios Iesous Christo`s kai` pase
       te teri` autou kata` te`n theoteta kai` te`n anthropo'teta;
       alethei'a dei` de` kai` eis to` a'gion pisteu'ein pneuma, kai` o'ti
       autexou'sioi o'ntes kolazo'metha me`n eph' hois amarta'nomen,
       timo'metha de` eph' hois eu prattomen.: [233]1
     * . . . . ou, katha'per a'n tis eika'seien a`nthropos, upere'ten
       tina` pe'mpsas e` a'ngelon e` a'rchonta e` tina ton diepo'nton ta`
       epi'geia e` tina ton pepisteume'non ta`s en ouranois dioike'seis,
       all' auto`n to`n techni'ten kai` demiourgo`n ton o'lon, k.t.l.:
       [234]1
     * . . . . ton lo'gon tou ku'riou Iesou, ou`s ela'kesen dida'skon:
       [235]1
     * . . . te`n ekklesi'an tou theou e`n periepoie'sato dia` tou
       ai'matos tou idi'ou: [236]1
     * Upe`r Kai'saros Autokra'ttoros theou : [237]1
     * Adelphoi', ou'tos dei emas phronein peri` Iesou, os peri` theou, os
       peri` kritou zo'nton kai` nekron: [238]1
     * Alethe`s Lo'gos: [239]1
     * Ap' arches atha'natoi' este kai` te'kna zoes este aioni'as, kai`
       to`n tha'naton ethe'lete meri'sasthai eis eautou's, i'na
       dapane'site auto`n kai` analo'sete, kai` apotha'ne' o tha'natos en
       umin kai` di' umon, o'tan ga`r to`n me`n ko'smon lu'ete, autoi de`
       me` katlu'esthe, kurieu'ete tes kri'seos kai` tes phthoras
       apa'ses.: [240]1
     * Basilei'a tou theou: [241]1
     * Diati' oun presbute'ra : [242]1
     * Did: [243]1
     * Didache`: [244]1 [245]2 [246]3
     * Didache` ku'rion dia` ton ib' aposto'lon: [247]1
     * Didache` ton aposto'lon: [248]1
     * Didache': [249]1
     * Du'o de` tinas sunistosin ek theou tetagme'nous, e'na me`n to`n
       Christo`n, e'na de` to`n dia'bolon. kai` to`n me`n Christo`n
       le'gousi tou me'llontos aionos eilephe'nai to`n kleron, to`n de`
       dia'bolon touton pepisteusthai on aiona, ek prostages dethen tou
       pantokra'toros kata` ai'tesin ekate'ron auton: [250]1
     * Du'o suneste ta` a'phesin amartema'ton parecho'mena, pa'thos dia`
       Christo'n kai` ba'ptisma.: [251]1
     * Ea'n muri'ous paidagogou`s e'chete en christo all' ou pollous
       pate'ras: [252]1
     * Enkra'teia: [253]1
     * Exelexa'men umas dodeka mathepa`s, k.t.l.: [254]1
     * Exegetika': [255]1
     * Epei` oude`n en ouk u'le'm ouk ousi'a, ouk aou'sion, ouk aploun,
       ouk su'ntheton, ouk ano'eton, ouk anai'stheton, ouk a'nthropos
       . . . . . . ouk o`n theo`s anoe'tos, anaisthe'tos abou'los
       aproaire'tos, apathos, anepithume'tios : [256]1
     * Epipha'nes, uio`s Karpokra'tous, e'zese ta` pa'nta e'te
       eptakai'deka kai' theo`s en Same tes Kephalleni'as teti'metai,
       e'ntha auto iero`n rhuton li'thon, bomoi', teme'ne, mouseion,
       okodo'metai' te kai' kathie'rotai, kai` sunio'ntes eis to` iero`n
       oi Kaphallenes kata` noumeni'an gene'thlion apothe'osin thu'ousin
       Epipha'nei, ppe'ndousi te kai` euochountai kai' u'mnoi le'gontai.:
       [257]1
     * Elle'non topho's tis: [258]1
     * Eis, iatro's estin sarkiko's te kai` pneumatiko's, genneto`s kai`
       age'nnetos, en sarki` geno'menos theo`s, en thana'to zoe`
       alethine', kai` ek Mari'as kai` ek theou, proton pathetos kai`
       to'te apathe's Iesous Christo`s o ku'rios emon.: [259]1
     * Emeis anapti'xantes ta`s bi'blous a`s ei'chomen ton propheton, a`
       me`n dia` parabolon a` de` dia` ainigma'ton e de` authentiko; kai`
       autolexei' to`n Christo`n Iesoun onomazo'nton, eu`rmen kai` te`n
       parousi'an autou kai` to`n thanaton kai` to`n stauro`n kai` ta`s
       loipa's kola'seis pa'sas, o`sas epoi'esan auto oi Ioudaioi, kai`
       te`n e'gersin kai` te`n eis ouranou`s ana'lepsin pro` tou
       Hierso'luma krithenai, katho`s ege'grapto tauta pa'nta a` e'dei
       auto`n pathein kai` met' auto`n a` e'stai; tauta oun epigno'ntes
       episteu'samen to theo dia` ton gegramme'non eis auto`n.: [260]1
     * Theo's: [261]1
     * I. Chr. o theo's o ou'tos umas pophi'sas: [262]1
     * Iesous: [263]1
     * Iesous Christo`s di' umas epto'cheusen plou'sios o'n: [264]1
     * Iesous eis touto etoimasthe, i'na . . . . emas lutrosa'menos ek tou
       sko'tous dia'thetai en emin diathe'ken lo'go.: [265]1
     * Ioudaioi kai` oi oli'go diaphe'rontes auton Ebionaioi: [266]1
     * Kai` schedo`n pa'ntes me`n Samareis, oli'goi de` kai` en a'llois
       e'thnesin, os to`n proton theo`n Si'mona omologountes, ekeinon kai`
       proskunousin: [267]1
     * Ke'rdon eis te`n ekklesi'an elthon kai` exomologou'menos, ou'tos
       diete'lese, pote` me`n lathrodidaskalon pote` de` pa'lin
       exomologou'menos, pote` de` elengo'menos eph' hois edi'daske kakos,
       kai` aphista'menos tes ton adelphon sunodi'as: [268]1
     * Mathe'se exes kai` te`n tou'tou arche'n te kai` ge'nnesin,
       axioume'ne tes apostolikes parado'seos, e` ek diadoches kai` emeis
       pareile'phamen, meta` kairou [sic] kanoni'sai pa'ntas tou`s lo'gous
       te tou soteros didaskali'a: [269]1
     * Marki'on sou to` o'noma epike'klentai oi upo sou epateme'noi os
       seauto`n keru'xantos kai` ouchi' Christo'n: [270]1
     * Me`ga'le Apo'phasis: [271]1
     * Monogene's: [272]1
     * Nous: [273]1 [274]2 [275]3 [276]4 [277]5 [278]6 [279]7 [280]8
       [281]9 [282]10 [283]11 [284]12 [285]13 [286]14
     * O Pe'tros apekri'the; o ku'rios emon ou'te theou`s einai
       ephthe'nxato para` to`n kti'santa ta` pa'nta ou'te eauto`n theo`n
       einai anego'reusen, uio`n de` theou tou ta` pa'nta diakosme'santos
       to`n eipo'nta auto`n eulo'gos emaka'risen kai` o Si'mon
       apekri'nato; ou dokei soi oun to`n apo` theo`n einai; kai` o
       Pe'tros e'phe; pos touto einai du'natai, phra'son emin, touto ga`r
       emeis eipein soi ou duna'metha o`ti me` ekou'samen par' autou.:
       [287]1
     * O'ti me`n oun kai` euchai kai` eucharisti'ai, upo' ton axi'on
       gino'menai, te'leiai mo'nai kai` eua'restoi eisi to theo thusi'ai,
       kai` auto's phemi: [288]1
     * O'ti, phesi'n, pa'nton pro'te ektisthe dia` touto presbute'ra, kai`
       dia` tau'ten o ko'smos katerti'sthe. : [289]1
     * Ouch os koino`n a'rton oude` koino`n po'ma tauta lamba'nomen, all'
       o'n tro'pon dia` lo'gou theou sarkopoietheis Iesous Christo`s o
       sote`r emon kai` sa'rka kai` aima uper soteri'as emon e'schen,
       ou'tos kai` te`n di' euches lo'gou tou par' autou eucharistetheisan
       trophe'n, ex hei aima kai` sa'rkes kata` metabole`n tre'phontai
       emon, ekei'nou tou sarkopoiethe'ntos Iesou kai` sa'rka kai` haima
       thdida'chthemen einai: [290]1
     * Pa'nta upomei'nas e`nkrate`s te`n theo'teta Iesous eirga'zeto.
       e`sthien ga`r kai` e'pien idi'os ouk apodidou`s ta` bro'mata,
       posau'te en auto tes enkratei'as du'namis, o'ste kai` me`
       phtharenai te`n trophe`n en auto epei` to` phthei'resthai auto`s
       ouk eichen.: [291]1
     * Pais: [292]1
     * Peri` archon: [293]1
     * Peri'odoi Pe'trou dia` Kle'mentos Anabathmoi` Iako'bou: [294]1
     * Pi'stis Sophi'a: [295]1
     * Pisteu'o eis theo`n pate'ra pantokra'tora kai` eis Chrito`n Iesoun
       (to`n) uio`n autou to`n monogene: [296]1
     * Proseuche` Iose'ph: [297]1
     * Seuerianoi` blasphemountes Paulon to`n apo'stolon athetousin autou
       ta`s epistola`s mede` ta`s pra'xeis ton aposto'lon katadecho'menoi:
       [298]1
     * Su` ei o theo`s mo'nos kai` Iesous Christo`s o pais sou kai` emeis
       lao's sou kai` pro'bata tes nomes sou: [299]1
     * Tati'anos Ioustinou akroate`s gegono's . . . . meta` de` te`n
       ekei'nou marturi'an aposta`s tes ekklesi'as, oie'mati didaska'lou
       eparthei`s . . . . i'dion charaktera didaskalei'ou suneste'sato.:
       [300]1
     * To` do'gmatos o'noma tes anthropi'nes e'chetai boules te kai`
       gno'mes. O'ti de` touth' ou'tos e'chei, marturei me`n, ikanos e
       dogmatike` ton iatron te'chne marturei de` kai` ta` ton
       philoso'phon kalou'mena do'gmata. O'ti de` kai` ta` sunkle'to
       do'xanta e'ti kai` nun do'gmata sunkle'tou le'getai, oude'na
       agnoein oimai.: [301]1
     * Ton ge me`n ermecheuton auton de` tou'ton iste'on, Ebionai'on to`n
       Su'mmachon gegone'nai . . . . kai` upomne'mata de` tou Summa'chou
       eise'ti nun pheretai, en ois dokei pro`s to` katu` Matthaion
       apoteino'menos euange'lion te`n dedelome'nen ai'resin kratu'nein:
       [302]1
     * To agaponi' emas kai` lu'santi emas ek tou amartion en to ai'mati
       auto, auto e do'xa: [303]1
     * Christo`s me`n kata` to` kechristhai kai` kosmesai ta pa'nta di'
       autou to`n theo`n le'getai: [304]1
     * Christo`s o ku'rios o so'sas emas o`n me`n to` proton pnethma
       ege'neto sa`rx kai` oo'tos emas eka'lesen: [305]1
     * Christo`s o ku'rios o so'sas emas, o`n me`n to` proton pneuma,
       ege'neto sa'rx kai` ou'tos emas eka'lesen: [306]1
     * Christo`s o'n theou lo'gos pro' aio'non: [307]1
     * Christo`s, o so'sas emas, o`n me`n to` proton pneuma kai` pa'ses
       kti'seos arche`, ege'neto sa'rx kai` ou'tos emas eka'lesen.: [308]1
     * Christos Iesous en morphe theou upa'rchon . . . . . eauto`n
       eke'nosen mo'rphen dou'lou labo'n, en omoio'mati anthro'pon
       geno'menos, kai` sche'mati eurethei`s os a'nthropos etapei'nosen
       eauto`n k.t.l.: [309]1
     * a'theoi: [310]1
     * a'nthropos: [311]1 [312]2
     * a'nthropos Christo`s Iesous: [313]1
     * a'nothen o'n: [314]1
     * a'rtos tes eucharisti'as: [315]1
     * a'phesis amartion, sarko`s: [316]1
     * a'phosis amartion: [317]1
     * aga'pe: [318]1
     * aga'pe a'phthartos.: [319]1
     * age'nnetos: [320]1
     * adelpho'tes: [321]1
     * athanasi'a: [322]1
     * athanasi'a (zoe` aio'nios): [323]1
     * alethei'a tes sarko's: [324]1
     * alla` to` me`n pneumatiko`n me` dedunesthai aute`n morphosai,
       epeide` omoou'sion uperche'n aute: [325]1
     * all' ereis; kai` me`n perite'tmetai o lao`s eis sphragida.: [326]1
     * ana'stasis: [327]1
     * ana'stasis sarko`s: [328]1
     * ana'stasis, zoe` aio'nios: [329]1
     * anazopure'santes en ai'mati theou: [330]1
     * anakephalai'osis: [331]1
     * anaplassein: [332]1
     * anasta'sis: [333]1 [334]2
     * anaste'seis te`n sa'rka mou tau'ten.: [335]1
     * ane'pte eis ourano`n o'then kai` heke, instead of o'then e'rchetai
       krinai zontas kai` nekrou's.: [336]1
     * anele'mphthe en do'xe: [337]1
     * ansitheseis: [338]1
     * apagoreu'o me'te sune'rchesthai tou`s artoko'kous kat' etairi'an
       me'te paresteko'tas thrasu'nesthai. peitha'rchein de pa'ntos tois
       upe`r tou koine sumphe'rontos epitattome'nois k.t.l. or the
       exhortation: kollasthe tois agi'ois, o'ti oi kollo'menoi autois
       agiasthe'sontai: [339]1
     * ape'thanen kata` ta`s grapha's: [340]1
     * apo` kataboles ko`smou: [341]1
     * apo` tou umete'rou ge'nous: [342]1
     * apo`stoloi, prophetai: [343]1
     * apo'deixin medemi'an peri` hon le'gousin e'chousin, alla` alo'gos
       os upo` lu'kou a'rnes suneprasme'noi ktl.: [344]1
     * apolu'trosis: [345]1 [346]2
     * aposto'lon ge'nomenos mathete`s gi`nomai dida'skalos ethnon, ta`
       paradothe'nta axi'os upereton ginome'nois alethei'as mathetais.:
       [347]1
     * ap' arches auto'ptais kai` upere'tais tou lo'gou: [348]1
     * arche` pa'ses kti'seos: [349]1
     * arche': [350]1 [351]2
     * aphtharsi'a: [352]1 [353]2
     * aph' eno`s patro's proelthon: [354]1
     * a' ego` e'oraka para` to patri` lalo: [355]1
     * a'gios: [356]1
     * a'ma to anabenai auto`n apo` tou potamou tou Iorda'nou, tes phones
       autou lechthei'ses uio's mou ei su', ego` se'meron gege'nneka' se:
       [357]1
     * ai kuriakai` graphai': [358]1
     * ai'resis, ekklesi'a: [359]1
     * auto`n de` metangizo'menon en so'masi pollois polla'kis kai` nun
       de` en to Iesou, omoi'os pote` me`n ek tou theou gegenesthai, pote`
       de` pneuma gegone'nai, pote` de` ek parthe'nou, pote` de` ou' kai`
       touton de` mete'peita aei` en so'mati metangi'zesthai kai` en
       pollois kata` kairou`s dei'knusthai: [360]1
     * auto`s de` ethe'lesen ou'to pathein; e'dei ga`r i'na epi` xu'lou
       pa'the: [361]1
     * auto`s de` i'na katarge'se to`n tha'naton kai` te`n ek nekron
       ana'stasin dei'xe, oti en sarki` e'dei auto`n phanerothenai,
       upe'meinen, i'na kai` tois patra'sin te`n epangeli'an apodo kai`
       auto`s eauto to`n lao`n to`n kaino`n etoima'zon, epidei'xe, tes ges
       o'n, o'tr te'n ona'stasig auto`s poie'sas krinei: [362]1
     * auto`s o dida'skalos emon kai` ku'rios: [363]1
     * autou: [364]1
     * autou me endunamountos tou telei'ou anthropou genome'nou, apart
       from the genome'nou: [365]1
     * haima I Chr. e'tis esti`n chara` aio'nios kai` para'monos.: [366]1
     * aima theou: [367]1
     * basilei'a tou theou: [368]1
     * basilei'a tou theou (christou): [369]1
     * basta'zein o'lon to`n zugo`n tou ku'riou: [370]1
     * ble'pe me'pote anabe epi` te`n kardi'an sou te`n sa'rka sou tau'ten
       phtharte`n einai.: [371]1
     * gennethe'nta dia` Mari'as: [372]1
     * gi'gnesthai sa'rx: [373]1
     * ginoskete o'ti heis theo`s estin o's arche`n pa'nton epoi'esen,
       kai` te'lous exousi'an e'chon: [374]1
     * gno'sis: [375]1 [376]2 [377]3
     * gno'sis kai` zoe': [378]1
     * gno'sis kai` zoe: [379]1
     * gno'sis tes zoes: [380]1
     * gnosis: [381]1
     * gnosis (ale'theia) kai` zoe` aio'nos: [382]1
     * gnosis soteri'as: [383]1
     * graphe`: [384]1
     * despo'tes: [385]1 [386]2
     * demiourgo`s kai` pater ton aio'non: [387]1
     * di`a: [388]1
     * dia`: [389]1
     * dia` te`n ekklesi'an o ko'smos katerti'sthe: [390]1
     * dia' tou egapeme'nou paido's sou Iesoun Christou: [391]1
     * dia'konoi: [392]1
     * dia'konos tou pepontho'tos theou: [393]1
     * diaaskaleion: [394]1
     * diakoni'a tou lo`gou: [395]1
     * diata'xeis ton aposto'lon: [396]1
     * dida'gmata Christou: [397]1
     * dida'gmata tou christou: [398]1
     * dida'skaloi: [399]1
     * dida'skalos: [400]1
     * dida'skein o'ti outo`s estin o christo`s tou theou: [401]1
     * dida'skein terein pa'nta o`sa enetei'lato o Iesous: [402]1
     * didache`, (lo'gos) ku'riou, didache` (ke'rugma) ton aposto'lon:
       [403]1
     * dikaiosu'ne ex e'rgon. : [404]1
     * dio` gnori'zo umin o'ti oudeis en pneu'mati theou lalon le'gei,
       ANAThEMA IESOUS, kai` oudeis du'natai eipein, KURIOS IESOUS ei me`
       en pneu'mati agi'o: [405]1
     * do'kesis: [406]1
     * do'xa: [407]1
     * du'o ousi'ai Christou: [408]1
     * dora, prosphorai': [409]1
     * e'doxen to pneu'mati to agi'o kai` emin: [410]1
     * e'thne: [411]1
     * e'i tis di optasi'an pro`s didaskali'an sophisthenai du'natai:
       [412]1
     * e'ktisas ta` pa'nta e'neken tou ono'matos sou: [413]1
     * e'nnomos politei'a: [414]1 [415]2
     * e'rchesthai (phanerousthai) en sarki': [416]1
     * e'sometha ek tes ekklesi'as tes pro'tes tes pneumatikes, tes pro`
       eli'ou kai` sele'nes ektisme'nes . . . . , ouk oi'omai de` umas
       agnoein, o'ti ekklesi'a zosa soma' estin Christou. le'gei ga`r e
       graphe'. Epoi'esen o theo`s to`n a'nthropon a'rsen kai` thelu. to`
       a'rsen esti`n o Christo's to`: [417]1
     * e'stin de` houtos o aio`n kai` o me'llon du'o echthroi'; houtos
       le'gei moichei'an kai` phthora`n kai` philargouri'an kai` apa'ten,
       ekeinos de` tou'tois aposta'ssetai: [418]1
     * ea`n o allo'phulos to`n no'mon pra'xe, Ioudaio's estin, me` pra'xas
       de' E'llen: [419]1
     * enkra'teia: [420]1
     * ego` ga`r pare'labon apo` tou kuri'ou, o` kai` pare'doka umin
       k.t.l.: [421]1
     * ego' se edo'xasa epi` tes ges to` e'rgon teleio'sas o de'dokas moi
       i'na poie'so· kai` nun do'xason me su', pa'ter, para` se'auto te
       do'xe e eichon pro` tou to`n ko'smon einai para` soi: [422]1
     * ek: [423]1
     * ek tes trophes tau'tes haima kai` sa'rkes kata` metabole`n
       tre'phontai emon (kata` metabole'n: [424]1
     * ekeinon zeto, to`n uper emon apothano'nta, ekeinon the'lo, to`n di'
       emas anasta'nta;: [425]1
     * eke'ruxas tois koimome'nois; nai': [426]1
     * ekklesi'a: [427]1 [428]2 [429]3 [430]4
     * ekklesi'a tou theou: [431]1 [432]2 [433]3
     * ekklesiastiko`s kano`n: [434]1
     * eklexa'menos doulo'n tina pisto` kai` eua'reston: [435]1
     * ekpeptoko'ta para` to`n tou diogmou kairo`n apo` tes eis Christo`n
       pi'steos epi' te`n Ioudaike`n ethelothreskei'an: [436]1
     * elutro'thete timi'o ai'mati o`s amnou amo'mou kai` aspi'lou
       Christou, proegnosme'nou me`n pro` kataboles ko'smou,
       phanerothe'ntos de` ep' escha'tou ton chro'non di' umas tou`s di'
       autou pistou`s eis theo`n to`n egei'ranta auto`n ek nekron kai`
       do'xan auto do'nta, o'ste te`n pi'stin umon kai` elpi'da einai eis
       theo'n.: [437]1
     * en anthro'pois theoi': [438]1
     * en arche en o lo'gos" the "pa'nta di' autou ege'neto" and the "o
       lo'gos sa'rx ege'neto: [439]1
     * en dikaiosune tou theou emon kai` soteros. I. Chr.: [440]1
     * en ko'mpo alazonei'as: [441]1
     * en morphe theou: [442]1
     * en hois theologeitai o christo's: [443]1
     * en uio (christo): [444]1
     * enarche: [445]1
     * eno'esa umas katertisme'nous en akine'to pi'stei, o'sper
       kathelome'nous en to stauro tou kuriou Iesou Christou sarki' te
       kai` pneu'mari kai` edrasme'nous en aga'pe en to ai'mari Christou,
       peplerophoreme'nous eis to`n kuri'ou emon, alethos o'nta ek ge'nous
       Dabi`d kata` sa'rka, uio`n theou kata` the'lema kai` du'namin
       theou, gegeneme'non alethos ek parthe'nou, bebaptisme'non upo`
       Ioa'nnou, i'na plerothe pasa dikaiosu'ne up' autou, alethos epi`
       Ponti'ou Pila'tou kai` Ero'dou tetra'rchou kathelome'non upe'r emon
       en sarki'--aph' hou karpou emeis, apo` tou theomakari'tou autou
       pa'thous--i'na a're su'ssemon eis tou's aionas dia' tes anasta'seos
       eis tou's agi'ous kai` pistou`s autou ei'te en Ioudai'ois ei'te en
       i'thnesin en eni` so'mate tes ekklesi'as autou.: [446]1
     * entlai (enta'lmata): [447]1
     * epangeli'a (zoe` aionios) gnosis (alethei'a) no'mos (enkra`te'ia):
       [448]1
     * epangeli'a, gnosis, no'mos: [449]1
     * epi` to` auto` sunercho'menoi sunzeteite peri` tou koine
       sumphe'rontos: [450]1
     * epi` to pa'thei tou upsi'stou: [451]1
     * epi`skopos episko'pon: [452]1
     * epi'skopoi: [453]1 [454]2
     * epi'skopoi dai'mones: [455]1
     * epi'skopos: [456]1
     * episkopoi: [457]1
     * epitre'psate' moi mimete`n einai tou pathous tou theou mou: [458]1
     * epipha'neia: [459]1
     * e'na a'rton klontes o's estin pha'rmakon athanasi'as, anti'dotos
       tou me` atothanein alla` zen en Iesou Christou dia` panto's.:
       [460]1
     * ete'ra meta'noia ouk e'stin ei me` ekei'ne, o'te eis u'dor
       kate'bemen kai` ela'bomen a'phesin amartion emon ton prote'ron:
       [461]1
     * ei ga`r me'chri nun kata` no'mon, Ioudaismo`n zomen omologoumen
       cha'rin me` eilephe'nai: [462]1
     * ei ga`r me' elthen en sarki', oud' a'n pos oi a'nthropoi eso'thesan
       ble'pontes auto'n; o'te to`n me'llonta me` einai e'lion
       emble'pontes ouk ischu'sousin eis ta`s aktinas autou
       antophthalmesai: [463]1
     * ei en te zoe tau'te` en christo elpiko'tes esme`n mo'non,
       eleeino'teroi pa'nton anthro'pon esme'n: [464]1
     * eiko'tos Ioudai'oi's me`n no'mos, E'llesi de` philosophi'a me'chris
       tes parousi'as enteuthen de` e klesis e katholike': [465]1
     * eis a'phesin amartion: [466]1
     * eis exousi'an mega'len kai` kuriu'teta: [467]1
     * eis to` a'phesin amartion: [468]1
     * eis to` o'noma: [469]1
     * eis to` o'noma : [470]1
     * eis to` o'noma tou patro`s, kai` tou uiou, kai` tou agi'ou
       rneu'matos: [471]1
     * eisi` ga`r tines aire'seis ta`s Pau'lou epistola`s tou aposto'lou
       me` prosie'menai o'sper Ebionaioi ampho'teroi kai` oi kalou'menoi
       ?Snkratetai': [472]1
     * ei?s estin o agatho's: [473]1
     * euange'lion (kuri'on): [474]1
     * euange'lion kuri'ou: [475]1
     * eucharisti'a: [476]1 [477]2
     * eucharisti'an poiein: [478]1
     * eucharisti'as kai` proseuches ape'chontai dia` to` me` omologein,
       te`n eucharisti'an sa'rka einei tou soteros emon Iesou Christou,
       te`n upe`r ton amartion emon pathousan.: [479]1
     * eucharistoume'n soi upe`r tes gnoseos kai` pi'steos kai`
       athanasi'as.: [480]1
     * eucharistoume'n soi, pa'ter a'gie, uper tou agi'ou ono'mato's sou,
       ou kaeske'nosas en tais kardi'as emon kai` upe'r tes gno'seos kai`
       pi'steos ai' athanasi'as, hes egno'risas emin dia` Iesou tou taidos
       sou: [481]1
     * eucharistoume'n soi, pa'ter emon uper tes zoes kai` gno'seos hes
       egno'risas emin dia` Iesou tou paido's sou: [482]1
     * eidr se pro` posou'tou aionos, Ermo'dore, e Si'bulla ekei'ne, kai`
       to'te estha: [483]1
     * heis de` estin agatho's, hou pa'rousi'a e dia` tou uiou
       phane'rosis: [484]1
     * heis theo`s, heis no'mos, mi'a elpi's: [485]1
     * zetei to` koinophele`s pasin kai` me` to` eautou: [486]1
     * zoe` aio'nios: [487]1
     * zoe`n aio'nion: [488]1
     * e arche` tes kti'seos tou theou: [489]1
     * e gno'me tou patro's: [490]1
     * e gnosis tou theou: [491]1
     * e graphe`, ta` bibli'a: [492]1
     * e de` paradexame'ne to` tou theou spe'rma telespho'rois odisi to`n
       mo'non kai` agapeto`n aistheto`n uio`n apeku'ese to`nde to`n
       ko`smon: [493]1
     * e didaskalia tou soteros: [494]1
     * e ek logi'on philosophi'a: [495]1
     * e ekklesi'a: [496]1
     * e ekklesi'a tou theou: [497]1
     * e para'dosis-- o paradothei`s lo'gos-- o kano`n tes alethei'as or
       te`s parado'seos--e pi'stis-- o kano'n tes pi'steos--: [498]1
     * e trophe` au'te kalheitai par' emin eucharisti'a: [499]1
     * e'tis esti`n me'ter emon, gennosa eis e`n epengeila'metha agi'an
       ekklesi'an.: [500]1
     * egapeme'nos: [501]1
     * egou'menoi: [502]1
     * emeis di' euches timomen to`n theo`n, kai` tau'ten te`n thusi'an
       ari'sten, kai` agiota'ten meta` dikaiosu'nes anape'mpomen to
       dikai'o lo'go: [503]1
     * emeis kai` Pe'tron kai` tou`s a'llous aposto'lous apodecho'metha os
       Christo'n: [504]1
     * emeis oi Christo`n to`n basile'a e'chomen, o'ti alethino`s theo's
       estin kai` poiete`s ouranou kai` ges kai` thala'sses. : [505]1
     * emeis proskunoumen o` oi'damen: [506]1
     * emeis tou's aposto'lous apodecho'metha os Christo`n: [507]1
     * emin de` echari'so, de'spota, pneumatike`n trophe'n kai` poto`n
       kai` zoe`n aio'nion dia` tou paido's sou: [508]1
     * emas basilei'an, iereis to theo kai` patri` autou: [509]1
     * emin echari'so pneumatike`n trophe`n kai` poto`n kai` zoe`n
       aio'nion: [510]1
     * emon: [511]1
     * thee` Iesou Christe': [512]1
     * theo`n pa'tera pantokra'tora: [513]1
     * theo`n pantokra'tora: [514]1
     * theo`n prosagoreu'ontes; ei kai' me'chri nun os a'nthropon
       ephobe'themen, alla` tou'nteuthen krei'ttona se thnetes tes
       phu'seos omologoumen: [515]1
     * theo`s: [516]1 [517]2 [518]3
     * theo`s Adriano's: [519]1
     * theo`s gi'netai ton lambano'nton: [520]1
     * theo`s en en arche te`n de` arche`n lo'gou du'namin pareile'phamen:
       [521]1
     * theo`s kai` theo`s uio`s: [522]1
     * theo`s monogene's: [523]1
     * theo`s sote'r: [524]1 [525]2
     * theo`s t. alethei'as: [526]1
     * theo`s o`n omou te kai` a'nthropos: [527]1
     * theo`s o'n en arche pro's to`n theo'n, : [528]1
     * theo's: [529]1 [530]2 [531]3 [532]4 [533]5 [534]6 [535]7 [536]8
       [537]9 [538]10
     * theo's Seoueros Eusebes: [539]1
     * theo's ek theou: [540]1
     * theo's,": [541]1
     * theo's--christos--oi do'deka aposto'loi--ekklesi'ai: [542]1
     * theoi': [543]1
     * theopiie'sis: [544]1
     * theopoi'esis: [545]1 [546]2
     * theopoie'sis: [547]1
     * theos: [548]1
     * theo exomologou'metha dia` I. Chr.--theo do'xa dia' I. Chr: [549]1
     * thi'asos: [550]1
     * threskei'a kathara` kai` ami'antos para` to the'o kai` patri` au'te
       esti'n, episke'ptesthai orpha'nous kai` che'ras en te thli'psei
       auton: [551]1
     * thu'ein: [552]1
     * thusi'a: [553]1 [554]2 [555]3
     * thusiaste'rion: [556]1
     * thelu e ekklesi'a: [557]1
     * i'de pa'lin Iesous, ouchi` uio`s anthro'pou alla` uio`s tou theou,
       tu'po de` en sarki` phanerothei's: [558]1
     * i'dios, proto'pokos: [559]1
     * i'na kai` e sa'rx au'te, douleu'sasa to pneu'mari ame'mptos, sche
       to'pon tina` kataske'no'seos, kai` me` doxe to`n mistho`n tes
       doulei'as autes apololeke'nai.: [560]1
     * ka'go` ouk e'dein auto'n, all' i'na phanerothe' to Isra`el dia`
       touto elthon, V. 19: ou du'natai o uio`s poiein aph' eautou oude`n
       a'n me' ti ble'pe to`n pate'ra poiounta: [561]1
     * katholikoi': [562]1
     * katho`s auto`s enetei'lato kai` oi euangelisa'menoi emas apo'stoloi
       kai` oi prophetai oi prokeru'xantes te`n e'leusin tou kuri'ou
       emon.: [563]1
     * kai` auto`s ta`s amarti'as auton ekatha'rise) polla` kopia'sas kai`
       pollou`s ko'pou`s entleko's: [564]1
     * kai` ga`r pa'ntes apeklei'sthesan eis touto a'kontes eipein, o'ti
       to` pan eis e'na anatre'chei. ei oun ta` pa'nta eis e'na
       anatre'chei kai` kata` thu'alentinon kai` kata` Marki'ona.
       Ke'ri'ntho'n te` kai` pasan te`n ekei'non phluari'an, kai` a'kontes
       eis touto perie'pesan, i'na to`n e'na o'mologe'sosin ai'tion ton
       pa'nton ou'tos oun suntre'chousin kai` autoi` me` the'lontes te
       alethei'a e'na theo`n le'gein poie'santa os ethe'lsen: [565]1
     * kai` ekklesiastikoi': [566]1
     * kai` emon (estin): [567]1
     * kai` me' lege'to tis umon o'ti au'te e sa`rx ou kri'netai oude`
       ani'statai.: [568]1
     * kai` o a'rtos kai` to` e'laion agia'zetai te du'namei tou ono'matos
       ou ta` auta` o'nta kata` to` phaino'menon hoia ele'phthe, alla`
       duna'mei eis du'namin pneumatike'n metabe'bletai: [569]1
     * kai` oi apo'stoloi; to` euange'lion: [570]1
     * kai` ou dei emas mikra` phronein peri` tes soteri'as emon; en tho
       ga`r phronein emas mikra` peri` autou, mikra` kai' elrizomen
       labein: [571]1
     * kai` to`n Christo`n de` ouk apo` ton en to plero'mati aio'non
       probeblesthai, alla` upo` tes metro`s, e'xo de` genome'nes, kata`
       te`n gno'men ton kreitto'non apokekuesthai meta` skias tino's. Kai`
       touton me'n, a'te a'rrena upa'rchonta, apoko`psanta uph' eautou
       te`n skia`n, anadramein eis to` ple'roma.: [572]1
     * kai` touton einai to`n kat' eiko'na kai` omoi'osin gegono'ta; kat'
       eiko'na me`n to`n uliko`n upa'rchein, paraple'sion me`n, all' ouch
       omoou'sion to theo kath' omoi'osin de` to`n psuchiko'n.: [573]1
     * kai' ga`r eisi tines, he says, apo` tou imete'rou ge'nous
       omologountes auto`n Christo`n einai, a'nthropon de` ex anthro'pon
       geno'menon apophaino'menoi, hois ou sunti'themai: [574]1
     * kainos to`n theo`n dia` tou Psristou sebo'metha.: [575]1
     * kano`n de` ekklesiastiko's e sunodi'a kai` sumphoni'a no'mou te
       kai` propheton te kata` te`n tou kuri'ou parousi'an paradidome'ne
       diathe'ke: [576]1
     * kano`n ekklesiastiko's: [577]1
     * kano`n tes parado'seos: [578]1
     * kano'n ekklesiastiko`s e` pros tou`s Ioudai'zontas: [579]1
     * kata` Christo'n: [580]1
     * kata` gno'men or kata` phu'sin: [581]1
     * kata` ke'leusi'n tou kuri'ou umon, k.o`.l.: [582]1
     * kata` pneuma: [583]1
     * kata` pneuma and kata` sa'rka: [584]1
     * kata` pan ge'nos anthro'pon: [585]1
     * kata` sa'kra, kata` pneuma: [586]1
     * kata` sa'rka: [587]1
     * kata` sa'rka--kata` pneuma: [588]1
     * kata` tneuma: [589]1
     * kata'skopos: [590]1
     * kataba's-anaba's: [591]1
     * kat' a'llon de' tro'pon le'gesthai theo`n zoon atha'naton logiko`n
       spoudaion, o'ste pasan astei'an psuche'n theo`n upa'rchein, ka`n
       perio'chetai, a'llos de` lenesthai theo`n to` kath' auto` o'n zonn
       atha'naton os ta` en anthropois sophois periechome'nas psucha`s me`
       upa'rchein theou's). : [592]1
     * kat' alethei'an: [593]1
     * kat' exoche'n: [594]1 [595]2
     * kekteme'noi adia'kriton pneuma, o's estin Iesous Christo`s.: [596]1
     * kekteme'noi adia'kriton pneuma, os estin Iesous Christo`s: [597]1
     * kenousthai, tapeinousthai, ptocheu'ein.: [598]1
     * keru'ssein te`n Basilei'an tou theou, kai` dida'skein ta` peri` tou
       kuri'ou Iesou Christou.: [599]1
     * klesis: [600]1
     * klesis tes epangeli'as, and the entolai` tes didaches: [601]1
     * klesis tes epangeli'as.: [602]1
     * ko`smos: [603]1
     * ko'smon: [604]1
     * ko'smon ethe'lese poiesai . . . . . . Ou'tos ouk o`n theo`s
       apoi`ese ko'smon ouk o'nta ex ouk o'nton, katabalo'menos kai`
       uposte'sas sperma ti e`n e'chon pasan en eauto tes tou ko'smou
       panstermi'an.: [605]1
     * ko'smos: [606]1
     * ko'smos noeto's: [607]1
     * koino`s a'rtos: [608]1
     * kollasthe tois agi'ois, o'ti oi kollo'menoi autois agiasthe'sontai:
       [609]1
     * kotmokra'tor: [610]1
     * krio`s epi'semos ek mega'lou poimni'ou eis prosphora'n, olokau'toma
       dekto`n to theo atoimasme'non.: [611]1
     * krite`s zo'nton kai` nekron: [612]1
     * ku'rio's, a'ngelos theou, theo`s en anthro'pois: [613]1
     * ku'rios: [614]1 [615]2
     * ku'rios = despotes: [616]1
     * ku'rios zo'nton: [617]1
     * ku'rios, a'ngelos, kata'skopos, epi'skopos, theo`s : [618]1
     * ku'rios, sote'r: [619]1
     * lalountes to`n lo'gon: [620]1
     * lao`s o tou egapeme'nou o philou'menos kai` philon autno'n: [621]1
     * le'gei o theo's: [622]1
     * lo`gos: [623]1
     * lo`gos theou dia` Iesou Christou dia` ton aposto'lon.: [624]1
     * lo'gia: [625]1
     * lo'goi: [626]1 [627]2
     * lo'gos: [628]1 [629]2 [630]3
     * lo'gos alethe's: [631]1 [632]2
     * lo'gos apoura'nios: [633]1
     * lo'gos theou': [634]1
     * lo'gos theou and lo'gos christou: [635]1
     * lo'gos theou, didache' ku'riou, ke'rugma ton do'deka aposto'lon :
       [636]1
     * lo'gos megalosu'nes tou theou: [637]1
     * lo'gos tou theou: [638]1
     * lo'gos tes pi'steos: [639]1
     * lu'trn: [640]1
     * ma'thesis: [641]1
     * mathe'tas: amen: [642]1
     * mathetai': [643]1
     * mega'le exousia kai` kurio'tes: [644]1
     * mesi'tes: [645]1
     * meta'basis eis a'llo ge'nos: [646]1
     * meta'noia: [647]1
     * me` arneisthai o'ti outo's estin o Christo`s, ea`n phai'netai os
       a'nthropos ex anthro'pon gennethei`s kai` ekloge geno'menos eis to`
       Christo`n einai apodeiknu'etai: [648]1
     * me` dein o'los exeta'zein to`n lo'gon, all' ekaston, os
       pepi'steuke, diame'nein. Sothe'sesthai ga`r tou`s eti' to`n
       estarome'non elpiko'tas apephai'neto, mo'non ea`n en e'rgois
       agathois euri'skontai . . . . to` de` pos e'sti mi'a arche', me`
       gino'skein e'legen, ou'to de` kineisthai mo'non . . . . me`
       epi'stasthai pos heis esti`n age'nnetos theo's, touto de`
       pisteu'ein.: [649]1
     * me` euri'okontes te`n diai'resin ton pragma'ton, os oude` ekeinos,
       duo` archa`s apephe'nanto psilos kai` anapodei'ktos: [650]1
     * me` o'n: [651]1
     * mede` kata` Ioudai'ous se'besthe; kai` ga`r ekeinoi mo'noi
       oio'menoi to`n theo`n gigno'skein ouk epi'stantai, latreu'ontes
       ange'lois kai` archange'lois, meni` kai` sele'ne, kai` ea`n me`
       sele'ne phane, sa'bbaton ouk agousi to` leko'menon proton, oude`
       geomeni'an a'gousin, oude` a'zuma, oude` eorte'n, oude` mega'len
       eme'ran.: [652]1
     * mi'a arche`: [653]1
     * mi'a e pa'nton ge'gone ton aposto'lon o'sper didaskali'a ou'tos de`
       kai` e para'dosis;: [654]1
     * mnemoneu'ontes hon eipen o kuri'os dida'skon: [655]1
     * mo`nos alethino`s: [656]1
     * mon: [657]1
     * monogene`s the'os: [658]1
     * mustagogi'a: [659]1
     * muste'rion: [660]1
     * nekron: [661]1
     * neo'teroi: [662]1
     * neo'teros uio's: [663]1
     * no`mos: [664]1
     * no'mos a'neu zugou ana'nkes: [665]1
     * no'mos t. eleutheri'as: [666]1
     * no'mos tneumatiko's: [667]1
     * no'mou politei'a: [668]1
     * nomi'zontes apo` Mari'as kai` deuro Christo`n auto`n kaleisthai
       kai' uio`n theou, kai` einai me`n pro'teron psilo`n a'nthropon,
       kata` prokope`n de` eilephe'nai te`n tou uiou tou theou
       prosegori'an: [669]1
     * nouthetein kai` ele'nchein: [670]1
     * nous: [671]1
     * o Iesous upe'meinen pathein, k.t.l.: [672]1
     * o Pe'tros e'kkritos en ton aposto'lon kai` pto'ma ton matheton kai`
       koruphe' tou so'rou.: [673]1
     * o a'nothen e`rcho'menos epa'no pa'nton estin. o o'n ek tes ges ek
       tes ges estin kai` ek tes ges lalei o ek tou ouranou ercho'menos
       epa'no pa'nton estin: [674]1
     * o agatho`s emon theo`s o eu'splanchnos, o elee'mon, o a'gios, o
       katharo's, o ami'antos, o mo'nos, o heis, o ameta'bletos, o
       eilikrine's, o a'dolos, o me` orgizo'menos, o pases emin legome'nes
       e` nooume'nes prosegori'as ano'teros kai` upselo'teros emon theo`s
       Iesous: [675]1
     * o agapeto`s pais: [676]1
     * o bi'os emon o'los a'llo oude`n en ei me` tha'natos: [677]1
     * o ga`r auto`s houtos paidagogo`s to'te me`n "phobethe'se ku'rion
       to`n theo`n e'legen, emin de` "a`gape'seis ku'rion to`n theo`n sou"
       tarenesen. dia` touto kai` ente'lletai emin "pau'sasthe apo` ton
       e'rgon umon" ton talaion amartion, "ma'thete kalo`n poiein,
       e'kklinon apo` kakou kai` poi'eson agatho'n, ega'pesas
       dikaiosu'nen, emi'sesas anomi'an" au'te mou e ne'a diathe'ke
       palai`o kecharagme'ne gra'mmati.: [678]1
     * o ga`r lalon pro`s umas, ego Iako`b kai` Israe'l, a'ngelos theou
       eimi` ego` kai` pneuma archiko`n kai` Abraa`m kai` Isaa`k
       proekti'sthesan pro pantos e'rgou, ego` de` Iako`b . . . . ego`
       protogonos panto` zo'os zooume'nou upo` theou." : [679]1
     * o dotheisa pi'stis--to` ke'rugma--ta` dida`gmata tou christou--e
       didache`--ta` mathe'mata, or to` ma'thema: [680]1
     * o e'schatos Ada`m eis pneuma zoopoioun, all' ou proton to`
       pneumatiko`n alla` to` psuchiko'n, e'peita to` pneumatiko'n. o
       protos a'nthropos ek ges choiko's o deu'teros a'nthropos ex
       ouranou: [681]1
     * o eklexa'menos emas eis apostole`n ethnon, o ekpe'mpsas emas eis
       te`n oikoume'nen theo's, o deixas eauto`n dia` ton apostolon:
       [682]1
     * o emo`s e'ros estau'rotai kai` ouk e'stin en emoi` pur philoulon.:
       [683]1
     * o eu'splanchnos theo's kai` kurio's emon Iesous Christo`s ouk
       ebou'leto apole'sthai ma'rtura ton idi'on pathema'ton: [684]1
     * o theo`s (ku'rios) le'gei.: [685]1
     * o theo`s e'doken to`n Christo`n kephale`n upe`r pa'nta te ekklesi'a
       e'tis esti`n to` soma autou: [686]1
     * o theo`s exele'xato emas en Christo pro` kataboles ko'smou: [687]1
     * o theo`s emon: [688]1
     * o theo`s pe'ponthen upo` dexia's Israeliti'dos: [689]1
     * o theo`s to`n eautou uio`n po'mpsas en omoio'mati sarko`s amarti'as
       kai` peri` amarti'as kate'krinen te`n amarti'an en te sarki':
       [690]1
     * o theo`s umin ego` e'de katastre'phein epita'ttomai to`n bi'on
       . . . . o kletheis atha'natos uph' emon e'de thanein apa'gomai:
       [691]1
     * o theo`s, o eklexa'menos to`n ku'rion Iesoun Christo`n kai` emas
       di' autou eis lao`n periou'sion don. k.t.l.: [692]1
     * o theo's: [693]1
     * o theo's Da'bid: [694]1
     * o theo's emon: [695]1
     * o theo's mou: [696]1
     * o ku'rios: [697]1 [698]2 [699]3 [700]4
     * o ku'rios (emon): [701]1
     * o ku'rios kai` dida'skalos emon heipen: [702]1
     * o lao`s o'n etoi'masen en to egapemo'no autou.: [703]1
     * o lo'gos sa'rx ege'neto: [704]1
     * o monogene`s pais: [705]1
     * o pate`r kai` kti'stes tou su'mpantos ko'smou: [706]1
     * o sote`r emon: [707]1
     * o`per esti'n o Christo's: [708]1
     * o`s a`n oun eltho'n dida'xe umas tauta pa'nta ta` proeireme'na,
       de'xasthe auto'n.: [709]1
     * o'pos to`n arithmo`n to`n katerithmeme'non ton eklekton autou en
       o'lo ko'smo diaphula'xe a'thrauston o demiourgo`s ton apa'nton dia`
       tou egapeme'nou paido`s autou Iesou Christou.: [710]1
     * o'son du'nasai agneu'seis: [711]1
     * o'te eudo'kesen o theo`s apokalu'psai to`n uio`n autou en emoi':
       [712]1
     * o'te eudo'kesen o theo`s apokalu'pssai to`n uio`n autou en emoi`:
       [713]1
     * o'te etosen o dida'skalos to`n a`rton kai` to` pote'rion kai`
       eulo'gesen auta` le'gon; touto esti to` soma' mou kai` to` haima,
       ouk epe`trepse tau'tais the women) sustenai emin . . . . Ma'rtha
       eipen dia` Maria'm, o'ti eiden aute`n meidiotan. Mari'a eipen
       ouke'ti ege'lasa.: [714]1
     * o'te etesen o didaska'los to`n a'rton: [715]1
     * o'ti a diathe'ke ekei'non: [716]1
     * o'ti eo'rakas me pepi'steukas, makarioi oi me` idontes kai`
       piste'usantes: [717]1
     * omoio'mati sarko`s amarti'as: [718]1
     * omologi'an einai te`n me`n en te pi'stei kai` politei'a, te`n de`
       en phone; e me`n oun en phone omologia kai` epi` ton exousion
       gi'netai, e'n mo'nen omologi'an egountai einai oi polloi', ouch
       ugios du'nantai de` tau'ten te`n omologi'an kai` oi upokrisai`
       omologein.: [719]1
     * omoou'sios: [720]1
     * oikonomi'a eis to`n kaino`n a'nthropon Iesoun Christo'n: [721]1
     * oi apo'stoloi emin euengeli'sthesan apo` tou kuri'ou Iesou
       Christou, Iesous o christo`s apr tou theou exepo'mphthe. o
       christo`s oun apo` tou theou, kai` oi apo'stoloi apo` tou Christou;
       ege'nonto oun ampho'tera euta'ktos ek thele'matos theou k.t.l.:
       [722]1
     * oi aute`n tes apolutro'seos emin pi'stin kai` elpida e'chontes:
       [723]1
     * oi dokountes e'chein theo`n: [724]1
     * oi ku'rioi: [725]1
     * oi orthegno'menes kata` pa'nta christanoi' eisin: [726]1
     * oi peri` to`n Petro`n: [727]1
     * oi prophetai, apo` tou ku'riou echontes te`n cha'rin, eis auto`n
       eprophe'teusan.: [728]1
     * oi prophetai kata` Christo`n Iesoun e'zesan: [729]1
     * ou pa'ntote' se os thea'n egesa'men: [730]1
     * ou'te christianoi` upa'rchontei ou'te Ioudaioi ou'te E'llenes,
       alla` me'son aplos upa'rchontes: [731]1
     * oude` ga'r xoe` a'neu gno'seos oude` gnosis asphale`s a'neu zoes
       alethous; dio` plesion eka'teron pephu'teutai: [732]1
     * oudei`s anabe'beken eis to`n ourano`n ei me` o ek tou ouranou
       kataba's, o uio`s tou anthro'pou: [733]1
     * oudei`s du'natai elthein pro`s me, ea'n me` o pate`r o pe'mpsas me
       elku'se auto`n: [734]1
     * oudei`s pi'stin epangello'menos amarta'nei: [735]1
     * ouchi` tauta e'dei pathein to`n Christo`n kai' euselthein eis te`n
       do'xan autou?: [736]1
     * ouchi` uio`s anthro'pou all: uio`s tou theou, topo de` en sarki`
       phanerothei's: [737]1
     * ou'tos du'namin labousa kuriake`n e psuche` meleta einai theo's,
       kako`n me`n oude`n a'llo ple`n agnoi'as einai nomi'zousa: [738]1
     * ou'tos kai` to` u'dor kai` to` exorkizo'menon kai` to` bapti'sma
       gino'menon ou mo'non chorei to` cheiron, alla` kai` agiasmo`n
       pposlamba'nei.: [739]1
     * oun: [740]1
     * houto`s, katha' phesin Ippo'botos, eis posos ton teratei'as
       e'lasen, o'ste Erinu'os analabo`n schema perieei, le'gon episkopos
       aphichthai ex A'idou ton amarto'me'non, o'pos pa'lin katio`n tasta
       apange'lloi tois ekei, dai'mosin: [741]1
     * houtos o aio'n: [742]1
     * pa'thos: [743]1
     * pa'thos (haima, stauro's): [744]1
     * pa'nta a' e'kousa para` tou patro's mou e'gno'risa umin: [745]1
     * pa'roikos: [746]1
     * pathe'mata tou theou: [747]1
     * panto`s tou kosmou ku'rios: [748]1
     * pantokra'tor: [749]1
     * paradothei`s lo'gos: [750]1
     * pare'doka umin en pro'tois, o kai` pare'labon, o'ti Christo`s
       ape'thanen upe`r ton amartion emon: [751]1
     * paroikousa te`n po'lin: [752]1
     * pais theou: [753]1 [754]2
     * peple'rotai o kairo`s kai` e'ngiken e' basilei'a tou theou·
       metanoeite kai` pisteu'ete en to euangeli'o: [755]1
     * peri` dikaiosu'nes--teri` prosphuous psuches--ethika`--peri`
       enkratei'as e peri` eunouchi'as: [756]1
     * peri` tou kata` to`n sotera katartismou: [757]1
     * peri` tou uiou autou, tou genome'nou ek spe'rmatos Dauei`d kata`
       sa'rka, ?tou oristhe'ntos uiou theou en duna'mei kata` pneuma
       agiosu'nes ex anasta'seos nekron, Iesou Christou tou kuri'ou emon:
       [758]1
     * peri` tes ek logi'on philosophi'as: [759]1
     * peri` tes eklogi'on philosophi'as: [760]1
     * peri` ton prote'ron agnoema'ton to theo mono dunato`n i'asin
       dounai; autou ga`r esti pasa exousi'a. Præd. Petri ap. Clem. Strom.
       VI. 6. 48: o'sa en agnoi'a tis umon epoi'esen me` eedo`s saphos
       to`n theo`n, ea`n epignou`s metanoe'se, ta'nta auto aphethe'setai
       ta` amarte'mata.: [761]1
     * perisso'teron auton pa'nton ekopi'asa: [762]1
     * pete`r tes alethei'as: [763]1
     * pi'stis: [764]1 [765]2 [766]3 [767]4
     * pisteu'o eis e'na theo`n pantokra'tora: [768]1
     * pisteu'o eis theo`n pete'ra pantokra'tora.: [769]1
     * pneuma: [770]1 [771]2 [772]3
     * pneuma Christo's: [773]1
     * pneuma zoopoioun: [774]1 [775]2
     * pneuma theou: [776]1
     * pneuma o theo`s, kai` tou`s proskunountas auto`n en pneu'mati kai'
       alethei'a dei proskunein: [777]1
     * pneuma, nous: [778]1
     * pneuma, omoou'sion to patri': [779]1
     * poeountes to` the'lema tou patro`s emon eso'metha ek tes ekklesi'as
       tes pro'tes tes pneumatikes, tes pro` eli'ou kai` sele'nes
       ektisme'nes . . . . ekklesi'a zosa soma' esti Christou; le'gei ga'r
       e graphe'; epoi'esen o theo`s to`n a'nthropon a'rsen kai' thelu.
       To` a'rsen esti`n o Christo's, to` thelu e ekklesi'a.: [780]1
     * poiein: [781]1 [782]2
     * poiein to` the'lema tou Christo`u: [783]1
     * politei'a en to kosmo: [784]1
     * polla'kis gennethe'nta kai` genno'menon pephene'nai kai`
       phu'esthai, alla'ssonta gene'seis kai` metensomatou'menon: [785]1
     * polloi` osperei` a'kontes proselelu'thasi christianismo,
       pneu'mato's tino's tre'psantos . . . kai` phantasio'santos autou`s
       u'par e' o'nar: [786]1
     * pote'ria oi'no kakrame'na prospoiou'menos eucharistein. Kai` epi'
       ple'on ektei'non to`n lo'gon tes epikleseos, porphu'rea kai`
       eruthra` anaphai'nesthai poiei, os dokein te`n apo` ton upo`r ta`
       o'la cha'rin to` haima to` eautes sta'zein en ekei'no to poteri'o
       dia` tes epikle'seos autou, kai` uperimei'resthai tou`s paro'ntas
       ex ekei'n9;u geu'sasthai tou po'matos, i'na kai` eis autou`s
       epombre'se e dia` tou ma'gou tou'tou kleizome'ne cha'ris.: [787]1
     * presbu'teroi: [788]1 [789]2
     * probole': [790]1
     * proe'legen, o'te edi'daskn: [791]1
     * proegnosme'nos pro` kataboles ko'smou: [792]1 [793]2 [794]3
     * proegnosme'nos pro` kataboles ko'smou, he is the arche` tes
       kti'seos tou theou: [795]1
     * proegnosme'nos pro` kataboles ko'smou, phanerothei's k.t.l.: [796]1
     * proegnosme'nos, phanerothei's: [797]1
     * proegnosme'nou me`n pro` kataboles ko'smou, phanerothei`s de` di'
       umas tou`s di' autou pistou`s eis theo`n to`n egei'ranta auto`n ek
       nekron kai` do'xan auto do'nta, o'ste te`n pi'stin umon kai`
       elpi'da einai eis theo'n.: [798]1
     * prokope`: [799]1
     * proorontas tou`s lo'gous tou didaska'lou emon: [800]1
     * prosdecho'menoi te`n makari'an elpi'da kai` epipha'neian tes do'xes
       tou mega'lou theou kai` soteros emon Christou Iesou: [801]1
     * prosta'tes kai` boetho`s tes asthenei'as, and as archiereu`s ton
       prosphoron emon: [802]1
     * prosphe'rein ta` dora: [803]1
     * prosphora`, dora: [804]1
     * prosphora`s prosphe'rein prose'taxen emin o sote'r, alla` ouchi'
       ta`s di' alo'gon zo'on e` tou'ton ton thomiama'ton alla` dia`
       pneumatikon ai'non kai` doxon kai` eucharisti'as kai` dia` tes eis
       toi`s plesi'on koinoni'as kai` e?poii'as.: [805]1
     * prosphora': [806]1
     * prosphorai': [807]1
     * proista'menoi tes ekklesi'as: [808]1
     * proto'tokon en pollois adelphois: [809]1
     * proto'tokos ek ton nekron: [810]1
     * proto'tokos pa'ses kti'seos: [811]1
     * proton pa'nton pi'steuson, o'ti heis esti`n o theo`s, o ta` pa'nta
       kti'sas kai` katarti'sas, k.t.l: [812]1
     * puknos metanoousi: [813]1
     * pos oun gegra'phate o'ti theo's o dia` sa'rkos patho`n kai`
       a`nasta's, . . . . oudamou de` haima theou di'cha sarko`s
       paradedo'kasin ai graphai` e` theo`n dia` sarko`s patho'nta kai`
       anasta'nta: [814]1
     * sa'kra labo'n: [815]1
     * sa'rx: [816]1 [817]2 [818]3 [819]4 [820]5 [821]6 [822]7 [823]8
     * sa'rx Iesou Christou, e upe'r ton amartion emon pathousa: [824]1
     * sa'rx ege'neto: [825]1
     * sa'rx pathousa: [826]1
     * sarko`s ana'stasin: [827]1
     * sarkos ana'stasin: [828]1
     * sophi'a, su'nesis, episte'me, gnosis (ton dikaioma'ton), from the
       lo'gos theou tes pi'steos: [829]1
     * sunagoge` Markioniston: [830]1
     * sunagoge', su'stema, diatribe', ai athro'pinai sunelu'seis, :
       [831]1
     * sune'geiren kai` suneka'thisen en tois epourani'ois en Christo
       Iesou: [832]1
     * suntalai'poroi kai` summisou'menoi: [833]1
     * suno'numa tauta einai le'getai.: [834]1
     * sphragi's: [835]1
     * so'ter: [836]1
     * sothe'sesthai tou`s epi' to`n estaurome'non elpiko'tas, mo'non ea`n
       en e'rgois agathois euri'skontai.: [837]1
     * soteri'a: [838]1
     * sote`r: [839]1
     * sote'r: [840]1 [841]2 [842]3
     * soteri'a, apolu'trosis: [843]1
     * ta` apomnemoneu'mata t. aposto'lon: [844]1
     * ta` pathe'mata autou: [845]1
     * ta' lo'gia (kuriaka'): [846]1
     * talai'poroi kai` misou'menoi: [847]1
     * tais ekklesi'ais tes Ioudai'as: [848]1
     * tais en Christo: [849]1
     * tauta tois epideome'nois choregon : [850]1
     * te`n ale'theian umin lela'leka e'n e'kousa para` tou theou: [851]1
     * tere'sate te`n sa'rka agne`n kai` te`n sphragida a'spilon: [852]1
     * tneuma (lo'gos): [853]1
     * to` adida'ktos a'neu optasi'as kai` onei'ron mathein apoka'lupsi's
       estin: [854]1
     * to` haima autou e'doken upe`r emon Iesous Christo`s . . . kai` te`n
       sa'rka upe`r tes sarko`s emon kai` te`n psuche`n upo`r ton psuchon
       e'mon.: [855]1
     * to` ba'thos eka'stou e u'le: [856]1
     * to` ba'ptisma umon mene'to os o'pla: [857]1
     * to` de` ku'ema tes metro`s tes "Achamo'th," omoou'sion upa'rchon te
       metri's: [858]1
     * to` didaska'lion tes thei'as aretes: [859]1
     * to` o'noma to` upe`r pan o'noma: [860]1
     * to` pa'thos tou theou mou; Eph. 7: [861]1
     * to` skeptron tes melagosu'nes tou theou: [862]1
     * to` tou do'gmatos o'noma tes anthropi'nes e'chetai boules te kai`
       gno'mes k.t.l.: [863]1
     * to` tes eusebei'as muste'rion: [864]1
     * to`n auto`n einai pate'ra, to`n auto`n einai uio`n, to`n auto`n
       einai a'gion pneuma: [865]1
     * to`n ku'rion emon to`n gennethe'nta ek pneu'matos agi'ou kai`
       Mari'as tes parthe'nou, to`n epi` Pontion Pila'tou staurothe'nta
       kai` taphe'nta; te tri'te eme'ra anasta'nta ek nekron, anaba'nta
       eis tou`s ouranou's, kathe'menon en dexia tou patro's, o'then
       e'rchetai krinai zontas kai` nekrou's; kai` eis pneuma a'gion,
       agi'an ekklisi'an, a'phesin amartion sarko`s ana'stasin, ame'n.:
       [866]1
     * to`n sotera le'gousin, oude` ga`r ku'rion onoma'zein auto`n
       the`lousin--ku'rios and despo'tes: [867]1
     * to`n tou christou lo'gon, with lo'gos theou peri` enkatei'as, kai`
       anasta'seos: [868]1
     * tou patro`s to` me' gegennesthai estin, uiou de` to` gegennesthai
       lenneto`n de` agenne'to e' kai` autugenne'to ou sunkri'netai:
       [869]1
     * touto poieite: [870]1
     * tri'as: [871]1
     * trophe` eucharistetheisa: [872]1
     * trophe` pneumatike': [873]1
     * tes diathe'kes autou: [874]1
     * tes pi'steos emon eisi`n boethoi` pho'bos kai` upomone', ta` de`
       summachounta emin makrothumi'a kai` enkra'teia; tou'ton meno'nton
       ta` pro`s ko'rion agnos, suneuphrai'nontai' autois sophi'a,
       su'nesis, episte'me, gnosis: [875]1
     * to mo'no theo aora'to, patri` tes alethei'as, to exapostei'lanti
       emin to`n sotera kai` archego`n tes aphtharsi'as, di' hou kai`
       ephane'rosen emin te`n ale'theian kai` te`n epoura'nion zoe'n, auto
       e do'xa.: [876]1
     * to uio anthro'pou kai` uio theou: [877]1
     * upe`r tes gno'seos kai` pi'steos kai` athanasi'as hes egno'risen
       emin o theo`s dia` Iesou, or upe`r tes zoes kai` gno'seos, and 1
       Clem. 36. 2: dia` tou'to ethe'lesen o despo'tes tes athana'tou
       gno'seos emas geu'sasthai: [878]1
     * upo` diabo'lou tau'ten paradi'dothsai dogmati'zousi, mimeisthai d'
       autou`s oi mega'lauchoi' phasi to`n ku'rion me'te ge'manta, me'te
       ti en to ko'smo ktesa'menon mallon para` tou`s a'llous nenoeke'nai
       to` euange'lion kaucho'menoi: [879]1
     * uph' hon kla'don skepasthe'ntes oi pa'ntes os o'rnea upo` kalia`n
       suneltho'nta mete'labon tes ex auton proerchome'nes edodi'mou kai`
       epourani'ou trophes: [880]1
     * phanerousthai: [881]1 [882]2 [883]3
     * phanerousthai en sarki': [884]1
     * phasi` tou`s me`n prote'rous a'pantas kai' autou`s tou`s
       aposto'lous pareilephe'nai te kai` dedidache'nai tauta, a' nun
       houtoi le'gousi, kai` teteresthai te`n ale'theia tou keru'gmatos
       me'chri ton chro'non tou Bi'ktoros . . . apo` de` tou diado'chou
       autou Zephuri'nou parakechara'chthai te`n ale'theian.: [885]1
     * pheu'gete ou ta`s phu'seis alla` ta`s gno'mas ton kakhon: [886]1
     * philanthropi'a: [887]1
     * philoxeni'a: [888]1
     * phronein peri` autou os peri` theou: [889]1
     * photismo's: [890]1 [891]2 [892]3
     * cha'ris metanoi'as: [893]1 [894]2 [895]3
     * chari'smata: [896]1
     * christo's": [897]1
     * psi'lo`s a'nthropos: [898]1
     * o'phthe ange'lois. ekeru'chthe en e'thnesin, episteu'the en
       ko'smo.: [899]1
     * os o nomos keru'ssei kai` oi prophetai kai` o ku'rios: [900]1
     * o'sper upo` ton zodi'on e ge'nesis dioikeitai, ou'tos upo` ton
       aposto'lon e anage'nnesis: [901]1
     * os auto's phesin o Basilei'des, e`n me'ros ek tou legome'nou
       thele'matos tou theou upeile'phamen, to` egapeke'nai a'panta. o'ti
       lo'gon aposo'zousi pro`s to` pan a'panta; e'teron de` to` medeno`s
       epithumein, kai` to` tri'ton misei'n mede` e'n?: [902]1
     * os peri` theou: [903]1 [904]2
     * elthon katalusai ta`s thusias, kai` ea`n me` tau'sesthe tou
       thu'ei`n, ou pau'setai aph' umon e orge`: [905]1
     * ina o kaino`s no'mos tou kuri'ou emon Iesou Christou me`
       anthropopoieton e'che te`n prosphora'n.: [906]1
     * "theo's": [907]1
     * "o uio`s tou theou": [908]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * (Ebionitæ) credentes in Christo propter hoc solum a patribus
       anathematizati sunt, quod legis cæremonias Christi evangelio
       miscuerunt, et sic nova confessa sunt, ut vetera non omitterent.:
       [909]1
     * Ab igne, inquiunt, creatoris deprehendetur: [910]1
     * Aiunt, Marcionem non tam innovasse regulam separatione legis et
       evangelii quam retro adulteratam recurasse: [911]1
     * Apostoli et discentes ipsorum: [912]1
     * Apostoli non diversa inter se docuerent: [913]1
     * Apostoli quæ sunt Judæorum sentientes scripserunt: [914]1
     * Apostolorum principem: [915]1
     * Apostolos admiscuisse ea quæ sunt legalia salvatoris verbis: [916]1
     * Apostolos vultis Judaismi magis adfines subintelligi.: [917]1
     * Atque adeo præ se ferunt Marcionitæ: quod deum suum omnino non
       timeant. Malus autem, inquiunt, timebitur; bonus autem diligitur.:
       [918]1
     * Carmen dicere Christo quasi deo: [919]1
     * Cessatio delicti radix est veniæ, ut venia sit pænitentiæ fructus:
       [920]1
     * Christiani rudes: [921]1
     * Consensus repetitus: [922]1
     * Corpus sumus: [923]1
     * De verbi autem administratione quid dicam, cum hoc sit negotium
       illis, non ethnicos convertendi, sed nostros evertendi? Hanc magis
       gloriam captant, si stantibus ruinam, non si jacentibus elevationem
       operentur. Quoniam et ipsum opus eorum non de suo proprio ædificio
       venit, sed de veritatis destructione; nostra suffodiunt, ut sua
       ædificent. Adime illis legem Moysis et prophetas et creatorem deum,
       accusationem eloqui non habent.: [924]1
     * Denique in tantam quidam dilectionis audaciam proruperunt, ut nova
       quædam et inaudita super Paulo monstra confingerent. Alli enim
       aiunt, hoc quod scriptum est, sedere a dextris salvatoris et
       sinistris, de Paulo et de Marcione dici, quod Paulus sedet a
       dextris, Marcion sedet a sinistris. Porro alii legentes: Mittam
       vobis advocatum Spiritum veritatis, nolunt intelligere tertiam
       personam a patre et filio, sed Apostolum Paulum.: [925]1
     * Deus incognitus: [926]1
     * Diabolus ipsas quoque res sacramentorum divinorum idolorum
       mysteriis æmulatur. Tingit et ipse quosdam, utique credentes et
       fideles suos; expositionem delictorum de lavacro repromittit, et si
       adhuc memini, Mithras signat illic in frontibus milites suos,
       celebrat et panis oblationem et imaginem resurrectionis inducit
       . . . . summum pontificem in unius nuptiis statuit, habet et
       virgines, habet et continentes.: [927]1
     * Dispares deos, alterum, judicem, ferum, bellipotentem; alterum
       mitem, placidum et tantummodo bonum atque optimum.: [928]1
     * Dixit Jesus ad suos mathe'tas: amen: [929]1
     * Dominus: [930]1
     * Dominus invenit me, qui ab initio orbis terrarum præparatus sum, ut
       sim arbiter (mesi'tes: [931]1
     * Es quo fit, ut nullo modo in theologicis, quæ omnia e libris
       antiquis hebraicis, græcis, latinis ducuntur, possit aliquis bene
       in definiendo versari et a peccatis multis et magnis sibi cavere,
       nisi litteras et historiam assumat.: [932]1
     * Et hoc est, quod schismata apud hæreticos fere non sunt, quia cum
       Sint, non parent. Schisma est enim unitas ipsa.: [933]1
     * Et in primis illud retorquendum in istos, qui duorum nobis deorum
       controversiam facere præsumunt. Scriptum est, quod negare non
       possunt: "Quoniam unus est dominus." De Christo ergo quid sentiunt?
       Dominum esse, aut ilium omnino non esse? Sed dominum illum omnino
       non dubitant. Ergo si vera est illorum ratiocinatio, jam duo sunt
       domini.: [934]1
     * Felix aqua quæ semel abluit, qum ludibrio pecatoribus non est.:
       [935]1
     * Fertur ergo in traditionibus, quoniam Johannes ipsum corpus, quod
       erat extrinsecus, tangens manum suam in profunda misisse et
       duritiam carnis nullo modo reluctatam esse, sed locum manui
       præbuisse discipuli.: [936]1
     * Gentiles quamvis idola colant, tamen summum deum patrem creatorem
       cognoscunt et confitentur [!]; in hunc Marcion, blasphemat, etc.:
       [937]1
     * Gnosticos autem se vocant, etiam imagines, quasdam quidem depictas,
       quasdam autem et de reliqua materia fabricatas habent et eas
       coronant, et proponent eas cum imaginibus mundi philosophorum,
       videlicet cum imagine Pythagoræ et Platonis et Aristotelis et
       reliquorum, et reliquam observationem circa eas similiter ut gentes
       faciunt.: [938]1
     * Hoc sentire et facere omnem servum dei oportet, etiam minor's loci,
       ut maioris fieri possit, si quern gradum in persecutionis
       tolerantia ascenderit: [939]1
     * Hominum plerique orationem demonstrativam continuam mente assequi
       nequeunt, quare indigent, ut instituantur parabolis. Veluti nostro
       tempore videmus, homines illos, qui Christiani vocantur, fidem suam
       e parabolis petiisse. Hi tamen interdum talia faciunt, qualia qui
       vere philosophantur. Nam quod mortem contemnunt, id quidem omnes
       ante oculos habemus; item quod verecundia quadam ducti ab usu rerum
       venerearam abhorrent. Sunt enim inter eos feminas et viri, qui per
       totam vitam a concubitu abstinuerint; sunt etiam qui in animis
       regendis coërcendisque et in accerrimo honestatis studio eo
       progressi sint, ut nihil cedant vere philosophantibus.: [940]1
     * Immo inquiunt Marcionitæ, deus poster, etsi non ab initio, etsi non
       per conditionem, sed per semetipsum revelatus est in Christi Jesu.:
       [941]1
     * Inflatus est iste [scil. the Valentinian proud of knowledge] neque
       in coelo, neque in terra putat se esse, sed intra Pleroma introisse
       et complexum jam angelum suum, cum institorio et supercilio incedit
       gallinacei elationem habens . . . . Plurimi, quasi jam perfecti,
       semetipsos spiritales vocant, et se nosse jam dicunt eum qui sit
       intra Pleroma ipsorum refrigerii locum: [942]1
     * Major pars imperitorum apud gloriosissimam multitudinem
       psychicorum.: [943]1
     * Major pæne vis hominum e visionibus deum discunt.: [944]1
     * Marcion non negat creatorem deum esse.: [945]1
     * Marcionitæ interrogati quid fiet peccatori cuique die illo?
       respondent abici ilium quasi ab oculis: [946]1
     * Mariccus . . . . iamque adsertor Galliarum et deus, nomen id sibi
       indiderat: [947]1
     * Mundus ille superior: [948]1
     * Nam Jacobum apostolum Symmachiani faciunt quasi duodecimum et hunc
       secuntur, qui ad dominum nostrum Jesum Christum adjungunt Judaismi
       observationem, quamquam etiam Jesum Christum fatentur; dicunt enim
       eum ipsum Adam esse et esse animam generalem, et aliæ hujusmodi
       blasphemiæ.: [949]1
     * Narem contrahentes impudentissimi Marcionitæ convertuntur ad
       destructionem operum creatoris. Nimirum, inquiunt, grande opus et
       dignum deo mundus?: [950]1
     * Naturam si expellas furca, tamen usque recurret.: [951]1
     * Nihil veritas erubescit nisi solummodo abscondi.: [952]1
     * Nullus potest hæresim struere, nisi qui ardens ingenii est et habet
       dona naturæ quæ a deo artifice sunt creata: talis fait Valentinus,
       talis Marcion, quos doctissimos legimus, talis Bardesanes, cujus
       etiam philosophi admirantur ingenium.: [953]1
     * Oportet me magis deo vivo et vero, regi sæculorum omnium Christo,
       sacrificium offerre.: [954]1
     * Prius est prædicare posterius tinguere: [955]1
     * Ptolemæus nomina et numeros Æonum distinxit in personales
       substantias, sed extra deum determinatas, quas Valentinus in ipsa
       summa divinitatis ut sensus et affectus motus incluserat.: [956]1
     * Quem deum colis? Respondit: Christum. Polemon (judex): Quid ergo?
       iste alter est? [the co-defendant Christians had immediately before
       confessed God the Creator]. Respondit: Non; sed ipse quem et ipsi
       paullo ante confessi sunt: [957]1
     * Quid dicam de Hebionitis, qui Christianos esse se simulant? usque
       hodie per totas orientis synagogas inter Judæos (!) hæresis est,
       que dicitur Minæorum et a Pharisæis nunc usque damnatur, quos vulgo
       Nazaræos nuncupant, qui credunt in Christum filium dei natum de
       Virgine Maria et eum dicunt esse, qui sub pontio Pilato passus est
       et resurrexit, in quem et nos credimus; sed dum volunt et Judæi
       esse et Christiani, nec Judæi sunt nec Christiani.: [958]1
     * Quid novi attulit dominus veniens?: [959]1
     * Quoniam opera bona, quæ fiunt ab infidelibus, in hoc sæculo its
       prosunt: [960]1
     * Sacrorum pleraque initia in Græcia participavi. Eorum quædam signa
       et monumenta tradita mihi a sacerdotibus sedulo conservo.: [961]1
     * Scio dicturos, atqui hanc esse principalem et perfectam bonitatem,
       cum sine ullo debito familiaritatis in extraneos voluntaria et
       libera effunditur, secundum quam inimicos quoque nostros et hoc
       nomine jam extraneos deligere jubeamur.: [962]1
     * Scio scripturam Enoch, quæ hunc ordinem angelis dedit, non recipi a
       quibusdam, quia nec in armorium Judaicum admittitur . . . sed cum
       Enoch eadem scriptura etiam de domino prædicarit, a nobis quidem
       nihil omnino reiciendum est quod pertinet ad nos. Et legimus omnem
       scripturam ædificationi habilem divinitus inspirari. A Judæis
       potest jam videri propterea reiecta, sicut et cetera fera quæ
       Christum sonant. . . . . Eo accedit quod Enoch apud Judam apostolum
       testimonium possidet.: [963]1
     * Sed enim nationes extraneæ, ab omni intellectu spiritalium
       potestatum eadem efficacia idolis suis subministrant. Sed viduis
       aquis sibi mentiuntur. Nam et sacris quibusdam per lavacrum
       initiantur, Isidis alicujus aut Mithræ; ipsos etiam deos suos
       lavationibus efferunt. Ceterum villas, domos, templa totasque urbes
       aspergine circumlatæ aqua expiant passim. Certe ludis Apollinaribus
       et Eleusiniis tinguuntur, idque se in regenerationem et impunitatem
       periuriorum suorum agere præsumunt. Item penes veteres, quisquis se
       homicidio infecerat, purgatrices aquas explorabat.: [964]1
     * Sensus, motus, affectus dei: [965]1
     * Separatio legis et Evangelii proprium et principale opus est
       Marcionis, nec poterunt negare discipuli ejus, quod in summo (suo)
       instrumento habent, quo denique initiantur et indurantur in hanc
       hæresim.: [966]1
     * Separatio legis et evangelii proprium et principale opus est
       Marcionis . . . ex diversitate sententiarum utriusque instrumenti
       diversitatem quoque argumentatur deorum.: [967]1
     * Si bona fide quæras, concreto vultu, suspenso supercilio, Altum
       est, aiunt. Si subtiliter temptes per ambiguitates bilingues
       communem fidem adfirmant. Si scire to subostendas negant quidquid
       agnoscunt. Si cominus certes, tuam simplicitatem sua cæde
       dispergunt. Ne discipulis quidem propriis ante committunt quam suos
       fecerint. Habent artificium quo prius persuadeant quam edoceant.:
       [968]1
     * Si hominem non perfectum fecit deus, unusquisque autem per
       industriam propriam perfectionem sibi virtutis adsciscit: non ne
       videtur plus sibi homo adquirere, quam ei deus contulit?: [969]1
     * Si homo tantummodo Christus, cur homo in orationibus mediator
       invocatur, cum invocatio hominis ad præstandam salutem inefficax
       judicetur.: [970]1
     * Sicut ex lege ac prophetis et a domino nostro Jesu Christo
       didicimus.: [971]1
     * Simplices quique, ne dixerim imprudentes et idiotæ, quæ major
       semper credentium pars est: [972]1
     * Solius bonitatis: [973]1
     * Speraverat Episcopatum Valentinus, quia et ingenio poterat et
       eloquio. Sed alium ex martyrii prærogativa loci potitum indignatus
       de ecclesia authenticæ regulæ abrupit: [974]1
     * Spiritus salutaris: [975]1
     * Subito Christus, subito et Johannes. Sic sunt omnia apud Marcionem,
       quæ suum et plenum habent ordinem apud creatorem.: [976]1
     * Sæculum: [977]1
     * Tranquilitas est et mansuetudinis segregare solummodo et partem
       ejus cum infidelibus ponere: [978]1
     * Valentini robustissima secta: [979]1
     * Valentiniani frequentissimum plane collegium inter hæreticos.:
       [980]1
     * Valentiniani nihil magis curant quam occultare, quod prædicant; si
       tamen prædicant qui occultant. Custodiæ officium conscientiæ
       officium est: [981]1
     * a ligno: [982]1
     * a priori: [983]1
     * analogia fidei: [984]1
     * articuli fide: [985]1
     * articulus constitutivus ecclesia: [986]1
     * ascensus in coelum: [987]1 [988]2
     * assumpta: [989]1
     * assumptio: [990]1
     * assumptio naturæ novæ: [991]1
     * carmen dicere Christo quasi deo: [992]1
     * collegia tenuiorum: [993]1
     * communem fidem adfirmant: [994]1
     * consensus patrum et doctorum: [995]1
     * corpus permixtum: [996]1
     * coelum tertium: [997]1
     * de conscientia religionis et disciplinæ unitate et spei foedere.:
       [998]1
     * de coelo: [999]1
     * decepti deceptores: [1000]1
     * dei filius: [1001]1
     * delicta pristinæ cæcitatis: [1002]1
     * demonstratio veræ carnis post resurrectionem: [1003]1
     * descensus ad inferna: [1004]1
     * descensus de coelo, ascensus in coelum; ascensus in coelum,
       descensus ad inferna: [1005]1
     * deus: [1006]1
     * deus Jesus Christus: [1007]1
     * deus melior: [1008]1
     * disciplina Evangelii: [1009]1
     * distincte agere: [1010]1
     * dominus ac deus: [1011]1 [1012]2 [1013]3
     * dominus ac deus noster: [1014]1 [1015]2
     * dominus regnavit: [1016]1
     * ex errare per veritatem ad errorem: [1017]1
     * ex necessitate salutis: [1018]1
     * ex professo: [1019]1 [1020]2
     * factiuncula, congregatio, conciliabulum, conventiculum: [1021]1
     * fides implicita: [1022]1
     * finis religionis: [1023]1
     * frequentissimum collegium: [1024]1
     * hic igitur a multis quasi deus glorificatus est, et docuit
       semetipsunr esse qui inter Judæos quidem quasi filius apparuerit,
       in Samaria autem quasi pater descenderit in reliquis vero gentibus
       quasi Spiritus Sanctus adventaverit.: [1025]1
     * hæc fere summa est doctrina apud suos, in qua cerni potest nihil
       inesse, quod discrepet a scripturis vel ab ecclesia Catholica vel
       ab ecclesia Romana . . . . sed dissensio est de quibusdam abusibus:
       [1026]1
     * in abstracto: [1027]1
     * invisibilia: [1028]1
     * justitia civilis: [1029]1
     * lex: [1030]1
     * malignus: [1031]1
     * malus: [1032]1
     * materia subjacens: [1033]1
     * minori ad majus: [1034]1
     * mutatis mutandis: [1035]1
     * ne quid nimis: [1036]1
     * numen supremum: [1037]1
     * passiones dei: [1038]1
     * per semetipsum: [1039]1
     * personalis substantia: [1040]1
     * phantasma: [1041]1
     * phantasma, assumptio naturæ humanæ, transmutatio, mixtura, duæ
       naturæ: [1042]1
     * plerique nec Ecclesias habent: [1043]1
     * primo per mantis impositionem in exorcismo, secundo per baptismi
       regenerationem: [1044]1
     * profanum vulgus: [1045]1 [1046]2
     * præsens et corporalis deus: [1047]1
     * præsens numen: [1048]1 [1049]2
     * præter nocturnas visiones per dies quoque impletur apud nos spiritu
       sancto puerorum innocens ætas, quæ in ecstasi videt: [1050]1
     * quamquam sciam somnia ridicula et visiones ineptas quibusdam
       videri, sed utique illis, qui malunt contra sacerdotes credere quam
       sacerdoti, sed nihil mirum, quando de Joseph fratres sui dixerunt:
       ecce somniator ille: [1051]1
     * qui est super omnia: [1052]1
     * qui est super omnia et originem nescit: [1053]1
     * qui vitam æternam habet: [1054]1
     * quæ sine scelere prodi non poterit: [1055]1
     * regula: [1056]1 [1057]2 [1058]3 [1059]4 [1060]5
     * regula fide: [1061]1 [1062]2 [1063]3
     * regula fidei: [1064]1 [1065]2
     * regulæ: [1066]1
     * regulæ fide: [1067]1
     * renatus in æternum taurobolio: [1068]1
     * restitutio in integrum: [1069]1
     * revelatio: [1070]1
     * salus legitima: [1071]1
     * sanctiores feminæ: [1072]1
     * sanguine dei: [1073]1
     * secundum motum animi mei et spiritus Sancti: [1074]1
     * secundum motum animi mei et spiritus sancti: [1075]1
     * semper idem: [1076]1
     * sub specie aternitatis et Christi: [1077]1
     * summum bonum: [1078]1
     * termini technici: [1079]1
     * tertium genus: [1080]1
     * theologia Christi: [1081]1 [1082]2
     * theologia patristica: [1083]1
     * umbra: [1084]1
     * unum: [1085]1 [1086]2
     * visibilia: [1087]1
     * vita beata: [1088]1
     * vulgus: [1089]1
     * "Sufficit," said the Marcionites, "unicum opsus deo nostro, quod
       hominem liberavit summa et præcipua bonitate sua": [1090]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [1091]iv  [1092]v  [1093]vi  [1094]vii  [1095]viii  [1096]xix  [1097]x
   [1098]xi  [1099]xii  [1100]xiii  [1101]xiv  [1102]xv  [1103]xvi
   [1104]xvii  [1105]xviii  [1106]xix  [1107]xx  [1108]xxi  [1109]xxii
   [1110]xxiii  [1111]1  [1112]2  [1113]3  [1114]4  [1115]5  [1116]6
   [1117]7  [1118]8  [1119]9  [1120]10  [1121]11  [1122]12  [1123]13
   [1124]14  [1125]15  [1126]16  [1127]17  [1128]18  [1129]19  [1130]20
   [1131]21  [1132]22  [1133]23  [1134]24  [1135]25  [1136]26  [1137]27
   [1138]28  [1139]29  [1140]30  [1141]31  [1142]32  [1143]33  [1144]34
   [1145]35  [1146]36  [1147]37  [1148]38  [1149]39  [1150]40  [1151]41
   [1152]42  [1153]43  [1154]44  [1155]45  [1156]46  [1157]47  [1158]48
   [1159]49  [1160]50  [1161]51  [1162]52  [1163]53  [1164]54  [1165]55
   [1166]56  [1167]57  [1168]58  [1169]59  [1170]60  [1171]61  [1172]62
   [1173]63  [1174]64  [1175]65  [1176]66  [1177]67  [1178]68  [1179]69
   [1180]70  [1181]71  [1182]72  [1183]73  [1184]74  [1185]75  [1186]76
   [1187]77  [1188]78  [1189]79  [1190]80  [1191]81  [1192]82  [1193]83
   [1194]84  [1195]85  [1196]86  [1197]87  [1198]88  [1199]89  [1200]90
   [1201]91  [1202]92  [1203]93  [1204]94  [1205]95  [1206]96  [1207]97
   [1208]98  [1209]99  [1210]100  [1211]101  [1212]102  [1213]103
   [1214]104  [1215]105  [1216]106  [1217]107  [1218]108  [1219]109
   [1220]110  [1221]111  [1222]112  [1223]113  [1224]114  [1225]115
   [1226]116  [1227]117  [1228]118  [1229]119  [1230]120  [1231]121
   [1232]122  [1233]123  [1234]124  [1235]125  [1236]126  [1237]127
   [1238]128  [1239]129  [1240]130  [1241]131  [1242]132  [1243]133
   [1244]134  [1245]135  [1246]136  [1247]137  [1248]138  [1249]139
   [1250]140  [1251]141  [1252]142  [1253]143  [1254]144  [1255]145
   [1256]146  [1257]147  [1258]148  [1259]149  [1260]150  [1261]151
   [1262]152  [1263]153  [1264]154  [1265]155  [1266]156  [1267]157
   [1268]158  [1269]159  [1270]160  [1271]161  [1272]162  [1273]163
   [1274]164  [1275]165  [1276]166  [1277]167  [1278]168  [1279]169
   [1280]170  [1281]171  [1282]172  [1283]173  [1284]174  [1285]175
   [1286]176  [1287]177  [1288]178  [1289]179  [1290]180  [1291]181
   [1292]182  [1293]183  [1294]184  [1295]185  [1296]186  [1297]187
   [1298]188  [1299]189  [1300]190  [1301]191  [1302]192  [1303]193
   [1304]194  [1305]195  [1306]196  [1307]197  [1308]198  [1309]199
   [1310]200  [1311]201  [1312]202  [1313]203  [1314]204  [1315]205
   [1316]206  [1317]207  [1318]208  [1319]209  [1320]210  [1321]211
   [1322]212  [1323]213  [1324]214  [1325]215  [1326]216  [1327]217
   [1328]218  [1329]219  [1330]220  [1331]221  [1332]222  [1333]223
   [1334]224  [1335]225  [1336]226  [1337]227  [1338]228  [1339]229
   [1340]230  [1341]231  [1342]232  [1343]233  [1344]234  [1345]235
   [1346]236  [1347]237  [1348]238  [1349]239  [1350]240  [1351]241
   [1352]242  [1353]243  [1354]244  [1355]245  [1356]246  [1357]247
   [1358]248  [1359]249  [1360]250  [1361]251  [1362]252  [1363]253
   [1364]254  [1365]255  [1366]256  [1367]257  [1368]258  [1369]259
   [1370]260  [1371]261  [1372]262  [1373]263  [1374]264  [1375]265
   [1376]266  [1377]270  [1378]268  [1379]269  [1380]270  [1381]271
   [1382]272  [1383]273  [1384]274  [1385]275  [1386]276  [1387]277
   [1388]278  [1389]279  [1390]280  [1391]281  [1392]282  [1393]283
   [1394]284  [1395]285  [1396]286  [1397]287  [1398]288  [1399]289
   [1400]290  [1401]291  [1402]292  [1403]293  [1404]294  [1405]295
   [1406]296  [1407]297  [1408]298  [1409]299  [1410]300  [1411]301
   [1412]302  [1413]303  [1414]304  [1415]305  [1416]306  [1417]307
   [1418]308  [1419]309  [1420]310  [1421]311  [1422]312  [1423]313
   [1424]314  [1425]315  [1426]316  [1427]317  [1428]318  [1429]319
   [1430]320  [1431]321  [1432]322  [1433]323  [1434]324  [1435]325
   [1436]326  [1437]327  [1438]328  [1439]329  [1440]330  [1441]331
   [1442]332  [1443]333  [1444]334  [1445]335  [1446]336  [1447]337
   [1448]338  [1449]339  [1450]340  [1451]341  [1452]342  [1453]343
   [1454]344  [1455]345  [1456]346  [1457]347  [1458]348  [1459]349
   [1460]350  [1461]351  [1462]352  [1463]353  [1464]354  [1465]355
   [1466]356  [1467]357  [1468]358  [1469]359  [1470]360  [1471]361
   [1472]362
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p28.28
   2. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p28.37
   3. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=24&scrV=3#ii.ii.ii-p33.5
   4. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=9#ii.iv.i-p8.1
   5. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=40#ii.iv.i-p8.1
   6. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=26&scrV=30#ii.iv.i-p8.2
   7. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=27&scrV=8#ii.iv.i-p8.3
   8. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=8&scrV=4#ii.iv.i-p8.4
   9. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=27&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p80.3
  10. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1880&scrV=0#ii.iii.iv-p42.1
  11. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=2#ii.ii.ii-p35.4
  12. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=8#ii.iii.iii-p27.18
  13. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=19#ii.iii.iii-p34.9
  14. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p92.6
  15. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p27.19
  16. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=4#ii.iii.iii-p27.21
  17. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=15#ii.iv.i-p11.1
  18. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p78.4
  19. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#ii.ii.ii-p74.4
  20. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#ii.ii.ii-p74.6
  21. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=1#ii.iii.vi-p9.20
  22. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=13#ii.iii.iii-p27.47
  23. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p58.5
  24. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p32.6
  25. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=13#ii.iv.i-p14.1
  26. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=1#ii.iv.i-p14.2
  27. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=11#ii.iii.iii-p36.4
  28. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p74.3
  29. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p24.1
  30. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#ii.iii.iii-p27.46
  31. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=1#ii.iii.vi-p15.6
  32. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#ii.ii.ii-p54.16
  33. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=17#ii.ii.ii-p54.17
  34. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#ii.ii.ii-p32.8
  35. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=31#ii.ii.ii-p35.6
  36. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=36#ii.ii.ii-p32.11
  37. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#ii.ii.ii-p54.3
  38. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#ii.iii.iii-p7.8
  39. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ii.ii.ii-p32.3
  40. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=18#ii.ii.ii-p34.2
  41. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=29#ii.ii.ii-p61.6
  42. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=45#ii.ii.ii-p33.4
  43. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=32#ii.ii.ii-p35.2
  44. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=32#ii.ii.ii-p32.10
  45. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=4#ii.iii.iii-p7.55
  46. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=34#ii.ii.ii-p74.5
  47. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=45#ii.iii.iii-p9.26
  48. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=27#ii.ii.ii-p35.3
  49. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=41#ii.iii.v-p4.4
  50. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=26#ii.ii.ii-p61.1
  51. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=34#ii.ii.ii-p59.3
  52. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=34#ii.iii.iii-p9.24
  53. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=51#ii.iii.iii-p30.9
  54. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p28.16
  55. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.iii.iii-p27.95
  56. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=30#ii.iv.i-p26.18
  57. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=31#ii.iv.i-p26.25
  58. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#ii.iii.iii-p30.12
  59. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#ii.iv.i-p26.14
  60. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=31#ii.iv.i-p26.16
  61. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=2#ii.ii.ii-p54.4
  62. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=22#ii.iii.iii-p23.4
  63. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#ii.iii.iii-p34.5
  64. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=62#ii.iii.iii-p30.13
  65. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#ii.iv.i-p26.11
  66. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#ii.iv.i-p26.11
  67. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=36#ii.iv.i-p26.27
  68. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p33.6
  69. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=27#ii.iii.iii-p36.26
  70. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=33#ii.iv.i-p26.19
  71. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=38#ii.iv.i-p26.19
  72. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=41#ii.iv.i-p26.19
  73. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#ii.iv.i-p26.9
  74. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=50#ii.iv.i-p26.19
  75. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=58#ii.iv.i-p26.19
  76. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=62#ii.iv.i-p26.19
  77. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=14#ii.iv.i-p26.20
  78. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=38#ii.iv.i-p26.28
  79. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=40#ii.iv.i-p26.30
  80. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#ii.iv.i-p26.20
  81. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=49#ii.iv.i-p26.32
  82. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#ii.iv.i-p26.33
  83. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p69.2
  84. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=4#ii.iv.i-p26.12
  85. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#ii.iv.i-p26.21
  86. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#ii.iii.iii-p30.11
  87. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#ii.iii.iii-p27.76
  88. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#ii.ii.ii-p61.3
  89. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=32&scrV=9#ii.iii.iii-p6.4
  90. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=88&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p9.30
  91. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=14#ii.iii.iii-p9.27
  92. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=32#ii.iii.iii-p30.8
  93. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=13#ii.iii.iii-p26.19
  94. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=42#ii.iii.iii-p26.23
  95. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=11#ii.ii.ii-p97.13
  96. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=22#ii.iii.iii-p11.13
  97. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=5#ii.ii.ii-p54.9
  98. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#ii.iii.iii-p27.33
  99. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=5#ii.iii.vi-p9.21
 100. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=6#ii.ii.ii-p97.14
 101. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=31#ii.ii.ii-p53.4
 102. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ii.iii.iii-p28.60
 103. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ii.iv.i-p20.1
 104. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#ii.iii.ii-p8.4
 105. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=1#ii.ii.iii-p2.1
 106. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p9.9
 107. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p9.35
 108. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p74.12
 109. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p40.5
 110. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=1#ii.iii.v-p1.24
 111. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=3#ii.iii.iii-p27.23
 112. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=3#ii.iii.iii-p27.57
 113. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p40.7
 114. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p36.33
 115. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p14.3
 116. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p41.2
 117. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#ii.iv.i-p22.3
 118. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#ii.iv.i-p17.6
 119. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#ii.iii.iii-p27.44
 120. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=6#ii.iii.iii-p30.14
 121. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=9#ii.ii.ii-p57.4
 122. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p34.7
 123. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=2#ii.ii.ii-p54.23
 124. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#ii.iii.iii-p9.33
 125. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=13#ii.ii.ii-p54.8
 126. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=2#ii.ii.i-p17.1
 127. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=15#ii.iii-p2.1
 128. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=5#ii.iii.iii-p9.34
 129. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=9#ii.ii.ii-p74.9
 130. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=9#ii.iii.vi-p6.12
 131. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#ii.ii.ii-p74.10
 132. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p7.4
 133. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=10#ii.ii.ii-p74.11
 134. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=23#ii.ii.ii-p33.7
 135. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#ii.ii.i-p17.2
 136. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#ii.ii.ii-p57.2
 137. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p41.1
 138. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p58.7
 139. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=1#ii.ii.ii-p60.3
 140. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=3#ii.ii.ii-p58.1
 141. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=5#ii.ii.ii-p59.2
 142. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=5#ii.iii.iii-p9.23
 143. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=5#ii.iii.iii-p9.29
 144. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=45#ii.iv.i-p20.4
 145. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#ii.iv.i-p17.2
 146. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#ii.ii.iii-p5.3
 147. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=9#ii.iv.i-p22.1
 148. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=13#ii.ii.ii-p54.26
 149. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ii.ii.ii-p60.1
 150. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ii.ii.iii-p5.5
 151. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.iii.iii-p9.28
 152. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=22#ii.ii.ii-p54.18
 153. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p9.4
 154. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=1#ii.iii.v-p7.5
 155. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=8#ii.iii.iii-p9.32
 156. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=11#ii.ii.ii-p65.4
 157. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ii.ii.ii-p74.7
 158. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=19#ii.ii.ii-p74.7
 159. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=22#ii.ii.ii-p74.8
 160. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#ii.ii.ii-p77.2
 161. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#ii.ii.ii-p9.5
 162. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p27.26
 163. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p27.55
 164. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#ii.iv.i-p17.13
 165. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=20#ii.iii.iii-p30.7
 166. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#ii.iv.i-p17.15
 167. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=6#ii.iv.i-p17.11
 168. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p28.41
 169. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=5#ii.iii.v-p4.11
 170. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=9#ii.iii.iii-p30.15
 171. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p27.59
 172. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p28.29
 173. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p28.73
 174. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p28.92
 175. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=7&scrV=2#ii.iii.iii-p28.86
 176. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=9&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p7.9
 177. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=9&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p34.15
 178. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=10&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p29.8
 179. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=14&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p2.15
 180. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=14&scrV=2#ii.iii.iii-p29.12
 181. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=17&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p28.43
 182. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=18&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p28.15
 183. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=19&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p40.3
 184. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=20&scrV=0#ii.iii.iii-p36.27
 185. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=20&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p28.87
 186. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=20&scrV=2#ii.iii.iii-p28.89
 187. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.ii.i-p17.3
 188. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=5#ii.iv.i-p22.5
 189. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#ii.iv.i-p17.5
 190. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#ii.ii.ii-p54.24
 191. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ii.iv.i-p17.3
 192. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.iv.i-p17.8
 193. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=269&scrV=0#ii.iii.vi-p14.3
 194. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=291&scrV=0#ii.iii.vi-p14.4
 195. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=409&scrV=0#ii.iii.vi-p2.5
 196. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=415&scrV=0#ii.ii.ii-p35.5
 197. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1155&scrV=0#ii.iii.vi-p11.4
 198. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#ii.iii.iii-p28.83
 199. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ii.iii.iii-p7.5
 200. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ii.iii.iii-p11.11
 201. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ii.iii.iii-p30.18
 202. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=20#ii.iii.v-p2.3
 203. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p26.24
 204. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=13#ii.iii.iii-p27.42
 205. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=13#ii.iii.iii-p27.85
 206. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#ii.iv.i-p17.4
 207. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=25#ii.iii.iii-p2.2
 208. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#ii.ii.ii-p77.4
 209. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=16#ii.iii.iii-p34.30
 210. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=25#ii.iii.iii-p12.27
 211. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=27#ii.iii.iii-p34.22
 212. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.iv.i-p16.1
 213. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#ii.iv.i-p29.1
 214. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#ii.iii.iii-p30.16
 215. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p27.43
 216. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.iii.iii-p27.87
 217. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=2#ii.iii.iii-p7.43
 218. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#ii.iii.iv-p17.6
 219. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#ii.iv.i-p17.10
 220. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=3#ii.ii.iii-p5.4
 221. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=9#ii.iii.iii-p3.4
 222. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=9#ii.iii.iii-p20.4
 223. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=9#ii.iii.iii-p20.5
 224. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=9#ii.iii.vi-p9.8
 225. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=14#ii.iv.i-p17.20
 226. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=2#ii.ii.ii-p77.3
 227. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3?scrBook=4Macc&scrCh=5&scrV=24#ii.ii.ii-p89.2
 228. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.11
 229. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.56
 230. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.3
 231. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.16
 232. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.48
 233. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.5
 234. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.13
 235. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.36
 236. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.34
 237. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.27
 238. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.8
 239. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p42.1
 240. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.24
 241. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p10.4
 242. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p77.11
 243. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.42
 244. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.3
 245. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.10
 246. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p20.2
 247. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.41
 248. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p2.3
 249. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.11
 250. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p13.9
 251. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.6
 252. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii-p1.1
 253. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p96.4
 254. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.21
 255. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p31.2
 256. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p13.1
 257. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.10
 258. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p21.2
 259. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.30
 260. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p19.4
 261. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.17
 262. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.60
 263. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.16
 264. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p22.2
 265. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.10
 266. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.13
 267. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p15.9
 268. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p17.5
 269. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p23.3
 270. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.13
 271. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p15.11
 272. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.6
 273. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p19.1
 274. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p19.2
 275. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p20.1
 276. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p20.3
 277. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p20.4
 278. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p20.5
 279. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p20.6
 280. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p20.7
 281. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p20.8
 282. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p20.9
 283. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p23.1
 284. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p23.2
 285. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p23.3
 286. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p24.1
 287. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.68
 288. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.17
 289. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p77.13
 290. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.39
 291. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p34.6
 292. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.15
 293. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p9.3
 294. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p13.4
 295. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p23.2
 296. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.22
 297. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p77.8
 298. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p7.4
 299. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.ii-p5.2
 300. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.15
 301. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-p23.1
 302. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p11.6
 303. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p58.4
 304. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.29
 305. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.20
 306. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.1
 307. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.36
 308. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.4
 309. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p22.6
 310. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.104
 311. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.81
 312. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.84
 313. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.82
 314. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p13.6
 315. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.17
 316. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.20
 317. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.20
 318. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.16
 319. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.34
 320. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p32.6
 321. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.11
 322. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.11
 323. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p10.2
 324. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.75
 325. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p32.3
 326. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p20.15
 327. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p96.5
 328. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.23
 329. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p3.3
 330. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.27
 331. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p34.7
 332. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.22
 333. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.7
 334. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.11
 335. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.4
 336. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p36.3
 337. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p30.17
 338. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p2.1
 339. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.5
 340. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p58.6
 341. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.22
 342. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p8.6
 343. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.6
 344. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.9
 345. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.28
 346. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.12
 347. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.14
 348. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.57
 349. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.5
 350. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.24
 351. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.25
 352. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.12
 353. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p15.2
 354. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.32
 355. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.29
 356. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.17
 357. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.14
 358. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.52
 359. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.17
 360. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p12.4
 361. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.24
 362. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.23
 363. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.34
 364. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.30
 365. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.85
 366. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.35
 367. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.56
 368. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p15.1
 369. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.14
 370. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.5
 371. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.5
 372. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.9
 373. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.47
 374. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.6
 375. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.19
 376. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p3.1
 377. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p3.3
 378. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p8.1
 379. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p4.3
 380. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p4.4
 381. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p19.7
 382. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.24
 383. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p9.4
 384. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.6
 385. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.1
 386. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.7
 387. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.10
 388. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p31.6
 389. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p31.5
 390. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.13
 391. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.ii-p5.1
 392. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.10
 393. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.28
 394. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.16
 395. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.5
 396. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p70.1
 397. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p8.4
 398. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.1
 399. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.7
 400. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.2
 401. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p55.2
 402. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p55.1
 403. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.14
 404. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p68.1
 405. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p57.3
 406. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.58
 407. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p20.3
 408. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.63
 409. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.10
 410. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.14
 411. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.2
 412. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p15.7
 413. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.14
 414. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p8.3
 415. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.1
 416. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.70
 417. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.17
 418. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.25
 419. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p2.2
 420. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p3.4
 421. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p33.8
 422. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.13
 423. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p31.4
 424. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.31
 425. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p40.6
 426. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p30.20
 427. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p10.3
 428. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.15
 429. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-p5.2
 430. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p35.1
 431. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p4.1
 432. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.13
 433. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-p5.1
 434. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p6.5
 435. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.7
 436. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.9
 437. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p16.2
 438. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.24
 439. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.7
 440. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.88
 441. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.25
 442. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p78.9
 443. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.52
 444. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.39
 445. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.38
 446. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p40.9
 447. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.49
 448. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p13.1
 449. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p13.3
 450. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.4
 451. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.37
 452. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p15.3
 453. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.23
 454. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.14
 455. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.21
 456. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.18
 457. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.9
 458. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.24
 459. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p34.3
 460. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.28
 461. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.16
 462. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.6
 463. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.69
 464. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p61.7
 465. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p8.1
 466. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.12
 467. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.14
 468. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.6
 469. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.11
 470. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.7
 471. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.10
 472. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p7.5
 473. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p32.9
 474. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.19
 475. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.17
 476. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.1
 477. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.11
 478. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.15
 479. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.32
 480. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.30
 481. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.3
 482. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p4.5
 483. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p87.2
 484. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p34.4
 485. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.10
 486. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.17
 487. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.13
 488. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.15
 489. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.3
 490. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.42
 491. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.44
 492. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.9
 493. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p87.6
 494. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.39
 495. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p10.12
 496. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p77.12
 497. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p63.1
 498. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.11
 499. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.12
 500. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p3.11
 501. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.18
 502. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.8
 503. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.18
 504. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.54
 505. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.97
 506. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.5
 507. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.20
 508. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p7.1
 509. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.21
 510. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.29
 511. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.89
 512. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.95
 513. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.30
 514. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.31
 515. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.30
 516. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.10
 517. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.38
 518. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.82
 519. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.28
 520. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.37
 521. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.40
 522. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.93
 523. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.94
 524. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.15
 525. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.90
 526. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.18
 527. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.64
 528. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p78.2
 529. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.15
 530. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.20
 531. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.31
 532. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.45
 533. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.51
 534. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.53
 535. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.66
 536. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.67
 537. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.73
 538. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.91
 539. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.29
 540. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.74
 541. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.61
 542. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.17
 543. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.34
 544. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.6
 545. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.12
 546. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.53
 547. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.4
 548. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.62
 549. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.9
 550. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.19
 551. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.23
 552. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.7
 553. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.9
 554. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.21
 555. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.23
 556. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.25
 557. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.18
 558. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.76
 559. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.5
 560. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.66
 561. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.26
 562. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p19.3
 563. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.47
 564. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.4
 565. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p3.2
 566. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p19.4
 567. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.5
 568. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.6
 569. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.15
 570. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.49
 571. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.9
 572. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.13
 573. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p32.4
 574. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.18
 575. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.4
 576. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p6.6
 577. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p6.7
 578. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.16
 579. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p6.4
 580. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.7
 581. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.17
 582. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.22
 583. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.34
 584. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.5
 585. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.3
 586. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.32
 587. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p40.2
 588. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.61
 589. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p40.1
 590. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.17
 591. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.33
 592. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.11
 593. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p31.1
 594. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p6.1
 595. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p20.6
 596. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.14
 597. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.49
 598. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p25.4
 599. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p53.5
 600. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p15.3
 601. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.5
 602. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p19.6
 603. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p87.8
 604. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.11
 605. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p13.2
 606. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p87.7
 607. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p19.3
 608. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.16
 609. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p17.3
 610. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p2.5
 611. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.11
 612. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p17.1
 613. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.19
 614. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.8
 615. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.70
 616. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.5
 617. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p22.10
 618. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.20
 619. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.1
 620. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.18
 621. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p3.9
 622. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.48
 623. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p87.9
 624. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.16
 625. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p6.2
 626. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p87.3
 627. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p24.2
 628. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.35
 629. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.45
 630. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p40.11
 631. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p98.1
 632. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p4.2
 633. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.10
 634. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.33
 635. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.15
 636. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-p4.1
 637. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.27
 638. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.5
 639. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.18
 640. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p33.2
 641. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p9.5
 642. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.10
 643. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p53.2
 644. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.11
 645. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p77.6
 646. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.23
 647. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p3.5
 648. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.8
 649. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.12
 650. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.11
 651. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p21.2
 652. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p20.9
 653. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p4.8
 654. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.13
 655. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.38
 656. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.1
 657. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.25
 658. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p69.4
 659. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p9.6
 660. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.3
 661. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p22.11
 662. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.2
 663. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p87.5
 664. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p40.10
 665. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.23
 666. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.25
 667. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p62.1
 668. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p12.1
 669. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.54
 670. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p106.1
 671. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.33
 672. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.39
 673. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.31
 674. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.17
 675. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.94
 676. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.20
 677. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.22
 678. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.17
 679. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p77.9
 680. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.12
 681. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p20.5
 682. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.19
 683. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p40.8
 684. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.36
 685. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.10
 686. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.16
 687. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.14
 688. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.54
 689. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.35
 690. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p22.4
 691. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.31
 692. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.5
 693. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.32
 694. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.22
 695. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.31
 696. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p40.4
 697. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.44
 698. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.50
 699. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.3
 700. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.78
 701. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.6
 702. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.35
 703. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.6
 704. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.8
 705. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.21
 706. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.9
 707. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.1
 708. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p13.7
 709. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p2.4
 710. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p3.2
 711. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.6
 712. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p60.2
 713. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p61.5
 714. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p80.4
 715. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.32
 716. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.4
 717. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p61.4
 718. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p22.9
 719. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.5
 720. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p32.2
 721. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.88
 722. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.12
 723. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.27
 724. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p20.8
 725. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.13
 726. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p17.8
 727. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.25
 728. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.16
 729. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p21.3
 730. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.35
 731. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p11.9
 732. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.9
 733. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.15
 734. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.10
 735. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.13
 736. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p61.2
 737. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.23
 738. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.16
 739. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.16
 740. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.12
 741. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.22
 742. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.24
 743. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.10
 744. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.6
 745. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.34
 746. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.12
 747. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.26
 748. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.21
 749. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.2
 750. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.19
 751. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p58.2
 752. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.13
 753. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p4.2
 754. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.ii-p4.1
 755. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p32.4
 756. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.23
 757. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.4
 758. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p20.2
 759. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p25.1
 760. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p6.1
 761. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.19
 762. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p64.1
 763. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.17
 764. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p13.4
 765. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p13.5
 766. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.37
 767. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p19.6
 768. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.26
 769. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.27
 770. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p78.8
 771. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.102
 772. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.17
 773. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p22.8
 774. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p20.7
 775. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p21.1
 776. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.i-p4.2
 777. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.6
 778. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.15
 779. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p34.5
 780. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p3.7
 781. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.6
 782. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.14
 783. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.50
 784. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.20
 785. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p12.2
 786. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p12.3
 787. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.14
 788. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.1
 789. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.15
 790. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p26.1
 791. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.33
 792. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.22
 793. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.2
 794. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.24
 795. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.19
 796. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p18.1
 797. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.1
 798. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p29.2
 799. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.55
 800. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.31
 801. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.86
 802. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.1
 803. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.3
 804. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.27
 805. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.19
 806. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.20
 807. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.8
 808. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.16
 809. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.7
 810. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.9
 811. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.21
 812. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.3
 813. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.13
 814. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.40
 815. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.36
 816. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.10
 817. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.50
 818. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.67
 819. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.74
 820. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.25
 821. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.36
 822. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p25.1
 823. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.23
 824. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.9
 825. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.72
 826. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.38
 827. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.16
 828. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p36.4
 829. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.4
 830. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.14
 831. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.20
 832. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p17.12
 833. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p6.3
 834. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.7
 835. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.21
 836. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p4.6
 837. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.7
 838. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p2.1
 839. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.84
 840. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p4.1
 841. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.80
 842. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.83
 843. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.26
 844. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.51
 845. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.29
 846. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.53
 847. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p6.1
 848. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.20
 849. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.19
 850. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.36
 851. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.31
 852. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p14.3
 853. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p26.22
 854. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p15.5
 855. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.78
 856. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p21.1
 857. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.20
 858. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p32.5
 859. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.i-p6.2
 860. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p22.7
 861. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.58
 862. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.24
 863. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p23.4
 864. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.6
 865. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.93
 866. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.23
 867. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.6
 868. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p1.2
 869. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p15.4
 870. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.5
 871. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p32.7
 872. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.13
 873. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.24
 874. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p77.7
 875. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.17
 876. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p6.7
 877. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.90
 878. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.10
 879. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.3
 880. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.11
 881. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p3.1
 882. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p8.5
 883. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p25.3
 884. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.46
 885. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.12
 886. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.8
 887. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p21.1
 888. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.13
 889. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.10
 890. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.22
 891. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.29
 892. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.31
 893. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.19
 894. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.21
 895. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p29.22
 896. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.3
 897. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p26.1
 898. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.79
 899. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p30.19
 900. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.45
 901. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.15
 902. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p10.5
 903. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p78.7
 904. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.11
 905. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p13.2
 906. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p34.1
 907. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.69
 908. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.3
 909. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.17
 910. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p4.7
 911. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.2
 912. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.6
 913. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p9.14
 914. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.7
 915. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.16
 916. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.6
 917. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.8
 918. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.23
 919. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.13
 920. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.20
 921. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p4.3
 922. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p25.3
 923. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.8
 924. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p17.2
 925. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.15
 926. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p3.4
 927. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.26
 928. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.21
 929. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.9
 930. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.4
 931. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p77.5
 932. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p25.7
 933. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p10.3
 934. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.4
 935. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.11
 936. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.57
 937. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p10.1
 938. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.11
 939. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.23
 940. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p10.9
 941. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.27
 942. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p36.5
 943. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p4.5
 944. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p12.2
 945. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p4.2
 946. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p4.5
 947. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.25
 948. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.15
 949. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p11.5
 950. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.29
 951. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-p8.5
 952. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p30.6
 953. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p7.2
 954. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.98
 955. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.8
 956. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p10.7
 957. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.96
 958. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p9.19
 959. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.30
 960. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p15.2
 961. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.24
 962. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p3.6
 963. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p92.7
 964. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.25
 965. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.105
 966. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p2.4
 967. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.20
 968. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p17.11
 969. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p31.3
 970. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p25.12
 971. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.46
 972. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p4.4
 973. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p3.2
 974. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p37.22
 975. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p5.2
 976. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.10
 977. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.21
 978. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p4.6
 979. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p16.4
 980. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p16.3
 981. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p17.10
 982. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p92.4
 983. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p65.1
 984. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p3.1
 985. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p6.3
 986. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p3.1
 987. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p30.1
 988. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p30.4
 989. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p25.2
 990. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p30.2
 991. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p3.2
 992. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.9
 993. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p99.1
 994. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.4
 995. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p23.7
 996. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p6.1
 997. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.16
 998. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p2.9
 999. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p30.3
1000. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-p26.1
1001. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.65
1002. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p12.18
1003. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.35
1004. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p30.5
1005. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p80.5
1006. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.5
1007. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.63
1008. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p3.3
1009. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p19.1
1010. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p34.1
1011. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.71
1012. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.75
1013. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.77
1014. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.2
1015. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.26
1016. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p92.5
1017. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p30.5
1018. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p54.5
1019. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p13.1
1020. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p7.11
1021. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.21
1022. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p6.6
1023. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p9.2
1024. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p37.3
1025. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.99
1026. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p6.4
1027. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p9.1
1028. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p2.12
1029. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p30.2
1030. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p105.2
1031. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p2.8
1032. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p2.9
1033. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.14
1034. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p19.5
1035. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p8.2
1036. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p100.4
1037. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.1
1038. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.38
1039. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p5.3
1040. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p28.106
1041. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p5.7
1042. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p4.1
1043. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p13.18
1044. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p35.27
1045. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p9.7
1046. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p35.3
1047. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.8
1048. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p96.2
1049. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p9.3
1050. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p12.4
1051. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p12.5
1052. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.41
1053. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.40
1054. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.39
1055. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p12.1
1056. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.5
1057. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.7
1058. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.8
1059. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.10
1060. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p36.2
1061. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.3
1062. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.12
1063. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p26.1
1064. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.1
1065. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p10.2
1066. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p24.6
1067. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.37
1068. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p96.3
1069. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p23.26
1070. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-p16.3
1071. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p105.1
1072. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p4.10
1073. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.39
1074. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p12.6
1075. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p11.16
1076. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p23.8
1077. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-p7.3
1078. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.13
1079. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p36.18
1080. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p3.14
1081. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.41
1082. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p27.79
1083. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-p24.3
1084. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p5.6
1085. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.28
1086. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-p7.29
1087. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p2.11
1088. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-p97.32
1089. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-p9.8
1090. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-p1.5
1091. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#i-Page_iv
1092. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii-Page_v
1093. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_vi
1094. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_vii
1095. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_viii
1096. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xix
1097. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_x
1098. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xi
1099. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xii
1100. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xiii
1101. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xiv
1102. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xv
1103. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xvi
1104. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xvii
1105. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xviii
1106. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xix_1
1107. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xx
1108. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xxi
1109. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.i-Page_xxii
1110. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii-Page_xxiii
1111. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii-Page_1
1112. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_2
1113. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_3
1114. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_4
1115. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_5
1116. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_6
1117. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_7
1118. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_8
1119. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_9
1120. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_10
1121. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_11
1122. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_12
1123. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_13
1124. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_14
1125. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_15
1126. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_16
1127. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_17
1128. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_18
1129. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_19
1130. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_20
1131. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_21
1132. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_22
1133. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_23
1134. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_24
1135. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_25
1136. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_26
1137. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_27
1138. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_28
1139. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_29
1140. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_30
1141. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_31
1142. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_32
1143. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_33
1144. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_34
1145. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_35
1146. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_36
1147. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_37
1148. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_38
1149. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_39
1150. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.i-Page_40
1151. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_41
1152. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_42
1153. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_43
1154. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_44
1155. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_45
1156. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_46
1157. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_47
1158. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_48
1159. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_49
1160. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_50
1161. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_51
1162. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_52
1163. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_53
1164. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_54
1165. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_55
1166. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_56
1167. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_57
1168. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_58
1169. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_59
1170. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_60
1171. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_61
1172. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_62
1173. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_63
1174. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_64
1175. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_65
1176. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_66
1177. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_67
1178. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_68
1179. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_69
1180. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_70
1181. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_71
1182. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_72
1183. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_73
1184. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_74
1185. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_75
1186. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_76
1187. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_77
1188. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_78
1189. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_79
1190. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_80
1191. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_81
1192. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_82
1193. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_83
1194. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_84
1195. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_85
1196. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_86
1197. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_87
1198. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_88
1199. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_89
1200. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_90
1201. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_91
1202. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_92
1203. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_93
1204. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_94
1205. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_95
1206. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_96
1207. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_97
1208. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_98
1209. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_99
1210. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_100
1211. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_101
1212. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_102
1213. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_103
1214. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_104
1215. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_105
1216. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_106
1217. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_107
1218. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_108
1219. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_109
1220. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_110
1221. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_111
1222. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_112
1223. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_113
1224. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_114
1225. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_115
1226. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_116
1227. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_117
1228. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_118
1229. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_119
1230. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_120
1231. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_121
1232. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_122
1233. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_123
1234. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_124
1235. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_125
1236. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_126
1237. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_127
1238. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_128
1239. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.ii-Page_129
1240. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-Page_130
1241. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-Page_131
1242. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-Page_132
1243. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-Page_133
1244. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-Page_134
1245. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-Page_135
1246. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.ii.iii-Page_136
1247. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii-Page_137
1248. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii-Page_138
1249. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii-Page_139
1250. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii-Page_140
1251. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii-Page_141
1252. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.i-Page_142
1253. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.i-Page_143
1254. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.i-Page_144
1255. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.i-Page_145
1256. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-Page_146
1257. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-Page_147
1258. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-Page_148
1259. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-Page_149
1260. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.ii-Page_150
1261. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_151
1262. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_152
1263. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_153
1264. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_154
1265. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_155
1266. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_156
1267. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_157
1268. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_158
1269. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_159
1270. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_160
1271. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_161
1272. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_162
1273. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_163
1274. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_164
1275. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_165
1276. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_166
1277. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_167
1278. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_168
1279. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_169
1280. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_170
1281. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_171
1282. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_172
1283. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_173
1284. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_174
1285. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_175
1286. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_176
1287. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_177
1288. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_178
1289. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_179
1290. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_180
1291. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_181
1292. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_182
1293. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_183
1294. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_184
1295. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_185
1296. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_186
1297. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_187
1298. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_188
1299. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_189
1300. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_190
1301. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_191
1302. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_192
1303. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_193
1304. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_194
1305. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_195
1306. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_196
1307. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_197
1308. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_198
1309. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_199
1310. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_200
1311. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_201
1312. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_202
1313. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_203
1314. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_204
1315. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_205
1316. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_206
1317. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_207
1318. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_208
1319. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_209
1320. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_210
1321. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_211
1322. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_212
1323. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_213
1324. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_214
1325. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_215
1326. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_216
1327. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_217
1328. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_218
1329. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_219
1330. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_220
1331. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_221
1332. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_222
1333. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iii-Page_223
1334. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_224
1335. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_225
1336. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_226
1337. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_227
1338. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_228
1339. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_229
1340. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_230
1341. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_231
1342. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_232
1343. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_233
1344. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_234
1345. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_235
1346. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_236
1347. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_237
1348. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_238
1349. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_239
1350. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_240
1351. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_241
1352. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_242
1353. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_243
1354. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_244
1355. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_245
1356. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_246
1357. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_247
1358. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_248
1359. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_249
1360. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_250
1361. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_251
1362. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_252
1363. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_253
1364. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_254
1365. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_255
1366. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_256
1367. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_257
1368. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_258
1369. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_259
1370. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_260
1371. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_261
1372. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_262
1373. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_263
1374. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_264
1375. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_265
1376. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_266
1377. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.iv-Page_270
1378. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_268
1379. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_269
1380. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_270
1381. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_271
1382. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_272
1383. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_273
1384. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_274
1385. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_275
1386. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_276
1387. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_277
1388. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_278
1389. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_279
1390. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_280
1391. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_281
1392. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_282
1393. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_283
1394. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_284
1395. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_285
1396. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_286
1397. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.v-Page_287
1398. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_288
1399. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_289
1400. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_290
1401. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_291
1402. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_292
1403. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_293
1404. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_294
1405. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_295
1406. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_296
1407. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_297
1408. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_298
1409. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_299
1410. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_300
1411. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_301
1412. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_302
1413. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_303
1414. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_304
1415. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_305
1416. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_306
1417. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_307
1418. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_308
1419. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_309
1420. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_310
1421. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_311
1422. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_312
1423. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_313
1424. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_314
1425. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_315
1426. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_316
1427. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_317
1428. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iii.vi-Page_318
1429. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_319
1430. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_320
1431. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_321
1432. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_322
1433. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_323
1434. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_324
1435. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_325
1436. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_326
1437. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_327
1438. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_328
1439. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_329
1440. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_330
1441. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_331
1442. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.i-Page_332
1443. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.ii-Page_333
1444. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.ii-Page_334
1445. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.ii-Page_335
1446. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_336
1447. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_337
1448. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_338
1449. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_339
1450. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_340
1451. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_341
1452. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_342
1453. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_343
1454. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_344
1455. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_345
1456. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_346
1457. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_347
1458. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_348
1459. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_349
1460. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_350
1461. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_351
1462. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_352
1463. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_353
1464. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_354
1465. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_355
1466. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_356
1467. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_357
1468. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_358
1469. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_359
1470. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_360
1471. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_361
1472. file:///ccel/h/harnack/dogma1/cache/dogma1.html3#ii.iv.iii-Page_362
