     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: A DEMONSTRATION of the Gross and Fundamental Errors
      Creator(s): Law, William (1686-1761)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________

  A DEMONSTRATION of the Gross and Fundamental Errors

  Of a late book,

  called A Plain Account of the Nature and End of the Sacrament

  of the Lord's Supper,

  Wherein also the nature and extent

  of the redemption of all mankind by Jesus Christ

  is stated and explained; and the pretences of the Deists,

  for a religion of natural reason instead of it,

  are examined to the bottom. The whole humbly, earnestly,

  and affectionately addressed to all orders of men,

  and more especially to all the younger clergy.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [Dem-1] My design (worthy reader) is not to lay before you all the
   errors and false reasonings of this author throughout his whole
   treatise. This would lead you into too much wrangle, and the
   multiplicity of things disputed, would take your eye from the chief
   point in question, and so make the matter less edifying to you.

   [Dem-2] Many therefore of his lesser mistakes I shall pass over, and
   only endeavor to discover such gross and fundamental errors, as may
   justly pass for an entire confutation of his whole book.

   [Dem-3] The foundation on which he proceeds, and the principal matters
   of his discourse, are not only notoriously against the truth of the
   sacrament, but plainly destructive of the principal doctrines of the
   Christian religion.

   [Dem-4] And if this key of knowledge, put into your hands by this
   author, is accepted by you, you will not only lose all the right
   knowledge of this sacrament, but be rendered a blind, deaf, and even
   dead reader of all the other doctrines of scripture. For the way he
   points out to find the truth of the doctrine of the sacrament, is the
   only way to lose the truth of all the most important parts of the
   gospel.

   [Dem-5] Who this nameless author is, neither concerns the truth, nor
   you, nor me, and therefore I leave that matter as he has left it.

   [Dem-6] He begins with giving us this account of the principles on
   which he proceeds.

   [Dem-6] I have endeavored to establish and explain the true nature,
   end, and effect of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. And this in such
   a manner, that all who are concerned may, I hope, be led into the right
   way of judging about it. {Page 5} To this I have endeavored to guide
   them, by directing and confining their attention to all that is said
   about this duty, by those who alone had any authority to declare the
   nature of it: Neither on the one hand diminishing, nor on the other
   augmenting, what is declared by them to belong to it. If therefore the
   manner in which I have chosen to treat this subject, should appear to
   some to stand in need of any apology; this is the only one I can
   persuade myself to make, that I have no authority to add to the words
   of Christ and his apostles upon this subject; nor to put any meaning or
   interpretation upon these words, but what is agreeable to the common
   rules of speaking in like cases, and to the declared design of the
   institution itself. {Page 6}--All who (in the apostle's phrase) love
   our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and who desire to be no wiser about
   his appointments, than he himself was; and are content to expect no
   more from his institution than he himself put into it, will join with
   me at least in the one only method of examining into the nature and
   extent of it. {Page 7}

   [Dem-7] Here he has given us a short, but full account of the
   principles upon which he proceeds, which I shall reduce into the
   following propositions.

   [Dem-8] First, that the nature, end, and effects of the holy sacrament
   can only be so far known, and apprehended by us, as the bare words of
   Christ in the institution of the sacrament, related by the apostles and
   evangelists, have made them known to us.

   [Dem-9] Secondly, that no other meaning or interpretation is to be put
   upon these words, but what is agreeable to the common rules of speaking
   on the like occasions.

   [Dem-10] Thirdly, that this examination into the meaning of the words,
   according to the common rules of speaking on the like occasions, is the
   one only method of knowing what is meant by them.

   [Dem-11] Fourthly, that this knowledge thus acquired from such a
   consideration of the words, is all the knowledge that we can have of
   the nature, end, and effects of this holy sacrament.

   [Dem-12] Everyone must see that these propositions are fairly taken
   from his own words, and that they are the foundation of his whole
   discourse. He builds upon them as upon so many axioms, or first
   principles; and all he says from the beginning to the end of his
   treatise, is founded upon the supposed incontestable truth of them.

   [Dem-13] Here therefore let me desire you to fix your eye, for here I
   will place the merits of the cause with him: If this foundation cannot
   be shaken, I will dispute nothing that he has built upon it.

   [Dem-14] But then let it be observed, that if these propositions are
   proved to be absolutely false, and most evidently repugnant to the
   repeated letter, constant spirit, and whole tenor of scripture, then
   all this whole treatise, from the beginning to the end, so far as he
   proceeds upon his own avowed principles, is mere fiction and fable, a
   castle in the air.

   [Dem-15] I shall therefore in the plainest manner show the falseness of
   these propositions, and that they are so far from being what he takes
   them to be, viz., the only means of arriving at the fullness of
   scripture truths, that whoever entertains them as truths, and abides by
   them in his search after scripture truths, is, and must be, so long as
   he continues in that sentiment and practice, stone-blind to all the
   mysteries of the kingdom of God, as related in scripture.

   [Dem-16] And that, if it were anyone's desire to do exactly what our
   blessed Lord charges upon the Pharisees and lawyer, "that they shut up
   the kingdom of heaven, took away the key of knowledge, entered not in
   themselves, and those that were entering in, they hindered": were this
   the deepest desire of anyone's heart, the one only effectual way of
   doing it, must be the way that this author has taken in this treatise.
   For, it shall also be made appear, that these principles of his are
   that very veil which the apostle says was upon the hearts of the Jews;
   and that the scriptures have never been useless to, misunderstood, or
   rejected by any people of any age, but for this reason, because their
   hearts were blinded and hardened by this very method of knowing
   scripture truths, which he proposes to us. All the characters of "stiff
   -necked, hardened, blind, carnal, and uncircumcised in heart and
   spirit," which are in the scriptures given to unbelieving Jews, are
   only so many various ways of describing that state of heart, which
   these very principles had produced in them.

   [Dem-17] Had they thought of any other method of knowing their messiah,
   but that of the bare letter of scripture, interpreted according to the
   common rules of speaking, the greatest occasion of their infidelity had
   been removed.

   [Dem-18] But to begin in my proposed method. The holy sacrament was
   instituted in these words: "And as they were eating, Jesus took bread,
   and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said,
   Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and gave it to them,
   saying, Drink ye all of it: for this is my blood of the New Testament,
   which is shed for many, for the remission of sins." Matt. 26:28. In St.
   Luke the words of institution are: "And he took the bread, and gave
   thanks, and brake it, and gave it unto them, saying, This is my body
   which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the
   cup after supper, saying, This cup is the New Testament in my blood,
   which is shed for you." Luke 22:19.

   [Dem-19] Let us now apply the doctrine contained in the forementioned
   propositions to these words of the institution of the sacrament.
   According to the doctrine of those propositions, the one only method of
   understanding what is meant by these words of the institution, is to
   consider and interpret them "according to the common rules of speaking
   in like cases." But, pray sir, where must a man look for a like case?
   Does the world afford us any case like it? Have the speaker, or the
   things spoken, any things in common life that are alike to either of
   them? How vain it is therefore to refer us to the common rules of
   speaking on the like cases, when the whole world affords us neither any
   person like him that spoke, nor any thing, or case, like the things and
   case here spoken of.

   [Dem-20] The scripture saith, "He spake the word, and they were made;
   he commanded, and they were created." {Psalm 148:5.} Has this way of
   speaking any parallel in the language of men? Do human things and
   transactions furnish us with anything like this?

   [Dem-21] Now the Word which thus speaking created all things, is not
   more extraordinary, more above the common rules of speaking, or more
   without human example, than that Word which, in the institution of the
   sacrament, spake, and it was done; commanded, and it was created. For
   it is the same omnipotent Word that here speaketh, that spoke the
   creation into being; and the effects of his speaking in the institution
   of the sacrament, are as extraordinary, and as much above the effects
   of human speaking, as when the same Word "spake, and they were made;
   commanded, and they were created." And it is impossible for anyone to
   show, that there is less of divine power and greatness, less of mystery
   and miracle implied in these words spoken by the eternal Word in the
   institution of the sacrament, than when the same eternal Word said,
   "Let there be light, and there was light."

   [Dem-22] All words have a meaning, a significancy and effect, according
   to the nature of him, whose they are. The words of God are of the
   nature of God, divine, living and powerful; the words of an angel are,
   as that angel is in power and perfection; the words of a devil have
   only his nature and power, and therefore they can only and solely tempt
   to evil; the words of man are, as men are, weak, vain, earthly, and of
   a poor and narrow signification. To direct us therefore to the common
   rules of speaking amongst men, as the only means of truly knowing all
   that the Son of God spoke, when he spoke of himself, and on such an
   occasion, and in such circumstances as never did, nor ever can happen
   or belong to anyone but himself, is surely no small mistake. The common
   rules of speaking are like other things that are common amongst men,
   viz., poor, empty, and superficial, hardly touching the outside of the
   mere human things we talk about. If therefore what the Son of God said
   of himself in the institution of this holy sacrament, must necessarily
   be supposed to have no higher meaning or deeper sense, than such as is
   according to the common rules of speaking amongst men; it must
   necessarily follow, that he spoke as meanly, as imperfectly, and as
   superficially in what he said of himself, and the matter he was upon,
   as when men speak of themselves and human things. For if there were not
   the same weak, empty, and superficial meaning in his words, as there is
   in the common discourse of men; then the common rules of speaking
   amongst men cannot be a proper, much less the only means of
   understanding all the truth that is contained in them.

   [Dem-23] This author seems to be in the same mistake concerning Jesus
   Christ and his kingdom, as his disciples were in, before they had
   received power from on high. They had till then heard him only with
   their outward ears; conceived what he said, only according to the
   common rules of speaking amongst men, and so continued perfect
   strangers to all the mysteries and great truths of the gospel. But
   after the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, their understandings
   were opened, and they saw all things with new eyes, and in a new light;
   they then fully apprehended what their Lord meant by these remarkable
   words, "My kingdom is not of this world." Which is the same thing as if
   he had said, I speak not as a person of this world, and therefore the
   things which I say, can neither be understood by a worldly mind, nor
   according to the common ways of speaking amongst men. And had this
   author sufficiently attended to the sense of these words, and felt the
   truth of them in his own heart, it seems next to impossible for him to
   have fallen into his present way of reasoning. For he that truly and
   fully believes that the kingdom of Christ is not of this world, and
   that therefore worldly powers and privileges are not a proper part of
   it, can hardly be so inconsistent with himself, as to affirm, that
   worldly language, spoken on worldly matters, is the only proper key to
   the right understanding the truths and doctrines of this kingdom, that
   is so out of, above, and contrary to this world.

   [Dem-24] And if he has but one just and good argument to prove, that
   worldly power is not the proper and only power that belongs to this
   kingdom, the same argument will as fully prove, that worldly language
   understood according to the common rules of speaking, cannot be the
   proper and only means of rightly apprehending the truths of this
   kingdom.

   [Dem-25] To proceed; he refers and confines us to the bare words of the
   institution, for the right and full understanding of all that is to be
   understood of the nature, end, and effects of the holy sacrament.

   [Dem-26] Here he throws an easy deception into the mind of his reader,
   who because he may justly think he is right in declaring the words of
   institution to be the only true and full account of the sacrament, as
   to the outward form and matter of it, suspects him not to be wrong,
   when he concludes from thence, that the words are also the only true
   and full account of the nature, end and effects of the holy sacrament.
   Whereas this is as false, as the other is true; for the nature, and
   end, and effects of the holy sacrament, neither are, nor possibly can
   be taught us (as shall be shown hereafter) from the bare words of the
   institution, considered by themselves.

   [Dem-27] Let us suppose that one of this author's rational men, of
   clear ideas, but an absolute stranger to the scriptures, and to our
   savior's doctrines, had been present only when he spoke the words of
   the institution; would his knowledge of the meaning of words, according
   to the common rules of speaking, have directed him to the true sense of
   all that was implied by this sacrament and the observation of it? To
   say that such a person thus qualified could have known the true nature,
   end, and effects of the holy sacrament, is surely too absurd to be
   imagined. And to say that he could not, is fully giving up this
   author's whole doctrine, namely, that the bare understanding the words
   of the institution according to the common rules of speaking, is the
   only way to understand all that is certain and true as the nature, end,
   and effects of the sacrament. For if this were so, it would evidently
   follow, that a perfect stranger to all the other doctrines and
   institutions both of the Old and New Testament, would be as well
   qualified to understand all that was implied in the words of the
   institution, as he that had the fullest knowledge of everything that
   ever had been revealed or appointed by God, either before or since the
   birth of Christ.

   [Dem-28] But if some knowledge of what God has revealed both in the Old
   and New Testament be required, for a right understanding what is
   implied in the words of the institution, then it is absolutely false,
   and highly blamable, to say, that the bare words of the institution,
   considered in themselves only, according to the common rules of
   speaking, are the only means or method of understanding all that is
   implied in them.

   [Dem-29] Either this sacrament has some relation to some other
   doctrines of the Old and New Testament, or it has not; if it has no
   relation to them, then it must be said to have no agreement with any
   other part of scripture: but if it has some relation to other doctrines
   of scripture, then it demonstratively follows, that this institution
   must be interpreted, not according to the bare meaning of the words in
   the common ways of speaking, but according to that relation which it
   has to some other doctrines of scripture. This, I think, is
   incontestable, and entirely overthrows his only method of understanding
   the nature of the sacrament.

   [Dem-30] Again, another argument of still greater force against him may
   be taken from the apostles themselves. He confines us to the bare words
   of the institution related by the apostles and evangelists, as the only
   means of knowing all that can be known of the nature, end, and effects
   of the sacrament; and yet it is certain, beyond all doubt, that the
   apostles and evangelists neither had, nor could possibly have this
   design in relating and recording the words of the institution, namely,
   that we might thereby have the one only means of knowing all that is to
   be understood by it.

   [Dem-31] For they very well knew, that they had received no such
   knowledge themselves from the bare words of the institution, and
   therefore they could not relate them as the only means of instruction
   in that matter to others. They very well knew, that if they had
   received no other light, besides that which those words conveyed, they
   had died in a total ignorance of the whole matter.

   [Dem-32] They very well knew, that though they had personally conversed
   with Christ, had heard from his own mouth, mysteries preparatory to
   their right knowledge of their savior, that notwithstanding all this,
   when they heard and saw him institute the sacrament in its outward form
   and matter, as they relate it, by the help of the bare words of the
   institution, they then neither did, nor could rightly understand the
   nature, end, and effects of the holy sacrament. And therefore it may be
   said to be certain beyond all doubt, that they neither did nor could
   relate and record these words of the institution, as the only means of
   rightly understanding all that is implied in the sacrament, as to the
   nature, end, and effects of it. And yet this author takes all this for
   granted, and supposes that the apostles had all their knowledge of the
   sacrament from the words of the institution, and that they have
   recorded the institution for this end, and with this design, that we
   might know all that they knew, and all that could be known concerning
   it.

   [Dem-33] That the apostles themselves did not comprehend the nature,
   end, and effects of the sacrament from the words of the institution, is
   plain; for they did not then know what person their savior was, or how
   he was to save them or what their salvation in itself implied. They
   knew nothing of the nature or merit of his sufferings, but thought all
   to be lost, when he suffered death. They knew not how to believe in his
   resurrection, and when they did believe it, they knew nothing of the
   consequences of it; which is a plain proof that they did not at all see
   into the meaning of the holy sacrament, for had they known what was
   implied in it, they must have known their savior, and the nature of
   their salvation. And yet (what is well to be observed) it is also
   plain, that in this state of gross ignorance and infidelity, knowing
   nothing of their salvation, they had all that knowledge of the holy
   sacrament which this author is recommending to the Christian world, as
   the only true knowledge of it. For they must have understood the words
   according to the common rules of speaking, which is all that he allows
   to be understood by them. For any other sense or meaning, that is not
   literally expressed in the words taken according to the common rules of
   speaking, is by him called a being wiser than Christ in his own
   appointments, an adding to the institution, or a putting something into
   it, which he has not put in. So that it is evidently plain, that this
   purity of knowledge concerning the sacrament, which this author has
   writ so large a volume in recommendation of, is that very knowledge of
   the sacrament which the apostles had, when they had no faith in Christ
   as their savior, nor any knowledge of the nature of Christian
   salvation. Everyone must see that this charge is justly brought against
   him, and that he cannot possibly avoid it. For if that is the only
   right knowledge the nature, end, and effects of the holy sacrament,
   which the bare words of the institution, understood according to the
   common rules of speaking, declare; if every other sense and meaning is
   to be rejected as a criminal adding, or putting something into Christ's
   institution, and a presuming to be wiser than he was; then it
   undeniably follows, that that simple and pure knowledge of the
   sacrament, which he lays so great claim to, and so much contends for,
   is that very gross ignorance of it which the apostles were in, when
   they had no light but from the bare words of the institution, and had
   all the articles of the Christian faith to learn.

   [Dem-34] Further, as the apostles did not, so they could not possibly
   know the nature, end, and effects of the holy sacrament, from the bare
   words of the institution, nor is it possible for anyone since their
   time to know it by that help alone.

   [Dem-35] The outward matter and form indeed, or that wherein the
   positive institution consists (as I have already said) is sufficiently
   plain and intelligible from the bare words of the institution, and is
   by them made unalterable. This is the only plainness of the
   institution. But what mysteries or doctrines of Christian faith are to
   be acknowledged or confessed by the words, the form, and the matter of
   it, and what are not, cannot be known from the bare words of the
   institution, but are to be learnt by that light which brought the
   apostles and the church after them into a true and full knowledge of
   the fundamental articles of the Christian faith.

   [Dem-36] Take the words of the institution alone as the apostles first
   heard them, understood only according to the common rules of speaking,
   and then there is nothing in them, but that poor conception which they
   had of them at that time, and such as did them no good; and then also
   we have that knowledge of this institution, which this author pleads
   for. But, take the same words of institution, understood and
   interpreted according to the articles of the Christian faith, and seen
   in that light in which the apostles afterwards saw them, when they knew
   their savior; and then everything that is great and adorable in the
   redemption of mankind, everything that can delight, comfort and support
   the heart of a Christian, is found to be centered in this holy
   sacrament. There then wants nothing but the wedding garment to make
   this holy supper the marriage feast of the Lamb: and it is this holy
   solemnity, this author is taking so much pains to wrangle us out of, by
   so many dry subtleties of a superficial logic.

   [Dem-37] But I proceed to show, that neither the apostles, nor any
   other persons since them, could possibly know the nature, end and
   effects of the holy sacrament, from the bare words of the institution
   considered only in themselves, according to the common rules of
   speaking. And this may be demonstrated from every part of the
   institution.

   [Dem-38] I shall begin with these words, which are only a command to
   observe the institution, "Do this in remembrance of me": that is, let
   this be done as your confession and acknowledgement of the salvation
   that is received through me. Does not every common Christian, that has
   any knowledge of scripture, know, that this is the plain meaning of
   these words? And that as often as he does this, he does it in
   remembrance of his savior, in acknowledgement and confession of that
   salvation which mankind received through him? But now, that which is
   thus plain and intelligible in the words of the institution to a common
   Christian, knowing only the chief articles of his salvation, is
   altogether unintelligible to any man that is left solely to the bare
   words of the institution; for unless he was instructed in the other
   parts of scripture, so as to know what he was to understand by the
   words, they would signify no more to him than they would to a heathen,
   who had by chance found a bit of paper in the fields with the same
   words writ upon it.

   [Dem-39] Now a heathen, ignorant of all divine revelation, if he found
   such a paper, could not know what it related to, nor what any of the
   words signified; he could not know when he was nearer, or when he was
   further from a right understanding of them; the common rules of
   speaking amongst men, would be of no use to teach him, whether there
   was any truth in such a paper, or what kind of truths were declared by
   it.

   [Dem-40] Now this is exactly the case of him that renounces all other
   means of knowing what is contained in the institution, but that of the
   words themselves, understood only according to the common rules of
   speaking amongst men. Such a one is only in the state of this heathen,
   the words of the institution are as unintelligible and useless to him,
   as if he had found them by chance; they relate to he knows not what,
   they may be all fiction and invention for aught he knows, they cannot
   possibly be understood as having any truth or reality in them, till he
   that reads them, knows more than is related by them, till he knows the
   chief articles of the Christian salvation. For the bare words of the
   institution, considered by themselves, do not at all prove, justify, or
   explain, even that which they literally express; they are all but
   empty, unmeaning words, till the proof, the justification and
   explication of them, is learned from some other parts of scripture.
   They do not at all prove, justify, or explain, either that we want a
   savior, or why we want him, or that a savior is given us, and how he
   effects our salvation; and yet all these things are absolutely
   necessary to a right understanding of this institution; and as soon as
   these things are proved, justified and explained, as soon as we know
   that we want a savior, and that one is given to us; as soon as we know
   who this savior is, how he saves us, and the nature and manner of our
   salvation, then, and not till then, all these words of the institution
   become clearly intelligible after a new manner; then all the great
   articles of our salvation appear to be finely remembered, acknowledged,
   and set forth by them.

   [Dem-41] The short of the matter is this; to understand these words
   only by themselves, knowing no more in them or by them, than what the
   common use of words teaches us, is to understand them only in such a
   degree as a heathen may understand them, who knows nothing of the
   scripture besides; and this is the knowledge, or rather the total
   ignorance of the sacrament, that this author is contending for.

   [Dem-42] But if these words are but a part of the Christian religion,
   if they are to be understood according to that religion of which they
   are a part, if the articles of our Christian salvation have any concern
   in them, and we are to receive them as Christians in such a sense as
   our Christianity requires of us; then it is undeniably certain, that
   this author refers us to an absurdity, and impossibility, when he
   refers and confines us to the bare words of the institution, understood
   only according to the common rules of speaking, in order to have a
   Christian knowledge of the holy sacrament.

   [Dem-43] Again, "Do this in remembrance of me": Now take these words in
   what sense you please, is it not equally and absolutely necessary for
   the right understanding of them, to know who and what kind of person
   this ME is, who is here to be remembered? For if this is to be done in
   remembrance of him, how can he be remembered, or acknowledged, unless
   it be known what qualities and characters of him are to be remembered
   and acknowledged?

   [Dem-44] But this is not done in the words of the institution; the
   state, nature, and characters of the person to be remembered are not
   there declared, nor proved, and explained; therefore something of the
   greatest importance to the words, and that must have the greatest
   effect upon the sense of them, and that is absolutely necessary to the
   right understanding of them, is necessarily to be learnt elsewhere; and
   therefore it is again proved that he refers us to an absurdity and
   impossibility, when he refers and confines us to the bare words of the
   institution, to know all that a Christian can rightly know of them.

   [Dem-45] For if all that is done in this sacrament, is to be done for
   the sake of remembering and acknowledging him as our savior, then
   surely it requires us to remember, and acknowledge him, according to
   what he is, with regard to our salvation, and according to those
   characters which are so plainly ascribed to him in scripture, and on
   which our whole religion is founded; and therefore it is also
   necessary, that we rightly know (what cannot possibly be known from the
   bare words of the institution) in what respects and on how many
   accounts he is our savior, before we can rightly make this remembrance
   and acknowledgement of him as such.

   [Dem-46] It was the want of this knowledge, that made the institution
   of the sacrament useless to the apostles when they first heard it; but
   when they had got this knowledge, and knew all the characters of their
   savior, and in how many respects he stood as the mediator and redeemer
   betwixt God and man, then the institution became highly intelligible to
   them, and every part of it plainly declared the mystery that in a
   certain sense was both concealed and expressed by it. Now the addition
   of this knowledge of the nature, condition, and characters of the
   person to be remembered and acknowledged by the institution, is adding
   nothing to the institution, but the right use of it; it is bringing
   nothing to it, but a mind capable of knowing and observing it.

   [Dem-47] He that is to understand a proposition written in Hebrew,
   cannot be charged with adding to that proposition, because he holds it
   necessary to learn the Hebrew language before he pretends to understand
   a proposition written in Hebrew.

   [Dem-48] Now a scripture-Christian institution must as necessarily be
   understood according to scripture and Christian doctrine, as an Hebrew
   proposition must be understood according to the Hebrew language: and
   the making use of scripture and Christian doctrine, in order to
   understand a scripture and Christian institution, is no more an adding
   of something to the institution, that need not, or ought not to be
   done, than the interpreting an Hebrew proposition by the Hebrew
   language, is an adding of something to it, that need not, or ought not
   to be done.

   [Dem-49] And, on the other hand, to confine us to the bare words of the
   institution, as they are in themselves, as they sound only in common
   language, in order to understand a scripture-Christian institution, is
   exactly the same thing as to confine us to the bare words of a
   proposition written in Hebrew, considered only according to the common
   rules of speaking, and not according to that meaning they have in the
   Hebrew language to which they belong, and of which they are a part.

   [Dem-50] For a scripture-Christian institution must in the same manner
   have its dependence upon, foundation in, and interpretation from
   scripture and Christian doctrine, of which it is a part, and to which
   it belongs, as an Hebrew proposition hath dependence upon, foundation
   in, and interpretation from the Hebrew language, to which it belongs,
   and of which it is a part.

   [Dem-51] This scripture-Christian institution being thus interpreted,
   according to the scripture and Christian doctrine, of which it is a
   part, is, when thus interpreted, left and kept in that state, in which
   Christ left it to be kept. Nay, the institution itself cannot even
   literally be observed according to the bare words of it, unless it be
   observed according to this knowledge and acknowledgement of all the
   characters of Christ.

   [Dem-52] For though the bare words of the institution do not express or
   teach these characters, yet the bare words or letter of it requires
   thus much: for since the letter of the institution requires us to do
   this in remembrance and acknowledgement of Christ, the bare letter
   requires us in doing this, to acknowledge and remember all the
   characters of Christ; therefore he that in doing this does not remember
   and acknowledge all the characters of Christ, must be said not to
   observe the very letter of the institution. Hence therefore there
   arises another plain demonstration against his doctrine, viz., that we
   are to know no more of the nature or right observation of the
   sacrament, than what is expressly taught us in the bare words of the
   institution. For the very letter itself of the institution contradicts
   this; and if he will not directly refuse what the bare words expressly
   commmand, he must seek for something towards the right observation of
   this sacrament, which is only required, but not taught in the words of
   the institution. For by the letter of the institution you are commanded
   to remember and acknowledge a person, whose characters, condition and
   offices to be acknowledged, are not taught in the institution, but only
   to be found in other parts of scripture; and therefore the bare letter
   of the institution is grossly violated, if we look no further than to
   the words of the institution for a right knowledge and observation of
   the sacrament.

   [Dem-53] Again, if the scriptures teach and prove Christ to be the
   sacrifice, atonement and propitiation for our sins, as expressly as
   they teach us the institution of the sacrament, does not the
   remembrance and acknowledgement of him as the sacrifice, atonement and
   propitiation for sin, become a necessary part of our right observation
   of the sacrament? For if the sacrament is appointed for the remembrance
   and acknowledgement of Christ as our savior, and if as our savior he is
   the atonement, the sacrifice, and propitiation for our sins, is not the
   remembrance and acknowledgement of him as our sacrifice and atonement,
   essential to the remembrance of him as our savior? If these characters
   were mentioned in the institution, I suppose they would be allowed to
   be an essential part of it. But if the letter of the institution
   directly points to, and calls for the acknowledgement of these
   characters, then they are as essential to it, as if they were expressly
   mentioned in it.

   [Dem-54] Jesus Christ is not mentioned in the institution as our
   savior, but I suppose it will not be denied that he is there by way of
   necessary implication, since the person there to be remembered, is
   declared by the scripture to be our savior. But if we may be allowed
   thus to take our savior to be the person that is to be remembered and
   acknowledged by the sacrament, if this may be done without adding
   anything to the institution, if it must be done as absolutely essential
   to it, then the addition of sacrifice, atonement, and propitiation for
   our sins, may be added without adding anything to the institution, and
   must be done as absolutely essential to it; because the scriptures
   teach and prove, that Jesus Christ, as our savior, is the sacrifice,
   atonement, and propitiation for our sins. Therefore if the remembrance
   of him as our savior is essential to the sacrament, the remembrance and
   acknowledgement of him as the sacrifice and atonement, and propitiation
   for sin, is essential to the sacrament.

   [Dem-55] And therefore it follows again, that the very words of the
   institution direct us to a further knowledge of the sacrament, than
   that which is expressly taught by them.

   [Dem-56] To proceed: "Take, eat; this is my body." Now what signifies
   it what anyone can make of these words, understood according to the
   common ways of speaking? For the way itself is singular and uncommon,
   and has no certain meaning according to the common rules of speaking.
   He may as well read a discourse upon truth, to know whether these words
   have any truth in them, as consult the common forms of speaking, to
   know what is meant by them. For if the things mentioned and expressed
   in these words, were not made significant and important to us by
   something not mentioned in the sacrament, if they were not asserted and
   explained in other parts of scripture, it could never be known from the
   words themselves, that they were of any significancy to us, or that
   there was any truth and reality in them. The short of the matter is
   this: either these words are only a great impropriety of speech, darkly
   expressing only a common thing; or they are a figurative form of words,
   which by the particularity of the expression are to raise the mind to a
   faith and apprehension of such things, as cannot be plainly and nakedly
   represented by human language. Now one of these two must necessarily be
   true, that is, they must necessarily be either a dark form of words
   with only a plain common meaning of an ordinary thing at the bottom, or
   they must be a mysterious form of words signifying something more than
   human. But now which of these two they are, cannot possibly be known
   from the words of the institution. For the words in themselves prove
   nothing at all of this; from aught that appears in the words
   themselves, they may be mere fiction and impropriety about a trifle, or
   the greatest and most important of all truths may be taught by them.
   But this can no other possible way be known, but by other parts of
   scripture. And if the scriptures were as silent about the truth,
   nature, and extent of the things barely mentioned in the sacrament, as
   the institution itself is, it must be the same useless, unintelligible
   form of words to us, that it was to the apostles when they first heard
   them, and had no knowledge of their savior.

   [Dem-57] But, on the other hand, if the things barely mentioned in the
   words of the institution, are openly asserted, and variously explained
   in other parts of scripture; if we are often told what the body of
   Christ is in several respects, of the necessity and possibility of
   eating his flesh, and drinking his blood; if the scriptures abound with
   instruction, showing us how we have our life in him and from him, how
   we must be born again in him and through him, how he must be formed in
   us, and we new creatures in him; then it follows, that to separate the
   institution from these scriptures that variously unfold its nature, and
   to confine us to the bare words of the institution itself, in order to
   understand it fully, is the same absurdity, the same offense against
   scripture and reason, as it would be to confine us to the bare words of
   the first promise of a savior made in the third chapter of Genesis, in
   order to know fully our Christian savior, and what our Christian
   salvation is. For as that first promise of a seed of the woman that
   should bruise the serpent's head, contained the whole character of our
   savior, and all that related to him as such, and yet contained nothing
   of it intelligible enough, till further revelations, doctrines and
   facts explained all that was short and figurative in that first
   promise, and showed how every part of our salvation was promised by it;
   so the institution of the sacrament contained everything relating to
   Christ as our savior, and yet contained nothing of it intelligible
   enough, till further revelations, new light, doctrines and facts
   explained all that was short and figurative in it, and plainly showed
   what it was in its real nature, how it stood in the heart of our
   religion, fully attesting and representing the chief characters of
   Christ, as he was our savior and redeemer.

   [Dem-58] Therefore it is the same gross error to confine the words of
   the institution to their own literal meaning, and to understand them
   only according to the common rules of speaking, as it would be to
   confine that first promise of a savior to the literal meaning of the
   words in which it was expressed, understood only according to the
   common rules of speaking. For as it was by the scriptures speaking a
   language different from the expressions of the first promise of a seed
   to bruise the serpent's head, and giving further revelations concerning
   the promised savior in other words, that the words of the first promise
   itself came rightly to be understood and believed; so it is by the
   scriptures speaking a language different from that of the sacrament,
   and by revealing doctrines on which it is founded, that the sacrament
   itself came rightly to be known and understood. And if the scripture
   may and must be allowed to explain, confirm, and establish the true
   meaning of the first promise of a seed to destroy the serpent's head,
   even where the words of it are not mentioned, or expressly said to be
   explained; then the scriptures may and must be allowed to explain,
   confirm, and establish the true nature of the sacrament, even where the
   words of it are not mentioned, or expressly said to be explained.

   [Dem-59] Yet this author poorly and vainly supposes, that the nature of
   the sacrament, and the things meant by it, are nowhere to be looked for
   in scripture, but where the sacramental words, or the manner of the
   outward institution is repeated, or expressly said to be explained:
   which is as just and solid, as if a Jew should from the same skill in
   words suppose, that the explication of the first promise of a woman's
   seed to bruise the serpent's head, was nowhere to be looked for in
   scripture, but in such places as spoke strictly the language of the
   first promise, and mentioned the express words, "seed," and "bruise,"
   and the "serpent's head."

   [Dem-60] And indeed herein, in this poor literal exactness lay all the
   infidelity of the Jews, the blindness and hardness of their hearts, and
   their incapacity to receive their savior. Look at every folly,
   grossness, and erroneous principle of the scribes and Pharisees; look
   through the whole of their false religion, and you will find, that they
   fell into it all, because they had this author's method of finding the
   truth. They placed all in the letter of scripture, as this author does;
   they understood that letter only according to the common rules of
   speaking amongst men, as this author does; they looked upon and
   understood all the institutions of their religion, as this author looks
   upon and understands the sacrament; they saw just so far into the Law,
   as he does into the gospel; they had his degree of knowledge, and he
   has their degree of ignorance. For take but away from the scribe and
   Pharisee the letter of scripture, understood according to the common
   rules of speaking, and you take away all their religion; they see no
   more of an inward mystery, spirit, or doctrine in it, than this author
   sees in the sacrament.

   [Dem-61] Again, leave them but the letter of scripture, understood
   according to the common rules of speaking, as this author would have
   the sacrament left, and then you leave them all that they would have;
   and the religion of the scribes and Pharisees is in its full
   perfection, and has exactly the perfection of this author's plain
   account of the sacrament.

   [Dem-62] This made me say above, that it would appear, that this
   author's method of understanding the scripture doctrine of the
   sacrament, was that very veil which the apostle said was upon the
   hearts of the Jews; and that he was laboring to draw skins over our
   eyes, and to make our ears gross and dull of hearing, that the New
   Testament might be as useless to us, as the Old Testament was to the
   unbelieving letter- learned scribes and Pharisees. For his excellent
   method of understanding the nature of the sacrament, is to a tittle
   that very method which kept them totally ignorant of the nature of
   their religion.

   [Dem-63] Every prophecy of our savior, whether in the Law, or the
   psalms, or the prophets, served only to keep him more out of their
   knowledge; because looking only upon it, as this author looks upon the
   words of the institution, they were under a necessity of understanding
   it wrong, and so the more prophecies they had of him, the further they
   were carried from the true knowledge of their promised savior.
   Circumcision, sacrifices, washings, feasts and fasts, &c., which were
   intended and appointed as so many school-masters or guides to Christ,
   were by them turned into dead, carnal, earthly ordinances, that left
   them in their sins, and incapable of acknowledging their savior, or so
   much as feeling any want of one; for this very reason, because they saw
   no further into their sacrifices, than this author sees into the
   sacrament; but thought that the whole nature and end of a sacrifice was
   fully observed, when they had slain an ox, and not changed it into the
   cutting off of a dog's head. This was their great point in sacrifice,
   just as this author has found out the great point, as he calls it, of
   the sacrament, which consists in a bare act of the memory, remembering
   Christ as a teacher of religion at the instant you take the bread or
   the cup, and not remembering Aristotle or Socinus, &c., as teachers of
   logic and criticism.

   [Dem-64] When you have by this sole act of your memory thus separated
   and distinguished what is done in the sacrament, from that which is
   done for food, or mirth, or in memory of your friends, then you have
   secured the great point in the sacrament, and are to look for nothing
   further as to the peculiar nature, end, and effects of it. Just as the
   letter- learned Pharisee thought that the whole nature and end of the
   sacrifice was fully observed when he had slain an ox, and not cut off a
   dog's head.

   [Dem-65] And if you are for adding anything to the sacrament besides
   this distinguishing act of the memory, you are as blamable in the sight
   of this author, as the apostles were in the eyes of the unbelieving
   Pharisee, when they taught that the blood of slain beasts was, as to
   its nature and end, a type and application of the atonement of Christ's
   blood. Thus does this author stand in the very state and place of the
   unbelieving Pharisee, teaching Christians the gospel, as he taught the
   Jews the Law, and excluding the true knowledge of Christ from Christian
   institutions, just as the Pharisee excluded it from the Jewish.

   [Dem-66] And if you ask, or search ever so much into the true reason
   why the religion of the scribes and Pharisees was so odious in the
   sight of our blessed savior, why he cast so many reproaches upon it,
   why he denounced so many woes against it; the one true genuine cause
   was this, it was because they stood on the outside of the Law, just as
   this author stands on the outside of the gospel, and were content with
   such a plain account of their sacrifices and circumcision, as he has
   given us of the sacrament; it was because they stuck to the bare letter
   of scripture, only understood according to the common rules of speaking
   amongst men; it was this fullness of a false, empty, and dead
   knowledge, that made the scriptures useless to them, that fixed them in
   a state of blind self -sufficiency, and made it harder for the
   rational, letter-learned Pharisee, than for a gross sinner to see the
   kingdom of God, or to acknowledge him that preached it.

   [Dem-67] And here we may see the true and solid meaning of the apostle,
   when he saith, God had "made them able ministers of the New Testament,
   not of the letter, but of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the
   spirit giveth life." {2 Cor. 3:6.}

   [Dem-68] For the letter of scripture, understood only according to the
   common rules of speaking, is the letter that killeth, the letter that
   made the Jews unbelievers in Christ, that makes speculative Christians,
   idealists, critics and grammarians fall into infidelity; but scripture,
   interpreted not by lexicons and dictionaries, but by doctrines revealed
   by God, and by an inward teaching and unction of the Holy Ghost, is
   that spirit which giveth life.

   [Dem-69] But this author, according to his own principles, is obliged
   to own himself to be an anti-apostle, and to declare, that not God, but
   logic, and much attention to human words and ways of reasoning, have
   made him an able minister of the New Testament, not of the spirit, but
   of the letter; and has convinced him, that it is the letter alone that
   giveth life. For he cannot allow the smallest degree of sound doctrine
   to be in the apostle's words; had he but dropped an expression like it,
   or made the least acknowledgement of a killing letter of scripture,
   till the spirit gave life to it, it must have passed for a full
   recantation of all his Plain Account.

   [Dem-70] But to return to the further consideration of the words of the
   institution: "This is my body, which is given for you; this is my
   blood, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins." Who can know
   what is right or wrong in these expressions, or in what sense they are
   to be received, if he look only to the sound of the words according to
   the common rules of speaking? Or supposing he could guess out some
   tolerable meaning; yet if the scripture has doctrines concerning these
   things, teaching, asserting, and explaining how, and in what sense his
   body is given for us, and his blood the atonement for our sins, in a
   way and manner above all human thought and conception; then it follows,
   that no meaning of the words can be admitted, but that which is
   according to the scripture explication of the things mentioned by them.

   [Dem-71] Nothing therefore can be more unjustifiable and impracticable,
   than this author's only method of understanding the nature of the
   sacrament from the words considered in themselves. For as this cannot
   be the way of understanding the truth of any doctrines of scripture, so
   least of all can it be the way of understanding the true meaning of the
   words of the institution; for these words have a more than ordinary
   relation to, and dependence upon all the scriptures. For as Christ is
   in some respect or other represented, and made further known what he is
   to us, in almost every page of scripture; so the sacrament, which is to
   be done in remembrance and acknowledgement of what he is to us, must
   have its relation to, and dependence upon all those places and
   doctrines of scripture, which teach what he is to us, and what we are
   to remember and acknowledge him to be. Therefore, all those passages of
   scripture, which teach and explain the nature, office, and condition of
   Christ, directly and immediately teach and explain what we are to do,
   remember and acknowledge in the sacrament, and are in the same degree
   true and proper comments upon the nature of the sacrament, in which
   they are true accounts and descriptions of our savior. And that which
   we are to believe of our savior according to the scriptures, that we
   are to remember and acknowledge of him in the sacrament; and therefore
   the scripture explication of the sacrament is not, as this author
   extravagantly supposes, confined to those texts that mention expressly
   the sacrament, or the words of the institution, but is as large and
   extensive as the scripture explication of the nature, office, and
   condition of Christ as our savior. Wherever we are taught anything
   concerning him as such, there we are directly taught something of the
   true nature and end of the sacrament, and what we are to remember and
   acknowledge of him in the doing it.

   [Dem-72] "Search the scriptures," saith our blessed savior, "for they
   are they which testify of me." Is not this in the plainest manner
   referring us to all the scriptures that speak of him as our savior, to
   know what we are to remember and acknowledge of him in the sacrament?
   For since he saith, Search the scriptures, for they are they that
   testify of me; and in the sacrament, Do this in remembrance or
   acknowledgement of me; is it not directly as full to the purpose, as if
   he had said, Search the scriptures, for they are they which testify
   what you are to remember and acknowledge concerning me in the
   sacrament? For that which they testify of him, that they must testify
   of the nature and end of the sacrament, which is to be done in
   remembrance and acknowledgement of that which is so testified of him.
   Since therefore every scripture that testifies anything concerning
   Christ, as our savior, testifies so much of that which is to be
   acknowledged of him in the sacrament, it plainly follows, that the
   nature and end of the sacrament can only be so far known, as the
   nature, character, office and condition of Christ is known; and that
   all those scriptures which teach us the one, in the same degree teach
   us the other, and are as necessary to teach us the nature of the
   sacrament, as the nature of Christ; for this plain reason, because the
   sacrament is to remember and acknowledge that which is taught us
   concerning the nature of Christ.

   [Dem-73] Hence again it appears with how little judgment and less truth
   this author affirms, that the nature and end of the sacrament is only
   to be known from the bare words of the institution, understood
   according to the common rules of speaking.

   [Dem-74] Again, another argument which will make the absurdity of this
   same error still further apparent, may be taken from the following
   passage of scripture. When our savior said in the 6th of St. John, that
   his "flesh was meat indeed, and his blood was drink indeed"; and that
   unless a "man did eat his flesh, and drink his blood, he had no life in
   him; his disciples were astonished at his discourse, and said, How can
   this man give us his flesh to eat?" To which, by way of answer, he
   said, "The words that I say unto you, they are Spirit, and they are
   life." For if our savior had thought at all like this author, and had
   intended to be understood according to the common rules of speaking, he
   would have spoken only common language; and upon their not
   understanding what he said, he must have directed them to the right
   way, and have said, Consider my words only according to the common
   rules of speaking, and then you will know all that is to be known by
   them.

   [Dem-75] Least of all could he have said, to help their understanding
   of them in a common way, "The words that I speak unto you, they are
   Spirit, and they are life"; for surely such a way of speaking could not
   be directing them to the common rules of speaking amongst men. For if
   he had intended to show them in the strongest manner, how much what he
   said was different from, and superior to all the common meaning of
   human words; how could he have done this in a higher degree, than by
   saying as he did, "The words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit and
   they are life."

   [Dem-76] Now, the question put by his disciples, "How can this man give
   us his flesh to eat?" comes as naturally in the case of the sacrament,
   where we are to eat his body, and drink his blood, as in the
   forementioned place of St. John; and as there is the same foundation
   for the same question, so there is strictly the same foundation for the
   same answer, viz., "The words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit,
   and they are life."

   [Dem-77] And it is absolutely impossible for anyone to show, that the
   words of the institution are not as truly to be looked upon as Spirit
   and life, as the other words about eating his flesh, and drinking his
   blood. For surely, he that is obliged to own, that the words in St.
   John, of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, are Spirit and life,
   cannot have any proof that the words in the sacrament, of eating his
   body and drinking his blood, have nothing of that Spirit and life in
   them. For if it be asked, Why the words in St. John are Spirit and
   life? The one only reason is this, because they speak of eating
   Christ's flesh and drinking his blood, which is such a spiritual,
   living participation of the nature of Christ, or, in scripture words,
   such a putting on of Christ, as cannot be understood or obtained by
   outward and dead words. And yet if the words in the sacrament must be
   said, not to be Spirit and life, the one only reason must be this,
   because they only speak of eating Christ's body, and drinking his
   blood.

   [Dem-78] But surely this is too great an absurdity for anyone to hold;
   for it is saying, that the drinking his blood, when joined with eating
   his body, is only an human expression, to be understood according to
   the common rules of speaking; but that the drinking his blood, when
   joined with eating his flesh, is so great a mystery, so above our
   common way of conceiving, that the words expressing it, are said to be
   Spirit and life.

   [Dem-79] But now if the case be thus, if the words in the sacrament
   must be allowed to be Spirit and life, for the same reason that the
   words in St. John are said to be Spirit and life; then there is an end
   of this author's poor contrivance to enter into the whole truth
   contained in the sacrament, by only considering the words according to
   the common rules of speaking. It is a contrivance as unfit for the
   purpose, as weakly and improperly thought of, as an iron key to open
   the kingdom of heaven.

   [Dem-80] Again, if a person hearing the words of our savior, as
   recorded in St. John, had said to him, There is no more Spirit and life
   in your words than in the words of anyone else, and they can mean no
   more than our words according to the common rules of speaking, such a
   person might have been reckoned amongst those that blasphemed the Son
   of God.

   [Dem-81] Now if this author will say the same thing concerning the
   words of the institution, of eating his body and drinking his blood,
   that they are no more Spirit and life, than the words of men speaking
   of human things, and that nothing more is to be understood in them and
   by them, than according to the common rules of speaking; I desire to
   know, how this could be a lesser degree of blasphemy, or a smaller
   offense against the Son of God, than in the former case? Or why it was
   not as right and justifiable for a person to say, there was no Spirit
   and life in the words of our savior, speaking of eating his flesh and
   drinking his blood, as to say, there is no Spirit and life in his
   words, speaking in the sacrament of eating his body and drinking his
   blood?

   [Dem-82] Lastly, either therefore this author must say with those that
   blaspheme the Son of God, that the words of the institution are not the
   words of him, whose words were Spirit and life, or he must give up his
   only method of understanding the true meaning of them. For if they are
   Spirit and life, then to seek for the sense of such words in the common
   forms of speaking, is truly to seek the living amongst the dead.

   [Dem-83] From what has been said of the words of the institution, of
   their not being understood by the apostles, of the impossibility of
   their being understood according to the sound of the words in the
   common ways of speaking; of the impossibility of their being
   understood, till the great doctrines and articles of the Christian
   faith were first known, and so became the plain and visible explication
   of them; from these things we may sufficiently see the falseness of
   this author's chief propositions concerning the sacrament.

   [Dem-84] These propositions are printed in a pompous manner, with great
   show of significancy, as so many pillars of truth. The four first are
   the chief; if therefore they are removed, the others must go with them.

   [Dem-85] I shall begin with the fourth proposition, because it is the
   chief; both those that are before, and those that follow it, depend
   entirely upon the truth of it; and yet it has already appeared, and
   shall be made still more apparent, that there is not the least glimpse
   of truth in it.

   [Dem-86] Speaking of our savior's instituting the sacrament, he says as
   follows.

   [Dem-86] Proposition IV. It cannot be doubted, that he himself
   sufficiently declared to his first and immediate followers, the whole
   of what he designed should be understood by it, or implied in it.

   [Dem-87] And yet it has been fully shown to be out of all doubt, by a
   variety of arguments, that the first followers of Christ, neither did,
   nor possibly could understand the whole nature of the sacrament from
   the words of the institution; which is all that our savior himself
   declared to them about it, and also all that this author appeals to, as
   a proof of his having sufficiently declared the whole matter to them.

   [Dem-88] Further, what is asserted in this proposition, is as directly
   contrary to truth, scripture, fact, and our savior's own declarations;
   as if it had been asserted, that our savior did that sufficiently
   himself, which he declared he had not done sufficiently; and also
   should not be done, till after his leaving the world. For at the time
   that he was about to depart from them, he expressly says unto them, "I
   have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot hear them now.
   Howbeit, when he the Spirit of truth is come, he shall guide you into
   all truth."

   [Dem-89] From this declaration of our savior, as well as from plain
   facts recorded in the history of the apostles, it is out of all doubt,
   that he left the apostles in great ignorance of the Christian religion,
   and that it was not his intention to deliver them out of this ignorance
   by his own personal instruction of them; but that they were to continue
   in this ignorance till further revelations, new light, and certain
   facts which were about to happen, should open to them a clear and full
   view of the nature of the Christian religion.

   [Dem-90] For first, here are many things that they were yet to be
   taught, which they then had not been taught, and of which they were
   then to continue ignorant; therefore it is plain, that they could not
   sufficiently know all that they were to know, or all that our savior
   designed they should know of any article or institution of the
   Christian religion; that is, they were so far from knowing the whole
   nature and end of the sacrament, that they knew the whole nature of
   nothing else in the Christian religion, but knew everything that they
   did know, in the most imperfect manner. For surely, if many things
   relating to the Christian salvation were yet to be kept secret from
   them, the Christian salvation was imperfectly made known unto them; and
   therefore they could only have been taught in part, and had only seen
   as it were some first sketches, or beginning lines of what they were
   afterwards to see in its true fullness.

   [Dem-91] And that these many things, of which they were kept thus
   ignorant, were many things of the greatest importance and signification
   to the right knowledge of the Christian salvation, is evident from the
   reason given by our savior, why they were not then taught by him, viz.,
   "But ye cannot bear them now." For surely, if those many things were
   then not taught them, for this reason, because they were not able to
   bear them then; they must have been things of the greatest importance,
   and most uncommon in their nature; such things as were the hardest to
   be comprehended, the most difficult to be believed, and the most
   contrary to the common conceptions of men, and consequently such as
   were most necessary and essential to a right knowledge of the Christian
   salvation.

   [Dem-92] From this it also appears, how low a state of knowledge the
   apostles were in at the time of the institution of the sacrament, since
   they were not only ignorant of so many things of the greatest
   importance to be known, but were in a state so contrary to this
   knowledge, so full of dispositions contrary to it, that they were then
   incapable of being taught it.

   [Dem-93] And though all this be declared by our savior himself, at the
   end of all his instructions, when he was upon the point of going from
   them; yet this author, in direct and full contradiction to scripture
   facts, and this express declaration of our savior, says, "It cannot be
   doubted, that he sufficiently declared to his disciples the whole of
   what he designed should be understood by it."

   [Dem-94] Whereas, the contrary to this is as plainly declared by our
   savior himself, as if he had said in express words, I have instituted a
   sacrament to be observed by you hereafter; but what is to be understood
   by it, and implied in it, can only be known by you now, in that poor,
   low, and ignorant manner, in which you know other things at present
   concerning me. But when the many things which ye now cannot bear to be
   taught, shall by my death, resurrection, and ascension, and the coming
   of the Holy Ghost, be made truly intelligible to you, and become the
   real light of your minds, then shall ye clearly see and know the whole
   of that which I designed to be understood by, and implied in this
   sacrament of my body and blood.

   [Dem-95] For what our savior has said concerning the imperfection of
   their knowledge then, and their unfitness to be instructed further, and
   of their necessity of being taught in another manner, is as plain a
   proof of this, as if it had in express words been applied to the
   sacrament.

   [Dem-96] For though it is too much for anyone to pretend to say exactly
   what or how many these things were, that they were then not in a
   condition and capacity to understand; yet this may with great assurance
   be affirmed, that the doctrines concerning Christ's death, the nature,
   necessity, and merits of his sacrifice and atonement for the sins of
   the world, the possibility and necessity of eating his flesh, and
   drinking his blood, were certainly amongst those many things; and
   therefore this holy sacrament, which hath its foundation in this
   atonement for sins, and is itself instituted for the eating his flesh,
   and drinking his blood must of all necessity be amongst those many
   things, of which they were then greatly ignorant, because they were not
   in a condition to receive a right and full knowledge of them. Therefore
   there is the fullest proof that can be desired, that our savior did
   not, and could not intend sufficiently to declare to them the whole of
   what he intended should be understood and implied in the sacrament of
   his body and blood.

   [Dem-97] And for this reason also he saith unto them, "It is expedient
   for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not
   come. But if I depart, I will send him unto you." Again, "These things
   have I said, being yet present with you; but the Comforter, which is
   the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach
   you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I
   have said unto you."

   [Dem-98] As if he had said, "It is expedient for you that I go away,
   because so long as I thus stay with you in the flesh, ye cannot know,
   nor believe, nor enter into the true nature, end, merits and effects of
   my death, resurrection and ascension; neither can the Holy Ghost come
   upon you in my name, till my kingdom is thus set up, and these things
   are accomplished in me. Therefore these things I have said, being yet
   present with you; that is, I have spoken thus far of these things in a
   way suited to your present state; not that they should be the matter of
   your present knowledge, whilst you know nothing rightly, nor apply
   anything that I say, to its proper object; but I have said these things
   to you, that they may be laid up in your minds, then and then only to
   be truly understood, rightly remembered in their proper place, and duly
   applied to their proper objects, when the Holy Ghost shall come in my
   name, that is, upon the foundation of my death, resurrection and
   ascension, and shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
   remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you."

   [Dem-99] From all these things it appears sufficiently, that this
   author's fourth and fundamental proposition is absolutely false, and
   grossly contradictory to scripture, facts, and the express declaration
   of our savior; and that our savior himself, in his own person, before
   he left the world, did not, could not intend sufficiently to declare to
   his disciples the whole of what he intended should be understood by,
   and implied in the sacrament.

   [Dem-100] And here I must observe to you, that the confutation of this
   fourth proposition, is not to be considered as the discovery of a
   single error in this author, but as a full detection of the general
   falseness, and erroneous procedure of his whole book; for everything,
   and every other proposition of any moment, throughout his whole book,
   is founded upon the supposed truth of this fourth proposition. He
   cannot take one step, in the way he is in, without it. He has not an
   argument but what is built upon it. And all his treatise, from the
   beginning to the end, is as idle and wandering as a sick man's dream,
   unless you grant him these two bulky errors; 1st, that our savior
   himself, in the words of the institution, sufficiently declared to his
   disciples the whole of what he intended should be understood by, and
   implied in the sacrament. 2dly, that the only method of understanding
   the whole of what he so sufficiently declared to them, is to interpret
   the same bare words of the institution, according to the common rules
   of speaking.

   [Dem-101] But as both these positions have, as I think, been already
   shown to be gross errors, directly contrary to reason, sense,
   scripture, facts, and the express declaration of our savior himself, so
   the whole of his treatise is already in the fullest manner confuted.

   [Dem-102] But I shall now proceed to consider some poor, little
   pretenses of argument, which this author brings in support of this
   false proposition. Which are as follows: "For this being," says he, "a
   positive institution, depending entirely upon his will; and not
   designed to contain anything in it, but what he himself should please
   to affix to it, it must follow, that he declared his mind about it,
   fully and plainly," p. 4.

   [Dem-103] This is his whole proof, that our savior himself sufficiently
   taught his disciples the whole nature and meaning of the sacrament, and
   they wholly understood it.

   [Dem-104] The thing that he would here speak to, is very improperly
   expressed, and ought to have proceeded thus: "This being a positive
   institution, by his will and pleasure introduced into a religion, which
   contains the means and method of the salvation of mankind by himself
   the institutor, cannot be designed by him to be any ways understood, or
   to have any other nature, meaning, and end in it, than such as is truly
   and fully according to the doctrines of that religion into which he has
   introduced it, and more especially according to that part of religion
   in which he has placed it."

   [Dem-105] Whereas instead of this, this author poorly says, it was not
   designed to contain anything in it, but he should please to affix to
   it. For he put nothing to be contained in it, he affixed nothing to it,
   but only placed it in the heart, or midst of a religion; which
   religion, as soon as it was truly known by his disciples, would
   sufficiently declare and explain to them the whole nature and end of
   this positive institution. In consequence of what he had just now
   erroneously said, he proceeds thus: "Because otherwise he must be
   supposed to institute a duty, of which none could have any notion
   without his institution; and at the same time not to instruct his
   followers sufficiently what that duty was to be." Whereas instead of
   this, it ought to have been expressed thus: "Because otherwise, if he
   had not so instituted this sacrament, as to have its nature, end, and
   effects explained and determined by that religion, and chiefly by that
   part of religion, in which it was placed, it could never have appeared
   to any of his followers, what they were to do in it, or that there was
   any reason in its institution, or any benefit to be had from the
   observance of it."

   [Dem-106] As for instance; if the religion, of which the sacrament is a
   part, did not teach us how his body is given and his blood shed for us,
   if it did not teach us something concerning the eating his flesh, and
   drinking his blood, what could the mentioning of these two strange
   things in the sacrament signify to us, or how could we have any notion
   of what was to be done or acknowledged by the sacrament? For if the
   sacrament speaks of anything that the religion in which it is placed
   speaks nothing of; if it represents anything that that religion has not
   to be represented, then it can signify no more in that religion after
   its institution, than it did before. But if to be a part of that
   religion in which it is appointed, it must speak the language of that
   religion; if the things that it represents, must be the things of that
   religion, then it plainly follows, 1st, that our savior himself in
   person, at the time, and by the words of the institution, did not,
   could not fully and plainly declare the whole nature of the sacrament;
   because the language which it spoke, and the things that it
   represented, were the language and things of a religion, which was not,
   and could not then be known by his disciples. 2dly, it follows also,
   that our savior had fully and sufficiently provided for their right
   knowledge of this sacrament, because it was so worded and so placed in
   their religion, that the first true knowledge of their religion would
   become the full and clear explication of it.

   [Dem-107] This sacrament was instituted before the religion, of which
   it was to be a part, was known; is it therefore any wonder in itself,
   or any matter of accusation of our savior, that when he appointed this
   institution, he left it to be then only understood, when the religion,
   of which it was to be a part, should be known? And if he left his
   disciples in the same ignorance of the sacrament, as of the nature,
   merits, and end of his death, resurrection and ascension, is there any
   more to find fault with in the one, than in the other?

   [Dem-108] And this author might with the same show of argument prove,
   that he did declare unto them, fully and plainly, the whole nature,
   merits, and end of his death. For it may as well be said of that, as of
   the sacrament, that he must have fully and plainly declared his mind
   about it; otherwise he must be supposed to have instructed them of a
   matter of faith, which, without his instruction, they could have no
   notion of, and at the same time not to instruct them fully about it.

   [Dem-109] Now if anything may be said in defense of what our savior did
   to his disciples with regard to that imperfect state in which he left
   them, as to the knowledge of the nature, merits, and end of his death;
   if he might justly leave the true and full knowledge of it, to its only
   proper time, and only proper manner of being fully known; namely, till
   the consequences of his death, till his resurrection, ascension, and
   coming of the Holy Ghost, should prove the nature, power, merits, and
   end of it; then the same may and must be said in defense of our
   savior's leaving his disciples so ignorant of the nature, end, and
   effects of the holy sacrament. It was not because he was deficient in
   instructing them, but because he instructed them with the greatest
   wisdom; not giving them verbal explications of thing which could not so
   be understood by them, but leaving them to be informed in the one only
   proper time, and the only proper manner; namely, when by the knowledge
   of his death, resurrection, and ascension, and by the coming of the
   Holy Ghost, they should truly and fully know the whole of that
   religion, of which this sacrament was appointed to be a part.

   [Dem-110] All therefore which this author saith of the necessity of
   their knowing sufficiently at first from the words of the institution,
   the whole nature of it, because it was a positive institution, and
   could have no more in it than he intended should be in it, are mere
   empty words; for it is granted on all sides, that the institution can
   be only that which Christ intended it should be, and can imply no more
   than he designed should be implied in it. But the question is, how we
   are to know all that he designed should be understood by, and implied
   in it.

   [Dem-111] This author says, this can only be known from the bare words
   of the institution considered in themselves, according to the common
   rules of speaking. Therefore, according to this author, had Socrates
   said the same things that Christ said, the institution had been just
   the same thing as it is; it had had the same meaning, and there had
   been neither more or less in it. This cannot be denied: for if the
   words of the institution are only to be understood according to the
   common meaning or sound of words in common life; then they must have
   the same meaning, and signify neither more or less, whether they be
   applied to Christ, or Socrates.

   [Dem-112] On the other hand, we say, since Christ appointed this
   institution to stand in a certain place, to be a certain part, and to
   have relation to certain doctrines of a religion not known, when this
   institution was appointed; that therefore what Christ meant by it, and
   would have implied in it, can then only be fully known, and when that
   religion in which it was to have a certain place, and of which it was
   to be a certain part, and to whose doctrines it was to be related, came
   to be fully known and understood. In short, that a Christian
   institution, ingrafted into the Christian religion, and connected with
   its chief doctrines, could then only be fully known, when the Christian
   religion was fully known.

   [Dem-113] Thus for instance: let it be supposed that at the time of
   instituting the sacrament, the apostles had no other way of knowing
   what was meant by it, but by considering the words in themselves,
   according to the common sound of the words. Yet, if after the death,
   and resurrection, and ascension of our savior, and the coming of the
   Holy Ghost, they knew a religion, which they knew nothing of before,
   and saw this sacrament to be a part of that religion; had they not then
   got a new and sure way of understanding what our savior meant by it?
   And had they not this very new means of understanding it from our
   savior himself? Did not he teach them all that they were taught by his
   death, resurrection, and ascension, and by the coming of the Holy
   Ghost? And was not that which he thus taught them in this manner, to be
   as sacred with them, and as much to be adhered to, as when he only
   taught them the words, outward form, and matter of the sacrament? And
   if he thus led them into the possession and knowledge of every truth
   and doctrine upon which this sacrament was founded, and to which it was
   related; is he not still the teacher of the sacrament, as well as he
   was the teacher of it in the words of the institution?

   [Dem-114] Vainly therefore doth this author thus further argue, that
   seeing "no one can be a judge, but the institutor himself, of what he
   designed should be contained in it; therefore, supposing him not to
   have spoken his mind plainly about it, it is impossible that any other
   person should make up the defect," p. 5.

   [Dem-115] Vainly, I say, is all this argued, because here is no defect
   charged upon the words of the institution, nor any other person
   appointed or appealed to, to make up the defect. The words of the
   institution are allowed to be full and plain, as to all that is
   positive in this institution, both as to the matter and form of the
   sacrament: they were as plain at the first as they are now, or ever can
   be. But that part which is not positive in this institution, which is
   the greatest and chiefest part of it, namely, the truths signified and
   represented, and acknowledged by the outward form and matter of the
   sacrament; as the body of Christ given, and his blood shed for the sins
   of the world, and the eating his flesh and drinking his blood were not
   then, are not now, nor ever can be truly and rightly known from the
   plainness of the words of the institution alone. Yet here is not the
   smallest defect either in the institutor or the institution. For since
   the institution was not an independent thing, made for itself, and on
   its own account, nor to be practiced at the time it was appointed; it
   was no defect in it, that it did not explain itself, or was not then
   known, when it was not to be practiced. And seeing the institution was
   appointed for the sake of a religion, that then was not, but soon
   should be, it could be no defect in the institutor, that it was not
   known sooner than it was wanted, or till the time came, that everything
   else that was to be practiced with it, or for the sake of it, were
   fully and truly known.

   [Dem-116] It was no defect in our savior as a teacher of religion, that
   his religion was not known nor understood, till after his ascension
   into heaven, and the coming of the Holy Ghost; because his ascension,
   and the coming of the Holy Ghost, were to be fundamental articles and
   principal parts of his religion.

   [Dem-117] So also it was no defect in him, as an institutor of the
   sacrament, that the true nature and end of it was not known, when he
   first instituted it, or from the bare words of the institution; or that
   it was not to be known, till such things as were to be the principal
   parts of it came to be known.

   [Dem-118] And as that which was further and fully known of the
   Christian religion, after our savior's death, was not by anyone's
   making up the defect of his teaching, but was solely done by his own
   power, and in his own name; so all that which was further and fully
   known of the sacrament after the death of Christ, was not by anyone's
   making up the defect of his institution, but was his own further
   teaching them by his death, resurrection, and ascension, and by the
   coming of the Holy Ghost. For as he thus by his own power set up his
   own kingdom, so all that which was plainly shown and declared by his
   kingdom, was strictly shown and declared by himself.

   [Dem-119] And as it necessarily followed, that they must know more of
   Christ as their savior, and the manner of their salvation, after his
   death, resurrection, and ascension, and mission of the Holy Ghost, than
   they did before; so also it necessarily follows, that they must have
   exactly the same increase of knowledge at that time, concerning the
   nature of the sacrament, which they had concerning their savior;
   because the sacrament is expressly appointed to do that which it does,
   in remembrance and acknowledgement of that savior so made known. And
   therefore the more they knew of him as their savior, the more they must
   know of that which was to be remembered and acknowledged of him in the
   holy sacrament.

   [Dem-120] All therefore which this author says, of the making up the
   defect, if Christ did not at first make the whole of the institution
   plain, is of no significancy; for what they further knew rightly of it,
   when they knew their religion, and saw how and in what manner it was
   part of it; all this further true and real knowledge of it, came as
   plainly and undeniably from him, as the words of the institution did;
   and what they were taught by his death and resurrection, and the
   consequences of them, was as truly from him, as what they were taught
   by his birth and incarnation, and miraculous conversation with them.

   [Dem-121] Having thus despatched this author's fourth and chiefest
   proposition, and his proof of it; I shall now go back to his first,
   which stands thus.

   [Dem-121] Proposition I. The partaking of the Lord's Supper, is not a
   duty of itself, or a duty apparent to us from the nature of the thing;
   but a duty made such to Christians, by the positive institution of
   Jesus Christ, p. 2.

   [Dem-122] There is a great deal of error and deceit proposed to the
   reader in this proposition. For it is to make him believe, that the
   nature and end of the sacrament is wholly positive, and that all that
   we are to mean, and intend, and do by it, is something that we are only
   obliged to do by virtue of the institution: all which is absolutely
   false.

   [Dem-123] For the institution, as to its nature and end, is so far from
   being wholly positive, that its nature and end hath nothing positive in
   it. And all that which it is our duty to intend and do by the
   sacrament, is to be intended and done for itself, on its own account;
   and that which is positive in the sacrament, is only as a means, or
   mark, or sign of our doing it. That which is positive in this
   institution, and not to be done but because of the will of the
   institutor, is something entirely distinct, and different from the
   nature, end, and intent of the institution. And that in which the whole
   reason, meaning, end and intent of this institution essentially
   consists; is something that is to be done for itself, and does not take
   its reason of being done from the institution.

   [Dem-124] Now if all that is to be done, implied and intended by our
   celebrating the Lord's Supper, was, and is absolutely necessary to be
   done, though the way of doing it by the sacrament had never been
   instituted; then the meaning, end and intent of the sacrament cannot be
   positive; and if our obligation to do all that is contained in this
   meaning and intent of the sacrament, is an obligation arising from the
   thing itself, then this is not a positive duty.

   [Dem-125] Now the meaning, end and intent of the sacrament, is to
   remember, acknowledge and profess Christ to be our savior, and the
   manner in which he is our savior; but all this is to be done on its own
   account, from the nature of the thing itself, and must have been done,
   though the sacrament had not been instituted; therefore the meaning,
   end and intent of the sacrament has nothing positive in it, and
   contains only our natural duty to Christ, arising from the relation
   between him and us. For to acknowledge and profess Christ to be our
   savior, and in all the respects in which he is our savior, is no more a
   positive duty, than it is a positive duty to acknowledge and profess
   the goodness of God towards us; but is a duty of itself, of the same
   nature, and of the same obligation, as faith and love, and adoration of
   our creator and redeemer are.

   [Dem-126] But to show still more plainly, that the nature, end and
   intent of the sacrament, is not positive, but entirely distinct and
   different from that which is positive in the sacrament; take the
   following instance.

   [Dem-127] Let it be supposed, that God by a positive command enjoined
   the people of one age to build an altar for his honor and worship; the
   people of another age to set up a tabernacle, a third to build a temple
   for the same end and intent; namely, for his honor and worship.

   [Dem-128] Now here are three positive appointments, and three positive
   duties; and all that is positive in the one, is very different from
   that which is positive in the other; yet the meaning, end and intent of
   all three is the same, namely, the honor and worship of God; therefore
   the meaning, end and intent of positive appointments, is something not
   positive, but entirely different and distinct from that which is the
   positive part of it.

   [Dem-129] Now this is exactly the case of the sacrament: bread and wine
   appointed to be used in acknowledgement of Jesus Christ as our savior,
   is as the altar or tabernacle, appointed to be built for the honor and
   worship of God. And as it was purely depending upon the will of God,
   whether it should be an altar or a tabernacle, or a temple, that should
   be built for his honor and worship; so it was solely depending upon the
   will of Jesus Christ, whether it should be bread and wine, or any other
   thing else that was to be used in remembrance and acknowledgement of
   him. And as the honor and worship of God, which was the sole meaning,
   end and intent of building either altar or tabernacle, was a natural
   duty, founded in the relation between God and his creatures, and was
   something that was to be done, though no altar or tabernacle had ever
   been built; so the remembrance and acknowledgement of Jesus Christ as
   our savior, which is the end and intent of our using bread and wine in
   the sacrament, was a natural duty, founded in the relation between
   Christ and us, and was something that was to be done for itself, though
   the use of bread and wine in the sacrament had never been appointed. It
   is therefore an unpardonable error in this author, to represent the
   sacrament, as containing nothing in its meaning, end and intent, that
   was a duty itself, or to be done upon its own account; but that
   everything implied by it, was only a duty by virtue of the institution.
   For the reverse of all this is the very truth; for all that is meant,
   implied and intended by the sacrament, is as much our duty to do on its
   own account, as it is our duty to believe in God; and the positive
   part, the use of bread and wine in this sacrament, is only an appointed
   way of our expressing, acknowledging and doing that, which it was our
   duty to express, acknowledge and do, though we had never been taught to
   use bread and wine for that end.

   [Dem-130] And indeed this is the case of all positive appointments and
   institutions of revealed religion; the meaning, end and intent of them,
   was always something entirely different from that which was positive in
   them; for the same reason, that an idea or sentiment is entirely
   different from that English or Latin word by which you are to express
   it, or to put yourself, or another person in mind of it. For the
   positive part of an institution has much of the nature of language in
   it, and is to express and teach something by symbols and outward
   things, better than it could be expressed or taught by mere words; but
   that which is meant, implied, and intended by the symbol, is as
   different from it in its whole nature, as the idea of sentiment meant
   and intended by an English or Latin word, is different from it in its
   whole nature. To look therefore, as this author doth, for the whole
   nature, end and intent of the sacrament, in the positive part of this
   institution, is as absurd, as to look for the true knowledge of God and
   the divine attributes from the English word, "God." For the things
   meant and intended by the sacrament, are as entirely and wholly
   different from that use of bread and wine by which they are expressed,
   as the divine nature is entirely and wholly different from that English
   or Latin word which is to express or remind us of that divine nature.

   [Dem-131] Great part of the Jewish religion consisted in positive
   appointments and institutions; but the meaning, end and intent of them
   was entirely of another nature, and consisted of such things as were
   duties of themselves, and of the highest necessity to be done. For the
   end and intent of their institutions were either to keep up and
   exercise their faith and hope of a redeemer, or to set forth the
   character and marks by which they should know him, or to represent to
   them the nature and manner of their expected redemption, or to teach
   them some inward dying unto sin, and inward living unto God, or some
   other truth, doctrine or practice, that was to be acknowledged and done
   for itself, though no positive institution had ever been made on its
   account. And the one only reason why the greatest part of the Jews
   lived in such a total ignorance of their religion, was, because they
   had learned it in the same manner as this author has learned
   Christianity; they would see nothing in their institutions but what a
   heathen might as well have seen, nothing but what could be seen in the
   outside of them; just as this author will see no more in the sacrament,
   than what a heathen that knows only the words of institution may see in
   it. They were too learned and rational to allow of any mysteries at the
   bottom of their services, as this author is too sober a critic to allow
   of any mystery in the institution of the sacrament. And as they,
   through a blind zeal for the letter, and to show their fidelity to
   them, lost all that which was truly meant and intended by them; so this
   author, full of the same zeal for the letter and plainness of this
   Christian institution, is doing all that he can to make us lose all
   that is truly meant and intended by it.

   [Dem-132] The sacrifices of the Jews were at the bottom, only so many
   representations and applications of that great sacrifice for the sins
   of the world, first promised to all mankind, in these words: "The seed
   of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head"; but because this was not
   expressly said in the institution of any of their sacrifices, this is
   done in consequence of that first promise, or this is to show you how
   and in what manner you are to seek and find your redeemer, because the
   letter was not thus adapted to these carnal men, they contented
   themselves with the religion of slaying beasts. Just as this author is
   only a bare eater of bread and wine in the sacrament, because it is not
   there expressly said, what great mysteries of Christ as our savior are
   represented by it. The Jews had many passages in their scriptures that
   called them to the spirituality of their religion, and showed them the
   inward meaning, spirit and intent of all their institutions; but
   because it was not expressly said, This is an explication of such an
   ordinance, or this that is here said, relates to the true meaning and
   intent of such an institution, all these passages of scripture were
   neglected by them, and not applied to their proper objects. It is just
   thus with this author; the New Testament abounds with passages that
   prove, teach and explain the true meaning, end and intent of the holy
   sacrament; but because those passages don't expressly say, This is the
   proof or explication of what is said in the institution, they are by
   him overlooked and rejected, as having nothing to do with it. The
   learned Pharisee, in order to know the meaning and intent of killing a
   heifer in sacrifice, or of circumcising the flesh, would only look for
   such places of scripture, as appoint the killing of an heifer, and the
   circumcising of the flesh; just so this author, to know the true
   meaning and intent of the institution of the sacrament, only searches
   the scripture in the same manner. He seeks only such places as
   expressly mention the institution, or repeat the words of it.

   [Dem-133] The Jews neither expected nor allowed any benefits and merits
   of Christ to be obtained by means of their sacrifices; because such
   benefits were not literally mentioned in the institution of their
   sacrifices; just so this author, neither expects nor allows the merits
   and benefits of Christ's passion to be applied to us by the holy
   sacrament, because the application of such benefits and merits is not
   expressly mentioned in the words of the institution. Thus was it that
   the Jews never found their savior in the Old Testament; and thus it is,
   that this author has lost him in the New.

   [Dem-134] And indeed, upon his principles, it is impossible that anyone
   should ever know anything of the real nature and truth of the Jewish or
   Christian religion. For let anyone but search into the nature, meaning
   and intent of the Jewish institutions, as this author doth into the
   nature and intent of the sacrament; and he must, as I said above, be
   rendered stone-blind to all the mysteries of the Old Testament as well
   as of the New.

   [Dem-135] For as Christ was the substance, the heart, and true meaning
   of all their ordinances, though not mentioned expressly in the letter
   of their positive institutions, they were obliged by this author's
   principles, not to acknowledge him to be in them, and to reject all
   such interpretations as led to him; and to allow nothing to be meant by
   their positive institutions, but that which the words of them
   understood, according to the common rules of speaking, declared to be
   in them: therefore every Jew that had this author's principles, was
   under a necessity of being stone-blind, or totally ignorant of the real
   nature and truth of the Jewish religion.

   [Dem-136] Again, the apostle saith, "He is not a Jew which is one
   outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh;
   but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the
   heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter." {Rom.ii.28.}

   [Dem-137] But according to this author's principles, you are to
   maintain, that he only is a Jew, which is one outwardly, and that only
   is circumcision which is outward in the flesh; for to allow Judaism to
   have anything inwardly more than is in the outward letter, or
   circumcision to be anything else than that which is expressed in the
   words of the institution, is a thing not lawful to be done upon this
   author's principles. This I think may sufficiently show you the truth
   of what I said to you in the beginning, that if you accept of this
   author's key of knowledge, for the right understanding the nature of
   the sacrament; you will not only lose all the right knowledge of the
   sacrament, but be rendered a blind, deaf and dead reader of all the
   other most important doctrines of scripture. For, according to his
   principles, you are to see no more spirit, life, or mystery in any
   other sayings of our savior, than in that of the sacrament; and low as
   he had reduced that, it is full as high and mysterious, and deep in its
   meaning, as anything in the whole nature of the Christian religion can
   be allowed to be by this author.

   [Dem-138] But to return; there are plainly two distinct and essential
   parts of the sacrament, which constitute its whole nature. The first is
   in these words, "This is my body which is given for you, this is my
   blood which is shed for the remission of sins."

   [Dem-139] What is here said by our Lord Christ, we are to acknowledge
   to be true; therefore we are to own and acknowledge this great truth,
   that this bread and wine are made symbols and memorials of, viz., that
   his body is given for us, and his blood shed for the remission of sins;
   and consequently all that the scripture teaches concerning the truth,
   reality and manner in which he is the sacrifice, atonement and
   satisfaction for our sins, is in this sacrament to be of all necessity
   acknowledged and confessed by us. And we cannot perform this sacrament
   according to what it is, unless we see and own all that to be in it,
   which Christ saw and owned to be in it; unless we present it to him in
   the same meaning, as he presented it to his disciples. For if Christ
   has declared this nature and meaning to be in it, we cannot perform
   this sacrament according to Christ's declaration, unless we also in our
   performance of it, declare that same nature and meaning to be in it.
   Therefore the acknowledgement of Christ's being the atonement and
   satisfaction for our sins, is an essential and important part of the
   sacrament. If we were to mistake or neglect something in the right use
   of bread and wine in the sacrament, such mistake would only relate to
   the outward positive part of this institution, which has no obligation
   upon us but from divine appointment; but if we refuse to own and
   confess Christ to be the atonement and satisfaction for our sins, we
   sin against God and the nature of things, as those atheists do, who
   refuse to own that it was the goodness of God that created them.

   [Dem-140] Secondly, the other essential, and no less important part of
   the sacrament is, the eating the body, and drinking the blood of
   Christ. This is plainly another essential part of the sacrament,
   entirely distinct from the other. The one respects Christ, as he is the
   atonement and satisfaction for our sins; the other shows that he is to
   be owned and received as a principle of life to us.

   [Dem-141] The other words, "Do this in remembrance of me," relate
   equally to both parts, and are only as if our savior had said after the
   institution; Let this, which I have thus appointed to be done, be your
   acknowledgement of that salvation which is received through me, both as
   I am the atonement and satisfaction for sin, and a principle of life to
   all that lay hold of me.

   [Dem-142] You cannot help seeing that all this is plain, easy and
   natural in this explication of the words of the institution, and that I
   have used no art or force to come at it, and that no one can find any
   fault with it; but he that is unwilling to own these two great truths
   of scripture, that Christ as our savior is the atonement and
   satisfaction for our sins, and a principle of life to us. The short of
   the matter is this; the scriptures are full of proofs of these two
   great and fundamental characters, that he is in one respect the
   atonement and satisfaction for our sins, and in another, a principle of
   a new life to us; if therefore these two essential characters of our
   savior, which contain all that is said of him as such, are not to be
   acknowledged by us in the sacrament; then the sacrament must be said to
   be instituted for the denial of Christ; and the words, "Do this in
   remembrance of me," must have this meaning, "Do this in denial of me":
   then he is not to be remembered and acknowledged as he is, and
   therefore in the strictest sense is to be denied.

   [Dem-143] Hence it appears, that this author's Plain Account can have
   no truth or reasonableness in it, but upon this supposition, that
   Christ Jesus is not a real atonement and satisfaction for our sins, nor
   a real principle of life to us. For if these things were true of Christ
   as our savior, then the sacrament, which is done in acknowledgement of
   him, as such, must also of necessity acknowledge these truths.
   Therefore this author's Plain Account, which does not acknowledge these
   things of Christ, can have no truth or reasonableness in it, but upon
   this supposition, that these things are not true of Christ.

   [Dem-144] For if these things were real doctrines of scripture, it must
   follow, that they were to be acknowledged in the sacrament, even though
   they were not expressly mentioned or pointed at in the words of the
   institution. For since the sacrament is to be done in remembrance and
   acknowledgement of Christ, it necessarily follows, that that which the
   scriptures teach us concerning the nature and character of Christ, is
   to be remembered and acknowledged of him in and by the sacrament,
   because the sacrament is appointed for that end. And therefore, since
   this author will not allow our savior to be thus acknowledged in the
   sacrament, he must deny that he is thus described in scripture.

   [Dem-145] Now deny either of these characters of our savior, and you
   deny all the Christian religion; the words, "savior," "salvation,"
   "redemption," and such like, have no proper meaning, truth or reality
   in them.

   [Dem-146] But if you allow these characters of our savior, that he
   really is, what he said he was, and what all the scriptures affirm of
   him; namely, the atonement for sins, and a principle of a new life to
   us; then the sacrament, which is the representation and acknowledgement
   of these two great truths, has all that is great, mysterious, and
   adorable in the Christian religion, centered in it. And had this author
   believed these two great doctrines concerning our savior, it had been
   as impossible for him to have his present poor notion of the sacrament,
   as it was impossible for St. John, who knew that the Word was God, and
   that the same Word was made flesh, to have had so poor a notion of
   Jesus Christ, as those Jews had, who took him to be only the
   carpenter's son.

   [Dem-147] Hence also it plainly appears, that seeing these two great
   truths are the essential parts of the sacrament, and that it is
   appointed to express our faith of them; that the nature and end of the
   sacrament is not, as this author teaches, to turn an act of our memory
   upon Christ; but that it is to exercise our faith in Christ, and to be
   our open profession of these two great truths; and also that our faith
   is thereby exercised in this twofold manner; 1st, in believing Christ
   to be the true atonement for our sins, and a real principle of life to
   us; 2dly, in believing that this atonement, and his being a principle
   of life to us, is made certain and confirmed to us, by taking the bread
   and wine to be the true significations of them.

   [Dem-148] For when our savior says, Do this, it is the same thing as if
   he had said, Do these two things appointed in the sacrament, as your
   act of faith, that I am both the atonement for your sins, and a
   principle of life to you. Don't say bare and empty outward words, when
   you say, "This is my body which is given for you, and this is my blood
   which is shed for the remission of sins"; but let faith say them, and
   acknowledge the truth of them: when you eat my body, and drink my
   blood, don't let your mouth only eat, or perform the outward action;
   but let faith, which is the true mouth of the inward man, believe that
   it really partakes of me, and that I enter in by faith; and when you
   thus by faith perform these two essential parts of the sacrament, then,
   and then only may what you do be said to be done in remembrance of me,
   and of what I am to you. For nothing remembers me but faith, nothing
   acknowledges me but faith, nothing finds me, nothing knows me but
   faith.

   [Dem-149] I appeal to the most ordinary understanding for the truth of
   all this; for it is so plain and visible, that nothing but art or
   prejudice can avoid it. For since our savior says, This is my body
   which is given for you, this is my blood which is shed for the
   remission of sins, what he says, that we are to say; and what we say,
   is an act or exercise of faith. And since in these words he says two
   things, the one, that he is the atonement for our sins; the other, that
   this bread and this wine are the signification or application of that
   atonement, or that which we are to take for it; therefore we in doing
   this, are by faith to say and believe these two things; and therefore
   all that we here do, is faith, and faith manifested in this twofold
   manner.

   [Dem-150] Again, seeing our savior commands us to eat his body, and
   drink his blood, we are to say and believe, that his body and blood are
   there signified and exhibited to us; and that his body and blood may be
   eaten and drank, as a principle of life to us; and therefore faith is
   all, or all is faith in this other essential part of the sacrament; and
   we cannot possibly do that which our savior commands us to do, unless
   it be done by faith.

   [Dem-151] But now this author, in his Plain Account, takes no more
   notice of these two great essential parts of the sacrament, than if
   there was not one word about them: and yet they are so much there, that
   in the whole institution, there is not a word about anything else. For
   the words, "Do this in remembrance of me," are as entirely distinct
   from the institution, as a command to do a thing, is distinct from the
   thing that is to be done. They enter no more into the nature of the
   institution, nor any more teach us what is to be done in it, than if
   Christ had only said, "Do this as your duty to me." Had he said thus,
   it would easily have been seen, that the institution must be entirely
   distinct from such a command to observe it. And yet his saying, "Do
   this in remembrance of me," has neither more nor less in it, than if he
   had said, "Do this as your duty to me."

   [Dem-152] The plain truth is this; the institution consists of those
   two essential parts just mentioned; that is, in offering, presenting,
   and pleading before God, by faith, the atonement of Christ's body and
   blood, and in owning him to be a principle of life to us, by our eating
   his body and blood: this is the entire, whole institution. The words,
   "Do this in remembrance of me," are only the command to observe the
   institution. Do this, is a command to do all that had been mentioned in
   the institution; and the words, in remembrance of me, don't show what
   the institution is, or what is to be done in it, but only the reason,
   why such an institution, whatever it is, was commanded to be observed.

   [Dem-153] The words therefore, in remembrance of me, are not a part of
   the institution, but are only a part of the command to observe the
   institution, and only show the reason why such an institution is
   commanded to be observed.

   [Dem-154] And yet this poor man (for so I must call one so miserably
   insensible of the greatness of the subject he is upon) can find nothing
   in the institution, but, first, bread and wine, not placed and offered
   before God, as first signifying and pleading the atonement of his Son's
   body and blood, and then eaten and drank in signfication of having our
   life from him; but bread and wine set upon a table, to put the people,
   that see it, in mind, that by and by they are to exercise an act of
   memory. And then, secondly, this same bread and wine afterwards brought
   to everyone in particular, not for them to know, or believe that they
   are receiving anything of Christ, or partaking of anything from him;
   but only to let them know, that the very instant they take the bread
   and wine into their mouth, is the very time for them actually to excite
   that act of memory, for the exciting of which, bread and wine had been
   before set upon a table.

   [Dem-155] This is the author's great point in the observance of the
   sacrament, and what he calls the peculiar nature of this duty. And this
   he teaches, not because the church, or saint, or father of any age
   since Christ, has taught him so; but because being a serious man, and
   of great exactness in weighing of words, he has found out, that the
   words, in remembrance of me, which are only a part of the command to
   observe the institution, are the whole of the institution itself; and
   that therefore nothing is to be admitted into it but an act of the
   memory, and bread and wine taken into the mouth to excite that act of
   the memory; because remembrance which is the whole of this duty,
   neither is nor can be anything else but an act of the memory.

   [Dem-156] Thus by making first the words, in remembrance of me, the
   whole essence of the institution, when they are as distinct from it, as
   they are from these words, "This is my body which is given for you";
   and teach us only the reason why we are commanded to do that which is
   to be done in the institution:

   [Dem-157] And then, 2dly, by limiting the word "remembrance," and
   allowing nothing to be meant by it, but an act of the memory: by the
   help of these two equally false and shameful steps, this author has
   stripped the institution of every mystery of our salvation, which the
   words of Christ show to be in it, and which every Christian that has
   any true faith, though but as a grain of mustard seed, is sure of
   finding in it.

   [Dem-158] God, we know, made a certain great promise to Abraham; now
   let it be supposed, that God, after the making of this promise to him,
   had enjoined him to come frequently to that place where the promise was
   made to him in remembrance of it: could it be supposed, that the
   remembrance here spoken of, could signify anything else, but an
   exercise of his faith in that promise; and as an outward sign of his
   declaring to God his full belief in it? Or could anything be more
   extravagant, than to say that God here only required of Abraham an act
   of his memory, because the word remembrance relates only to the memory?

   [Dem-159] Now this is strictly the case of the sacrament. In the
   institution our savior has said, "This is my body and blood, which is
   given and shed for you, for the remission of sins"; in the institution
   he has bidden us to eat his body, and drink his blood. All this is
   proposed to our faith, just as the promise was proposed to Abraham's
   faith. When therefore he bids us to do this, that is, do these two
   things in remembrance of him; can it be supposed, that the remembrance
   of him can be anything else but an act of faith in him, believing and
   owning all that concerning him, which we say and do in and by the
   sacrament? For nothing but faith can see, or hear, or understand, or do
   that which is to be done in the sacrament: nothing but faith can say,
   that this his body and blood are the atonement of our sins: nothing but
   faith can say, that the bread and wine are his body and blood: nothing
   but faith can eat his body, and drink his blood: nothing but faith can
   say, that his body and blood are a principle of life to us: therefore
   the command to do these things, is a command to exercise so many acts
   of faith; because the things commanded can only be done by faith; and
   the person, in remembrance of whom these things are to be done, can
   only be remembered by faith. For to remember him, neither is nor can be
   anything else, but to have faith in him.

   [Dem-160] And therefore it is out of all doubt, that when he said, "Do
   this in remembrance of me," nothing more nor less can possibly be meant
   by it, than if he had said, Do all this, as your act of faith in me.

   [Dem-161] Since therefore this is so plainly the nature of the
   institution, which is solely appointed to express our faith in these
   two great characters of our savior, both as he is the atonement for our
   sins, and a principle of life to us; you may well ask how it was
   possible for this author, with his eyes open, and the scriptures before
   him, to give us so false and so poor an account of it.

   [Dem-162] Now the one only reason why the scriptures are thus useless
   to him, and why he is forced to find out a doctrine that is not in
   them, is this, it is because he is blinded with a philosophy, and
   science falsely so-called, which will not allow him to believe, that
   Jesus Christ was truly and essentially God, as well as a perfect man:
   for the foundation and possibility of Christ's being a real atonement
   and satisfaction for our sins, and a real principle of life to us, was
   his divine nature; but as this author cannot be suspected to believe
   this great foundation doctrine, that Christ was truly and essentially
   God, very God of very God, so he could not believe him to be a true and
   real atonement for sins, or a true and real principle of life to us,
   and therefore could admit nothing of these truths into his account of
   the sacrament.

   [Dem-163] The way therefore that this author came by his Plain Account
   of the sacrament, was not, as he would have you believe, from a bare
   impartial consideration of the words of the institution, but from his
   wrong knowledge of the Christian faith. He had first lost and renounced
   all the right and true knowledge of our savior in the scriptures, and
   therefore was obliged not to find it in the sacrament. And because it
   would be openly confessing to the world, that he was in the sense of
   the scripture an anti-Christ, if he should plainly have told you, that
   he did not believe Christ to be truly and essentially God, or the
   atonement and satisfaction for our sins, or a principle of life to us;
   therefore he only tells you, that he has been led into this account of
   the sacrament, by a bare consideration of the words of the institution,
   according to the common rules of speaking.

   [Dem-164] Now if this author will declare, that he sincerely believes
   Jesus Christ to be truly and really God by nature, and the true real
   atonement and satisfaction for our sins, and a true and real principle
   of life to us; I shall be glad, and he ought to be glad, that I have
   been the occasion of his declaring things so important to himself, and
   to the matter in hand. But this I may still say, that he could not have
   had this faith, when he wrote his Plain Account, unless he may be
   supposed to have had it, but would not write of the sacrament
   conformably to it.

   [Dem-165] And, secondly, if he will now declare, that without any
   equivocation or mental reserve, he fully believes these great truths,
   no further recantation of his whole book need to be desired.

   [Dem-166] For if these things are true and undeniable characters of our
   savior; then it follows, that the nature and end of the sacrament must
   be essentially concerned with them, since it is the confessed nature
   and end of the sacrament, to remember and acknowledge Christ to be that
   which the scriptures testify him to be.

   [Dem-167] The short of the matter is this; either this author will
   plainly own a sincere belief of these doctrines, or he will not: if he
   will not own the belief of them, you have no reason to consider him as
   a Christian writer upon this subject; and so ought no more to learn
   from him, than from a Jew, the nature of the sacrament. But if he will
   declare his full belief of these doctrines, then you have the fullest
   assurance from himself, that his Plain Account cannot be Christian:
   because if these things are true of Christ, they must be remembered and
   acknowledged in that sacrament, which is appointed for the remembrance
   and acknowledgement of him.

   [Dem-168] Now these two essential parts of the sacrament, relating to
   this twofold character of our savior, as he is the atonement and
   satisfaction for our sins, and as he is a principle of life to us,
   contain the whole nature, end, and effects of the sacrament. You are to
   look nowhere, nor in anything else, for the right knowledge of this
   sacrament, but in the right faith and knowledge of these two great
   points. And everything that they teach you, and everything that
   scripture teaches you of these two great points, is the only true
   doctrine of the sacrament.

   [Dem-169] All that you know of Christ, as the atonement for our sins,
   all that you know of him, as a principle of life to us, is neither more
   nor less than that which you are to know, and confess, and appeal to,
   in and by the use of the sacrament. And indeed these two great points
   do so plainly show themselves, at first sight, to be in the words of
   the institution, that any man upon the bare reading of them, without
   any further knowledge, might justly say, If Christ is not an atonement
   for our sins, why is his body said to be given, and his blood shed for
   our sins? If he is not a food to our souls, or a principle of life to
   us, why are we commanded to eat his body, and drink his blood?

   [Dem-170] So that though a man could not say, that these things were
   certainly true, or in what sense they were true, merely from the
   mention of them in the sacrament, yet he might justly say, that the
   words of the institution pointed at such truths, and could have no
   foundation, unless these things barely mentioned in it, were in the
   scriptures proved and declared to be true doctrines of the Christian
   religion.

   [Dem-171] And as these two great points are so visibly plain in the
   sacrament, and constitute its whole nature; so as soon as we rightly
   understand what the scripture has taught concerning these points, they
   make known to us, in the shortest and plainest way, all the merit,
   dignity, and value of this sacrament, all the blessings and advantages
   derived to us from it, and all the pious dispositions with which we are
   to approach it. Hence it was that the apostles, after the day of
   Pentecost, when they had all their ignorance dispelled, yet gave us no
   further or particular explications of the nature of the sacrament;
   because as soon as it was known, that Christ was a real atonement and
   satisfaction for sins, and a real principle of life to us; as soon as
   these two great doctrines were known, the sacrament had all the
   explication it could possibly have.

   [Dem-172] For no more can be known of the sacrament, than is signified
   by them. All that is great, mysterious, and adorable in these
   doctrines, as found in the scriptures, is equally great, mysterious and
   adorable in them as they are found in the sacrament.

   [Dem-173] Needless therefore would all books be upon the nature of the
   sacrament, and the right preparation for it, did we but truly know and
   believe Christ to be the atonement and satisfaction for our sins, and a
   principle of life to us; for the belief of these things in the
   sacrament, would like the unction, spoken of by St. John, teach us all
   things concerning it; and we should have no need of other teaching.

   [Dem-174] No one need then, as this author vainly does, enquire for
   some promise of scripture annexing a benefit to this sacrament, to know
   what good we are to receive by it. For the knowledge of these two great
   parts of the sacrament, would sufficiently show us the inestimable
   benefit that we receive by it.

   [Dem-175] For if this sacrament is appointed by Jesus Christ, as the
   acknowledgement of his being the atonement of our sins, and a principle
   of life to us; if it is appointed to stand between him and us, as a
   declared proof on his side, that he is thus our atonement and life; and
   as a declared proof on our side, that we own, seek, and apply to him as
   such; and if this is not set as a mark once for all, but as a proof
   that is to be repeated continually, and that is to be made good to us,
   not by our once having done it, or he once owned it, but to be
   perpetually owned and done, both on his side and ours, can we want any
   other assurance of the benefit and advantage of observing this
   sacrament, than the thing itself by its own nature declares?

   [Dem-176] For if we are in covenant with Christ, and have an interest
   in him, as our atonement and life; not because he once said, that this
   was his body and blood, given and shed for our sins, or because we once
   owned it, and pleaded it before him; but because he continues to say
   the same thing in the sacrament, and to present himself there to us as
   our atonement and life, and because we continue to own and apply to him
   as such; it necessarily follows, that the sacrament rightly used, is
   the highest means of finishing our salvation, and puts us in the
   fullest possession of all the benefits of our savior, both as he is our
   atonement and life, that we are then at that time capable of.

   [Dem-177] For if the atonement of our sins by Christ, and that life
   which he communicates to us, is not to be considered as a transient
   matter, as something that is done and past, but as something that on
   the side of Christ is always doing, and never will be done, till the
   consummation of all things; if our applying to, and receiving Christ as
   our atonement and life, is not to be considered as a transient act, as
   something that is done and past, but as something that is always doing,
   and never will be done, till we depart out of a state of trial; then it
   follows, that that which is the appointed means or proof of Christ's
   continuing to communicate himself to us, as our atonement and life, and
   of our continuing to apply to, and receive him as such, is in its own
   nature, unless hindered by us, a certain means and instrument of
   conveying and imparting to us all the benefits of Christ, both as he is
   our atonement and life. To ask therefore for a particular promise
   annexed to this institution, which in its nature communicates to us all
   that ever was promised to us in a savior, is highly absurd.

   [Dem-178] But after all, it can be truly said, that the scriptures are
   very full and particular in setting forth the benefits and advantages
   of the holy communion, to all those that have eyes that see, and ears
   that hear. For do not the scriptures plainly enough tell us of the
   benefit of believing, seeking, and applying to Christ as the atonement
   for our sins? And is not the benefit of this faith the benefit of the
   sacrament, if Christ is there believed, sought and applied to as our
   atonement?

   [Dem-179] And is it not the sole end of the sacrament to continue,
   confirm and exercise this faith, to which all the blessings of our
   salvation are annexed? Therefore, all that the scriptures say of the
   riches and blessings, and treasures, which faith in Christ as our
   redeemer, can procure to us, all that they say of the benefit of that
   faith, which is absolutely required and exercised by this sacrament.

   [Dem-180] Again, do not the scriptures plainly and frequently enough
   tell us of the benefit of the new birth in Christ, of the putting on
   Christ, of having Christ formed in us, of Christ's being our life, of
   our having life in him, of his being that bread from heaven, that bread
   of life, of which the manna was only a type; of his flesh being meat
   indeed, and his blood drink indeed; of our eating his flesh, and
   drinking his blood, and that without it we have no life in us; and are
   not all these things so many plain and open declarations of that which
   we seek and obtain, by eating the body and blood of Christ?

   [Dem-181] For we eat the sacramental body and blood of Christ, to show
   that we want and desire, and by faith lay hold of the real, spiritual
   nature and being of Christ; to show that we want and desire, the
   progress of the new birth in Christ; to put on Christ, to have Christ
   formed and revealed in us, to have him our life, to partake of him our
   second Adam, in the same fullness and reality, as we partake of the
   nature of the first Adam: and therefore all that the scripture says of
   the benefits and blessings are sought and obtained by the eating the
   body and blood of Christ in the Lord's Supper. For to eat the body and
   blood of Christ, is neither more nor less than to put on Christ, to
   receive birth and life, and nourishment and growth from him; as the
   branch receives its being and life, and nourishment and growth from the
   vine. And because Christ is that to us, which the vine is to the
   branches, therefore there is a strict truth and reality in these
   expressions; and the same truth and reality, whether it be expressed,
   by saying, that we eat the flesh and blood of Christ, or that we put on
   Christ, or that Christ is formed, manifested or revealed in us.

   [Dem-182] For if you could bid the branch to eat the substance and
   juice of the vine, the same must be intended, as if you had said, that
   the vine must be formed in the branch, or must manifest itself in the
   branch. So when it is said, that we must eat the flesh and blood of
   Christ, it is the same thing as saying, that Christ must be formed in
   us, or manifested in us.

   [Dem-183] But you will perhaps say, How does it appear, that these
   expressions of putting on Christ, of Christ's being formed in us, of
   his being our life, the bread of life, and his flesh meat indeed, and
   his blood drink indeed; how does it appear, that these and the like
   places of scripture are to be understood sacramentally?

   [Dem-184] I answer, it does not appear. And the question itself is as
   absurd, as if it was asked, How does it appear, that the scriptures are
   to be understood sacramentally? Whereas, if the question began at the
   right end, it should proceed thus, How does it appear, that the
   sacrament is to be understood scripturally, or according to the plain
   doctrines of scripture? Was the question thus put, as it ought to be,
   it would fall of itself. For surely it need not be proved, that the
   things spoken of Christ in the sacrament, are to be understood
   according to that which is spoken of Christ in the scripture. When our
   savior said in the sixth of St. John, "that his flesh was meat indeed,
   and his blood drink indeed, and that except a man eat his flesh, and
   drink his blood, he hath no life in him; and that he who eateth his
   flesh, and drinketh his blood, dwelleth in him, and he in him"; he did
   not speak of the sacrament, nor could possibly speak of it, for this
   plain reason, because he spoke of the truth, the reality, and the thing
   itself; for the sake of which, and for the application of which to
   ourselves, he afterwards instituted the sacrament.

   [Dem-185] But if the sacrament was instituted for the sake of that
   truth and reality, of which he then spake; then the sacrament must be
   essentially related to that which he then said, and must have its
   meaning and end according to it.

   [Dem-186] And if what he then said, was that truth and reality of the
   thing itself, and the sacrament was instituted as an outward sign,
   proof or declaration of it; then what he said in St. John, he spoke not
   of the sacrament; and yet what he instituted in the sacrament, has all
   its meaning according to that which he said in St. John.

   [Dem-187] To ask, whether our savior meant the sacramental bread and
   wine, when he said, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
   indeed, is as absurd as to ask, whether he did not mean the flesh and
   blood of some other person, when he said, my flesh and my blood?

   [Dem-188] And, on the other hand, to ask, whether the sacramental bread
   and wine does not signify to us that flesh and blood which is our meat
   indeed, and drink indeed, is as absurd, as to ask, whether the
   appointed sign of a thing, does not signify that which it is appointed
   to signify?

   [Dem-189] These two things therefore are evidently plain: First, that
   our savior in the sixth of St. John did not, could not possibly speak
   of his sacramental body and blood, or bread and wine, because he spoke
   of himself, of his real, natural, and true life, of which we must
   partake: Secondly, that what he calls his body and blood in the
   sacrament, or has appointed to be the signs of his body and blood, must
   be understood according to that which he has said in St. John, of his
   flesh which is meat indeed, and his blood which is drink indeed; for
   this plain reason, because the appointed sign of a thing must signify
   that which it is appointed to signify.

   [Dem-190] Therefore in St. John there is nothing said of the sacrament;
   and yet what is said in the sacrament, is to be necessarily understood
   of that very thing which is said in St. John. And the reason is plain;
   for the thing is essentially different from that which is appointed to
   be a sign of it; therefore, he that speaks of the thing, cannot in
   speaking of that, speak of the sign. But the sign, as such, has all its
   nature from the thing that it is to signify; and therefore the thing
   itself must be meant by that which the sign speaks of.

   [Dem-191] To say, as some do, that our savior could not speak of that
   in St. John, which is intended by the sacrament, because the sacrament
   was not then instituted, is very weak and unreasonable; for it is
   saying, that he could not then speak of a thing or doctrine, because he
   afterwards appointed something to be a sign or outward declaration of
   it. For if he had appointed an institution, or positive rite, which
   related to nothing that he had before taught, it must have been very
   unaccountable. Thus to command us to eat his body and blood in the
   sacrament, if he had not beforehand taught that we had our life from
   him, and that his flesh was our meat indeed, and his blood our drink
   indeed, had been very unaccountable. But seeing he had in the openest,
   plainest manner declared, that he was the life of men, and that except
   we eat his flesh and drink his blood we have no life in us; the command
   to eat bread and wine as his body and blood, is plain and intelligible;
   and we have the fullest assurance of the meaning of it, for this
   reason, because Christ had often, and long beforehand taught that
   truth, of which he afterwards appointed the sacrament to be an outward
   sign, and an outward means of our owning, confessing, and embracing it.
   Thus all the controversy about this place in St. John, and other like
   passages of scripture, is at an end, and has the most plain and
   satisfactory solution; such passages do not speak of the sacrament,
   because they speak of the thing itself, of which the sacrament is an
   appointed outward signification; but the sacrament directly speaks of,
   and points to those passages, because they contain that truth and
   reality which the sacrament is appointed to signify.

   [Dem-192] For were not Christ our real life, there had not been any
   outward figure or declaration of it appointed; was there not a real
   eating the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ, was there not a true
   substantial putting on of Christ, or partaking of the nature of Christ,
   the sacramental eating and drinking of his body and blood, had not been
   appointed; there could have been no foundation for it; or if appointed,
   it could have had no meaning suitable to the words. But since that
   which is sacramentally figured or signified, by the eating and drinking
   the sacramental body and blood of Christ, is in the scriptures declared
   to be a real truth, since its reality is taught, declared and explained
   by various ways and manners of speech, it is undeniable, that the
   sacrament, which is an appointed figure, must be explained and asserted
   according to that truth and reality, of which it is the appointed
   figure.

   [Dem-193] When our savior said, "he that eateth my flesh, and drinketh
   my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him": when he said, "I am the life";
   and again, "I am the true vine, and ye are the branches," &c., he spake
   as much strict and real truth, and as much according to the letter, as
   when he said of himself, he came down from heaven, or that he is in the
   Father, and the Father in him. What is there said, is no more to be
   considered as a metaphor, or figure of speech, than when it is said,
   that God is our Father, or that in God we live, move, and have our
   being.

   [Dem-194] For what is said of Christ, as our life, is as strictly true,
   as when it is said, that in God we live, and move, and have our being;
   and what is said of Christ's being the true vine, has the same real
   truth in it, as when God is said to be our Father.

   [Dem-195] Had Christ indeed said, This vine is me, and these branches
   are ye, what he said must then have been as figurative, as when he said
   of the bread, "This is my body"; and his speaking so of a vine, must
   have been only a sign to us, that he was in truth and reality that to
   us, which the vine is in a poor, earthly, perishable manner to its
   branches. But seeing he does not speak of a vine, but speaks directly
   of himself, and says, that I am the true vine; it is as if he had said,
   I am the vine in truth and reality, as God is the Father of you all in
   truth and reality, because I am that in a true and real, and living
   manner to you, which the vine is in a poor, earthly, perishable manner
   to its branches.

   [Dem-196] Therefore all that is here said, is the real truth, as far as
   human words can set it forth; and when it is said, that we must put on
   Christ, or that Christ must be formed in us, or that he is the true
   vine, and we are the branches, there is the same literal, real,
   immutable and eternal truth in these expressions, as when it is said,
   that "in God we live and move, and have our being," or that God is our
   Father, and we are his children.

   [Dem-197] Now to deny that Christ is thus our life, is as great a
   denial of him, as to deny him to be the eternal Word, or the Son of
   God, or the light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world.
   And to deny that we receive our life from him, or eat his flesh and
   blood in the same reality as the branch eateth of the substance and
   juice of the vine, and receiveth what it hath from it, is as great a
   denial of him, as if we deny that he came from heaven, and was in
   heaven, even when he was upon earth.

   [Dem-198] But if we own these great truths, which are the very heart
   and substance of Christianity, if we know and acknowledge that we are
   thus of him, and by him, that our inward man, which is all that is
   Christian within us, has all its birth, life, and growth from Christ,
   as its principle, eating, drinking, and drawing in life from him, as
   the branch eats, drinks, and draws its life and substance from the
   vine; then we cannot be at a loss either to know what is meant by the
   sacrament, and the benefits we receive thereby, or to know what parts
   of scripture explain those benefits to us. Since it must appear to us
   beyond all doubt, that all that which the scriptures speak to us of
   Christ, as the atonement for our sins, and our peace with God, and all
   that they speak to us of our life in Christ, of his forming and
   manifesting himself in the birth and growth of our inward new man; is
   that which it speaks to us of the meaning and benefits of this holy
   sacrament, which is solely appointed as the figure of all this, as the
   application of all this to us, and as an established means of
   exercising, increasing and strengthening our faith in him, as he is all
   this to us.

   [Dem-199] Here therefore is full room for all our devotion, and at the
   same time a full security against all delusion. For whilst we believe
   nothing of the sacrament, seek nothing in it, nor plead anything by it,
   but such scripture truths and benefits as we are obliged to believe,
   own and plead, though the sacrament had not been appointed, all the
   devotion which the sacrament thus raises in us, is as secure from
   delusion, has as much the stamp of truth upon it, and is as proper an
   exercise of solid piety, as when any thing or occasion excites us to an
   act of loving God with all our mind, and heart, and strength. For as we
   cannot too much esteem, love and adore our savior, both as he is the
   atonement for our sins, and a principle of life to us; so if the use of
   the sacrament quickens, nourishes, keeps up, and increases this esteem,
   love and adoration of him, as such, it cannot do this too much.

   [Dem-200] For as we do nothing in the sacrament, but what is our
   natural duty, and good and right in itself; as we seek to Christ, trust
   in Christ, rely upon his merits, desire to have life in and from him,
   only in such a manner as we ought to do, though we were not assisted in
   it by the sacrament; so all this faith and hope, and love and desire,
   and devotion which we practice by means of the sacrament, has
   everything in it, that can prove to be right, and just, and good. And
   the want of this faith, hope, love, desire, adoration and devotion, is
   more blamable in the use of the sacrament than anywhere else, because
   it is there more properly required, and has the most proper object and
   occasion to excite it.

   [Dem-201] You must therefore consider the sacrament purely as an object
   of your devotion, that is to exercise all your faith, that is to raise,
   exercise, and inflame every holy ardor of your soul that tends to God.
   It is an abstract, or sum of all the mysteries that have been revealed
   concerning our savior, from the first promise of a seed of the woman to
   bruise the serpent's head, to the day of Pentecost.

   [Dem-202] As you can receive or believe nothing higher of our savior,
   than that he is the atonement for our sins, and a real principle of
   life to us; so every height and depth of devotion, faith, love, and
   adoration, which is due to God as your creator, is due to God as your
   redeemer.

   [Dem-203] Jacob's ladder that reached from earth to heaven, and was
   filled with angels ascending and descending between heaven and earth,
   is but a small signification of that communion between God and man,
   which this holy sacrament is the means and instrument of.

   [Dem-204] Now here it may be proper for you to observe, that whatever
   names or titles this institution is signified to you by, whether it be
   called a sacrifice propitiatory, or commemorative; whether it be called
   an holy oblation, the eucharist, the sacrament of the body and blood of
   Christ, the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the heavenly banquet, the
   food of immortality, or the holy communion, and the like, matters not
   much. For all these words or names are right and good, and there is
   nothing wrong in them, but the striving and contention about them.

   [Dem-205] For they all express something that is true of the sacrament,
   and therefore are every one of them, in a good sense, rightly
   applicable to it; but all of them are far short of expressing the whole
   nature of the sacrament, and therefore the help of all of them is
   wanted.

   [Dem-206] He therefore that contends for one name, as the only proper
   one in exclusion of the rest, is in the same mistake, as he that should
   contend for one name and character of our savior, as the only proper
   one, in exclusion of all the rest. For as all the names and titles by
   which Christ is described, from the seed of the woman in Genesis, to
   the Alpha and Omega in the last chapter of the Revelation, are only to
   help us to know, believe, and experience more of him as our savior,
   than can be expressed by all these different characters of him: so all
   the various names and titles given to the sacrament, are only to teach
   us to know, believe, and find more of our redemption and salvation in
   the sacrament, than can be pointed out to us by any or all these
   expressions.

   [Dem-207] If you have yet known Christ in any true degree, what must
   you think of him, who should contend that the Lamb of God was the only
   proper character of our savior, and that therefore those other names,
   seed of the woman, root of David, bright and morning star, bread of
   life, tree of life, son of man, first-born of all creatures, Word of
   God, could not belong to him as our savior, because of the disagreement
   there is between a lamb, and the bread of life, or a tree of life?

   [Dem-208] Now this is the learning this author is full of; from this
   scrupulous attention to words, and the ideas annexed to them, he
   rejects almost all the names by which the sacrament has ever been
   expressed.

   [Dem-209] He is able to prove, that the sacrament is not a
   commemorative sacrifice, because it is the Supper of the Lord; just as
   another by the same skill in words, might prove, that the Lamb of God
   is not the tree of life, or the bread that came down from heaven,
   because of the great difference there is between a tree, bread, and a
   lamb.

   [Dem-210] Now the reason why our savior is described under this vast
   variety of characters, is this, because no one phrase or particular
   form of expression can truly describe him to us; therefore that is to
   be done as well as it can, by different and seemingly contrary
   characters.

   [Dem-211] Thus he is called the seed of the woman that was to bruise
   the serpent's head, in another aspect the Lamb of God, in another the
   desire of all nations, in another the son of man, in another the
   brightness of his Father's glory, in another the bread that came down
   from heaven, in another the tree of life, the Alpha and Omega. Now it
   is the exceeding difference, and even literal contrariety of these
   expressions, that makes them proper and useful to us; and we have the
   more true knowledge of our savior because of these characters, which,
   considered in themselves, seem to have no agreement with each other.

   [Dem-212] Thus the Lamb of God, and the bread of life, are characters
   of our savior, that have no connection with each other, and yet they
   teach us the greatest truths concerning our savior, because they are
   thus without connection, and so unrelated to each other.

   [Dem-213] It is just thus with the sacrament; the different and
   seemingly incoherent characters and expressions by which it is
   signified to us, help us to know more truth of it, merely because of
   their difference, than could be taught us by such expressions as had a
   literal agreement and connection with each other.

   [Dem-214] Do you therefore reject this author's wisdom of words which
   he proposes to you, and be content to be devout without it. Be glad to
   know, that as the nature, office, and condition of our savior could not
   be made known to us, but by a variety of different names and titles
   ascribed to him; so the nature and end and effects of this holy
   sacrament could not be made known to us, but by a variety of different
   names and titles ascribed to it; that in one respect it is a
   propitiatory sacrifice, in another a commemorative sacrifice; in one
   respect it is the seal and renewal of the covenant between God and man,
   in another the food of immortality, the life of the soul, the bread
   that came down from heaven, the tree of life; that in one respect it is
   the holy eucharist, in another the holy communion.

   [Dem-215] And be assured, that he who tries to set these expressions at
   variance with each other, and would persuade you that if one is a true
   account of the sacrament, the others cannot be so, is as vain a
   disputer of this world, as he that would persuade you, that if our
   savior be the seed of the woman, he cannot be essentially the Son of
   God; or if he be the Lamb of God, he cannot be the bread of life.

   [Dem-216] The reason why this sacrament is said in one respect to be a
   propitiatory, or commemorative sacrifice, is only this, because you
   there offer, present, and plead before God, such things as are by
   Christ himself said to be his body and blood given for you: but if that
   which is thus offered, presented, and pleaded before God, is offered,
   presented, and pleaded before him only for this reason, because it
   signifies and represents both to God, and angels, and men, the great
   sacrifice for all the world, is there not sufficient reason to consider
   this service as truly a sacrifice? Or even supposing, that the calling
   the service a sacrifice, is no more according to a certain literal
   exactness of some critics, that when our savior says of himself, "I am
   the resurrection"; or that a quibbler in words may be able to object as
   much against it, as against our savior's saying of himself, "I am the
   resurrection and the life," have you any reason to dislike it on that
   account, or to wish that such little critics might find more of their
   empty, superficial, worthless niceties in the language of the church,
   than in the language of scripture?

   [Dem-217] The miserable use which this author makes of this kind of
   learning may be sufficiently seen by the following instances: "To say,"
   says he, "that this communion is the actual partaking of all the
   benefits of Christ's body broken and blood shed for us, or of his
   living and dying for our good, has this peculiar absurdity in it, that
   in this rite, which was instituted for the remembrance of Christ, it
   destroys that very notion of remembrance, which is the essence of it.
   The great design of this institution is to call to mind the remembrance
   of Christ, and to commemorate the benefits accruing to Christians from
   it. To make it therefore the actual partaking of these benefits, is
   altering the nature of it, as much as actual partaking of anything is
   different from remembering it." {Page 158.} Many other passages like
   this are to be found in this author.

   [Dem-218] Now to see the truth and sense of this doctrine in its proper
   light: Let it be supposed, that our savior, after the institution, had
   thus added, "Observe well what it is that I have taught you to
   understand and do by this rite: I have indeed said, This is my body
   which is given for you; but the meaning of my institution does not lie
   in these words, nor are you to think that I am any way present in that
   which I call my body, or that you are to present, and show, and plead
   it before God as my body, which is given for you; for this is not my
   intent, though I thus speak. I have also said, This is my blood which
   is shed for the remission of sins, and have ordered you to say so of it
   before God, and angels, and men in the church; but what I have taught
   has nothing to do with this institution, nor is it to be any part of
   it; there is no remission of sins to be thought of in it, or pleaded by
   it. I have also bid you to eat that which I have declared to be my
   body, and to drink that which I have declared to be my blood; but you
   must not therefore imagine, that you receive anything of me, or of my
   nature, into yourselves, or that I am a principle of life to you. For
   though I thus speak so fully and plainly of eating my very body and
   blood, yet nothing is meant of any real partaking of anything from me.
   For this is no part of my institution, nor is it appointed for you to
   receive anything from me, nor for me to communicate anything to you.
   And to prevent your apprehension of anything of this kind, and to
   secure you from the dangerous error of supposing that any benefits and
   blessings are received by your receiving my body and blood; I have
   added, Do this in remembrance of me; which words sufficiently show,
   that neither me, nor the benefits of me, as your savior, can here be
   received, because that which is appointed here to be remembered,
   cannot, without great absurdity, be supposed to be present. Had I
   indeed said, Do this in acknowledgement of me, or of that salvation
   which is received through me; or had I said, Do this as an act of faith
   in me as your savior, then indeed you must have believed that there
   were great benefits and blessings presented to you by this institution;
   for ye could not by faith appeal to this my body and blood, without the
   actual partaking of my benefits and blessings, both as I am the
   atonement for your sins, and a principle of life to you: but as I have
   chosen the word remembrance, you must see that it is only an act of
   your memory that is required of you; for this is the great point in
   this institution, perform but this and you have performed all that the
   nature and end of this institution requires of you. Take care therefore
   that you keep strictly to this bare act of the memory, and that you
   don't add anything to it; for the essence of this institution consists
   in this simple act of the memory. But above all, take heed of such
   faith, devotion, and desire of me, as may lead you to hope or believe
   that you partake of my benefits by the partaking of this holy rite; for
   such a faith and hope are so inconsistent with this institution, that
   they would destroy the very nature and essence of it, which is to be
   the remembrance of my benefits, and therefore cannot possibly be the
   actual partaking of them. Nor can you think of partaking of them by
   this holy institution, but by making it an institution of your own,
   directly contrary to that which I designed it to be."

   [Dem-219] Everyone, I believe, must at first sight perceive, that to
   put this paraphrase upon the sacrament into the mouth of our savior,
   would be profaneness and blasphemy; and yet everyone must plainly see,
   that profane and blasphemous as it would be, there is not a thought or
   word in it, but what is strictly according to this author's doctrine.

   [Dem-220] Secondly, let it be supposed that instead of "Do this in
   remembrance of me," our savior had said, Do this as a means of
   partaking of all my benefits to mankind: this author's criticism would
   prove it absurd to make the sacrament even than an actual partaking of
   those benefits. For he must say, that the great design of it, was to be
   a means of partaking of those benefits. To make it therefore the actual
   partaking of those benefits, is altering the nature of it, as much as
   actual partaking of anything is different from the means of partaking
   of it. Such is his wisdom of words!

   [Dem-221] Thirdly, if it were true, that the actual partaking of
   Christ's benefits was not only not intended by, but also inconsistent
   with the right observance of this institution, so as to destroy its
   essence, and alter its nature, if such actual partaking was thought of
   by it; then it would follow, that no good Christian ought to observe
   this institution, or act according to the nature and intent of it.

   [Dem-222] For it is as unlawful and even atheistical for any Christian
   to think himself not an actual partaker of the benefits and blessings
   of Christ, as to think himself not an actual partaker of the benefits
   and blessings of a God and providence. "Without me," says our blessed
   Lord, "ye can do nothing." {John 15:5.} But, according to this author,
   we not only can, but must do all that is done in this sacrament without
   him, and must look upon the sacrament as instituted for this very end,
   to keep up a sense and belief of our being without him, and to assure
   us, that we are not actual partakers of him, that he is not present
   with us, nor acting in us. Again, saith our blessed Lord, "Abide in me,
   and I in you; as the branch cannot bear fruit, except it abide in the
   vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me."

   [Dem-223] But, according to this author, he that would rightly perform
   this institution, must, every time he performs it, come out of Christ
   as perfectly as he can, and make himself as separate from Christ, as
   the withered branch that is separated from the vine; that having no
   actual possession of the benefits and blessings of Christ, he may be
   qualified to do this in remembrance of them.

   [Dem-224] Further, no one can believe in Christ, love Christ, adore
   him, and hope and trust in him, without being an actual partaker of the
   benefits of Christ by so doing; if therefore to the due observation of
   the sacrament, and to preserve its nature and essence, there must be no
   actual partaking of the benefits of Christ allowed in it, or by it;
   then it must be performed without faith or love of Christ, and without
   any devotion towards him, or adoration of him; for if these accompany
   that which we do in the sacrament, and attend our reception of it, the
   benefits of Christ must be actually received by it.

   [Dem-225] Fourthly, to see still more of the absurdity and impiety of
   this author's observation on the remembrance in the sacrament, we need
   only apply it to this parallel text of scripture, "Remember thy creator
   in the days of thy youth." {Eccles.xii.1.} For, according to our
   author, he that would not alter and destroy the nature and essence of
   this duty of remembering God, must not pretend, or hope, or believe,
   that by the observance of this duty, he is made an actual partaker or
   sharer of the goodness, perfections, and attributes of his creator, or
   of anything that belongs to his creator, or that can be remembered of
   him: because so long as he keeps strictly to the true nature of this
   duty, and continues to remember his creator, so long every thing, or
   attribute, or perfection that belongs to his creator, must be
   considered as at a distance from him, as unenjoyed and unpossessed by
   him, because that which is to be remembered, cannot be present. And
   therefore the command to remember our creator, is, according to this
   doctrine, a command to look upon our creator as at a distance and far
   from us, and is inconsistent with our believing, that "in him we live,
   move, and have our being"; because we cannot remember a creator so
   present with us, and of whose perfections we are actual partakers.

   [Dem-226] If therefore this author has found out the right way of
   remembering God as our redeemer, he ought to have told us, that the
   same way of remembering God as our creator was wrong, and tended to
   atheism. For to remember God as absent, is but a very little way from
   atheism.

   [Dem-227] Lastly, if, as this author teaches, the actual partaking of
   the benefits of Christ's living and dying for us, by means of this
   sacrament, is an absurdity that cannot be supposed, without destroying
   the nature and essence of the sacrament, for this reason, because that
   which is possessed as present, and actually partaken of, cannot be
   remembered; then it follows, that no man can fully perform this duty,
   that is, make it a remembrance of all the benefits of Christ, but he
   that is actually dispossessed of all of them. Because he cannot
   remember all, if any of them are then present with him, and enjoyed by
   him.

   [Dem-228] Secondly, it follows, that he who daily grows in the gifts
   and graces of Christ, and in whom Christ is every day more and more
   formed, must, in proportion as the strength, and spirit, and power of
   Christ is revealed in him, daily be less qualified to do perfectly that
   which is to be done in the sacrament; because being daily more and more
   possessed of the benefits and blessings of Christ, he has every day
   less and less to commemorate in and by the sacrament.

   [Dem-229] Thirdly, it follows, that he who falls from his state of
   grace in Christ, who becomes every day more and more empty and
   destitute of his gifts and graces, who daily loses something of the
   sense and taste of the heavenly gifts, and the powers of the world to
   come, and finds himself less animated, assisted and strengthened by the
   power and spirit of Christ, must in proportion, as he becomes every day
   more earthly, sensual, carnal, blind and weak, and wretched, and dead,
   and fallen from Christ, be more and more qualified to do that which,
   according to this author, is to be done in the sacrament; for losing
   every day something of the benefits of Christ, and being daily less a
   partaker of them, he is daily qualified to commemorate more of them,
   and so to perform that which is to be performed in this sacrament in a
   more perfect manner.

   [Dem-230] Again, the apostle saith, "Know ye not that Christ Jesus is
   in you, except ye be reprobates"? {2 Cor.xiii.5.} But this author must
   say, Know ye not that Christ Jesus is not in you, nor can be in you, if
   the sacrament is to be observed in remembrance of him? For how can ye
   without absurdity commemorate that which is not absent from you?

   [Dem-231] Lastly, he who can say with the apostle, "the life that I now
   live is not mine, but Christ that liveth in me," is utterly incapable
   of remembering Christ in the sacrament; for he cannot commemorate an
   absent Christ, and therefore cannot commemorate him, till Christ has
   done living in him.

   [Dem-232] But there is no end of exposing all the impious consequences
   of this author's learned account of the word remembrance. Which,
   monstrous as it is, is only founded upon a little criticism, that the
   word remembrance can only signify an act of the memory upon something
   that is absent. And yet it is certain that it does not, cannot signify
   so, when you are to remember your creator, and therefore need not
   signify so, when you are to remember your redeemer. And if you do but
   suppose it possible, that "Do this in remembrance of me," may only
   signify, do this in regard of me, as your act of faith in me; then all
   this extraordinary doctrine of the impossibility and absurdity of
   partaking of the benefits of Christ by partaking of the sacrament, has
   not so much as one of his quibbles to support it.

   [Dem-233] Further, this author's absurd interpretation of the word
   remembrance in the sacrament is founded on this gross error, that the
   things to be remembered, are things done and past, and therefore only
   capable of being remembered by an act of the memory. This he expressly
   says in many places. Thus, "They," says he, "could not do the actions
   here named, in remembrance of anything which was not done and past."
   {Page 30.} And in other places, that the "benefits cannot be present
   that are to be commemorated."

   [Dem-234] And therefore the whole support of this arguing is founded on
   this error, that the things to be remembered, are done and past. Which
   is an error, that he could not have fallen into, if he had but
   moderately understood the nature either of the Jewish or Christian
   religion.

   [Dem-235] Now that which is to be remembered in the sacrament is
   Christ, or the benefits and blessings of Christ as the savior of
   mankind; but neither Christ, nor his benefits and blessings have the
   nature of things done, or gone, and past, but are always present,
   always in being, always doing, and never done.

   [Dem-236] "Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, today, and for ever,"
   always was, now is, and ever will be present as the savior of the
   world. He is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, and
   therefore equally present in and through all from the beginning to the
   end. "Behold," saith he, "I stand at the door, and knock; if any man
   hear my voice, and open the door, I will come into him, and will sup
   with him." {Rev.iii.20.} Thus he stood at the door of Adam's heart, as
   near as he stood to the apostles'; and thus he stands, and will stand
   knocking at the door of every man's heart, till time shall be no more.
   Happy he that does not consider this Christ as absent, and is only for
   such a Supper of the Lord, as will not admit of his presence.

   [Dem-237] The benefits and blessings of Christ as the savior of
   mankind, began with the first promise of a seed of the woman to bruise
   the serpent's head; they have continued with this promise, they are the
   benefits of every age, they will never be at an end, till all that was
   implied in the promise shall have its full completion in the utter
   destruction of the serpent. Jesus Christ was the Lamb slain from the
   foundation of the world; and the first sacrifice of the first man, and
   every sacrifice since, that hath been accepted of God, has been made
   solely acceptable through the benefits and blessings of Christ.

   [Dem-238] All the shadows and types, sacrifices and ceremonies of the
   Jewish religion were only so many ways of applying the benefits of
   Jesus Christ to that people. "Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, today,
   and for ever," is the same in and through all ages; he was the savior
   of Adam, the patriarchs, and the Jews, just as he is our savior. His
   body and blood, offered in their sacrifices, was their atonement, as it
   is ours, offered upon the cross. His flesh and blood was meat and
   drink, or a principle of life to them, as it is to us.

   [Dem-239] Jesus Christ was theirs, as he is ours; he was the life, and
   substance, and spirit of the Law, as he is the life, and substance, and
   spirit of the gospel; only with this difference, that then Christ was
   covered, and received under more outward figures and ceremonies than he
   is now; we do that more openly, which was then done more covertly by
   the Israel of God.

   [Dem-240] His atonement for our sins is not a transitory thing, that
   began and ended with his passion and death, but it began with the Lamb
   that was slain from the foundation of the world; for he was the Lamb of
   God slain in all their types and sacrifices through every age, till he
   became the real expiatory sacrifice on the cross for the sins of the
   world.

   [Dem-241] When he died upon the cross, his atonement did not then
   become a thing that was over, or past, and done, that was only to be
   remembered by an act of the memory, but continued increasing in its
   power and virtue.

   [Dem-242] As Christ by his death put an end to nothing in religion but
   types and prefiguration; so by his death he put an end to nothing of
   his atonement, but that which was typical and prefigurative of it. And
   as he arose from the grave with greater power and strength, and became
   instead of a meek and suffering Lamb, a powerful conqueror over death,
   a royal priest over the house of God, so his atonement went on
   increasing in strength and virtue.

   [Dem-243] His atonement was so far from being a thing done and past,
   when his blood was shed upon the cross, that it was shed for this very
   end, that he might for ever do that in the reality, which the high
   priest did in the type, when with the blood of the sacrifice he entered
   once a year into the holiest of all, to make the highest atonement for
   the people.

   [Dem-244] Thus Christ, to perform, and to continue for ever the most
   powerful way of atoning for us, by his own blood he entered once into
   the holy place--now to appear in the presence of God for us.
   {Heb.ix.24.} Where he continueth for ever, and hath an unchangeable
   priesthood; {Heb.vii.24} and therefore our atonement is never done and
   past, but is just as perpetual and unchangeable as his priesthood. For
   he can be no longer a priest, than while he maketh an atonement and
   intercession for us. And from this his unchangeable priesthood, the
   apostle thus argues, "wherefore he is able also to save them to the
   uttermost, who come unto God by him, {Heb.vii.25} seeing he ever liveth
   to make intercession for us."

   [Dem-245] But if he is "able to save them to the uttermost, who come
   unto God by him"; then his atonement is not something done and past,
   but always in being, always present, always doing, and always
   presenting itself everywhere, and to every man; and if he is ever
   living to make intercession for us, then we have a propitiation that
   never ceases, that is as near to us as it was to the apostles, and will
   be as present to those that shall be born two thousand years after
   Christ, as it was to those who stood by his cross when he died.
   Agreeable to this, St. John saith, "We have an advocate with the
   Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our
   sins." He does not say, we have had an advocate with the Father, nor
   that Christ was our propitiation some time ago, but that he is the
   propitiation for our sins.

   [Dem-246] And indeed Jesus Christ is the atonement for our sins, in
   that same unlimited universal and omnipresent manner, in which he is
   the life and light of the world. And as he is the light which lighteth
   every man that cometh into the world, and is not an actual present
   light to some, and a distant unpossessed light to others, only to be
   remembered by an act of their memory; so he is the atonement for every
   man that cometh into the world, and is not an actual, present atonement
   to some, and a distant atonement to others, only to be remembered by an
   act of their memory; but is an atonement actually and really present to
   all, as he is a light actually and really present to all, and every man
   that cometh into the world.

   [Dem-247] Therefore this author's account of the remembrance in the
   sacrament, has not only those absurdities in it demonstrated above, but
   is also solely founded upon this grossest of all errors, that the
   benefits and blessings of Christ, as the savior of mankind, are
   something done and past; which is an error that no one could have
   fallen into, that had but a common knowledge of the first and plainest
   principles either of the Jewish or Christian religion. For both these
   religions are founded upon this great truth, and suppose it in every
   part, that the benefits and blessings of Christ were always in being,
   always doing, always present in and to every age, as well before as
   since the incarnation and death of Christ.

   [Dem-248] And as this author has been forced to assent, they were
   things absent, done, and past, in order to make the sacrament to
   consist of an action of the memory upon those absent things; so seeing
   it is an undeniable truth, that they are not things absent, done, and
   past, but are as actually present, as ever they were, or ever could be,
   it follows, according to his own principles, that the remembrance
   spoken of in the sacrament, cannot possibly signify only an action of
   the memory, but must necessarily signify such faith and acknowledgement
   of Christ, as when we are bid to remember our creator, or believe in
   God.

   [Dem-249] Further, this author proceeds thus: "To say that the
   communion is the actual partaking of all the benefits of Christ's
   living and dying for us, is to put that upon one single act of
   obedience, which is by our blessed Lord made to depend upon the whole
   system of all virtues united." {Page 58.} And again, "Such a doctrine
   as this would, in my opinion, be not only inconsistent with the
   plainest declarations of the gospel, but directly contradictory and
   destructive to the main design of it." {Page 144.}

   [Dem-250] What this author calls here a single act, and a single
   instance of obedience, is true only of his own sacrament, which
   consists only of a single action of the memory cast upon Christ at a
   certain instant of time, and to which single action, this author
   expressly says, that no prayer is necessary, {Page 160.} not even
   necessary to attend upon it, either as going before, or following after
   it. That in its own proper and peculiar nature, it has nothing to do
   with prayer or devotion of any kind, can have no perfection from it,
   nor be in any degree imperfect as to its nature and essence, for want
   of any prayer, because its essence is entirely distinct from prayer.

   [Dem-251] And therefore all prayers, thanksgivings and devotions, are
   to be considered as things distinct from this sacrament, that have no
   relation to the peculiar nature and proper essence of it. {Page 173.}

   [Dem-252] Hence it is plain, that we do not overcharge this author,
   when we say, that he places the whole nature of the sacrament in a bare
   single action of the memory. For if, as he says, no kind of prayer,
   devotion or thanksgiving, is of the essence of this sacrament, or can
   be an essential part of it; then it has all its perfection within
   itself, as it is a bare act of the memory, and cannot, as to its own
   proper nature or essence, have anything added to it by prayer, or taken
   from it by the want of prayer. Hence it is also undeniable, that this
   author's sacrament is not so much as a bare act of religion, nor can
   have any more religion in it, than if it was the act of a parrot. For
   no act can be a religious act, but so far, and in such degree, as it is
   an act of faith, and love, and devotion to God. But this author's
   sacrament will not, as it is a sacrament, allow faith, or love, or
   devotion to be any part of it, therefore it cannot be so much as a bare
   act of religion.

   [Dem-253] Nay, it may and must be said, that the right observation of
   this author's sacrament is directly an act of atheism. For if it is an
   act, that in its own nature, and according to its peculiar essence,
   cannot be performed according to what it is, unless it be done without
   faith, and love, and devotion towards God; then it is directly an act
   of atheism, because atheism is nothing else but a cessation of faith,
   love and devotion towards God. But the essence of this author's
   sacrament cannot be preserved, unless you keep prayer, devotion and
   thanksgiving out of it. Therefore to perform it rightly according to
   what it is, is to perform an act of atheism.

   [Dem-254] And if at the taking of the bread and wine, you should suffer
   faith, or love, or adoration of God, or thanksgiving, to take up your
   mind, you might as well have let the sacrament alone, for you have
   neglected all that in which its whole nature consists; and have only
   been in such a state of devotion, as has nothing to do with it, nor can
   possibly be a part of it. And therefore, if you will perform this
   sacrament rightly according to this author, you must perform it
   atheistically; you must excite such a remembrance as excludes faith,
   love, devotion and thanksgiving, from being a part of it. And your
   remembrance is not performed, unless it be such a remembrance as these
   things cannot be a part of.

   [Dem-255] The devils are said to believe a God; but why is it that
   their faith is no religious act, nor of any benefit to them? It is
   because their faith is only a bare act of believing, just as this
   author's sacrament has only a bare act of remembering; and that which
   is the perfection of his sacrament, is their wretchedness.

   [Dem-256] If you ask this author, why faith, and prayer, and adoration
   and thanksgiving, are not of the essence, or cannot be essential parts
   of the sacrament: all he has to say is this, that the "duty of prayer
   is a duty absolutely distinct from the participation of the Lord's
   Supper." {Page 160.}

   [Dem-257] It may and must be granted, that prayer, humility, faith,
   hope, charity, &c., are absolutely distinct from each other; that
   humility is not prayer, nor faith in its proper idea prayer, and so of
   the rest. Yet notwithstanding this distinction between them, they are
   all of them essential to each other. Faith is of the essence of prayer,
   hope is of the essence of faith, and all of them are essential parts of
   prayer. Therefore when this author asserts that prayer is not an
   essential part of the communion, he is just as much in the right, and
   has as much truth on his side, as he who says, that humility, faith and
   hope are not essential to prayer, because prayer is distinct from
   humility, faith and hope.

   [Dem-258] What this author saith of the sacrament, that it is one
   single act, or one single instance of obedience, is only true of his
   own fiction of a sacrament, which he makes to consist in a single act
   of the memory; and indeed it would be highly inconsistent with the
   gospel, to make such a sacrament a means of obtaining the benefits of
   Christ. But this is not the sacrament of Christ, nor the sacrament
   which the church of Christ observes.

   [Dem-259] For all that relates to our salvation, either on the part of
   Christ, or on our own part, is plainly united in that sacrament which
   Christ has instituted. All that relates to our salvation on the part of
   Christ, is in the sacrament, because he has said that his body and
   blood are there for the remission of our sins, and that his body and
   blood are there to be eaten and drank, as the food and life of our
   souls, therefore Christ as our savior is wholly there.

   [Dem-260] And all that relates to our salvation on our own part, is
   there; because we cannot come to Christ, or find him to be there, as he
   has said he is, unless we come to him with all those qualities and
   pious dispositions that correspond to him, as he is an atonement for
   our sins, and a principle of life to us; therefore all that relates to
   our salvation, either on the part of Christ, or on our own part, is
   plainly united in the sacrament. And to call such a communion one
   single act of obedience, is just the same absurdity, as to say, that
   the baptism of a heathen converted to Christianity, is but one single
   instance of obedience. For everything that is implied in such a
   conversion and baptism, whether it be on the part of Christ, or on the
   part of the person baptized, is implied in this communion.

   [Dem-261] And as the baptism of such a person contains all in it that
   relates to his salvation, either on the part of Christ, or on his own
   part, and therefore cannot without great ignorance be called a single
   instance or act of obedience: so it is with the sacrament, it is all
   that to the pious communicant, both on the part of Christ, and on his
   own part, that baptism is to the true converted heathen; and he is made
   an actual partaker of all the benefits of Christ by it, as the convert
   is made so by baptism; and therefore it is the same absurdity to call
   it a single act, or instance of obedience.

   [Dem-262] And as it would be vain and groundless to say, that it was
   inconsistent with the main design of the gospel, to make such baptism
   the actual partaking of all the benefits of Christ; so it is equally,
   if not more so, to say the same thing of communion; because every pious
   and holy disposition is to be supposed to be in an higher state, in the
   pious communicant, than in the pious desirer of baptism; and therefore,
   it cannot without much absurdity be supposed, that the sacrament is not
   as beneficial to the pious communicant, as baptism is to the pious
   convert.

   [Dem-263] For if Christ has appointed this institution, to assure us,
   that he is there, both as the atonement for our sins, and a principle
   of life to us, and we come to it with such pious dispositions as
   correspond and answer to him in both these respects, and make us
   capable of him; it must be great absurdity to say, that we find him not
   there as our atonement, nor receive him as a principle of life to us,
   nor are made partakers of these benefits of him.

   [Dem-264] If we stand before this atonement, without such dispositions
   as correspond to it, we are as absent from the sacrament of Christ, as
   they are that refuse to come to it; if we eat that which is before us
   in the sacrament, without such faith and purity as qualify us to
   receive the flesh and blood of Christ, we are only eating that, which
   might have been the bread of life to our souls.

   [Dem-265] But if we, according to the condition of our humanity, are
   that which these two essential parts of the sacrament require us to be,
   then we may and ought as firmly to believe, that we are by this
   sacrament made actual partakers of all the benefits of Christ, as that
   we are saved through Christ, and not by ourselves.

   [Dem-266] This author makes great complaint of ascribing these benefits
   to the reception of the communion, because it is, as he says, to put
   that upon a single instance of obedience, which our blessed Lord has
   made to depend upon the whole system of all virtues united in us: that
   is, Christ has made the system of all virtues united in us, to be the
   only qualification for the actual partaking of his benefits; which is
   not only utterly inconsistent with the gospel, but nonsensical in
   itself; for it is saying that we are then only qualified for the
   benefits of our savior, when we have no need of them; for if all
   virtues were so united in us, all that our savior could do for us,
   would be done beforehand.

   [Dem-267] But let us take an instance or two from our savior's own
   words, and then we shall best see how truly this author has said, that
   he has made the actual partaking of his benefits, to depend upon the
   whole system of all virtues united. When our blessed Lord stood by
   Jacob's well, talking with the woman of Samaria, he said to her, "If
   thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, give me
   to drink, thou wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee
   living water; a water which shall be in him that drinketh it, a well of
   water springing up into everlasting life." {John 4:10.}

   [Dem-268] Here, I suppose, are offered to this poor woman all the
   benefits of the savior of mankind. Our Lord does not say to her, If
   thou hadst the whole system of all virtues united in thee, then thou
   mightest be made a partaker of all my benefits; I could make the water
   of eternal life perpetually spring up within thee.

   [Dem-269] No, there is no such jargon as this in the gospel: but as he
   came as a compassionate savior, to make the blind to see, the deaf to
   hear, and the dumb to speak, and the dead to awake; as he came as a
   good shepherd to seek that which was lost, and as a physician to heal
   the sick; so he only says to the woman, if she had asked, that is, if
   she had felt the want of a savior, as the blind feel the want of sight,
   and her heart had only desired this gift of God, he would then have
   bestowed this greatest of all gifts upon her.

   [Dem-270] But surely, if this desire in the woman would have made her
   thus capable of all the benefits of our savior, it cannot be
   inconsistent with the gospel, to make the same desire as beneficial to
   a true and pious Christian, as it would have been to an unbaptized
   Samaritan.

   [Dem-271] Again, our Lord saith, "All things whatsoever ye shall ask in
   prayer, believing, ye shall receive." {Matt. 21:22.} Here you see, all
   things, and therefore all the benefits of Christ, are ascribed to
   faith, and we have everything that we can desire or pray for, by virtue
   of it. Does not our Lord here ascribe as much benefit to faith, as ever
   anyone ascribed to the holy communion? Or who ever said that of the
   power, or benefit, or efficacy of the sacrament, which our Lord here
   says of the benefit of faith in prayer?

   [Dem-272] Is not this as inconsistent with the gospel, as the actual
   partaking of Christ's benefits, by the single duty of receiving the
   sacrament? Is not this benefit of the prayer of faith as contrary to
   this author's whole system of virtues united in us, as that other
   benefit of the sacrament? Is it not as just to say, that this prayer of
   faith is only a single instance of obedience, as to say so of the
   sacrament? And is not the main design of the gospel as much destroyed
   by making faith to be thus beneficial, as by making the communion to be
   so beneficial?

   [Dem-273] Or can it be supposed, that when our Lord, who ascribes thus
   much to the prayer of faith, when it is alone, would think it too much
   to be ascribed ot it, when the holy sacrament is united with it? Or
   must it be supposed, that this prayer of faith loses its virtue and
   power, is deprived of its excellent effects, only then, when it is a
   part of the communion of Christ's body and blood.

   [Dem-274] Again, our Lord saith, "Verily, verily, I say unto you,
   Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you."
   Must not this author have as much to complain of in this doctrine, that
   ascribes so much to prayer in the name of Christ, as in that doctrine,
   that ascribes so much to the sacrament? Must he not say, that the
   praying in the name of Christ, is but one single instance of obedience;
   and that to say, we are thereby made partakers of all the benefits of
   Christ, is putting that upon one single act of obedience, which our
   blessed Lord has made to depend upon the whole system of all virtues
   united in us? Must he not say, that this account of the power and
   efficacy of prayer in Christ's name, is a doctrine destructive of the
   main design of the gospel?

   [Dem-275] For everything that this author objects against this doctrine
   of the sacrament, must with the same strength be objected against
   these, and many other the like express declarations of our savior.

   [Dem-276] Everyone must know that it would be very easy to produce
   various passages of the gospel, that teach the same doctrine, as these
   do that I have quoted; and that when this author said, our savior made
   the partaking of his benefits to depend upon the whole system of all
   virtues united in us, he had just the same reason and authority from
   the gospel to say so, as he has to say, that Christ declared he came to
   seek that which was not lost, to heal those which were not sick, and
   save those who stood in no need of a savior.

   [Dem-277] But now, seeing this is the nature, power, and efficacy of
   the prayer of faith, and of prayer in the name of Christ; seeing he
   himself has assured us, that they make us actual partakers of
   everything that we can ask of the Father, or that he through Christ can
   give us, we have the fullest assurance, that if we do that which the
   sacrament requires to be done; if we don't separate faith and prayer in
   the name of Christ from it, but perform it in this faith and prayer, or
   make it as it ought to be, a real exercise of this faith and prayer,
   then we receive in and by it all the benefits of our savior.

   [Dem-278] But because this author seems entirely out of his element,
   when speaking of the benefits of Jesus Christ, and not to be able to
   speak an intelligible word about it, as to the true grounds and nature
   of it, but only to puzzle himself and the reader with an empty
   superficial way of arguing from the sound of words: I shall therefore,
   in a word or two, endeavor to lay before you the true grounds of the
   benefits of Jesus Christ, as he is the savior of all mankind.

   [Dem-279] It is the fundamental doctrine, or rather the known
   foundation of all revealed religion, and the known foundation of all
   natural piety and goodness, that Jesus Christ is the second Adam: that
   he is a common head, or parent, or person to all mankind, in the same
   manner as Adam is the common head, or parent, or person to all mankind.

   [Dem-280] That a real birth, life, nature, and true man, is in the same
   truth and reality derived to us from this our second Adam, as a real
   birth, and life, and nature is derived to us from our first Adam. And
   that as without any figure or metaphor of speech we are all said to be
   born of Adam, and descended from him; so we are all in the same
   dependence upon our second Adam, really and not figuratively born of
   him, and have our descent from him; spirit of his spirit, life of his
   life, in the same truth and reality, as every man has the nature of the
   first Adam.

   [Dem-281] And herein is seen the infinite depth of divine love and
   goodness to mankind, who though they were by the condition of their
   creation to be derived from one head or parent, and to take his state
   of perfection or imperfection; yet were by the goodness and care of God
   for them, provided from the very beginning with a second parent, or
   common head, who after the fall of the first, and the fallen state that
   he had brought upon his posterity, should be a common restorer, and put
   it in every man's power to have the same choice of life and death, as
   the first man had; that so, they who were lost before they were born,
   and were made inheritors of a miserable nature without their choice,
   might have a divine life restored to them in a second parent, which
   should not be in the power of anyone to lose for them, but should
   depend entirely upon their own will and desire of it, upon their own
   faith, and hope, and hungering after it.

   [Dem-282] This eternal and immutable truth, worthy of being written in
   capital letters of gold, is the foundation of all revealed and natural
   religion: and a standing monument of God's universal goodness and love
   to all mankind, and such as is sufficient to make all men rejoice and
   give praise to God.

   [Dem-283] For by this truth, all that seems hard and cruel to human
   reason, that the posterity of Adam should be involved in the
   consequences of their first Father's fall, (yet how could it be
   otherwise?) all this, I say, is made a wonderful scene of love, as soon
   as we consider, that all mankind were redeemed as soon as they were
   lost, and that their redemption was as early, as universal, and as
   extensive in its effects, as the fall was. And that no son of Adam is
   left to inherit a poor, earthy, perishable, corrupt nature from him,
   without having it in his choice to be born again of a second Adam, and
   restored, with advantage, to all the riches, and treasures, and
   blessings of a divine and paradisiacal nature, which were lost without
   his consent.

   [Dem-284] There is something so amazingly loving and merciful in this
   conduct of divine providence over mankind, that I cannot help thinking,
   no one can calmly consider it in the quiet of his mind, without having
   all his infidelity melted down by it. And that such an act of general
   pardon, as early as the first sin, and a new parent provided for us, to
   be our parent by choice and faith, as soon as our first parent had
   undone us without our consent: such an act of pardon being the
   beginning and foundation of all revealed religion, and of everything
   that is afterwards revealed in it, has surely enough in it, if once
   known, to make revealed religion the joy, and comfort, and desire of
   every man's heart. What would I give that I could but dart one ray of
   this truth into every unbeliever's heart; for the smallest ray of it
   would do to everyone as the light that fell from heaven did to St.
   Paul, it would make as it were scales fall from his eyes: and he would
   find that all books and systems of infidelity were as unreasonable in
   themselves, and as hurtful to him, as those commissions were which Paul
   had from the high priest to bind all that called on the name of Christ.

   [Dem-285] But to proceed: that Jesus Christ is thus the savior and
   universal redeemer of all mankind, that he is this second Adam or
   parent, giving a new birth and life to all that which was extinguished
   and lost by Adam; restoring Adam himself, and in him all mankind to a
   possibility of being born again, by their own will, choice, faith, and
   desire; and that revealed religion began with the declaration of this
   redemption, and has revealed nothing but for the sake and support of
   it, is a truth sufficiently attested by scripture.

   [Dem-286] The declaration which God made to Adam immediately after his
   fall, of a seed of the woman to bruise the serpent's head, was a
   declaration of pardon and redemption to Adam, and in him to all
   mankind; for what he said to Adam, that he said to all that were in the
   loins of Adam; who, as they fell in his fall before they were born,
   without the possibility of any one man's being exempted from it; so
   were they all put into his state of pardon and redemption before they
   were born, without the possibility of any one man's being excluded, or
   left out of it.

   [Dem-287] Thus revealed religion begins with an offer of a second Adam,
   and upon the foot of an universal pardon and redemption to all mankind.
   Every son of Adam is in the same covenant with God that Adam was, and
   has the same bruiser of the serpent as near to him, as he was to Adam,
   and declared to be his redeemer, in the same degree as he was declared
   to be the redeemer of Adam.

   [Dem-288] And who would seek for arguments against such a savior? Or
   who would cavil at a revealed religion, that has no other beginning or
   end, but to reveal an universal redemption? Or who can enough call upon
   all creation, heaven and earth, angels and men, and everything that
   hath breath, to praise the Lord for such salvation? You must forgive
   these little digressions; for I want so much to touch the heart of my
   reader, and make him in love with God, and his own salvation in Christ
   Jesus, that I know not how to content myself with bare argument.

   [Dem-289] Now this declaration of God to Adam, of his pardon and
   redemption by the seed of the woman, is not to be considered, as we
   consider the declaration of a pardon made by some great prince to an
   offending subject, which is only a declaration of words, that are heard
   only with our outward ears, and of a person that is entirely distinct
   from us.

   [Dem-290] God's pardoning a sinner, or redeeming fallen man, has
   nothing like this in it. If this offending subject had his life, and
   breath, and being in and from this great prince, or could be said to
   live, and move, and have his being in him; it would be easy, nay,
   necessary to believe, that his declaration of pardon to him, must be
   something very different from a pardon of words, and must signify some
   inward light, or change, or new state of existence in his prince.

   [Dem-291] Now this declaration of God's pardon and reconciliation to
   Adam, and in him to all mankind, is not the declaration of a being that
   is out of, or separate from us, but of a God in whom we live, and move,
   and have our being; who is the center of that which is most central in
   us, the life of our life, the spirit of our spirit: his declaration
   therefore of pardon is not a declaration of words, or of a being that
   is separate from us; but must signify some inward change, or new state
   of our existence in him, or that he is to us, and in us, that which he
   was not before he pardoned us. For his words are power, and what he
   speaks he acts; and what he acts, he acts not out of us, but in the
   inmost essence of our being, because so we exist in him, and he in us.

   [Dem-292] If God at the fall had said, Let us save man, the same had
   been effected, as when he said, "Let us make man." When therefore God
   said to Adam and Eve, "The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of
   the serpent," what was said, was done; and it was the same thing, had
   the same meaning and effect, as if he had said, "Be ye henceforth in a
   state of salvation, and let the redeeming, conquering seed of the woman
   from this time begin to have power in you, and to be in you a strength
   and might against the serpent." And what he said was done, as when he
   said, "Let there be light, and there was light."

   [Dem-293] Thus this declaration of pardon and redemption made by God to
   Adam, and, in him, to all his posterity, was not solely a promise of
   something to come, or of a pardon that was at a distance, no more than
   it was the promise of a God that was at a distance from him; but the
   declaration of something then inwardly done and given, by a God
   inwardly present in him, and signified no less than God's seeking and
   manifesting himself again to a creature, that had lost him as his God
   and only good.

   [Dem-294] For how can the anger of that being, "in whom we live, and
   move, and have our being," be only an anger of words, or made known to
   us only by words? Or how can it be anything else, but some inward loss
   of that which is our good in him?

   [Dem-295] Or how can his pardon be only a pardon of words, or something
   heard only with our ears? Or how can it be anything else, but his
   restoring that to us, or his reviving that in us, which makes us again
   capable of finding him our God and only good?

   [Dem-296] Therefore God's declaration of pardon to Adam, was not barely
   a promise of something to come, but the pardon itself; and was the real
   communication of something to Adam, which made him capable of enjoying
   God as his good, which he had not when he wanted to be pardoned, and
   which he could not have, if God was in a state of anger with him.

   [Dem-297] Now had not God spoken this pardon and reconciliation to Adam
   after his fall, he had been in the condition of the deep, when it was
   said, darkness was upon the face of the deep.

   [Dem-298] Nay, it had been much worse with him; for had not God made
   this declaration of pardon and redemption to him at that time, that is,
   had he not done inwardly in the depth of his soul, something like that
   which he did to the darkness of the deep, when he spoke light into it,
   Adam and Eve, and all their posterity, had been inwardly mere devils,
   and outwardly mere beasts, a motley mixture of both, till the beast
   fell into the earth, and the soul to the state of devils.

   [Dem-299] For had not God thus in the beginning of the fall, before any
   man was born into the world of Adam and Eve, had he not spoke pardon
   and redemption unto Adam and Eve; neither they, nor any of their
   posterity had been capable of any faith, or hope, or desire of God, but
   had lived as much without all conscience, or instinct of goodness, as
   the beasts of the earth and devils do.

   [Dem-300] Therefore God redeemed man, that is, restored to him a power
   of being again his creature, or a power of knowing and finding him to
   be his God, when he said, the "seed of the woman shall bruise the
   serpent's head." He redeemed him by communicating to him a sense, a
   feeling, and a desire of God, by communicating to him a capacity to
   enjoy him as his only good, by sowing into him a seed of the woman, a
   spark of life, an instinct of goodness, a taste of heaven, a principle
   of holiness, a touch of love, the pearl of the gospel, the pledge of
   immortality, the hidden kingdom of God.

   [Dem-301] For all these expressions of a seed, a spark, an instinct, a
   principle, a pearl and kingdom, are insufficient to express that inward
   treasure of the soul, and fund of everlasting happiness, which God in
   the beginning of redemption, or as his act of redemption, communicated
   to man.

   [Dem-302] Now in this degree of redemption is every creature that is
   born of Adam; he has this kingdom of God in his soul, as a grain of
   mustard seed, as a spark of life, as a pledge of immortality, as his
   attraction to God: if he tramples this pearl under his feet, if he will
   choke this Word, if he will put out this spark, if he will resist this
   attraction, then his destruction is from himself; and when the carcass
   of flesh and blood falls off from him, he must find himself in his own
   hell, and must have the misery of a darkened, anxious, fiery, self-
   tormented nature for ever, that would not suffer itself to be redeemed.

   [Dem-303] But if he will consent to his redemption, and cooperate with
   that inward redeemer which God has put into his soul; if he will suffer
   his spark to kindle, his instinct of goodness to spread itself, the
   light of the life to arise in him, the voice of God to be heard in him;
   then will the divine life, the inward man, be brought forth in him; and
   when his body breaks off, heaven will be made manifest in his soul, and
   he will fall into all the fullness of God. The Son of God will be his
   light, the Holy Spirit will breathe in him, and the power and
   omnipotency of the Father will be life and strength in him; and thus,
   in the completest sense of the words, shall he ever live, and move, and
   have his being in God.

   [Dem-304] And now, my dear reader, what shall I say to you? How shall I
   do that, which I most of all desire to do, touch your heart? Or how can
   your heart be untouched with this affecting view of the mercies of God
   in Christ Jesus, and of the riches and treasures which lie hid in your
   own soul, wanting nothing but your own consent and good wishes to be
   manifested in you?

   [Dem-305] But it may be, modern infidelity has stolen into your heart,
   and so you lie starving in the midst of plenty, choosing rather to
   famish on the dry husks of reason, dispute, and infidelity, than to
   have this divine life, this riches of your own soul, discovered to you
   on the terms of the gospel. It may be you have buried this spark of
   life, this inward man, and have heaped all the earth upon him that you
   can get, that you have sealed the stone of his sepulcher, and have set
   your greatest enemy, a reasoning infidelity, upon the watch, to
   dispute, wrangle, and deny every doctrine of scripture, that as a good
   angel would roll away the stone of the sepulcher, and let your inward
   redeemer arise in you.

   [Dem-306] If this is your case, if you have let a reasoning infidelity
   into your heart, you know not what mischief you have let into it; for
   the denial of the gospel reaches much further, and is more extensive
   than you imagine.

   [Dem-307] For to deny Jesus Christ, is to deny your share in the first
   pardon of God to man; it is returning into the first state of the fall,
   and refusing to be a partner with Adam in his state of forgiveness; it
   is going over to the side of the serpent, and declaring that you will
   not enter into peace with God on the terms of bruising his head; for
   Jesus Christ that calls upon you in the gospel, is that same Christ
   which became Adam's pardon; and if you reject him in the gospel, it is
   rejecting him from the beginning: and is saying, that you will have no
   share in that salvation which was granted to Adam, and in him to all
   mankind. Nay, what is still more, if you reject the savior offered to
   you in the gospel, you reject all that which makes you differ from a
   devil; for that savior which speaks to you in the gospel, is that very
   same inward light of your mind, which makes you differ from a devil;
   for had you nothing of that Jesus Christ in you, whom you reject in the
   gospel, you would be in the same dark malignity, and self-tormenting
   wretchedness, in which every diabolical nature is.

   [Dem-308] To refuse him that speaketh to you in the gospel, is not
   barely to renounce a certain particular religion revealed by God at a
   certain time, it is not barely to reject Christ as come in the flesh;
   but it is rejecting all that God has ever transacted with man, it is
   renouncing all that is divine and good within you, all that God
   inwardly speaks and teaches in the depth of your soul; it is saying
   that you will have no benefit from the good workings or motions of your
   own heart, or the instincts of goodness that are stirring in it; for
   Jesus Christ that calls you to repentance in the gospel, is the very
   same blessed savior, that warns, reproves, and preaches repentance in
   the inmost essence of your spirit. For it is a deceit of the grossest
   kind, to think that Christ came only as our savior, when he came in the
   flesh, or that he only speaks to us that which is outwardly spoken in
   the gospel; for he always was that in every man that saved him from
   being entirely a diabolical nature, and was as really the teacher and
   mover of all that is good within you, as he was the teacher of the
   gospel. Therefore to reject him as your savior, to refuse him as such,
   and to desire to be without him, is in reality to desire to be in hell,
   to have the darkness and distress of diabolical beings; it is desiring
   to be without any light of God upon your mind, or any instincts of
   goodness stirring in your heart.

   [Dem-309] And if this is not the immediate effect of your infidelity,
   if you don't immediately find that the denial of Christ is putting out
   all the light within you; 'tis because Christ is love, and will be so
   good towards you, as to continue his inward light to you, though you
   reject his outward light of the gospel.

   [Dem-310] But, my friend, be wise in time, for this goodness will
   continue but a time; don't let a poor worthless infidelity beguile you
   to eat the dust of the earth with the serpent, when God has provided
   for you the bread of life. For this time of goodness and forbearance
   will soon be over; and if the end of it finds you in your infidelity,
   rejecting the benefits of Christ, you will then see the whole of all
   you desired, you will be without Christ, you will find that all is gone
   with him, and that you will have nothing left, but that nature which is
   the torment of hell.

   [Dem-311] You now think, that because you can frame ideas of virtue,
   and exert some acts of goodness, though you reject all faith in Christ,
   that therefore he is not necessary to your virtue and happiness; but
   your miserable mistake lies here, that you think Christ is only he that
   preached the gospel, and that it is not him that speaks and moves every
   good thought or word that is spoken in you, but that you have a light
   and goodness of your own. But when this time is over, and you have
   spent your hour of grace, Christ will no longer stand knocking at the
   door of your heart; and then you will find, that you are as empty of
   all inward light, as you are of the gospel, and that by rejecting him
   as your savior, you have rejected all that was divine and good within
   you.

   [Dem-312] Infidelity therefore is a much deeper evil than you may
   imagine, it denies and rejects more than you think of; you may intend
   by it only to change the light of the gospel for the light of reason,
   but Christ will not be divided by your intention; he is the one only
   light of men, the same in the heart that he is in the gospel; and
   though you may now think that you have two teachers, because he teaches
   in two places, and therefore may adhere to one, and reject the other;
   yet this is a deceit that can last no longer than the disputings of
   this world last with you.

   [Dem-313] When the veil of flesh and blood is pulled off, and you must
   stand in the nakedness of your soul before God; then you will know,
   that these two lights are only one, and that neither of them can be
   rejected by itself. These lights appear now as two, only because God is
   so good as to leave no part of you untried, but presses the kingdom of
   heaven upon you, both from within, and from without.

   [Dem-314] The eternal Word, the Son of God, took human nature upon him,
   worked all his miracles, taught all his doctrines, underwent all his
   sufferings, to make that light of the mind, which every man that cometh
   into the world had received from him, effectual to their salvation;
   therefore the light of the gospel, and the light of the mind, are one,
   as Christ is one, whether he speaks to you inwardly or outwardly. If
   therefore you reject Christ in the utmost efforts of his goodness to
   save you, you will find that the renouncing of Christ, is renouncing
   all that you have from him, and that all the good light of your mind,
   call it what you will, as it was his, is all rejected with him, and
   that nothing is left in that soul, where he is not, but mere darkness.

   [Dem-315] But to return to my subject; what I have said above of God's
   covenant with Adam, and the redemption granted to him, is God's
   covenant with all mankind, and therefore thus far all mankind are the
   redeemed of Jesus. There is no partiality in God, no election of one
   people to salvation, and dereliction of another to their own misery. As
   all fell and died in Adam, so all were restored in his restoration.

   [Dem-316] Thus says the apostle, "As by the offense of one, judgment
   came upon all to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the
   free gift came upon all men unto justification of life." {Rom.v.18.}

   [Dem-317] But you will perhaps say, how does it appear, that this first
   covenant of God with mankind, or redemption of all men in the
   redemption of Adam, is the redemption in and by Jesus Christ.

   [Dem-318] I may better ask you, Where you can have the smallest reason
   even to suspect the contrary? For is not the seed of the woman, Jesus
   Christ? And if our salvation then began, when God made declaration of
   the saving power of this seed, it is plain, that Christ's redemption
   then began in mankind, that he was thenceforward in every man as a
   spark of life, that as a secret power, should bruise the serpent, and
   support us against him, till he, in the fullness of time, should, in
   the fullness of the promise, become such a seed of the woman, as should
   openly triumph over death and hell, and all the kingdom of the serpent.
   For if it were Christ that became the ransom and life of his soul; then
   all the sons of Adam, from the first to the last, are in Adam's state
   of covenant with God through Jesus Christ, and have the seed of the
   woman doing all that for them, which it did for Adam.

   [Dem-319] Again, does not the gospel expressly say, that Jesus Christ
   is the true light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world?
   Therefore Jesus Christ is in every man that cometh into the world, and
   every son of Adam is in a state of redemption in and by Jesus Christ,
   and every son of Adam has received that same from Jesus Christ, which
   Adam received from him, viz., an inward light of life, a beginning of
   his salvation, an actual power or strength to resist the serpent;
   therefore Jesus Christ, as he is the light and life of men, as he is
   the bruiser of the serpent, as he is the power of salvation, is and
   ever was the free gift of God unto all men.

   [Dem-320] Again, does not the scripture teach us, that God is as well
   the God of the gentiles, as the God of the Jews? But if he is their
   God, then they are his people. And as we know that God is not the
   creator of any beings, but in and by Jesus Christ, by whom everything
   was made, that was made; so he is not the God of any people, but in and
   by Jesus Christ, who is the reconciler of all things unto God, by whom
   alone all things and persons are made acceptable to him; therefore if
   he is the God and Father of the gentiles, then the gentiles have an
   interest in Jesus Christ, have all their access to God, as their Father
   and creator, in and by the benefits and merits of Jesus Christ; or, in
   other words, are actual partakers of the benefits of Jesus Christ, as
   he is the savior of mankind.

   [Dem-321] Which is a privilege or blessing that this author will not
   allow Christians to have, even when eating the flesh and drinking the
   blood of Christ; so little does he know what he speaks of, when he
   speaks of the partaking of the benefits of Christ.

   [Dem-322] But you will perhaps further ask, how can the gentiles have
   an interest in the benefits of Jesus Christ, since they know him not,
   nor ask anything in his name. May you not as well ask me, how they can
   be said to live, and move, and have their being in God, who know not
   what it is to have life, and motion, and being in him, nor ever
   confessed it in a true manner, or under a right sense of it? For if
   they can have the benefit of a life in God, and be blessed by it, who
   are either totally, or much ignorant of it; then Christ, as he is the
   atonement and life of Adam and his posterity, may be a benefit and
   blessing to those who are totally ignorant of it, or at least know
   nothing of him, as he is Christ, or the Son of God manifest in the
   flesh.

   [Dem-323] Again, the scripture says of Jesus Christ, that he came unto
   his own, and his own received him not, that is, they knew him not: now
   if he could come unto his own, though they knew him not, then it is
   plain, that they may be his, who know him not, that is, they may have
   some interest in him, be purchased by him, have received much from him,
   be greatly related to him, who yet are insensible of it.

   [Dem-324] Lastly, you might much better ask me, how can they, who never
   knew anything of Christ, as their mediator and atonement, be judged by
   him at the last day? For if they were altogether strangers to Christ,
   had no relation to him, had received nothing from him, or by means of
   him, he could not be their judge. For Jesus Christ cannot do anything
   as a judge, till he has done everything as a savior; nor be anywhere a
   judge, but where he has first appeared as a savior.

   [Dem-325] Therefore, it is an evident truth, that had not all nations,
   and every individual man, received a certain means of salvation through
   him, he could not be the judge of all.

   [Dem-326] Heathens, Jews, and Christians differ not thus, that the one
   have a savior and are in a redeemed state, and the other are not; or
   that the one have one savior, and the other have another; for the one
   judge of all, is the one savior of all: but they only differ in this,
   that one and the same savior is differently made known to them, and
   differently to be obtained by them. The heathens knew him not as he was
   in the numerous types of the Jewish Law, they knew him not as he is
   gloriously manifested in the gospel; but they knew him as he was the
   God of their hearts, manifesting himself by a light of the mind, by
   instincts of goodness, by a sensibility of guilt, by awakenings and
   warnings of conscience; and this was their gospel, which they received
   as truly and really in, and by, and through Jesus Christ as the Law and
   gospel were received through him.

   [Dem-327] Therefore it is a great and glorious truth, enough to turn
   every voice into a trumpet, and make heaven and earth ring with praises
   and hallelujahs to God, that Jesus Christ is the savior of all the
   world, and of every man of every nation, kindred and language.
   Therefore saith St. John, "They sung a new song, saying, Thou art
   worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast
   slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred,
   and tongue, and people, and nation." {Rev.vi.9.} And again, "After this
   I beheld," says he, "and lo, a great multitude, which no man could
   number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood
   before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and
   with palms in their hands, and cried with a loud voice, saying,
   Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb."
   {Rev.vii.9,10.}

   [Dem-328] I must, before I proceed further, put in here a word of
   caution to two sorts of readers. If you are in such a state, as I
   supposed one to be above, touched with modern infidelity, having your
   reason set upon the watch to guard you against the gospel, it may here
   do its office, and will perhaps tell you, that what I have here said in
   favor of the general light, or seed of life that is in all men, is much
   the same thing that you say in defense of natural reason, or religion,
   only with this difference, that I mention it as coming from Christ, and
   you consider it as the bare light of nature.

   [Dem-329] Now if this were all the difference, is not this enough to
   show you, that my opinion is the very denial of yours; for if I proved
   that what you called the natural light of men, was wholly derived from
   the divine revelation, would not that be a sufficient proof that I
   denied and disproved your religion of natural reason? And have I not
   done the same thing, if I have asserted the light of men to be a light
   derived from Christ? And how can such an assertion be made in the least
   favorable to your opinion, that such a light is natural?

   [Dem-330] But to prevent all misapprehensions, I now declare to you,
   and will show you in the most explicit manner, that that which I call
   the light of men, or the seed of life sown into all men by Jesus
   Christ, is as wholly different from that which you call natural reason,
   as light is different from darkness; and that they stand in that same
   state of contrariety to each other, both as to their original, their
   nature and qualities, as our savior and Pontius Pilate did.

   [Dem-331] I must therefore assure you, that as I fear God, and wish
   your salvation, so I can no more say a word in favor of what is now
   called the religion of natural reason, than I would recommend to you
   the ancient idolatry of heathens. And yet at the same time, I am no
   more an enemy to reason, than I am an enemy to the light of the sun,
   and as freely wish you all the benefits of the one, as of the other.

   [Dem-332] But if you do by reason, as they did by the sun, who thought
   it to be divine, fell down before it, and expected all from it; then I
   must speak as plainly to you of the inability of reason to do you this
   good, as I must have spoken of the inability of the sun to such
   idolaters of it.

   [Dem-333] And if I should have told them, that the sun was no more
   their God, than the poorest worm upon earth, and that it could no more
   make those to be divine that worshipped it, than a storm of hail could
   make those to be divine that it fell upon, I should have told them a
   great truth. So if I say to you, that reason, or the faculty of
   reasoning, is no more the religion of man, than the faculty of doubting
   or erring is; and that it can no more make those to be divine who place
   their trust in it, than a great error can make those to be divine who
   abide by it, I should tell you a great and useful truth.

   [Dem-334] For reason, or a faculty of reasoning upon the moral
   habitudes and relations of things and persons, or upon the moral
   proportion of actions, has no more of the nature and power of religion
   in it, than so much reasoning upon the relations of squares and
   triangles. And if a man had this religion of reason only when he was
   dreaming in sleep, it would be the same good thing to him, as it is to
   those who make it their religion when they are awake.

   [Dem-335] For the good of religion, is like the good of food and drink
   to an hungry and thirsty creature; and if instead of giving such a one
   bread and wine, or water, you should teach him to seek for relief, by
   attending to clear ideas of the nature of bread, of different ways of
   making it, and the relation it hath to water; he would be left to die
   in the want of sustenance, just as your religion of reasoning leaves
   the soul to perish in the want of religion. And as such a man would
   have no more benefit from such reasoning about the relation that bread
   had to water, whether it was the reasoning of a dream, or the reasoning
   of a man awake, because either way he was kept under the same want of
   that which was to preserve his life; so whether a man has your religion
   of reasoning only when he is asleep, or when he is awake, is the same
   thing; because either way he is kept under the same want of that which
   can alone preserve the life of the soul. For the good that is in
   religion, or the good that we want to receive by it, is no more within
   the reach of our reason, or to be communicated to us by it, than the
   good of food is in the reach of our reason, or can be communicated to
   us by it. And yet as a man may have the good of food much assisted and
   secured to him, by the right use of his reason, though reason has not
   the good of food in it; so a man may have the good of religion much
   assisted and secured to him by the right use of reason, though reason
   has not the good of religion in it.

   [Dem-336] And as a man ought not to be accused as an enemy to the true
   use of reasoning about food, because he declares that reason is not
   food, nor can supply the place of it; so a man ought not to be accused
   as an enemy to the use of reasoning in religion, because he declares
   that reason is not religion, nor can supply the place of it.

   [Dem-337] But to show you the bottom of this whole matter, pray
   consider with me as follows: We have no want of religion, but so far as
   we want to better our state in God, or so far as we are unpossessed of
   God, or less possessed of him than we might be. This is the true ground
   of religion, to alter our state of existence in God, and to have more
   of the divine nature or perfections communicated to us. Nothing
   therefore is our good in religion, but that which alters our state of
   existence in God for the better, and puts us in possession of something
   of God, or makes us partakers of the divine nature in such a manner and
   degree as we wanted it.

   [Dem-338] Everything that is in life, has its degree of life in and
   from God, it lives, and moves, and has its being in God. This is as
   true of devils themselves, as of the highest and most perfect angels.
   Therefore all the happiness or misery of all creatures consists only in
   this, as they are more or less possessed of God, or as they differently
   partake of the divine nature, according to their different state of
   existence in God.

   [Dem-339] But if this be the truth of the matter, (and who can deny
   it?) then we have the certainty of demonstration, that nothing can be
   our good in religion, but that which communicates to us something of
   God, or the divine nature, or that which betters our state and manner
   of existence in God.

   [Dem-340] For if devils are what they are, because of their state and
   manner of existence in God; if blessed angels are what they are,
   because of their state and manner of existence in God; then it
   undeniably follows, that all that is betwixt angels and devils, all
   beings from the happiness of the one to the misery of the other, must
   and can have no other happiness or misery, but according to their state
   and manner of existence in God, or according as they have more or less
   of the state of angels, or the state of devils in them. Therefore
   nothing can be our good in religion, but that which alters our state
   and manner of existence in God, and renders us possessed of him in a
   different and better manner.

   [Dem-341] Now if you were to send to the fallen spirits of darkness,
   all the systems of your religion of reason, that have been published
   here, to let them know that they have the power of their own
   restoration and happiness within themselves, that they need seek to
   nothing, but their own natural reason and understanding, and the
   strength and activity of their own powers, to raise them to all the
   happiness they are capable of; such a religion would be so far from
   altering or mending their state of existence in God, or doing them any
   good, that it would add strength to all their chains; and the more
   firmly they believed and relied upon it, the more would they be
   confirmed and fixed in their separation from God.

   [Dem-342] And yet, a religion that must necessarily keep them in hell,
   is the only religion that you will have to carry you to heaven. May God
   deliver you from this error!

   [Dem-343] On the other hand, if you could infuse into those dark
   spirits a glimpse of that light of the mind, or instinct of goodness,
   which I have said all mankind have received from Jesus Christ, as their
   second Adam, their salvation would be so far begun, and hell would
   become a state of trial for their redemption. Therefore that light of
   the mind, or instinct of goodness, which I have spoken of, has the
   utmost contrariety to your religion of reason, that can possibly be
   imagined.

   [Dem-344] The one is the beginning of the new birth in Christ, and the
   foundation of heaven; the other is the growth of death, and the very
   essence of hell in the soul. Now that here is no aggravation of the
   matter, but plain and naked truth, you may easily see from a
   consideration of the articles of your religion of reason. Your religion
   of reason, is a religion of natural strength and power, that rejects
   the necessity of a savior, that feels no want of him, that rejects the
   necessity of divine grace, the guidance of the Holy Spirit, and feels
   no want of it; these are the essential parts of your religion of
   reason, which are in truth and reality the religion of hell, or that
   very state of mind which reigns and governs there.

   [Dem-345] For could those miserable spirits renounce these articles of
   your religion, their chains of darkness would break off from them.
   Could they cast themselves down before God, humbly confessing, that of
   themselves they are not able to save themselves, or even to think a
   good thought: could they in humility and penitence beg of the mercy of
   God, to do something in them and for them, which they cannot do for
   themselves: could they acknowledge the want of a savior, ask God to
   find one for them: could they feel and own the want of his Holy Spirit,
   and humbly beg of God to be assisted by it, a door of salvation would
   be opened to them. And yet you see that nothing opens this door, but
   the plain and full renunciation of every part of your religion of
   reason.

   [Dem-346] And if it be asked, why they cannot be saved? no other reason
   can be given, but because they will not; they cannot renounce your
   religion of reason, that is, they cannot humbly acknowledge their own
   inability to do themselves good; they will not admit the thought of a
   savior, they will not be assisted by the Spirit of God, or own the want
   of his life in them, and therefore they are and must be what they are,
   prisoners in chains of darkness.

   [Dem-347] Awake therefore, my dear friend, and cast away this religion
   from you, with more earnestness than you would cast burning coals out
   of your bosom: for could it only destroy your body, I should have been
   less earnest in giving you notice of it. But as I have the fullest
   conviction, that it is the death and darkness of your soul, and is
   bringing the essence of hell secretly and invisibly into it; you must
   forgive me, if I use all the expressions and descriptions I can think
   of, to prevent your giving into it. Had I a superficial charity for
   you, or a slight view of the hurt you are doing to yourself, I should
   speak to you accordingly; but the depth and earnestness of my desire to
   do you good, must have expressions suitable to it. Study not therefore
   how to find fault with me, or to dislike the words, or manner of my
   style, for it is the style of love and zeal for your salvation; and if
   you condemn anything but love in it, you condemn something that is not
   there.

   [Dem-348] I have shown you, that the religion of reason is the very
   state of hellish minds, and that they are what they are, because they
   will do all for themselves, place all in their own strength, because
   they cannot be humble, cannot own the want of a savior; and have only
   appealed to this instance of the nature and power of your religion of
   reason, to show you in the most undeniable manner, that it must, and
   can have no other effect upon you, than it has upon them; that it must
   produce the same hell in your soul, the same separation from God, and
   cannot possibly be any more the way of salvation for you, than it is
   for them.

   [Dem-349] What is the reason that the faith of the devils, or their
   belief of a God, does them no good? It is because there is nothing in
   it but their own act, a mere product of their own; it is because it is
   an act of your religion of reason, that will have no virtue but by its
   own strength, and of its own growth. But if they could have so much of
   the religion of the gospel, as to say in the language of it, "Lord,
   help our unbelief," their faith would be changed, and be beneficial to
   them, only for this reason, because they had renounced your religion of
   doing good to themselves by their own natural powers.

   [Dem-350] Hence it sufficiently appears, that your way of natural
   reason cannot be the way of salvation; 1st, because the want of
   salvation is nothing else, but the wanting to have our state, or manner
   of existence in God, altered for the better; or to have something of
   God communicated to us, which we want and are capable of receiving. But
   if this is the nature of salvation, then no religion can save us, can
   do us our proper good, or supply our proper want, but that which has
   power to alter our state of existence in God, or to communicate to us
   that of God which we want, and are capable of. Therefore it follows,
   that nothing but that same God which created us, which gave us our
   state and manner of existence in him, and communicated to us that which
   we possess of him; nothing but that same God can redeem us, or help us
   to that state or manner of existence in him, which we have lost, or are
   in want of.

   [Dem-351] But if God alone can redeem us, and for the same reason that
   he alone can create; if creation and redemption necessarily require the
   same power, and must for the same reason be necessarily appropriated to
   God, because each of them equally imply the communication of something
   of God to us; then I suppose it may be granted, that the religion of
   reason, which is for saving ourselves by our own natural powers, is the
   greatest of all absurdities; as absurd as to suppose, that we can
   create by our own natural powers, because creation and redemption both
   of them equally imply a communication of something of the divine
   nature; and therefore he that cannot do the one, cannot do the other.

   [Dem-352] And if a man was to ask himself, why he cannot be the savior
   of other people, as well as of himself? He could say nothing against
   the one, but what must for the same reason be said against the other.
   For if salvation is a communication of something of God to the person
   saved, then it is plain, that a man can no more do this for himself,
   than he can do it for another.

   [Dem-353] There never could have been any dispute about the possibility
   of saving ourselves, nor any pretense to save ourselves by our own
   natural faculties, had not men lost all true knowledge both of God and
   themselves. For this dispute cannot happen, till men suppose that God
   is some outward being, that our relation to him is an outward relation,
   that religion is an outward thing that passes between God and us, like
   terms of behavior between man and man; that sin hurts and separates us
   from God, only as a misdemeanor hurts and separates us from our prince;
   that an offended or angry God either gives or refuses pardon to us, as
   an angry prince does to his subjects; and that what he gives us, or
   forgives us, is something as distinct and different from himself, as
   when a prince sitting upon his throne gives or forgives something to an
   offender, that is an hundred miles from him.

   [Dem-354] Now all this is the same total ignorance of God, of what he
   is, of the relation we have to him, and the manner of his being our
   good, as when the old idolaters took men to be gods. And yet nothing is
   more plain, than that your religion of reason is wholly founded upon
   these gross and false notions of God. You have not an argument in its
   defense, but what supposes all these errors just mentioned; that our
   relation to God is an outward relation, like that of subjects to their
   prince, and that what we do to, and for God, as our service to him, is
   and must be done by our own power, as that which we do to, and for our
   prince, must be by our own power. And here lies the foundation of all
   your religion of reason and natural power, that if it was not
   sufficient to obtain for us all that we want of God, he must be less
   good than a good earthly prince, who requires no more of us, than that
   which we have a natural strength to do, or can do by our own power.

   [Dem-355] And yet this error appears to have all the grossness of
   idolatry, as soon as you suppose, that God is no outward separate
   being, but that we are what we are, have what we have, can do that
   which we can do, because he has brought us to this state of life, power
   and existence in himself, because he has made us, so far as we are made
   partakers or possessors of his own nature, and has communicated to us
   so much of himself; or, in the words of scripture, because in him we
   live, move, and have our being, and consequently have no life, motion
   or being out of him. For from this state of our existence in God, it
   necessarily follows, first, that by the nature of our creation we are
   only put into a capacity of receiving good: a creature as such, can be
   in no other state; it is as impossible for him to enrich himself, or
   communicate more good to himself, as it was to create himself. 2dly,
   that nothing but God himself can do us any good. 3dly, that God cannot
   do us good, but by the communication of himself in some manner to us.

   [Dem-356] For hence it evidently follows, that your religion of reason,
   which supposes that we have natural powers that can put us in
   possession of that, which we want to be possessed of in God, or that we
   need no more divine assistance to recover what we have lost of God,
   than to obtain a pardon from a prince; or that God need communicate no
   more of himself to us in our salvation, than a prince communicates of
   himself to his pardoned subject, has all the mistakes, error and
   ignorance of God that is in idolatry, when it takes God to be something
   that he is not; and has all the false devotion that is in idolatry,
   when it puts the same trust in, and expects the same help from its own
   powers and faculties, which idolaters did in and from their idols.

   [Dem-357] Therefore your religion of reason, which you esteem as the
   modern refinement of an human mind, and more excellent and rational
   than the faith and humility of the gospel, has all the dregs of the
   heathen idolatry in it, and has changed nothing in idolatry, but the
   idol; but has the same mistakes of the nature of God, and of the manner
   in which he is our God, and our good, as those idolaters had; and only
   differs from them in such a degree of philosophy, as the religion of
   worshipping the sun differs from the religion of worshipping an onion.

   [Dem-358] And if you expect that divine assistance from your reason,
   which one did from the sun, and another from an onion; ye are all
   equally idolaters, though ye may not be equally philosophers.

   [Dem-359] For as soon as it is known and confessed, that God is all in
   all, that in him we live, move, and have our being; that we can have
   nothing separately or out of him, but everything in him; that we can
   have no being, nor any degree of being, nor any degree of good but in
   him; and that he can give us nothing but himself, nor any degree of
   salvation, but in such a degree as he communicates something more of
   himself; as soon as this is known, then it is known with the utmost
   evidence, that to put our trust in the sun, an onion, or our own
   reason, if not equally absurd, is yet equally idolatrous, and equally
   prejudicial to our salvation.

   [Dem-360] This I think, my friend, may sufficiently show you both the
   nature and danger of your religion of reason; and that it can no more
   supply the needs and necessities of your soul, than an idol can save
   them that worshipped it; that in this respect it has the insignificancy
   of an idol, the vanity of an idol, and the sin of an idol; that it is
   that same self-confidence, self-acquiescence, that same refusal of a
   savior and all divine assistance, that keeps lost spirits the prisoners
   of hell. Could they touch the spirit of the gospel, their freedom would
   be begun; and because they will not, cannot depart in the smallest
   tittle from your religion of natural strength, their chains are
   unmovable.

   [Dem-361] For no soul can be lost, that can truly humble itself before
   God, and apply to his mercy to be helped, saved, and redeemed in such a
   manner as it shall please him. Let it be hid, or buried, or imprisoned
   where it will, hell and earth, death and darkness, and everything must
   give way to the soul thus converted to God, that has no confidence in
   itself, that sees nothing of its own but sin, and that desires and
   calls upon God to save it by some miracle of his own mercy and
   goodness. By this sensibility of the want of a savior, and by this
   humble conversion and application to God for him, all chains are broken
   off, all wounds are healed, and the soul must infallibly find, if it
   thus continues to seek, its salvation in the unknown depths and riches
   of the divine mercy.

   [Dem-362] On the other hand, no soul, however refined and speculative,
   however lofty and aspiring in its imaginations, spiritual in its
   conceptions, or deep in its penetration, can possibly be saved, that
   trusts in its own strength and ability, and will have no other savior
   or redeemer, but its own natural reason and faculties.

   [Dem-363] The whole universe has not two truths of greater certainty
   than these. And yet if they are truths, and truths of the utmost
   certainty, then the absolute necessity of the gospel salvation, and
   utter impossibility of being saved by your religion of reason, has its
   final decision.

   [Dem-364] Further, that principle of life, or light of the mind, which
   I have said that every man receives from Jesus Christ, as the beginning
   of his salvation, is entirely different from your magnified light of
   reason, as that signifies a faculty of viewing the relations of the
   ideas of things, and drawing consequences from them. For that light I
   speak of, is goodness itself, a seed or degree of so much of the
   heavenly life in the soul; but this faculty of speculating and
   reasoning has nothing of the nature of goodness or religion; it has not
   so much as the shadow of it, and is in its own nature as foreign from
   religion, when it is speculating upon it, as when it is speculating
   upon anything else. Just as our faculty of seeing has no more of
   goodness, or the nature of an angel in it, when it sees the picture of
   an angel, than when it sees the picture of a beast.

   [Dem-365] And as a blind man has no more light in him, when he reasons
   about light and colors, than when he discourses about weights and
   measures; so this ratiocination, or reasoning of the mind, has no more
   of religion in it, when it speculates its ideas of God, goodness and
   morality, than when it speculates its ideas of trees and houses.

   [Dem-366] And the reason is plain, because this faculty of speculating
   and arguing, is only the activity of the mind upon its own images and
   ideas, and is only the same bare activity, whatever the images be that
   exercise it; it has nothing of the nature of the images that it views,
   nor gets the nature of them, because it views them; as it does not
   become dark when it considers the nature, causes, and effects of
   darkness, nor becomes light when it reasons about it; so neither is it
   religion, nor gets anything of the nature of religion, when it is
   wholly taken up in making descriptions and definitions of it.

   [Dem-367] If the needle touched with the loadstone was an intelligent
   being, it could reason and make definitions of itself, of attraction,
   and of the loadstone; but it would be easy to see, that the attraction
   of the needle, or the virtue of the loadstone that was left in it, was
   something in its whole nature really different from this reasoning
   about it; and that this reasoning and defining had no relation to this
   attraction, nor would ever be the more like it, for its reasoning upon
   it, though it continued ever so long, or improved ever so much in its
   descriptions of it, but would always be at the same distance from it,
   and could have nothing of its nature in it. But now if this reasoning
   faculty in the needle should pretend, that the needle need not be drawn
   by an inward attraction, that it need not be unfixed, or delivered from
   any outward impediments of its turning to the loadstone, because this
   reasoning faculty was its true and proper attraction, being full of
   ideas and definitions of it; you would then have a plain example of
   your practice, in taking natural reason to be true religion, and to
   have the nature and power of something that carries the soul to God.

   [Dem-368] For this instance is a clear explication of the whole matter;
   for that which I have called the first redemption of Christ in the
   soul, a seed of life, an instinct of good, a stirring of conscience, an
   attraction to God, is that to the soul, which attraction is to the
   needle that is touched, and is as different from your religion of
   reason, as a reasoning faculty in the needle would be different from
   its attraction, and never could be attraction, or have the nature of
   it.

   [Dem-369] If the needle loses its attraction, its communication with
   the loadstone is at an end; and though it reasons never so long about
   it, it is still at the same distance from it. So if the soul loses its
   instinct of goodness, its seed of a divine life, its attraction to God,
   all its reasonings and definitions about God and goodness are of no use
   to carry it to God, but it must lie in an absolute state of separation
   from him, if its attraction, its inward tendency to God, is lost.

   [Dem-370] And let me tell you, my dear friend, for so I must call you
   and think of you, that there is much more in this instance than you
   imagine. For all is magnetism, all is sentiment, instinct, and
   attraction, and the freedom of the will has the government of it. There
   is nothing in the universe but magnetism, and the impediments of it.
   For as all things come from God, and all things have something of God
   and goodness in them, so all things have magnetical effects and
   instincts both towards God and one another. This is the life, the
   force, the power, the nature of everything, and hence everything has
   all that is really good or evil in it; reason stands only as a
   busybody, as an idle spectator of all this, and has only an imaginary
   power over it.

   [Dem-371] We discover this magnetism in some things, where it breaks
   out sensibly; but it is everywhere, for the same reason that it is
   anywhere, though we are too busy with the fictions of our own minds to
   see it, or too much employed in such things as resist and suppress its
   force.

   [Dem-372] But because this magnetism is a secret life, that wants to
   increase its strength before it can sensibly show its power; and
   because we have an activity of reason within us, that is soon in
   action, and concerns itself with everything, and takes all upon it, as
   if it did all; because it can look at all, and dispute about all,
   therefore it is, that this magnetism, or instinct towards God and
   goodness, has much difficulty to show itself sufficiently, and only
   stirs now and then within us, or when sickness, distress, or some great
   outward shock has so dashed in pieces all images of reason, and stopped
   the activity of our minds, that this secret power of the soul has
   liberty to awake in it.

   [Dem-373] This is that trumpet of God which will raise and separate the
   dead, and then all impediments being removed, everything will take its
   place not according to the images and ideas it has here played with,
   but according to the inward tendency and attraction of its nature, and
   heaven and hell will each take its own.

   [Dem-374] And even whilst we are in this life, this magnetism is the
   mark within us, to what part we belong; and that which has its
   attraction in us, has the right to us, and power over us, though for a
   while flesh and blood, and the nature of our temporal state, hinders
   this from being visibly and sensibly known.

   [Dem-375] Nothing however is more plain, than that our goodness bears
   no proportion to our intellectual abilities of reason; everyone sees
   this, and yet no more than this need be seen, to give us the fullest
   demonstration, that natural reason has no connection with virtue and
   goodness, and therefore surely can have no connection with our
   salvation, or be the proper cause of it.

   [Dem-376] Hence we see, that learned, acute, rational philosophers are
   often atheists; and those that can demonstrate the foundation of
   virtue, and paint every office of it, are rakes and debauchees, and
   will sell every appearance of practical virtue for a salary of so much
   a year; whilst those that seem to have little of intellectual
   accomplishments, are virtuous and honest, have a taste and relish for
   every practical virtue.

   [Dem-377] The natural love or affection of relations, bears no
   proportion to our rational abilities to speak or write of them. A
   parent that is of too refined an understanding to content himself with
   the morals of the gospel, or its low way of making men good, and that
   wants to be entertained with a virtue of more mathematical exactness,
   is often content with the demonstration, and so remains deficient in
   the plainest duties of domestic affection: when the poor laborer or
   mechanic, that knows not what you mean by a definition, has all the
   solid love and affection that becomes a good relation. All this, and
   much more, which you and everyone may think for himself of the same
   kind, is something entirely distinct from our natural faculties of
   reason and speculation.

   [Dem-378] And therefore, when you place the power of your salvation in
   your intellectual light, or the strength of your own reason, you place
   it in your weakest part, in the poorest, most trifling and
   insignificant thing that belongs to you, and upon that which has the
   least effect in human life.

   [Dem-379] The only good that reason can do to you, is to remove the
   impediments of virtue, and to give room to that inward instinct or
   attraction to God and goodness to display itself; that the inmost
   spirit of your mind may receive its strength and assistance from the
   Spirit of God, from which, as the needle from the loadstone, it has all
   its instinct of goodness and tendency towards God.

   [Dem-380] For this inward instinct of goodness, or life of God in the
   soul, is all the real and living goodness that is in you, and is as
   different and distinct from natural reason, as the light, and heat, and
   power and virtue of the sun, is different from a picture of it upon a
   piece of canvas, and has as different effects upon the mind.

   [Dem-381] For this light of bare reason, or the reasoning faculty of
   the mind, has no contrariety to the vices of the heart, it neither
   kills them, nor is killed by them. As pride, vanity, hypocrisy, envy or
   malice, don't take away from the mind its geometrical skill; so a man
   may be most mathematical in his demonstrations of the religion of
   reason, when he has extinguished every good sentiment of his heart, and
   be the most zealous for its excellency and sufficiency, when he has his
   passions in the most disordered state.

   [Dem-382] But in that light of the heart, or attraction to God, which I
   have said is common to all mankind in and through Jesus Christ, all is
   contrary. As it is a gift and grace of God, so it is a real life, a
   living thing, a sentiment of the heart, and so far as it grows and
   increases in us, so far it destroys all that is bad and corrupt within
   us. It has the same contrariety to all vices of the heart, that light
   has to darkness, and must either suppress or be suppressed by them.

   [Dem-383] Now when I speak of this light, or instinct of the heart, or
   attraction to God, I have not only the authority of scripture, but
   every man's own experience on my side; that distinction between the
   head and the heart, which everyone knows how to make, plainly declares
   for all I have said. It shows that the state, and manner, and tendency
   of our heart, is all that is good within us; and that the reasonings
   and speculations of the head, are only an empty show and noise that is
   made in the outside of us.

   [Dem-384] For that which we mean by the heart, plainly speaks thus
   much; it is a kind of life and motion within us, which everyone knows
   contains all that is good or bad in us; that we are that which our
   hearts are, let us talk, and reason, and dispute what we will about
   goodness and virtue; and that this state of our heart is as distinct
   from, and independent of all speculations of our reasoning faculties,
   as it is distinct from, and independent of all the languages in which a
   scholar can reason and speculate upon it. And if a man should say, that
   the excellency and sufficiency of natural religion consisted in knowing
   all the languages in which virtue, goodness and religion are expressed
   by different sounds and characters, he would have said as much truth,
   and as well grounded, as he who places the excellency and sufficiency
   of natural religion in the many arguments and demonstrations which
   reason can raise about it. For all reasoning and speculation stand on
   the outside of the heart, in the same superficial manner as all
   languages do.

   [Dem-385] For our heart is our manner of existence, or the state in
   which we feel ourselves to be; it is an inward life, a vital
   sensibility, which contains our manner of feeling what and how we are;
   it is the state of our desires and tendencies, of inwardly seeing,
   hearing, tasting, relishing and feeling that which passes within us: it
   is that to us inwardly with regard to ourselves, which our senses of
   seeing, hearing, feeling &c., are, with regard to things that are
   without, or external to us.

   [Dem-386] Now as reason is a poor, superficial, and insignificant thing
   with respect to our outward senses, unable to add anything to our
   hearing and seeing, &c., or to be the true power and life of them, by
   all its speculations and reasonings upon them; so it is much more a
   poor, and superficial, and insignificant thing with respect to the
   inward sensibility of the heart, or its seeing, feeling, &c., and much
   more unable to add to, or amend the state of the heart, or become the
   life and power of its motions, by its arguings about them.

   [Dem-387] And therefore, to seek for the religion or perfection of the
   heart in the power of our reason, is more groundless and absurd, and
   against the nature of things, than to seek for the perfection and
   strength of our senses in the power of our reason.

   [Dem-388] Now I appeal to every man in the world for the truth of all
   this; for every man has the fullest inward conviction, that his heart
   is not his reason, nor his reason his heart, but that the one is as
   different from the other in its whole nature, as pain, and joy, and
   desire, are different from definitions of them; and that as a thousand
   definitions of joy and desire, will not become that desire and joy
   itself; so a thousand definitions of religion will not become religion
   itself, but be always in the same state of distance from it; and that
   all reasoning and speculations upon religion, are at the same state of
   distance from the nature and power of religion, as speculations upon
   our passions are from the nature and power of them.

   [Dem-389] You know, not by hearsay, reasoning, or books, but by an
   inward sentiment, that your reason can be very nicely religious, very
   strict in its descriptions of goodness, at the same time that the heart
   is a mere libertine, sunk into the very dregs of corruption: on the
   other hand, you know, that when your reason is debauched with
   arguments, is contending for profaneness, and seems full of proof that
   piety is superstition, your heart at the same time has a virtue in it,
   that secretly dissents from all that you say.

   [Dem-390] Now all this proof that the state of reason is not the state
   of your heart, is the same proof that reason is not the power or
   strength of our religion, because what our heart is, that is our
   religion; what belongs to our heart, that belongs to our religion;
   which never had nor can have any other nature, power, or perfection,
   than that which is the nature, power, and perfection of our heart.

   [Dem-391] You are forced to know and feel, whether you will or no, that
   God has a certain secret power within you, which is watching every
   opportunity of saying something to you, either of yourself, the vanity
   of the world, or the guilt and consequences of sin.

   [Dem-392] This is that instinct of goodness, attraction of God, or
   witness of himself in the soul of every man, which without arguments
   and reasonings rises up in the soul, and would be doing some good to
   it, if not quenched and resisted by the noise and hurry either of
   pleasures or business.

   [Dem-393] And this is everyone's natural religion, or call to God and
   goodness, which is faithful to every man, and is the only foundation of
   all the virtue and goodness that shall be brought forth in him. And the
   least stirring of this inward principle, or power of life, is of more
   value than all the activity of our reason, which is only as it were a
   painter of dead images, which leave the heart in the same state of
   death, and emptiness of all goodness in which they find it.

   [Dem-394] Therefore, my dear friend, know the place of your religion,
   turn inwards, listen to the voice of grace, the instinct of God that
   speaks and moves within you; and instead of forming dead and lifeless
   images, let your heart pray to God, that all that is good and holy in
   him, may touch, and stir, and revive all that is capable of goodness
   and holiness in you. Your heart wants nothing but God, and nothing but
   your heart can receive him. This is the only place and seat of
   religion, and of all communication between God and you.

   [Dem-395] We are apt to consider conscience only as some working of our
   heart, that checks us, and so we are rather afraid, than fond of it.
   But if we looked upon it as it really is, so much of God within us,
   revealing himself within us, so much of a heavenly life, that is
   striving to raise us from the dead, we should love and adhere to it, as
   our happy guide to heaven.

   [Dem-396] For this reason, I have called this spark of life, or
   instinct of goodness, our inward redeemer; not only because it is the
   only thing within, that helps forward our salvation, but also because
   it is the first beginning of Christ's redemption in the souls of all
   men, by his becoming the atonement for all.

   [Dem-397] And as it is the first step of Christ's redemption in the
   soul, and that which became their capacity of salvation; so the
   progress of their redemption consists in the increase and growth of
   this first seed of life, till the new man be wholly raised up by it.

   [Dem-398] Lastly, another real difference between this instinct of
   goodness, or piety of the heart, and your religion of reason, is this,
   that natural reason in itself is incapable of Jesus Christ; it cannot
   comprehend him, it is at enmity with him, and sets itself up against
   him. For it feels no want of a savior, and therefore is unwilling to
   receive one. Or if it were to admit of a savior, it must be only such a
   one as came to increase the number of its images and ideas, or to help
   it to be more active and artful in the ranging, dividing and
   distinguishing them. And for this reason it is, that a book of ideas
   and distinctions is more valued by some people, than all the salvation
   that is offered in the gospel.

   [Dem-399] But this natural religion or instinct of goodness, of which I
   have spoken, as God's free gift to all men in Jesus Christ, has that
   natural fitness for the receiving of Christ, as the eye has for
   receiving the light; it wants him, it desires him, it is for him, it
   knows him, it rejoices in him, as the eye wants, desires, knows, and
   rejoices in him, as the eye wants, desires, knows, and rejoices in the
   light. And of this natural religion, or religion of the heart, does our
   savior plainly speak, when he saith, "He that is of God heareth God's
   Word," and again, "My sheep hear my voice." Therefore this instinct of
   goodness, or piety of the heart, though it is God's gift to man before
   his hearing the outward word, is yet a certain preparation for it; and
   if it be brought forth in us, is a never-failing fitness to receive it.
   Therefore he that has this natural religion of the heart, of which I
   have spoken, has the greatest fitness to receive the gospel, he is so
   of God, that he heareth God's Word, such a sheep of Christ as knoweth
   his voice. And therefore the receiving, or not receiving the gospel, is
   the greatest of all demonstrations, whether a man hath, or hath not
   that right religion that is antecedent to it.

   [Dem-400] Natural religion, when rightly understood, is a real thing,
   and of the same truth as revealed religion. But the mistake lies here,
   in our taking natural religion to be the work or effect of natural
   reason; whereas reason, or our faculty of reasoning upon our ideas, is
   not a part of natural or revealed religion, but only a bare spectator
   of its own images of natural and revealed religion, just as it is not a
   part of our hearing and seeing; nor can come any nearer to them, than
   as it is a bare spectator of its own images of them.

   [Dem-401] All men, by virtue of God's first pardon to Adam, are put
   into a state of salvation; and as this state, though it is the free
   gift of God, is common to all men, as men, or born of Adam; so it may
   in a good sense be called their natural state, and the religion of this
   state, their natural religion.

   [Dem-402] Now the question is, What is the natural religion of this
   state? It is that which his state and condition speaks to him. Now his
   condition and state in the world plainly speaks thus much to him, that
   he is a sinner, and yet in a state of favor with God, or in a
   possibility of being accepted of him. Every man's nature teaches him
   thus much, with the same certainty that it teaches him, that he is weak
   and mortal. That he is a sinner, and at the same time an object of
   divine mercy, are things that are made known to him, not by arguments
   or speculation, but by his own being what he is.

   [Dem-403] Therefore the whole of natural religion consists in a man's
   following this voice of nature, and acting conformably to it; in
   acknowledging the sinfulness of his state, and in imploring and relying
   upon the divine mercy to be delivered from it. This is the whole truth
   of natural religion; an humble penitent sense of sin, and an humble
   faith and trust in the mercy of God to be delivered from it; though it
   is not known by what name to call that deliverance, or what kind of
   savior is wanted to effect it. But he that thus according to the
   direction of his natural state lives before God, in penitence, and in
   faith in his mercy, is sure of having the benefit of all the mercy of
   God, though he does not know the method, or the means, by which the
   mercy of God will save him.

   [Dem-404] So that true, natural religion and revealed religion agree in
   these two great and essential points, that man is in a state of sin,
   and yet in a state of acceptance with God through his mercy; therefore
   the piety of the one, is the piety of the other, viz., a penitent sense
   of sin, and a humble faith and trust in God to be delivered from it by
   his mercy.

   [Dem-405] And here you may again see, why this natural religion is to
   be considered, not as a matter of reason, but as an instinct of
   goodness, or piety of the heart; because it is nothing else but so much
   goodness, not in idea, but in the very inward essence of the soul, as
   distinguishes and preserves it both from beasts and fallen spirits.

   [Dem-406] Had a man no sense of shame for his sins, he would be in the
   very state of the beasts; had he no faith and hope in the mercy of God,
   he would be in the state of the devils. Therefore that internal
   sentiment of heart, that instinct of goodness, is his only true
   religion of nature, because it is thus the preservation of his nature,
   and the saving him from being like to beasts and fallen spirits.

   [Dem-407] Reason therefore, as it is a faculty of speculating and
   comparing ideas, has no more share in this religion of nature, than it
   has a share in our natural powers of hearing and seeing; and as it can
   only in a little way, and in certain circumstances, do some outward
   service to these senses, so it can only in the same little and low way
   help and assist this religion of nature by some outward services.

   [Dem-408] And as this instinct of goodness, or inward sentiment of the
   heart, is that alone which preserves our nature, and therefore is alone
   the true religion, or salvation of nature; so the whole of all revealed
   religion is to improve this true religion of nature in its two
   essential parts, penitence for sin, and faith and trust in the mercy of
   God. For all revealed religion has only this end, it teaches nothing,
   intends nothing, but to give us more reasons for penitence, and more
   reasons for faith and trust in the mercy of God.

   [Dem-409] And therefore it was that I said, this instinct of good, or
   true religion of nature, is the very preparation of the heart for the
   reception of the gospel. For so much as there is of this penitence and
   faith living in the soul, so much it has of eyes to see, of ears to
   hear, and of a heart to understand all the truths of divine revelation.
   The humility and penitence of the gospel, the mercies of God in and
   through Jesus Christ, are as agreeable to a man in this state of heart,
   as food and water to the hungry and thirsty soul. The gospel presents
   everything to him that he wants; and God is thereby become all that to
   him, which the miserable state of his soul stood in need of. And so
   when he finds the gospel, he finds the pearl, for which he gladly sells
   all that he hath.

   [Dem-410] Therefore a man can have no greater proof that the religion
   of nature is suppressed in him, that he has not the religion of
   penitence and faith, than by his refusal of the gospel; for the gospel
   as naturally agrees with such a state of heart, as light mixes with
   light, and darkness with darkness.

   [Dem-411] Lay the cause of infidelity where you will, it is a certain
   truth, that it lies only in this insensibility of heart, in this
   extinction of the religion of nature. And if the least sentiment of
   penitence arises in your heart, or a sensibility of the need of divine
   mercy, the gospel has got so far an entrance into you, and it cannot
   lose its hold of you, but by your losing this state of heart.

   [Dem-412] Let your reason pretend what it will, and fancy it has ever
   so many objections of speculation and argument against the gospel, they
   are all objections of the heart. For the gospel speaks only to the
   heart, and nothing but the heart can either receive or reject it. For
   this is an eternal truth, which you cannot too much reflect upon, that
   reason always follows the state of the heart, and what your heart is,
   that is your reason. If your heart is full of sentiments of penitence,
   and of faith in the divine mercy, your reason will take part with your
   heart, and will entertain itself with all arguments, ideas, and
   discourses, that can exercise this religion of the heart.

   [Dem-413] But if your heart is shut up in death and dryness, your
   reason will be according to it, a poor quibbler in words, and dead
   images, and will delight in nothing but such dry objections and
   speculations as answer to the deadness and insensibility of your heart.

   [Dem-414] So what you imagine, of your having a religion of pure
   reason, is the merest fiction of deceit that can be imposed upon you;
   for reason has nothing of its own, it acts nothing of itself, it barely
   reflects that which comes from the heart, as the servant of the heart,
   and must act or not act in obedience to it; what the heart loves, that
   reason contends for; and what the heart has no inclination to, that
   reason objects against. Therefore there neither is, nor was, nor ever
   can be any other religion but the religion of the heart, and reason is
   only its servant, in the same manner, and in the same degree, whatever
   the religion of the heart be, whether true or false.

   [Dem-415] And to imagine that natural religion is the effect of pure
   reason and speculation, is as great an error against the nature of
   things, and more hurtful to you, than to imagine that natural hearing
   and seeing is the effect of reason and speculation.

   [Dem-416] Natural religion, if you understand it rightly, is a most
   excellent thing, it is a right sentiment of heart, it is so much
   goodness in the heart, it is its sensibility both of its separation
   from, and its relation to God; and therefore it shows itself in nothing
   but in a penitential sentiment of the weight of its sins, and in an
   humble recourse by faith to the mercy of God. Call but this the
   religion of nature, and then the more you esteem it, the better; for
   you cannot wish well to it, without bringing it to the gospel state of
   perfection.

   [Dem-417] For the religion of the gospel is this religion of penitence,
   and faith in the mercy of God, brought forth into its full perfection.
   For the gospel calls you to nothing, but to know, and understand, and
   practice a full and real penitence, and to know by faith, such heights
   and depths of the divine mercy towards you, as the religion of nature
   had only some little uncertain glimmerings of. Therefore there is the
   same agreement, and the same difference between the true religion of
   nature, and the religion of the gospel, that there is between the
   breaking of the day, and the rising of the sun to its meridian height;
   the one is the beginning, and the other is the perfection of the same
   thing. And as the light of the daybreak, and the light of the noonday,
   are both the same light, and from the same producer of light; so the
   light of the religion of nature, and the light of the gospel, are the
   same light, and from the same producer of light in the mind.

   [Dem-418] If you only stood for some time in the first break of day,
   sensible of the misery of darkness, and only feeling some hope and
   expectation of the light, yet knowing nothing of that globe of fire
   that afterwards was to appear, and bless you with so many unknown and
   unhoped for joys and comforts of the noonday light, you would then
   resemble one standing for some time in the daybreak of natural
   religion, sensible of the weight of his sins, and only hoping in God
   for some kind of mercy towards him; yet knowing nothing of that globe
   of fire, that mystery of divine love that was by degrees to discover
   itself, and bless him with so many unknown, unhoped-for joys and
   comforts of the divine mercy towards him.

   [Dem-419] The original instinct of goodness in the soul, which I have
   shown to be the only religion of nature, is the light of daybreak in
   the soul, and is that light which lighteth every man that cometh into
   the world. The light of the gospel is that noonday light, which
   discovers such joys and comforts as no one could have thought of, that
   had only stood in the break of day.

   [Dem-420] And as no one, when the day arises, can reject or dispute the
   coming or goodness of the rising sun, but because he has lost that
   sense which was to distinguish light from darkness; so no one can
   reject or dislike, or dispute against the light of the gospel, but he
   that has extinguished that instinct of goodness in his soul, which
   alone can distinguish good from evil, and make him love the one, and
   reject the other.

   [Dem-421] Don't therefore, my dear friend, deceive yourself, nor let
   anyone else deceive you. The matter is of infinite consequence that you
   have before you. You come into the world but once, and have but one
   trial, but the effects of it are to last for ever. The time of
   disputing and speculating upon ideas is short; it can last no longer
   than whilst the sun of this world can refresh your flesh and blood, and
   so keep the soul from knowing its own depth, or what has been growing
   in it. But when this is over, then you must know and feel what it is to
   have a nature as deep, and strong, and large as eternity.

   [Dem-422] If you have lived upon the amusements of reason and
   speculation, your life has been worse than a dream, and your soul will,
   at the end of such a life, be left to itself in its own darkness,
   hunger, thirst, and anxiety, to be for ever devoured by its own fire.
   But if you have watched over that instinct of goodness which God
   planted in your soul, and have exercised yourself in that penitence for
   your sins, and humble faith in the mercy of God, that the gospel
   proposes to you; then when your body falls off from you, you will feel
   and know what a kingdom of God lay hid in your soul, you will see that
   you have a life and strength like that of eternity, and the fullness of
   God himself will be your everlasting enjoyment.

   [Dem-423] For heaven and hell stand ready to awake and be revealed in
   you, and can no longer be hid from you, than whilst you are under the
   cover of flesh and blood. And then will be fully verified in you that
   saying of scripture, "he that seeketh findeth": for you will find that
   which you have sought, and according to your faith, so will it
   eternally be done unto you. Your soul will have nothing taken from it,
   but it will have all that good which you sought after, and provided for
   it. You chose to be saved only by the powers of your own reason, and
   refused the mercy of God that was to have saved you, and therefore you
   will have that very salvation you have chosen, you will be entirely
   without the mercy of God, and left wholly to your own nature: and that
   salvation is the misery of hell.

   [Dem-424] You are now your own carver, and must be that which you shall
   have made of yourself. If the depth of your heart has not in this
   lifetime its proper cure; if it has not something done to it, which
   your reason can no more do, than it can create the light, your heart
   will become your hell. And if you let the light of the gospel shine
   into it, and revive the good seed of life in it, then it will become
   the seat and habitation of your heaven.

   [Dem-425] You may perhaps imagine, that because you practice sobriety
   and justice, and are a friend to moral behavior, both in yourself and
   other people, that therefore your disbelief of the gospel cannot
   proceed from the disorder of your heart, or a want of piety. But this,
   sir, is all mistake. For you may have all this moral behavior, and yet
   have nothing at all of that sentiment of penitence, and faith in the
   divine mercy, which I have shown to be the only true religion of
   nature. It is as easy to have all this kind of goodness which you
   appeal to, as it is to be civil, well-bred, and a friend to the peace
   and order of that society of which one is a member. Even an atheist may
   find his ends, and act suitably to his own principles of self-love,
   ease and reputation, by this moral behavior.

   [Dem-426] But the preaching of the gospel discovers all, and shows from
   what principle all this morality proceeds. If there was this sentiment
   of penitence and faith in the mercy of God at the bottom, then this
   morality would want and rejoice at the precepts and doctrines of the
   gospel, because they raise a morality built upon the foundation of
   penitence and faith. But when this morality is only a worldly wisdom, a
   convenience of life, a political conformity, and as mere a
   gratification of selfishness, as any other worldly accomplishments are,
   then this morality is in the greatest enmity with the gospel, because
   the gospel takes away its worth, and all the self-accomplishment that
   was placed in it.

   [Dem-427] Therefore it is not the mere moral man that has that goodness
   of the heart, that is a qualification to receive the gospel: for an
   atheist may be such a moral man; but it is he, whose heart is in a
   state of penitence for his sins, and humbly looking to the mercy of God
   to be some way or other delivered from them.

   [Dem-428] This is the only foundation of a religious morality, and this
   is that state of heart which must be wanting in every moralist that
   refuses the gospel.

   [Dem-429] Hence therefore it is plain, that you may have a great deal
   of morality in your behavior, and yet nothing of the religion of nature
   in your heart, and so be entirely unqualified to receive the gospel,
   because of the disorder of your heart. For the morality of an
   unreformed heart, adds no more goodness to it, than whited sepulchers
   do to the rottenness of dead men's bones.

   [Dem-430] What I say I say not to reproach you, but from a sincere
   desire of doing you all the good that I can. For I have too much
   experience myself of the weakness and mistakes of human nature, to
   reproach any degree of them in other people. But if you will take in
   good part what is well meant, I hope you will find that I have been
   your friend in discovering the bottom of your disorder.

   [Dem-431] But it may be you will say, you would believe the gospel if
   you could, but that its evidence cannot have that effect upon your
   mind. You may say also, the gospel is a matter of fact; you must
   examine into the truth of it, as you do into the truth of other matters
   of history; and as both the internal and external evidence of the
   gospel is much defended and opposed by learned men, its evidence is so
   perplexed, and made a matter of such laborious and intricate enquiry,
   that your mind cannot come at any certainty of what you ought to
   believe concerning the truth of it.

   [Dem-432] I will therefore propose to you the shortest, and at the same
   time the surest of all methods, and such as you shall either be obliged
   to acquiesce in as sufficient, or to own that you have suppressed that
   instinct of goodness within you, which I have shown to be the original
   birthright of all mankind, and to be the only state of heart that saves
   us from being a mere mixture of the beasts and the devils.

   [Dem-433] I don't recommend to you to lay aside prejudice, and begin
   again the controversy from the bottom, and read all on both sides with
   all the impartiality you can. I would as soon send you on a pilgrimage,
   to be a penitent, as propose to you this travel to be a Christian. The
   truth of the gospel lies much nearer to us than we imagine, and we only
   dispute and wrangle ourselves into a distance from it.

   [Dem-434] Do you think that you need many books to show you that you
   are a sinner, that you have the disorder of almost all the beasts
   within you; that you have besides this, such passions and tempers of
   pride, envy, selfishness and malice, as would make you shun the sight
   of other people, if they could see all that passes within you? Need any
   learning instruct you, that at the same time that you have all these
   disorders, both of the beasts and evil spirits within you, you have a
   great desire to seem to be without them, and are affecting continually
   to have, and appear in those very virtues which you feel the want of?
   When you are full of hatred and envy, you affect to be thought good and
   good-natured, when proud, to appear as humble.

   [Dem-435] Now I desire you to know no books, but this book of your own
   heart, nor to be well read in any controversy but in that which passes
   within you, in order to know the gospel to be the greatest of all
   truths, and the infallible voice of God speaking the way of salvation
   to you. No echo answers to the voice that raises it, so certainly and
   agreeably as the voice of nature or the state of your own heart answers
   to that which the gospel preaches unto you. And this I will show you to
   be the shortest and surest of all methods to discover the truth of the
   gospel.

   [Dem-436] The gospel is built on these two pillars, first, that you are
   a fallen: secondly, that you are a redeemed creature. Now every man's
   own soul, and what daily passes within him, speaks these two great
   truths to him, with a conviction and sensibility that cannot be
   avoided.

   [Dem-437] You have seen, and you feel, and know that you are a sinner,
   that you have the disorders of the beasts, and the depravity of evil
   spirits within you. Is not this saying to you, not in the sound of
   words, but by the frame and voice of your nature, that you are a fallen
   creature, and not in that state in which a good being must have created
   you? For I appeal to yourself, in your own degree of goodness, if you
   could create your own children, whether you would not create them in a
   better state, and with less evil, both of the beast and the devil, in
   them, than that in which you were born yourself?

   [Dem-438] Therefore, only supposing God to have your degree of
   goodness, he could not have created the first man, from whom your
   nature is derived, in the state that you are; and therefore supposing
   him only to be good, you have a sufficient proof; but supposing him to
   be infinitely good, or goodness itself, you have an infallible
   demonstration written n the frame of your nature, that you are a fallen
   creature, or not in that state in which God created you.

   [Dem-439] Again, do you want any learning, or books, or reasoning, to
   show you, that every man, as well as yourself, affects to appear
   virtuous, to have good qualities, and is ashamed of every beastly and
   diabolical disorder; and would seem to have virtues and goodness that
   he has not, because of an innate love that he has for them, and from a
   sense of their being proper for him? And is not this saying again with
   the same fullness of certainty, that you are a redeemed creature, that
   there is in you an inward redeemer, a light of the mind, a seed of
   goodness, an instinct to virtue, given you by God, though without
   revelation you don't know when nor how?

   [Dem-440] And is not this such an evidence of the truth of the
   Christian religion, and of its fitness to save your soul, as not only
   needs not the assistance of foreign books and learning, but is also
   sufficient to support itself against all the books and learning in the
   world that should oppose it? Can any echo answer better to the voice
   that raises it, than the voice of your nature answers to the sound of
   the gospel? And do you not hereby plainly see, that you stand nearer to
   the truth of the Christian religion, than you do to anything else? It
   is only the description of that which passes within you. It is the book
   of yourself, it talks of nothing out of you, it speaks but that which
   is written within you, and therefore you have a sufficient help to
   understand it. To look for outward testimonies, is like looking for
   yourself abroad; turn but your eyes inward, and you have no need of
   miracles to show you, that Jesus Christ came from that God that made
   you, and that he teaches you the only way to find that perfection and
   happiness for which he made you.

   [Dem-441] What can the gospel say to you of the fall of man, that your
   heart does not feel to be true? What can it say to you of your
   redemption, that is not at the same time said to you by the state of
   your own soul?

   [Dem-442] For if you were not fallen, how could you labor under so much
   corruption? A sinful creature cannot come from God in its sinful state.
   And, on the other hand, if you were not redeemed, how could you feel a
   dislike of sin, an inclination to goodness, and a desire of appearing
   virtuous? For what else is this desire of goodness, but a certain
   inward principle that has begun your redemption, and is trying to carry
   it on?

   [Dem-443] Now the Christian religion says nothing to you; it has not
   one doctrine, or practice, or institution, but what has its immediate
   relation to these two great truths, and is, for the sake of them,
   either to convince you of your fall, or to assist your redemption.

   [Dem-444] Now if a revelation from God had only told you, that you had
   a mixture of evil and good in you, could you have any doubt about the
   truth of such a revelation? Or if it told you that the evil came from
   the fault of your first parents, and the good was God's free gift to
   you at their fall, that the evil might be resisted and suppressed; if
   it told you, that God had a desire, and a design in the depths of his
   mercy, to assist the good that was in you, that it might conquer and
   put an entire end to all the evil of your nature, would you ask for
   proofs of the goodness of such a revelation, or of its being worthy of
   God, and suitable to your own needs?

   [Dem-445] Now the Christian religion is this revelation. It tells you
   only this great truth, that you are fallen and redeemed, that is, that
   you have a mixture of evil and good in you; it tells you that God, as
   early as the fall, redeemed you, when the seed of the woman became the
   enemy of the serpent; that is, as soon as the evil came into you, he of
   his free gift put a good power into you to withstand it; it tells you,
   that from the beginning of the world, it has been God's gracious desire
   and design in and by Jesus Christ to render your redemption effectual,
   that is, to make the good that is in you perfectly overcome all your
   evil.

   [Dem-446] Complain therefore no more of want of evidence; neither
   books, nor study, nor learning is wanted; the gospel is within you, and
   you are its evidence; it is preached into you in your own bosom, and
   everything within you is a proof of the truth of it.

   [Dem-447] Ask how you shall know there is such a thing as day and
   night; for the fall and redemption are as manifest within you, as day
   and night are manifest without you.

   [Dem-448] Here, sir, in this intimate and true knowledge of yourself
   lies the most precious evidence of the gospel, and is as near to you,
   as you are to yourself; because all that is said and declared, and
   recorded in the gospel, is only a plain record of that which is said
   and done, and doing in yourself.

   [Dem-449] And when you once feel it thus proved to you, by its
   agreement with the state of your own nature, then it becomes a pearl
   that is dearer to you than your life; and what is best, it is then a
   pearl which no one can rob you of. You are then in such assurance and
   possession of the power and goodness of Christ, as those blind men
   were, whose eyes he had opened to see the light.

   [Dem-450] Then all the wrangle and dispute of learned men against the
   truth of the gospel, will signify no more to you, nor raise any more
   doubt in you, than if by history and criticism they would prove, that
   you never had any benefit from the light of the sun.

   [Dem-451] If you go only outwardly to work, and seek only for an
   outward proof of the truth of the gospel, you can only know it by such
   labors, and in such uncertainty as you know other matters of history,
   and must be always balancing what is said for, and against it. And if
   you come to believe it this way, your faith will be held by an
   uncertain tenure, you will be alarmed at every new attack, and
   frightened at every new enemy that pretends to lessen the evidence of
   the gospel.

   [Dem-452] But these, sir, are difficulties that we make to ourselves,
   by neglecting the proper evidence of the gospel, and choosing only to
   know it, as we know other histories that have no relation to us, or
   connection with our own state.

   [Dem-453] The gospel is not a history of something that was done and
   past 1700 years ago, or of a redemption that was then present, and only
   to be transmitted to posterity as a matter of history; but it is the
   declaration of a redeemer, and a redeeming power that is always in its
   redeeming state, and equally present to every man.

   [Dem-454] We all stand as near to the reasons and motives for receiving
   the gospel, as they did to whom it was first preached. No one then did,
   or could receive Jesus Christ when he was on earth, but for the same
   reasons, that the sick, the lame, and the blind, sought to him to be
   cured, namely, because they felt their infirmities, and wanted to be
   relieved from them. But if this state of heart, or their insensibility
   of their condition, of what they were, and what they wanted, was then
   the only possible reason they could have for receiving Christ; then it
   follows, that every man of every age, has all the reasons for receiving
   or not receiving the gospel within himself, and stands just as near to
   and just as far from the evidence of it, as those did who first heard
   it.

   [Dem-455] If you know of no burden or weight of sin, nor want any
   assistance to overcome it, the gospel has no evidence for you; and
   though you had stood by our savior, you had been never the nearer to
   it. But if you know your state, as the sick, the lame, and the blind
   knew their state; if you groan under the power of sin, and are looking
   towards God for some assistance to overcome it, then you have all the
   reasons for receiving the gospel written in your heart, and you stand
   as near all its proper evidence, whether you were born the last age, or
   1700 years ago.

   [Dem-456] Now if you don't know and feel, that the gospel has this
   foundation in you, that you have that fall and redemption in you that
   it teaches, then all external evidence of it can be of no use to you,
   because you are not the person that wants such a salvation.

   [Dem-457] But if you know that these two things are written in the
   frame of your nature, that evil and good, or the fall and the
   redemption, are at strife within you, and that you want some divine
   assistance to help you to overcome the evil that is in you; then the
   gospel needs no external evidence, because your heart is a witness of
   all the truth of it. For you are then only doing that in a lower
   degree, which the gospel teaches and enables you to do in a more
   perfect and prevailing manner.

   [Dem-458] Further, if you have only that instinct of goodness in you,
   which I have shown to be the only religion of nature; if you have a
   desire to act suitably to this state of your heart, this struggle of
   evil and good that is in you, and are weary of your sins, and desirous
   to be delivered from them, then you are fully prepared to love, admire,
   and receive all the precepts of the gospel, because they have no end,
   but to do that which you want and desire to have done in you; that is,
   to suppress the power of evil in you, to destroy the old man, or the
   first life of your corrupt nature, and to raise the new man, or
   principle of goodness that is in you, to its full state of strength and
   perfection.

   [Dem-459] And here you have the shortest and surest of all methods, to
   find both the truth and excellency, and necessity of the gospel method
   of salvation.

   [Dem-460] I put no labor or deep enquiry upon your hands; I desire you
   only to know, what you cannot help knowing, that you have good and evil
   alive, and at work in you. For this is the whole of the fall of Adam,
   and of the redemption of Jesus Christ. Say that you have no evil in
   you, and I will not desire you to believe the fall of Adam. Say that
   you have no sense of goodness in you, and I will not desire you to
   acknowledge the redemption through Jesus Christ. But if neither of
   these can be denied to be in you, if your own heart confesses these two
   things; how can you want a proof of the truth of that religion, which
   only tells you that which your own heart is a witness of?

   [Dem-461] Again, say that you have no instinct of goodness in you, that
   you have no dislike of the corruption of your nature, nor the smallest
   desire to be free from it, and then I will excuse your ignorance of the
   truth and fitness of the precepts of the gospel.

   [Dem-462] But if you will but own so much of natural religion, as to be
   at all troubled at your sins, or but secretly wish that God would some
   way or other help you to get the better of them; then you are under a
   necessity of seeing and knowing that the precepts of the gospel are
   highly suited to the state of your soul, to assist this degree of
   natural religion in you, and to help you to that conquest over sin
   which you want.

   [Dem-463] So that from this plain and easy knowledge of yourself, you
   are absolutely obliged either to deny the most known state of your
   heart, and to deny that you have any degree, or desire of goodness in
   you; or to own the gospel to have everything in it, both as to doctrine
   and precept, that strictly answers to the state and necessities, and
   good inclinations of your heart.

   [Dem-464] And therefore the proof of the gospel is at no distance from
   you, requires no labor of learning, or search of history, but arises
   from the most obvious knowledge of yourself, what you are, and what you
   want. And you may have the utmost assurance, that you cannot hurt or
   deceive yourself in this short method that I have recommended. For if
   you cannot be hurt or deceived in believing yourself to be a sinner,
   and yet to be in a state that admits of the divine mercy to you, then
   you are sure that you cannot have any hurt or deceit put upon you by
   the gospel; because it is to do nothing to you, you are to receive
   nothing from it, but a confirmation of your penitence, and a
   strengthening your faith in the mercy of God.

   [Dem-465] Understand all the gospel in this manner, and then you
   understand it according to the truth, as it is in itself. For there is
   not a doctrine or precept of the gospel, but is given you for this end;
   to perfect your penitence, to show you all the grounds, and reasons,
   and extent of it, and to confirm, increase, and exercise your faith in
   the mercy of God, by such a discovery of God, and his goodness towards
   you, as without the gospel could not have been known.

   [Dem-466] So then, if you know the religion of nature, the religion of
   penitence and faith, to be a true and good religion; if the proof of
   the truth and goodness of this religion lies within you, then the proof
   of the truth and goodness of the gospel is in the same degree of
   nearness to you, and you cannot but know it in the same manner and
   degree as you know yourself, what you are, and what you want.

   [Dem-467] Thus much may serve to convince my unbelieving reader, if I
   have such a one, whom I would fain lead to God, that I have said
   nothing in favor of a modern religion of reason; which I have shown to
   have the vanity, insignificancy, and sin of the ancient idolatry in it,
   and to be that very confidence in natural strength, and hardness of
   heart, which keeps fallen angels prisoners of darkness.

   [Dem-468] I must now say a word to the zealous Christian, who may
   perhaps imagine, from what I have said of that inward light, which is
   the gift of God to all men in Jesus Christ, that I have brought this
   light too near to the advantageous state of revealed religion, whether
   Jewish or Christian.

   [Dem-469] To such a one I say, first, that what I have said of this
   light of the mind, or instinct of goodness common to all men, is so
   much said of the light and benefit of divine revelation. Because this
   light of the mind, or instinct of goodness, is not something
   independent of, and antecedent to all divine revelation, but was the
   effect of God's revealing himself as reconciled to Adam through the
   seed of the woman. God's pardoning Adam as the head and representative
   of all mankind, and giving him a mediator and redeemer, was putting him
   into a state and capacity of being renewed in his mind; and this
   renewing power, which God then by pardoning him bestowed upon him, is
   that instinct of goodness, or light of the mind, of which I have
   spoken. And therefore all the possibility of religion, and all that is
   good in it, is to be ascribed to divine revelation.

   [Dem-470] Secondly, what I have said of this common light, or piety of
   the heart, is only to signify, that they have a possibility of such
   good dispositions as belong to those, of whom it is said, "He that is
   of God, heareth God's Word"; and of such as Christ spoke, when he said,
   "My sheep hear my voice."

   [Dem-471] Now if there were not a possibility or capacity of this
   degree of goodness in men, distinct from all outward revelation, how
   could mankind be fit for God to make a revelation to? For if men could
   not be in this state of goodness, so as to be prepared or qualified
   hearers of the Word of God, why should God speak to them? Or why should
   the voice of Christ be sounded, if there were no sheep that could know
   it? Therefore what I have said of this light of men, is only so much
   said of their capacity to receive divine revelation; it is only a
   glimmering of light, a seed of goodness, a possibility of piety, which
   lies only in the soul, as the beginning of its salvation, and therefore
   is in great want of, and must be much benefited by further revelations
   from God.

   [Dem-472] I have not considered it as a species of religion that may
   trust in itself, or set up itself against divine revelation, as having
   no need of it. When it is thus, it is not the religion I speak of, it
   is so far from being then the light of Christ in the soul, or the
   instinct of goodness that it had from him, that it is the darkness and
   depravity of the heart, and the foundation of that hell which will be
   at last manifested in it.

   [Dem-473] Lastly, if my zealous Christian should find it a disagreeable
   thought to him, to think that all mankind have had some benefit from
   Christ, and that the seed of the woman from the beginning has helped,
   and will to the end of the world help and call every man to resist and
   make war against the serpent; I must tell him, he need have no greater
   proof than this, that his own heart is not yet truly Christian, that he
   is not a true disciple of that Lord who would have all men to be saved.

   [Dem-474] Having said this much to guard against all misapprehension,
   either by the unbeliever, or the Christian, I now return to my subject,
   concerning the benefits of Christ, as he is the savior of mankind.

   [Dem-475] Now this great truth that I have already declared, namely,
   that all mankind were pardoned and redeemed in Adam's pardon and
   redemption; that at the fall, Jesus Christ became the second Adam, or
   parent of all mankind, who from him received a principle or seed of
   life, an instinct of goodness, which was to be in every man a beginning
   of a new birth, a possibility of his salvation, or receiving a new man
   from this second Adam, in the same reality as he received a natural
   life from the first Adam; this great and glorious truth is of great
   importance when rightly known, and is the key to all the mysteries of
   scripture; it leads you into the fullness of the greatest truths, and
   disperses all difficulties.

   [Dem-476] This free gift of God to all men, in thus making all men
   partakers of Christ's redemption, by a seed of life, which all men, as
   men, receive from Christ, is the true and solid meaning of that which
   is called preventing grace, and which, when rightly spoken of, is said
   to be common to all men. It is grace, because it is God's free gift; we
   could not lay hold of it by any power of our own, nor had any right to
   claim it. It is preventing grace, because it prevents, or goes before,
   and is not given us for anything that we have done. And therefore it
   has its plain distinction from God's assisting grace, which always is
   in proportion to the nature of our actions, and only works as they
   work. Hence there is a full end of all the wretched disputes of an
   abominable election and reprobation, and of other disputes concerning
   the grace of God.

   [Dem-477] For if all men, as sons of Adam, are by the free gift of God
   made sons of the second Adam, and, as such have a principle or seed of
   life in them from him, in order to be raised up to a perfection of the
   new man in Jesus Christ; and if this seed of life, or instinct of
   goodness, or light of the mind, is the general preventing grace of all
   men, that enables them so to act as to obtain God's assisting grace in
   the renewal of their minds; then you must easily see, that all men have
   a general call and a general capacity to obtain their salvation, and
   that the doctrine of particular absolute election and reprobation is
   plucked up by the roots, and most of the difficulties of God's
   dispensation fairly solved. But this is by the by.

   [Dem-478] Now you must have observed that this general grace, or
   redemption, of life given to all men in Christ as their second Adam, is
   not done only by an outward teaching, as when one teaches another the
   way of a new life, or by an outward adoption, as when a person takes a
   stranger to be his son; but by the communication of an essential seed
   or principle of life from the second Adam to all the sons of the first
   Adam. From which seed or principle of life, every son of Adam has
   Christ for his spiritual father and parent in the same reality, as he
   had the first Adam for his natural parent.

   [Dem-479] For this reason, the change that religion aims at, is
   constantly represented as a new birth, and our progress in religion as
   our progress in regeneration, or being born again. We are not called
   upon only to change our notions, or to receive such an alteration, as
   scholars may receive from their teachers, but to die to ourselves, that
   a new life may be raised up in us; or to suffer something to be revived
   in us that is not of our own growth, or any change that we can make
   upon ourselves.

   [Dem-480] Thus says our Lord, "Except a man be born of water and of the
   Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." {John 3:5.} And to
   show that this new birth is to be understood according to the literal
   truth of the expression, there is added, "That which is born of the
   flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit."
   Therefore the birth of the spirit is as real as the birth of the flesh,
   and Christ is a principle of life to us, as surely as we derive our
   flesh from Adam.

   [Dem-481] Again, "The first Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam
   was made a quickening Spirit." {1 Cor.xv.45} That is, the first Adam
   was made to be a fountain, or original, of a natural life to men, the
   second Adam was made a reviver or parent of a spiritual life in men.
   Therefore the spiritual life derived from the second Adam, is in the
   same degree of reality, as the natural life derived from the first
   Adam. The apostle adds, "The first is of the earth, earthy; the second
   is the Lord from heaven. And as is the earthy, such are they also that
   are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are
   heavenly."

   [Dem-482] Therefore those that are related to Christ, have his heavenly
   life and nature in them, in the same reality as those that are related
   to Adam have his earthy nature in them. "And as we have borne the image
   of the earthy, so we shall also bear the image of the heavenly."
   Therefore, as we bear the image of the first Adam, by having his nature
   and life in us, derived, from him; so we can only bear the image of the
   second, by having his nature and life in us, derived from him.

   [Dem-483] So that it is an undoubted truth, that Christ is our second
   Adam, or a raiser of a new birth and life in us, in the same reality as
   we have our natural birth and life from Adam. Hence it is that you see
   so much mention in scripture of Christ's being in us, formed in us,
   revealed in us, of our putting on Christ, of our receiving life from
   him, as the branches from the vine. Hence also so much mention of a new
   and old man that is in us, and the whole of religion represented as a
   contest betwixt this twofold man that is in us, the one from the first,
   the other from the second Adam.

   [Dem-484] The knowledge of this great truth, that Christ is our second
   Adam, as mentioned above, renders all the most mysterious, and
   seemingly hard passages of scripture, not only plainly intelligible,
   but full of a most affecting sense. Thus when it is said, that Christ
   must be formed in us, and that "we are members of his body, of his
   flesh, and of his bones," &c. {Eph.v.30.} all this, and the like, is
   highly intelligible, as soon as it is known, that Christ is the parent
   of a spiritual man in us, in the same reality, as Adam is the parent of
   our natural life.

   [Dem-485] Thus also when Christ saith, "Except ye eat the flesh of the
   son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you." And again, "I
   am the bread of life, he that cometh to me shall never hunger, and he
   that believeth on me shall never thirst." {John 6:35.} And again,
   "Whosoever shall drink the water that I shall give him, shall never
   thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
   water springing up into everlasting life." {John 4:14.} And again, "I
   am the resurrection and the life. Whosoever liveth and believeth in me,
   shall never die." {John 11:25}

   [Dem-486] Now if Jesus Christ had been only a teacher of morality, how
   unaccountable must all this language have been? But as soon as it is
   known that he is a spiritual parent, or principle of life to us, in the
   same reality as we derive our flesh and blood from Adam, and that this
   life lieth in us as a seed, which is to be brought forth to the
   fullness of its stature by faith in Christ, then all these passages
   have a meaning that is plainly intelligible, yet never to be exhausted,
   but is always suited to the state and progress of the reader.

   [Dem-487] For if Christ is a principle of life to us, and this life is
   drawn into, or formed in us by means of our faith; then how justly are
   we said to eat Christ as the bread of life, to eat his flesh and drink
   his blood, &c., when by faith we draw him into us, as our principle of
   life? For what can express the nature of this faith, so well as hunger
   and thirst? Or how can it be a real faith, unless it have much of the
   nature of hunger, or a strong desire, and ardent thirst?

   [Dem-488] Therefore all these expressions are as literally suited to
   the nature of the thing, to that which Christ is to us, as human words
   can be, and are not a language adapted to our reason, to increase its
   ideas; but are the language of heaven to the heavenly part of us, and
   are only to excite, direct, and confirm our faith in Christ, or to
   raise, increase, and exercise our hunger, thirst, and desire of the new
   birth of Christ in our soul.

   [Dem-489] But this author knowing nothing of this doctrine, is forced
   to deny the most precious truths of scripture. Thus all that our savior
   says of himself in the sixth of St. John, of his flesh being "meat
   indeed, and his blood drink indeed," and of the necessity of eating and
   drinking it, to have eternal life in us; all this, says this author,
   "was only a very high figurative representation to the Jews then about
   him, of their duty and obligation to receive into their hearts, and
   digest his whole doctrine, as the food and life of their souls." {Page
   100.}

   [Dem-490] Therefore, according to this author, Christ is our life, in
   no other meaning or sense, than any other person who teaches us any
   doctrine that may do us good, and we have no life from him any other
   way, than we may have from any teacher of useful truths. And therefore
   what he says of himself, of his being the life of the world, has just
   as much truth in it, as if any of the apostles had said the same things
   of themselves. Nay, had Socrates, or Plato, or anybody else, preached
   the same gospel that our savior has done, there had been just the same
   meaning, and neither more nor less in it than in the gospel of Jesus
   Christ.

   [Dem-491] St. John saith, "Who is a liar, but he that denieth that
   Jesus is the Christ? He is anti-Christ that denieth the Father and the
   Son." {1 John 2:22}

   [Dem-492] Now surely the Son could not be mentioned with the Father, as
   an equal object of our faith and acknowledgement, if he could not in
   reality be said to be our life in such a sense, as the Father may be
   said to be our God, not by a very high or strong figure of speech, but
   in truth and reality.

   [Dem-493] The scriptures tell us that Jesus Christ is the "Word that
   was with God," and "was that God by whom all things were made." {John
   1:3.} "That by him all things were created that are in heaven and in
   earth, visible and invisible, and that in him all things consist."
   {Col.i.16.} {Sic, but should be 17.}

   [Dem-494] Must not this author be here obliged to have recourse to much
   higher and stronger figures of speech, to account for the meaning of
   these expressions? For if there is anything in the nature of our
   savior, to support the literal meaning and truth of these expressions,
   then it must not only be groundless, but absolutely false, to say, that
   we can only be said to dwell in him, or have our life from him, by a
   very high or strong figure of speech.

   [Dem-495] For surely, if all things both in heaven and earth are
   created by him, if "in him all things consist," then it may be said
   without any strong figure, that he is our life, and that we "dwell in
   him, and he in us," in the same reality, as we are said to "live, and
   move, and have our being in God." For if this creator becomes our
   redeemer, we may be said to receive life from him, to be new-born, or
   created again by him, in the same reality and fullness of truth, as we
   can be said to be created by him at first.

   [Dem-496] When therefore this author saith, "We may be said (by a
   strong figure of speech) to dwell in him, and he in us; to be one with
   Christ, and Christ with us," that is, that "Christ and we, to all the
   intents and purposes of true religion, shall be in perfect friendship
   and union together": {Page 111.} it is the same barefaced denial of the
   gospel, the same direct blasphemy against God, as to affirm, that God
   can only by a strong figure of speech, be said to be our life, our
   "creator, in whom we live, and move, and have our being." It is the
   same blasphemy as to affirm, that we have no relation to, or dependence
   upon God, or existence in him, but such as any party of people, whether
   at court, or the exchange, have with one another, when they are to all
   the intents and purposes of their party interest, in perfect friendship
   and union together.

   [Dem-497] But to return: from this doctrine of Christ's being a
   principle of life, or parent of a new birth in us, we may see the plain
   reason, why the scripture describes a Christian as a creature or
   instrument of the Holy Spirit, and entirely animated by it, so far as
   he is truly Christian. Because as Christianity consists in the birth of
   a new man within us, it must needs have a Spirit and breath as suitable
   to it, as the spirit and air of this world is suitable to a life of
   flesh and blood. And as every thought and motion of our outward man
   must be in, and by the assistance of the spirit, and air of this
   outward world: so every thought, and motion, and desire of our inward
   spiritual man, must be in, and by the assistance of the Spirit, and air
   of that world, whose creature it is.

   [Dem-498] Now, was there not as really this new spiritual man within
   us, in the same reality of existence, as our outward rational nature,
   there could be no foundation for this doctrine of the necessity of
   God's Holy Spirit. Nor could the scripture account of the guidance of
   that Holy Spirit be at all intelligible, upon this supposition, that we
   had nothing more in us, but our outward rational nature.

   [Dem-499] Thus when it is said, "No one can call Jesus the Lord, but by
   the Holy Spirit": how could this be intelligible, or have any truth in
   it, if there were not a principle in us, a spiritual man, distinct from
   our rational nature? For our rational nature can as well call Jesus
   Lord, as it can call anyone else Lord, or as Judas said, "Hail master."

   [Dem-500] Therefore since man in his natural state, and by his powers
   as a rational man, cannot truly call Jesus Lord, it follows, that he
   has a spiritual nature or principle in him, entirely distinct from his
   rational nature, and which receiving its life and power from the Spirit
   of God, has alone the power of owning, knowing, and receiving Jesus
   Christ as Lord.

   [Dem-501] St. Paul saith, "Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit,
   if so be the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. Now if any man hath not the
   Spirit of Christ, he is none of his." {Rom.viii.9.} And again; "Now we
   have received not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is of
   God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.
   But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for
   they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they
   are spiritually discerned." {1 Cor.ii.12}

   [Dem-502] Therefore there is a spiritual life, or man within us, by
   which alone we have our communication with God, and which is so
   distinct and different from our natural, rational man, that they are of
   a nature contrary to each other. The one is by nature fitted to
   receive, and know the things of the Spirit of God; the other has a
   nature that cannot know, nor receive them.

   [Dem-503] This is not to be understood, as if the natural man could not
   understand the words of scripture, as other words are to be understood,
   for he can reason and discourse as well upon scripture, and the things
   of the Spirit of God, as upon other matters.

   [Dem-504] Neither are we to take him that is able to discern things
   spiritually, to be only such a one whose faculty of reasoning is
   assisted by the Holy Spirit. For this does not make the spiritual man
   here spoken of. No, the subject of the Holy Spirit, or that which {it?}
   operates upon in us, is not our reasoning faculty, it no more assists
   our reason in this manner, than it assists our eyes to read a difficult
   print, or our ears to hear sounds more distinctly.

   [Dem-505] For as the Holy Spirit is holiness itself, or the life and
   power of holiness, so it operates only in the manner of itself, and
   only upon that part of us, which has its own nature, or a real
   agreement with it. Therefore the spiritual man that is animated,
   enlightened and guided by the Holy Spirit, is that vital instinct of
   goodness, that spark of life, of which I have spoken so much, and which
   shows itself in an inward sentiment of the weight of sin, and in an
   inward sentiment of hope and conversion to the mercy of God.

   [Dem-506] This is the beginning, or foundation, or seed of that
   spiritual man, for whom the scriptures are written, to whom they speak,
   and who alone has a capacity to be animated, moved, and governed by the
   Holy Spirit.

   [Dem-507] And therefore it is, that our savior saith so often, "He that
   hath ears to hear, let him hear." Meaning only this inward state of
   sensibility of the heart. He is so far from saying, according to modern
   learning, he that hath clear ideas, that has accustomed himself to
   reason, and distinguish about them; he that can speculate impartially,
   and search into the nature of things, actions and persons, by comparing
   the ideas of them; let such a one so prepared, draw near to the kingdom
   of heaven; he is so far from saying anything like this, that he rejects
   it all as the burden and darkness of the heart and says, "Except ye be
   converted, and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the
   kingdom of God."

   [Dem-508] But you will perhaps say, If the scriptures are not proposed
   to our reason, if reason is not the subject or faculty of religion in
   us; is not this the same as to say, that the scriptures and religion
   are proposed to the unreasonable part of us; is it not saying, that we
   must neglect or suppress that which is most excellent in us, in order
   to be religious?

   [Dem-509] You shall see reason possessed of all that belongs to it, and
   yet religion set up in a better place.

   [Dem-510] I will grant you much more than you imagine in respect of
   reason; I will grant it to have as great a share in the good things of
   religion, as it has in the good things of this life; that it can assist
   the soul, just as it can assist the body; that it has the same power
   and virtue in the spiritual world that it has in the natural world;
   that it can communicate to us as much of the one as in the other. Can
   you ask more?

   [Dem-511] Now man considered as a member of this world, that is to have
   his share in the good that is in it, is a sensible and a rational
   creature; that is, he has a certain number of senses, as seeing,
   hearing, tasting, smelling and touching, by which he is sensible of
   that which the outward world, in which he is placed, can do to him, or
   communicate to him, he is sensible of what kind and degree of happiness
   he can have from it; besides these organs of sense, he has a power or
   faculty of reasoning upon the ideas which he has received by these
   senses.

   [Dem-512] Now how is it, that this world, or the good things of this
   world are communicated to man? How is he put in possession of them? To
   what part of him are they proposed? Are his senses or his reason the
   means of his having so much as he has, or can have from this world?

   [Dem-513] Now here you must degrade reason, just as much as it is
   degraded by religion. And as we say, that the good things of scripture
   and religion are not proposed to our reason; so you must say, that the
   good things of this world are not proposed to our reason. And as St.
   Paul says, the natural man cannot receive the things of the Spirit of
   God, because they are spiritually discerned; so you must also say, the
   rational man cannot receive the things of this world, because they are
   to be sensibly received, that is, by the organs of sense.

   [Dem-514] Thus must you necessarily set reason as low, with respect to
   the things of this world, as it is set with respect to the things of
   the spiritual world. It is no more the means of communicating the good
   things of the one, than of communicating the good things of the other.

   [Dem-515] It stands in the same incapacity in one world, as in the
   other.

   [Dem-516] For everyone knows, that we know no more, can receive no
   more, can possess no more of anything that is communicable to us from
   this world, than what we know, receive and possess by our senses, or
   that sensible capacity that is in us, of having something communicated
   to us by the world. Sounds are only proposed to our ears, light our
   eyes; nothing is communicated to our reason; no part of the world hath
   any communication with it. Reason therefore has no higher office or
   power in the things of this world, than in the things of religion. The
   world is only so far known, received and possessed, as we receive and
   possess it by our senses. And reason stands by, as an impotent
   spectator, only beholding and speculating upon its own ideas and
   notions of what has passed between the world and the sensible part of
   the soul.

   [Dem-517] And as this is the state of man in this world, where he
   receives all the good he can receive from it, by a sensibility of his
   nature, entirely distinct from his faculty of reasoning; so is it his
   state with regard to the spiritual world, where he stands only capable
   of receiving the invisible good things of it, by a sensibility of his
   nature, or such a capacity as lets the spiritual world into him, in the
   manner as the natural is let into him in this life. Religion therefore
   does no more violence to your reason, or rejects it in any other way,
   than as all the good things of this life reject it. It is not seeing,
   it is not hearing, it is not tasting and feeling the things of this
   life, it can supply the place of no one of these senses. Now it is only
   thus helpless and useless in religion; it is neither seeing, nor
   hearing, tasting nor feeling of spiritual things; therefore in the
   things of religion, and in the things of this world, it has one and the
   same insignificancy. So that the things of the Spirit of God belong not
   to reason, cannot be known and received by it, for the same reason,
   that the good things of this world belong not to reason, and cannot be
   known and received by it.

   [Dem-518] It is the sensibility of the soul that must receive what this
   world can communicate to it; it is the sensibility of the soul that
   must receive what God can communicate to it. Reason may follow after in
   either case, and view through its own glass what is done, but it can do
   no more.

   [Dem-519] Now the sensibility of the soul, which is its capacity for
   divine communications, or for the operation of God's Holy Spirit upon
   it, consists in an inward sentiment of the weight and disorder of sin,
   and in an inward sentiment of hope and conversion to the mercy of God.
   This is the first seed of life, sown into the soul when Adam was
   redeemed; and it is this seed of life, or sensibility, that the Holy
   Spirit of God acts upon, moves and quickens, and enlightens; and to
   this it is, that all that is said in the scripture is addressed.
   Nothing but this sensibility, or state of heart, has eyes to see, or
   ears to hear the things of the Spirit of God.

   [Dem-520] Reason may be here of the same service to us, as it may be
   when we want any of the enjoyments of this life. It may take away a
   cover from our eyes, or open our window-shutters, when we want the
   light, but it can do no more towards seeing, than to make way for the
   light to act upon our eyes. This is all its office and ability in the
   good things of religion, it may remove that which hinders the
   sensibility of the soul, or prevents the divine light's acting upon it,
   but it can do no more.

   [Dem-521] Hence you may judge of the following passage of the Plain
   Account, "We may be sure we are pleasing God, whilst we are obeying the
   command of his Son." "But in this particular instance of our duty, we
   can with reason go no further, I say with reason; because the benefits
   received from all such performances by reasonable creatures, cannot
   possibly be received in but a reasonable way. These duties, how well
   soever performed, cannot be supposed to operate as charms; nor to
   influence us, as if we were only clock-work, or machines, to be acted
   upon by the arbitrary force of a superior being." {Page 154.}

   [Dem-522] Now all this is in direct contradiction to the nature and
   state of man in this world. For no good thing of this world, no power
   or virtue in the whole system of beings that surround us, can possibly
   be communicated to our reason, or by the way of our reason. Whatever
   the world communicates to us of its power and virtue must be
   communicated to the sensibility of our nature, to that part of us which
   is as distinct from our reasoning faculty, as seeing the light is
   distinct from a conjecture about the nature of it.

   [Dem-523] Now let us suppose a man to stand in this world, only with
   his rational nature, or faculty of reasoning, but destitute of the
   sensibility of his nature, or the organs of sense; what would all this
   world, or all the good of it signify to him? If he was to receive
   nothing but the way of reason, would it not be the same thing as to
   say, that he was to receive nothing from it?

   [Dem-524] Now this is the state that this author would have you be in,
   with relation to God, and the spiritual world. No power, or virtue, or
   influence of God, or the spiritual world, is to be communicated to you,
   but by the way of reason, and you are to stand with relation to all the
   riches and powers, and virtues of God, and the spiritual world, in the
   same state as he stands in this world, who is to know and feel, and
   possess no more of it, than he can know, and feel, and possess by way
   of reason, without any one sense. Therefore it is plain, that this
   author desires all communication from God to you, to be as much at an
   end, as all communication from this world must be at an end, if you had
   not one sense left.

   [Dem-525] I have just supposed a man to stand in this world, without
   all sensibility of nature, endued only with a faculty of reasoning; let
   it now be supposed, that you had a power to awaken a sensibility of
   nature in him, and to help him to all those senses that are common to
   man. Would you say, this must by no means be done? Would you say, that
   you must keep off this sensibility of nature, that you might preserve
   him a free agent? And that if the light and heat of the sun, the
   virtues and powers of the world, should operate upon him in any other
   manner than by the way of reason, he would be turned from a rational
   creature, into a mere machine and clock-work.

   [Dem-526] Now this is the way that this author would preserve you a
   free agent, with relation to God, and the spiritual world: he will not
   allow you to have any senses, that he may preserve your reason. For if
   God, or the spiritual world, could do that to you, which this outward
   world can do to a man that has his senses; if God should communicate
   any good to you, as the sun communicates its light and good influence
   without the assistance of your reason, and only by making you sensible
   of them, you are undone, the freedom and rationality of your nature is
   lost, and you are turned into clock-work.

   [Dem-527] Let me ask this rational man, who is so great an enemy to all
   that is not done in a rational way, whether he feels no attachment to
   the world, and his interest in it; whether he pursues it no further,
   and has no sensibility of its power over him, but just so much as pure
   reason and the light of the gospel raise in him; whether he has no
   self- love, no family-love, no party-love, no ambition, no pride, no
   sensuality, but what is weighed out to him by arguments and motives of
   pure reason, enlightened by the letter of the gospel? Now if there is
   something of those tempers in him, arising from some secret power that
   is working in him, that has not all its life and working from pure
   reason, will he therefore say, that he is a mere machine, that he has
   no liberty left, that he is no longer a rational creature; now if a
   degree of goodness should steal upon him this way, without consulting
   his reason, if he should find a heavenly love, a purity of heart, an
   attraction to God, a desire of holiness, a poverty of spirit, a
   contempt of the world, a sensibility of the greatness of eternal
   things, stirring and awakened in him in a greater degree than ever he
   intended to have them by his own reason, would he be obliged to cry
   out, that his reasonable soul was undone, that he had lost the
   rationality of his nature, was become a machine, because such a sense
   of God and goodness had got entrance into him without consulting his
   reason?

   [Dem-528] And if God is as ready to operate upon our souls, and to
   manifest his power and presence in them, when we give way to it, as the
   world and the devil are when we leave an entrance for them, has a
   preacher of the gospel any authority from thence, to reproach this
   divine assistance, as "communications and impressions from above, which
   leave the mind in a state satisfied with what carries no rational
   satisfaction in it"? {Page 156}

   [Dem-529] For however this author may please himself with thinking that
   his mind is free from communications and impressions from above, and
   satisfied only with such things as carry a rational satisfaction in
   them; yet it is an eternal immutable truth, founded in the nature of
   things, that no soul can enjoy any degree of good whatsoever, but by a
   communication or impression of something upon it.

   [Dem-530] Every creature, as such, is by the necessity of nature, in a
   state of poverty and want, and may be defined to be only a capacity to
   receive so much good as shall be communicated to it, or impressed upon
   it. Were not this the state of our souls, it would not be the state of
   our bodies; and as the body stands in this world in poverty and want,
   only capable of being fed, nourished, comforted and blessed by
   communications and impressions from the things that surround it, so the
   soul stands in the same poverty and want in the spiritual world, and
   only capable of being nourished, comforted, and blessed by
   communications and impressions from God.

   [Dem-531] So that this author's satisfaction which he has chosen for
   himself, a satisfaction purely rational, or by way of his reason,
   instead of divine impressions, is the choice of a man in a dream, that
   knows nothing of the nature of God, or of his soul, or of the state and
   nature of things. For the satisfaction of every being, from the highest
   angel to the lowest of human creatures, is all sensible, and wholly
   seated in the sensibility of their nature.

   [Dem-532] This is as certain, as that a child has no rational
   satisfaction; for no man ever was satisfied or dissatisfied for any
   other reason, or upon any other account, than as a child is satisfied
   or dissatisfied, namely, according as its senses, or the sensibility of
   its nature, has or has not that which is agreeable to it. For nature
   shows what it is in a child, and does not become another thing in a
   grown man. The child has no cunning or fraud, and therefore he plainly
   owns what he wants and cries for it.

   [Dem-533] Grown men are under the same sensibility of nature, want only
   what the child wanted, viz., to have their senses gratified, but they
   have the cunning not to own it, and the fraud to pretend something
   else.

   [Dem-534] And thus it must be with every human creature. He must be
   governed by this sensibility of his nature, must be happy or unhappy,
   according as his senses are gratified, till such time as he is born
   again from above, till the new birth has awakened another sensibility
   in him, and opened a way for divine communications and impressions to
   have more effect upon him, than the things of this world have upon his
   natural senses. For no created being whatever, can any moment of time
   be free from communications and impressions of some kind or other; if
   it is not governed by communications and impressions from above, it is
   certainly governed by communications and impressions from below.

   [Dem-535] The needle that is touched with the loadstone, does not then
   begin to be under the power of attraction, for it was under the power
   of attraction from the earth before. And if it loses the attraction of
   the loadstone, it does not cease to be attracted by something else.

   [Dem-536] The soul that is touched with an impression from God, does
   not then begin to be under the power of something that acts upon it,
   for the world and the devil, or the nature of those things that
   surround it, attract it, and act upon it. For as it has something of
   the nature of everything in it, so the whole nature of things as
   continually act upon it by impressions, as the sun acts upon everything
   that has anything of the nature of the sun in it.

   [Dem-537] Now the freedom of the will, is not a freedom from
   communications and impressions, but is only a liberty of choosing to be
   made happy, either by yielding ourselves up to the attraction or
   operation of God upon us, or to be miserable, by yielding ourselves up
   to the impressions of the world, and sensible things.

   [Dem-538] There is no middle way; if we reject or make ourselves
   incapable of impressions from God, we are the machines and clockwork of
   this sensible world.

   [Dem-539] Two men born blind may talk and dispute about receiving light
   in a rational way, and think it ought only to be received by their
   reason, or in conformity to its power of speculating; as soon as their
   eyes are opened, they both see that reason was a fool, and that light
   can only act upon them by way of impression upon the sensibility of
   their nature.

   [Dem-540] It is so far therefore from being a dangerous delusion to
   expect, desire, believe, and pray for communications and impressions
   from above, by means of the holy sacrament, that it is as right and
   sound a faith, and as beneficial to the soul, as to believe that the
   goodness of God's providence is in everything, and that everything is
   blessed by his power and presence in it to the faithful receiver.

   [Dem-541] All the perfections of God have some kind of similitude or
   resemblance of their power in the perfections of the sun, which refresh
   our animal and rational nature by continual communications and
   impressions upon it, as the perfections of God communicate and impress
   themselves upon the inmost spirit of our souls.

   [Dem-542] And he that would have his animal rational nature comforted
   and refreshed only in a rational way, without communications and
   impressions from the sun, would be just such a pleader for reason, as
   he that would have religious satisfaction only in a rational way,
   without communications and impressions from above.

   [Dem-543] For the impressions from God are more necessary and essential
   to the pious life of the soul, than the impressions of the sun are to
   the comfortable life of our outward rational man.

   [Dem-544] And he that prays for nothing else but these divine
   communications and impressions, who thinks of nothing else, desires
   nothing else, trusts in nothing else, as able to comfort, strengthen,
   and enrich his soul: he that is thus, all prayer, all love, all desire,
   and all faith, in these communications and impressions from above, is
   just in the same state of sobriety, as he that only prays that God
   would not leave him to himself.

   [Dem-545] For he that is without anything of these communications and
   impressions of God upon him, is in the same state of death and
   separation from God as the devils are. And to turn men from the faith
   and love, and desire of these divine impressions, is to lay the ax to
   the root of religion, and is as direct a way to atheism, as to teach
   them, as Epicurus did, that God is afar off. For a God without any
   communications and impressions upon us, a God afar off, are equally
   atheistical tenets, equally destructive of all piety.

   [Dem-546] The one opinion is the same denial of God as the other.

   [Dem-547] And when men have once lost all sense of the necessity of
   being inwardly, invisibly, and secretly supported, assisted, guided,
   and blessed by communications and impressions of God upon their souls,
   it signifies not much what religion they profess, or for what reason
   they profess it, whether they have the reason of Epicurus, or Hobbs, or
   this author. For a religion has no good of religion in it, but so far
   as it introduces the life, power, and presence of God into the soul.

   [Dem-548] For there is nothing good even in heaven itself, but the
   fullness of divine communications and impressions; no wretchedness in
   hell, but what arises from an entire cessation of them; and this life
   has no possibility of being changed into a heavenly life, but so far as
   it is capable of divine communications and impressions.

   [Dem-549] For as the sun is the light of this world, only by
   communications and impressions of his light upon all objects, according
   to their capacity to receive it; so God is the God of all his
   creatures, only by communications and impressions of his life, and
   power, and presence upon all his creatures, according to their capacity
   to receive them. And therefore to discredit and ridicule the desire,
   hunger, faith, and expectation of divine communications and impressions
   in all acts and parts of religion, is to teach men to unite religion
   with atheism, and to make their very acts of religion, a renunciation
   of, and departure from God.

   [Dem-550] Had this author openly and plainly said with Epicurus, God is
   afar off, the atheism had been plain and apparent, and confessed by
   all; and yet he has said more than this; for to say that we are without
   all communications and impressions of God upon us, for this reason,
   because they would make us machines and clock-work, and could give us
   no rational satisfaction, is not only saying that God is afar off, but
   that he ought and must continue to be so, if we are not to be machines,
   and lose the rationality of our nature. So that according to this
   author's doctrine, rational and free agents are not only to believe
   with Epicurus, but also ought to rejoice that God is afar off, and to
   desire, for the sake of the rationality of their nature, that he may
   always be at the same distance from them.

   [Dem-551] Hence it is, that this author is, as Epicurus was, forced to
   invent a summum bonum, or chief good for man, exclusive of the
   enjoyment of God. Thus says he, "The highest good of mortal man, is the
   uniform practice of morality, chosen by ourselves, as our happiness
   here, and our unspeakable reward hereafter." {Page 157.}

   [Dem-552] For as Epicurus was forced to place the highest good of man
   in his philosophical garden, because he had separated the gods from
   men, and placed them apart by themselves; so this author having
   rejected all divine communications and impressions upon us, as having
   no rational satisfaction in them, as making us machines and clock-work,
   was forced to invent a highest good for mortal man, both here and
   hereafter, that has nothing of good in it.

   [Dem-553] Epicurus therefore and this parochial minister of the gospel
   agree in this: first, that they place the highest good, or happiness of
   man, in something that is exclusive of God. Secondly, that they place
   it in something that they can do for themselves.

   [Dem-554] The church, of which this author says he is a minister, sings
   every day, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God, heaven and earth are full of
   thy majesty and glory"; but according to him, it sings of something
   that is no part of its happiness, either here or hereafter.

   [Dem-555] The gospel, of which he pretends to be a preacher, brings the
   glad tidings of a savior, and salvation to all mankind; but he preaches
   a highest good of mortal man, that has nothing of this savior or
   salvation in it.

   [Dem-556] Jesus Christ says, "Except a man be born again of the water
   and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." That, "as the
   Father raises up the dead, and quickeneth them, even so the Son
   quickeneth whom he will." {John 5:21.} And "that to as many as received
   him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God." Who "were born,
   not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
   of God." {John 1:12.} Again, "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in
   you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Ask and
   ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. If any man love me, my
   Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode
   with him." The apostle saith, "Giving thanks unto the Father, who hath
   delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into
   the kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we have redemption through his
   blood."

   [Dem-557] Now had a Celsus, or a Porphyry, or any modern adversary of
   the gospel, a mind to show their utmost detestation and abhorrence of
   these doctrines, of a birth of the Spirit, a birth of God, a quickening
   savior, a life in him and through him, a redemption through his blood,
   a translation into his kingdom, of our asking and receiving all through
   him, of his Father's and his abode in us, had they the greatest desire
   to persuade all people that all this was a groundless fiction, without
   the least truth, or reasonableness in it, need they declare any more,
   or desire any more to be believed than this, "That the highest good of
   man, is the uniform practice of morality, chosen by ourselves, as our
   happiness here, and our unspeakable reward hereafter"? For is not this
   the same thing as to say, all the doctrines of the gospel savior and
   salvation, of a new birth, of the Spirit of God, of redemption through
   Christ, of righteousness in him, of entering into his kingdom, are
   absolutely false? For it is the same total denial of all the Christian
   method of salvation, as to say, that we have our happiness or highest
   good both here and hereafter from Epicurus. For the salvation, and
   happiness, and eternal life which we receive through Jesus Christ, is
   equally denied and rejected as false, whether you place our highest
   good in what we can do for ourselves, or in what Epicurus can do for
   us.

   [Dem-558] The scripture saith, "The gift of God is eternal life,
   through Jesus Christ our Lord." {Rom.vi.23} And again, "He that hath
   the Son, hath life; and he who hath not the Son, hath not life." {1
   John 5:12.} Again, "By grace ye are saved through faith; and that not
   of yourselves, it is the gift of God." {Eph.ii.8.} And again, "If
   Christ be not raised, ye are yet in your sins": And, "as in Adam all
   died, so in Christ shall all be made alive." And again, "Your life is
   hid with Christ in God. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then
   shall ye also appear with him in glory." {Col.iii.3.}

   [Dem-559] Now this author does not expressly say all this is absolutely
   false, and not fit to be believed, but he only desires you to believe
   something, that will show it to be impossible to be true.

   [Dem-560] For if our own morality, chosen by ourselves, is our highest
   good and reward both here and hereafter, it is impossible to be true,
   that we have no life but in the Son of God, or that eternal life is the
   gift of God to us through Jesus Christ, or that we are saved by grace,
   through faith, and not of ourselves.

   [Dem-561] So that this author is not to be considered as one that has
   barely mistaken something in the nature of the sacrament, but as one
   that rejects the whole method of salvation through Jesus Christ, and
   will have no happiness or redemption from him here, or eternal life
   hereafter.

   [Dem-562] When therefore he saith, "Do we not partake of the benefit of
   remission of our sins, by partaking of the Lord's Supper worthily?" I
   must answer, No; if the gospel be true. {Page 144.}

   [Dem-563] This ought to have no more weight with you, than if Celsus or
   Porphyry, or Hobbs, had said the same thing. For since he makes our own
   morality, chosen by ourselves, to be our highest good, both here and
   hereafter, he as absolutely rejects our salvation through Jesus Christ,
   and denies the love and goodness of God towards us in Christ Jesus, to
   be our highest good, both here and hereafter, as ever Celsus or
   Porphyry did: and therefore can have no more right or pretense to
   explain any part of that salvation, which he has so totally denied,
   than they had. In the gospel, says he, no pardon of past sins is
   promised or given, unless to those just converted, renouncing their
   sins, and baptized into the Christian faith; or to those, who having
   sinned after baptism, actually amend their lives. This is to show you,
   that there is no remission of sins obtained by worthy partaking of the
   sacrament, if the gospel be true.

   [Dem-564] Now in the gospel, our blessed Lord seeing their faith,
   "saith to the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are
   forgiven thee."

   [Dem-565] Now here pardon of sins is given, directly contrary to this
   author's assertion, to one not converted and baptized into the
   Christian faith, but because of his and their faith that brought him on
   a bed.

   [Dem-566] Again, of Magdalen, our Lord saith, "Her sins, which are
   many, are forgiven; for she loved much. But to whom little is forgiven,
   the same loveth little."

   [Dem-567] Here you see again a plain confutation of this author's
   doctrine; for here remission of sins is actually given and declared to
   be due to love, and love is affirmed to be the measure of it.

   [Dem-568] Therefore it is an undeniable doctrine of the gospel, that
   faith and love are certain means of obtaining remission of our sins; if
   therefore the sacrament is an exercise of our faith and love, then we
   have the utmost assurance from our savior's own words, that we thereby
   obtain remission of our sins.

   [Dem-569] But this author has another argument against it, taken from
   our liturgy. In our public office, says he, "it is not supposed that
   the worthy partaking of the Lord's Supper does itself operate this
   forgiveness; but it is made part of a prayer to God, that they who have
   partaken of it, may obtain remission of their sins, &c. They are taught
   to pray thus, after the act of communion is over, which supposes that
   it is not already obtained." {Page 145.}

   [Dem-570] Now if there was any truth or reason in this argument, it
   would follow, that our savior's apostles had obtained no remission of
   sins from him; and though he had chosen them out of the world, called
   them his friends, and declared his extraordinary love for them, and
   though they left all and followed him, yet he had not done that for
   them, which he had done for the sick of the palsy, and many others; for
   this reason, because he had taught and enjoined them a form of prayer,
   in which they were to pray for the forgiveness of their sins.

   [Dem-571] For if it is rightly argued, that there is no remission of
   sins obtained by the use of the sacrament, because afterwards there is
   prayer made for the forgiveness of sins; then it must follow, that our
   savior's apostles could not have received any remission of sins, when
   he taught them to pray for it. It must follow also, that he never
   intended that they should be in the state of new converts, baptized for
   the remission of their sins, because then they could not without great
   absurdity have used that form of prayer which he gave them.

   [Dem-572] It follows also, that the apostles could not have taught this
   form of prayer, or enjoined the use of it to their new baptized
   converts, because it would have been, according to this author, a
   proving to them, that they had not received the pardon of their sins by
   baptism.

   [Dem-573] Now the inconsistency which this author finds in praying for
   the forgiveness of sins, and all other benefits of Christ's passion,
   after the reception of the sacrament, if the sacrament itself was a
   means of obtaining them, all this inconsistency and difficulty had been
   removed, if he had only known or acknowledged, that the Christian life
   is a progressive state, and that forgiveness of sins is a grace and
   benefit of Jesus Christ, bestowed upon us in the same manner as every
   other grace or degree of holiness, as a talent to be improved, as a
   seed to be nourished up by us to its full growth. And for this reason
   it is, that we are obliged to pray for every grace, and every virtue,
   that we have already received, because we had received it to grow up in
   us, and prayer or desire of it is the only soil in which it can grow.

   [Dem-574] Thus he to whom God has already given the grace of penitence,
   for that reason prays for penitence; he that has already received of
   God the gift of faith, for that reason prays, Lord, help thou my
   unbelief; and he that is the fullest of righteousness, feels the
   greatest hunger and thirst after it.

   [Dem-575] But according to this author's religion, he that has received
   the Spirit of God, cannot be supposed to pray for it; and yet according
   to the religion of the gospel, no one can pray for it, but because he
   has received it.

   [Dem-576] I shall now add a word or two on what this author says in
   defense of the safety of his doctrine of the sacrament; though it
   should be erroneous.

   [Dem-577] "It ought certainly," says he, "to be far from the thoughts
   of every Christian to lessen any privileges, or undervalue any
   promises, annexed by Christ to any duty or institution of his religion.
   It is an inexcusable carelessness to do it for want of due
   consideration. But this, I think, may with truth be said, that an error
   of this sort (should it be supposed) does not really hurt any
   Christian, nor alter the effect of the duty at all." {Pref., p. 5.}

   [Dem-578] The safety therefore of his doctrine of the sacrament,
   supposing it to lessen and undervalue the benefits of it, is grounded
   upon this general proposition, which he takes to be a great truth,
   viz., "That to lessen or undervalue the privileges and promises annexed
   to any duty or institution by Jesus Christ, does not really hurt any
   Christian, or alter the effect of the duty at all."

   [Dem-579] Now this doctrine directly leads to infidelity, for
   infidelity is nothing else but a lessening and undervaluing the
   privileges and promises annexed to faith in Christ.

   [Dem-580] The scripture saith, "In this was manifested the love of God
   toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
   that we might live through him"; and again, He sent his Son to be the
   propitiation for our sins. {1 John 4:10.} "God so loved the world, that
   he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should
   not perish, but have eternal life." Here the privilege and promise of
   life, and atonement for our sins, is annexed to faith in Christ; but
   according to this author, it does you no real hurt, nor alters the
   effect of your faith at all, though you lessen and undervalue this
   privilege and promise of life, and atonement for your sins, offered to
   your faith in Christ Jesus.

   [Dem-581] Is not this directly saying, that infidelity is as safe and
   beneficial to you, as a belief in the privileges and promises of the
   gospel? Is it not saying, that it is as beneficial to you to esteem
   Christ only as a carpenter's son, as to expect atonement and life from
   him, as the only begotten Son of God?

   [Dem-582] It is said of our blessed Lord, that among those of his own
   country he did no mighty works, because of their unbelief. Now what was
   their unbelief? It was nothing but the infidelity which this author
   would prove to be harmless; it was only a lessening and undervaluing
   all those privileges and promises which our savior offered to those
   that would have a just sense of the value of them. Now if we lessen or
   undervalue any privileges and promises annexed to faith in Christ, or
   any other duty, such unbelief will certainly have the same effect upon
   us that it had upon those amongst whom Christ lived, it will hinder him
   from doing any mighty works among us, or in other words, render our
   knowledge and profession of him ineffectual to our salvation.

   [Dem-583] Prayer and faith are amongst the greatest duties of the
   Christian life, and are the most powerful means of obtaining all the
   blessings of our salvation. Now to these two duties the greatest
   privileges and promises are annexed by Christ. The promise of the Holy
   Spirit is made to prayer. Now, according to this author, if you lessen
   and undervalue this privilege and promise annexed to prayer, if you
   grow indifferent about the necessity or benefit of the Holy Spirit, and
   fancy that you are sufficient of yourself for all the virtue that you
   want, all this does you no real hurt, nor alters at all the effect of
   your prayer.

   [Dem-584] Again, another privilege annexed to prayer, is that of being
   heard in and through the name of Christ.

   [Dem-585] "Hitherto," says our blessed Lord, "ye have asked nothing in
   my name; ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full."
   "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you."
   {John 16:24.}

   [Dem-586] Now if any infidel, to abate your zeal for, and confidence in
   this kind of prayer, should teach you, that no one can suffer any real
   hurt by lessening and undervaluing prayer in the name of Christ, and
   that it would have the same effect upon you, though you expected little
   or no good from it, the gospel would be preached to you, just as it is
   by this author.

   [Dem-587] Again, "All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer,
   believing, ye shall receive." Now what is this believing, but an entire
   faith in the privileges and promises annexed to prayer?

   [Dem-588] But if prayer is effectual because of this faith in the
   promises made to prayer, then everyone suffers a real hurt, and the
   effect of his prayer is altogether hindered by this want of faith, or
   by a lessening and undervaluing the privileges and promises annexed to
   it.

   [Dem-589] But if this author's doctrine was true, it might then be
   said, in contradiction to the gospel, prayer does you as much real good
   when you have little or no faith in it, as when you have ever so much,
   and your believing is no help to your receiving.

   [Dem-590] The scriptures attribute a kind of omnipotence to faith;
   thus, "All things are possible to him that believeth." Again,
   "According to thy faith, so be it done unto thee. Thy faith hath saved
   thee. Thy faith hath made thee whole." But according to this author, it
   must be said, that the want of faith does you no real hurt, that you
   will be healed and saved, and have all things done to you, in the same
   manner, whether you be faithless or believing.

   [Dem-591] And on this foundation it is that he grounds your safety in
   receiving his doctrine of the sacrament, though he should have lessened
   and undervalued the benefits annexed to it. But you ought to observe,
   that you can have no safety in receiving his doctrine of the sacrament,
   unless it be safe for you to receive another gospel.

   [Dem-592] Had the sick, the lame, the blind, and the deaf believed that
   which this author would have you believe, as safe doctrine, viz., that
   to lessen and undervalue the promises and privileges made to faith,
   could do them no real hurt, they had continued in their infirmities,
   merely for knowing Jesus Christ and the gospel as this author would
   have you know them.

   [Dem-593] When two blind men ran crying after our savior to have mercy
   on them, "He saith unto them, believe ye that I am able to do this?
   They said unto him, yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying,
   according to your faith be it unto you. And their eyes were opened."
   {Matt.ix.30.} The poor woman that wanted to be healed of her infirmity,
   said, "If I may but touch his clothes I shall be whole.": upon this
   faith of the woman, our savior said, "I perceive that virtue is gone
   out of me; and turning him about, and seeing the woman, he said unto
   her, daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith hath made thee whole."
   {Matt.ix.22}

   [Dem-594] Now, had the blind men answered to our savior's question, No,
   Lord, we do not believe that thou canst give us sight; had the diseased
   woman said, I am so far from expecting to be healed by touching his
   clothes, that I don't believe he has the power of healing in himself;
   according to this author, their infidelity must have helped them to
   just the same benefit from Christ, as their faith did, notwithstanding
   that Christ himself ascribes it to their faith. For unless it be true,
   that their want of faith had helped them to the same benefit from
   Christ that their faith did, it cannot be true, that to lessen and
   undervalue the privileges and promises annexed to any duty, does you no
   real hurt, nor alters the effect of it at all.

   [Dem-595] And therefore the safety which this author proposes to you,
   in lessening and undervaluing the privileges and promises annexed to
   the sacrament, is only the safety of infidelity, and such a safety as
   they are in, who lessen and undervalue the privileges and promises
   annexed to faith in Jesus Christ.

   [Dem-596] And indeed herein he is, though inconsistent with the gospel,
   very consistent with himself. For if, as he has said, an uniform
   morality chosen by ourselves, is our highest good both here and
   hereafter; our highest good makes Christ as needless to us as the
   sacrament; for if this is true, you can no more need the benefits of a
   savior, than the benefits of a sacrament, and it can signify nothing to
   your happiness, whatever privileges and promises are offered to you in
   the gospel, because you want none, can receive none as a part of your
   happiness, because you have it all from yourself, both here and
   hereafter.

   [Dem-597] So that if this minister of the gospel carries his point with
   you, if you believe his doctrines of the sacrament, upon the principles
   on which he teaches it, you may indeed retain something of the outward
   form of the sacrament, but must reject the whole salvation of the
   gospel

   FINIS.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Psalms

   [1]148:5

   Matthew

   [2]21:22   [3]26:28

   Luke

   [4]22:19

   John

   [5]1:3   [6]1:12   [7]3:5   [8]4:10   [9]4:14   [10]5:21   [11]6:35
   [12]11:25   [13]15:5   [14]16:24

   2 Corinthians

   [15]3:6

   1 John

   [16]2:22   [17]4:10   [18]5:12
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=5#i.ii-p21.1
   2. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=22#i.ii-p274.1
   3. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=28#i.ii-p19.1
   4. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=19#i.ii-p19.2
   5. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.ii-p496.1
   6. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#i.ii-p559.2
   7. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#i.ii-p483.1
   8. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#i.ii-p270.1
   9. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#i.ii-p488.2
  10. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#i.ii-p559.1
  11. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=35#i.ii-p488.1
  12. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=25#i.ii-p488.3
  13. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#i.ii-p225.1
  14. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#i.ii-p588.1
  15. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#i.ii-p68.1
  16. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=22#i.ii-p494.1
  17. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=10#i.ii-p583.1
  18. file:///ccel/l/law/errors/cache/errors.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=12#i.ii-p561.1
