     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Golden Legend, vol. 7
      Creator(s): Voragine, Jacobus de (1230-1298)
     Print Basis: T. & A. Constable, Ltd. 1900
          Rights: Copyright claimed by Paul Halsell, Sept. 2000, prohibiting
                  commercial use
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BX4654.J334 V.7
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Roman Catholic Church

                  Biography and portraits

                  Collective

                  Saints and martyrs
     __________________________________________________________________

  The GOLDEN LEGEND or LIVES of the SAINTS

  Compiled by Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, 1275

  First Edition Published 1470

  ENGLISHED by WILLIAM CAXTON, First Edition 1483

  VOLUME SEVEN

  From the Temple Classics

  Edited by F.S. ELLIS

  First issue of this Edition, 1900

  Reprinted 1922, 1931
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Life of Katherine, virgin and martyr, and first of her name.

   Katherine is said of catha, that is all, and ruina that is falling, for
   all the edifice of the devil fell all from her. For the edifice of
   pride fell from her by humility that she had, and the edifice of
   fleshly desire fell from her by her virginity, and worldly covetise,
   for that she despised all worldly things. Or Katherine may be said as,
   a little chain, for she made a chain of good works by which she mounted
   into heaven, and this chain or ladder had four grees or steps which be:
   innocence of work, cleanness of body, despising of vanity and saying of
   truth, which the prophet putteth by order where he saith: Quis ascendet
   in montem domini? Innocens manibus. Who shall ascend into the mountain
   of our Lord? that is heaven, and he answereth: The innocent of his
   hands, he that is clean in his heart, he that hath not taken in vain
   his soul, and he that hath not sworn in fraud and deceit to his
   neighbour. And it appeareth in her legend how these four degrees were
   in her.

   Katherine, by descent of line, was of the noble lineage of the emperors
   of Rome as it shall be declared more plainly hereafter by a notable
   chronicle, whose most blessed life and conversation wrote the solemn
   doctor Athanasius, which knew her lineage and her life, for he was one
   of her masters in her tender age ere she was converted to the christian
   faith. And after, the said Athanasius, by her preaching and marvellous
   work of our Lord, was converted also, which, after her martyrdom, was
   made bishop of Alexandria, and a glorious pillar of the church by the
   grace of God and merits of S. Katherine.

   And as we find by credible chronicles, in the time of Diocletian and
   Maximian was great and cruel tyranny showed in all the world, as well
   to christian men as to paynims, so that many that were subject to Rome
   put away the yoke of servage and rebelled openly against the empire.
   Among whom the realm of Armenia was one that withstood most the tribute
   of the Romans, wherefore they of Rome deputed a noble man of dignity
   named Constantius, which was tofore others a valiant man in arms,
   discreet and virtuous. The which lord, after he came in to Armenia,
   anon subdued them by his discreet prudence, and deserved to have the
   love and favour of his enemies, in so much that he was desired to marry
   the daughter of the king which was sole heir of the realm, and he
   consented and married her. And soon after the king her father died, and
   then Constantius was enhanced and crowned king, which soon after had a
   son by his wife named Costus, at the birth of whom his mother died.
   After the death of whom Constantius returned to Rome to see the
   emperor, and to know how his lordships were governed in those parts,
   and in the meantime tidings came to Rome how that Great Britain, which
   now is called England, rebelled against the empire. Wherefore, by the
   advice of the consulate, it was concluded that Constantius, king of
   Armenia, should go into Britain to subdue them; which addressed him
   thither, and in short time after he entered into the land, by his
   prowess and wisdom he appeased the realm and subdued it again to the
   empire of Rome. And also he was so acceptable to the king of Britain,
   named Coel, that he married his daughter Helen, which afterward found
   the holy cross, and in short time he gat on her Constantine, which
   after was emperor. And then soon after died Constantius. And
   Constantine, after the death of King Coel, by his mother was crowned
   king of Britain. And Costus, the first son of Constantius, wedded the
   king's daughter of Cyprus, which was heir, of whom, as shall be
   hereafter said, was engendered S. Katherine, which came of the lineage
   of Constantius.

Now followeth the Life of S. Katherine.

   In the year of our Lord two hundred, reigned in Cyprus a noble and
   prudent king named Costus, which was a noble and seemly man, rich and
   of good conditions, and had to his wife a queen like to himself in
   virtuous governance, which lived together prosperously, but after the
   law of paynims, and worshipped idols. This king, because he loved
   renomee and would have his name spread through the world, he founded a
   city in which he edified a temple of his false gods, and named that
   city after his name Costi, which after, to increase his fame, the
   people named it Fama Costi, and yet unto this day is called Famagosta;
   in which city he and the queen lived in great wealth and prosperity.
   And like as the fair rose springeth among the briars and thorns, right
   so between these two paynims was brought forth this blessed S.
   Katherine. And when this holy virgin was born she was so fair of visage
   and so well formed Katherine in her members that all the people enjoyed
   in her beauty, and when she came to seven years of age, anon after she
   was set to school, where she profited much more than any other of her
   age, and was informed in the arts liberal, wherein she drank
   plenteously of the well of wisdom, for she was chosen to be a teacher
   and informer of everlasting wisdom. The king Costus her father had so
   great joy of the great towardness and wisdom of his daughter, that he
   let ordain a tower in his palace, with divers studies and chambers, in
   which she might be at her pleasure and also at her will, and also he
   ordained for to wait on her seven the best masters and wisest in
   conning that might be gotten in those parts. And within a while they
   that came to teach her, they after that, learned of her and became her
   disciples.

   And when this virgin came to the age of fourteen years, her father king
   Costus died, and then she was left as queen and heir after him, and
   then the estates of the land came to this young lady, Katherine, and
   desired her to make a parliament in which she might be crowned and
   receive the homage of her subjects, and that such rule might be set in
   her beginning, that peace and prospenty might ensue in her realm. And
   this young maid granted to them their asking. And when the parliament
   was assembled and the young queen crowned with great solemnity, and she
   sitting on a day in her parliament, and her mother by her, with all the
   lords each in his place, a lord arose by the assent of her mother, the
   other lords, and the commons, and kneeled down tofore her, saying these
   words: Right high and mighty princess, and our most sovereign lady,
   please if you to wit that I am commanded by the queen your mother, by
   all the lords and commons of this your realm, to require your highness
   that it may please you to grant to them that they might provide some
   noble knight or prince to marry you, to the end that he might rule and
   defend your realm and subjects, like as your father did before you, and
   also that of you might proceed noble lineage which after you may reign
   upon us, which thing we most desire, and hereof we desire your good
   answer. This young queen Katherine, hearing this request, was abashed
   and troubled in her courage how she might answer to content her mother,
   the lords, and her subjects, and to keep herself chaste, for she had
   concluded to keep her virginity, and rather to suffer death than to
   defile it. And then with a sad cheer and meek look she answered in this
   wise: Cousin, I have well understood your request, and thank my mother,
   the lords, and my subjects of the great love that they all have to me
   and to my realm, and as touching my marriage, I trust verily there may
   be no peril, considering the great wisdom of my lady my mother, and of
   the lords, with the good obeisance of the commons, trusting in their
   good continuance. Wherefore we need not to seek a stranger for to rule
   us and our realm, for with your good assistance and aid we hope to
   rule, govern, and keep this our realm in good justice, peace, and rest,
   in like wise as the king my father held you in. Wherefore at this time
   I pray you to be content and to cease of this matter, and let us
   proceed to such matters as be requisite for the rule, governance and
   universal weal of this realm. And when this young queen Katherine had
   achieved her answer, the queen her mother, and all the lords, were
   abashed of her of words and wist not what to say, for they considered
   well by her words that she had no will to be married. And then there
   arose and stood up a duke, which was her uncle, and with due reverence
   said to her in this wise: My sovereign lady, saving your high and noble
   discretion, this answer is full heavy to my lady your mother, and to us
   all your humble liegemen, without ye take better advice to your noble
   courage. Wherefore I shall move to you of four notable things that the
   great God hath endowed you with before all other creatures that we
   know, which things ought to cause you to take a lord to your husband,
   to the end that the plenteous gifts of nature and grace may spring of
   you by generation, which may succeed by right line to reign upon us, to
   the great comfort and joy of all your people and subjects, and the
   contrary should turn to great sorrow and heaviness. Now, good uncle,
   said she, what be these four notable things that so ye repute in us?
   Madame, said he, the first is this, that we be ascertained that ye be
   come of the most noble blood in the world. The second, that ye be a
   great inheritor, and the greatest that liveth of woman to our
   knowledge. The third is, that ye in science, conning, and wisdom pass
   all other, and the fourth is, in bodily shape and beauty there is none
   like to you. Wherefore, madame, us think that these four notable things
   must needs constrain you to incline to our request. Then said this
   young Queen Katherine with a sad countenance: Now, uncle, sith God and
   nature have wrought so great virtues in us, we be so much more bound to
   love and to please him, and we thank him humbly of his great and large
   gifts. But sith ye desire so much that we should consent to be married,
   we let you plainly wit that like as ye have described us, so will we
   describe him that we will have to Katherine our lord and husband, and
   if ye can get such an one we will agree to take him with all our heart.
   For he that shall be lord of mine heart and mine husband shall have the
   four notable things in him over all measure; so farforthly that all
   creatures shall have need of him, and he needeth of none. And he that
   shall be my lord must be of so noble blood that all men shall do to him
   worship, and therewith so great a lord that I shall never think that I
   made him a king, and so rich that he pass all others in riches. And so
   full of beauty that angels have joy to behold him, and so pure that his
   mother be a virgin. And so meek and benign that he can gladly forgive
   all offences done unto him. Now I have described to you him that I will
   have and desire to my lord and to my husband, go ye and seek him, and
   if ye can find such an one, I will be his wife with all mine heart, if
   he vouchsafe to have me. And finally, but if ye find such an one I
   shall never take none, and take this for a final answer. And with this
   she cast down her eyes meekly and held her still. And when the queen
   her mother and the lords heard this, they made great sorrow and
   heaviness, for they saw well that there was no remedy in that matter.
   Then said her mother to her with an angry voice: Alas, daughter, is
   this your great wisdom that is talked so far? Much sorrow be ye like to
   do me and all yours. Alas! who saw ever woman forge to her such a
   husband with such virtues as ye do? For such one as ye have devised,
   there was never none, ne never shall be, and therefore, daughter, leave
   this folly, and do as your noble elders have done tofore you. And then
   said this young Queen Katherine unto her mother, with a piteous
   sighing: Madam, I wot well by very reason that there is one much better
   than I can devise him, and but be by his grace find me, I shall never
   have joy. For I feel by great reason that there is a way that we be
   clean out of, and we be in darkness, and till the light of grace come
   we may not see the clear way, and when it pleaseth him to come he shall
   avoid all darkness of the clouds of ignorance, and show him clearly to
   me whom my heart so fervently desireth and loveth. And if it so be that
   he list not that I find him, yet reason commandeth me to keep whole
   that is unhurt, wherefore I beseech you meekly, my lady mother, that ye
   ne none other move me more of this matter, for I promise you plainly
   that for to die therefore I shall never have other husband but only him
   that I have described, to whom I shall truly keep me with all the pure
   love of mine heart. And with this she arose, and her mother and all the
   lords of the parliament, with great sorrow and lamentation, and taking
   their leave, departed. And this noble young Katherine went to her
   palace, whose heart was set afire upon this husband that she had
   devised, that she could do nothing, but all her mind and intent was set
   on him, and continually mused how she might find him, but she could not
   find the means, how well he was nigh to her heart that she sought. For
   he had kindled a burning love which could never after be quenched for
   no pain ne tribulation, as it appeared in her passion.

   But now I leave this young queen in her contemplation, and shall say
   you as far as God will give me grace, how that our Lord by his special
   miracle, called her unto baptism in a special manner, such as hath not
   been heard of before ne sith, and also how she was visibly married to
   our Lord, in showing to her sovereign tokens of singular love. Then,
   beside Alexandria, a certain space of miles, dwelled a holy father, a
   hermit in desert named Adrian, which had served our Lord continually by
   the space of thirty years in great penance. And on a day as he walked
   before his cell being in his holy meditations, there came against him
   the most reverent lady that ever any earthly creature might behold, and
   when this holy man beheld her high estate and excellent beauty, which
   was above nature, he was sore abashed and so much astonished, that he
   fell down as he had been dead. Then this blessed lady, seeing this,
   called him by his name goodly and said: Brother Adrian, dread ye
   nothing, for I am come to you for your good honour and profit. And with
   that she took him up meekly, comforting him, and said in this wise:
   Adrian, ye must go in a message for me into the city of Alexandria, and
   to the palace of the queen Katherine, and say to her that the lady
   saluteth her whose son she hath chosen to her lord and husband, sitting
   in her parliament with her mother and lords about her, where she had a
   great confiict and battle to keep her virginity, and say to her that
   this same lord whom she chose is my son, that am a pure virgin, and he
   desireth her beauty and loveth her chastity among all the virgins on
   the earth. I command her, without tarrying, that she come with thee
   alone unto this palace, whereas she shall be new clothed, and then
   shall she see him, and have him to her everlasting spouse. Then Adrian
   hearing this said dreadfully in this wise: Ah! blessed lady, how shall
   I do this message? for I know not the city ne the way thither, and who
   am I, though I knew it, to do such a message to the queen? For her
   meiny will not suffer me to come to her presence, and though I come to
   her she will not believe me, but put me in duresse as I were a faitour.
   Adrian, said this blessed lady, dread ye not, for that my son hath
   begun in her must be performed, for she is a chosen vessel of special
   grace before all women that live, but go forth and ye shall find no
   letting, and enter into her chamber, for the angel of my lord shall
   lead you thither, and bring you both hither safely. Then he, meekly
   obeying, went forth into Alexandria and entered into the palace, and
   found doors and closures opening against him, and so passed from
   chamber to chamber till he came into her secret study, whereas none
   came but herself alone. And there he found her in her holy
   contemplation, and did to her his message like as ye have heard,
   according to his charge. And when this blessed virgin Katherine had
   heard his message and understood by certain tokens that he came for to
   fetch her to him whom she so fervently desired, anon she arose
   forgetting her estate and meiny, and followed this old man through her
   palace and the city of Alexandria, unknown of any person, and so into
   desert. In which way as they walked she demanded of him many a high
   question, and he answered to her sufficiently in all her demands and
   informed her in the faith, and she benignly received his doctrine.

   And as they thus went in the desert this holy man had lost his way, and
   wist not where he was and was all confused in himself, and said
   secretly: Alas I fear me I am deceived, and that this be an illusion.
   Alas! shall this virgin here be perished among these wild beasts? Now
   blessed lady, help me that almost am in despair, and save this maiden
   that hath forsaken for your love all that she had, and hath obeyed your
   commandment. And as he thus sorrowed, the blessed virgin Katherine
   apperceived and demanded him what him ailed, and why he sorrowed, and
   he said: For you, because I cannot find my cell, ne wot not where I am.
   Father, said she, dread ye not, for trust ye verily, that that good
   lady which sent you for me, shall not suffer us to perish in this
   wilderness, and then she said to him: What monastery is yonder that I
   see, which is so rich and fair to behold? And he demanded of her where
   she saw it, and she said: Yonder in the east, and then he wiped his
   eyes and saw the most glorious monastery that ever he saw, whereof he
   was full of joy, and said to her: Now blessed be God that hath endowed
   you with so perfect faith, for there is that place wherein ye shall
   receive so great worship and joy, that there was never none like, save
   only our blessed Lady, Christ's own mother, queen of all queens. Now,
   good Father Adrian, hie you fast that we were there, for there is all
   my desire and joy. And soon after they approached that glorious place,
   and when they came to the gate, there met them a glorious company, all
   clothed in white and with chaplets of white lilies on their heads,
   whose beauty was so great and bright that the virgin Katherine ne the
   old man might not behold them, but all ravished fell down in great
   dread. Then one more excellent than another spake first, and said to
   this virgin: Katherine, stand up our dear sister, for ye be right
   welcome, and led her farther in till they came to the second gate where
   another more glorious company they came to the second gate where
   another more glorious company met her, all clothed in purple, with
   fresh chaplets of red roses on their heads. And the holy virgin seeing
   them, fell down for reverence and dread, and they, benignly comforting
   her, took her up and said to her: Dread ye nothing, our dear sister,
   for there was never none more heartily welcome to our sovereign lord
   than ye be, and to us all, for ye shall receive our clothing ard our
   crown with so great honour, that all saints shall joy in you; Come
   forth, for the Lord abideth desiring you. And then this blessed virgin
   Katherine with trembling joy passed forth with them, like as she that
   was ravished with so marvellous joy that she could not speak, and when
   she was entered into the body of the church she heard a melody of
   marvellous sweetness, which passed all hearts to think it, and there
   they beheld a royal queen standing in her estate with a great multitude
   of angels and saints, whose beauty and riches might no heart think, ne
   no pen write, for it exceedeth every man's mind. Then the noble company
   of martyrs with the fellowship of virgins, which led the virgin
   Katherine, fell down flat tofore this royal empress with sovereign
   reverence, saying in this wise: Our most sovereign Lady Queen of
   heaven, Lady of all the world, Empress of hell, Mother of Almighty God,
   King of bliss, to whose commandment obey all heavenly creatures and
   earthly, liketh it you that we here present to you our dear sister,
   whose name is written in the Book of Life, beseeching your benign grace
   to receive her as your daughter chosen and humble handmaid, for to
   accomplish the work which our blessed Lord hath begun in her. And with
   that our blessed Lady said: Bring ye my daughter and when the holy
   virgin heard our Lady speak, she was so much replenished with heavenly
   joy that she lay as she had been dead. Then the holy company took her
   up and brought her tofore our blessed Lady, to whom she said: My dear
   daughter ye be welcome to me, and ye be strong and of good comfort, for
   ye be specially chosen of my son to be honoured. Remember ye not how
   sitting in your parliament ye described to you a husband, whereas ye
   had a great conflict and battle in defending your chastity? And then
   this holy Katherine kneeling with most humble reverence and dread said:
   O most blessed Lady; blessed be ye among all women; I remember how I
   chose that Lord which then was full far from my knowledge, but now
   blessed Lady, by his mighty mercy and your special grace he hath opened
   the eyes of my blind conscience and ignorance, so that now I see the
   clear way of truth, and humbly beseech you most blessed Lady, that I
   may have him whom my heart loveth and desireth above all things,
   without whom I may not live. And with these words her spirits were so
   fast closed that she lay as she had been dead, and then our Lady in
   conforting her said: My dear daughter, it shall be as ye desire, but
   yet ye lack one thing that ye must receive ere ye come to the presence
   of my son; ye must be clothed with the sacrament of baptism, wherefore
   come on my daughter for all things are provided. For there was a font
   solemnly apparelled with all things requisite unto baptism.

   And then our blessed Lady called Adrian the old father to her and said:
   Brother, this office longeth to you for ye be a priest, therefore
   baptize ye my daughter but change not her name, for Katherine shall she
   be named and I shall be her godmother. And then this holy man Adrian
   baptized her, and after, our Lady said to her: Now mine own daughter be
   glad and joyful, for ye lack no thing that longeth to the wife of a
   heavenly spouse, and now I shall bring you to my Lord my son which
   abideth for you. And so our Lady led her forth unto the quire door
   whereas she saw our Saviour Jesu Christ with a great multitude of
   angels, whose beauty is impossible to be thought or written of earthly
   creature, of whose sight this blessed virgin was I fulfilled with so
   great sweetness that it cannot be expressed. To whom our blessed Lady
   benignly said: Most sovereign honour, joy and glory be to you, King of
   bliss, my Lord, my God and my son, Lo! I have brought here unto your
   blessed presence your humble servant and ancille Katherine, which for
   your love hath refused all earthly things, and hath at my sending
   obeyed to come hither, hoping and trusting to receive that I promised
   to her. Then our Blessed Lord took up, his mother and said: Mother,
   that which pleaseth you, pleaseth me, and your desire is mine, for I
   desire that she be knit to me by marriage among all the virgins of the
   earth. And said to her Katherine, come hither to me. And as soon as she
   heard him name her name, so great a sweetness entered into her soul
   that she was all ravished, and therewith our Lord gave to her a new
   strength which passed nature, and said to her: Come my spouse, and give
   to me your hand. And there our Lord espoused her in joining himself to
   her by spiritual marriage, promising ever to keep her in all her life
   in this world, and after this life to reign perpetually in his bliss,
   and in token of this set a ring on her finger, which he commanded her
   to keep in remembrance of this, and said: Dread ye not, my dear spouse,
   I shall not depart from you, but always comfort and strengthen you.
   Then said this new spouse: O blessed Lord, I thank you with all mine
   heart of all your great mercies, beseeching you to make me digne and
   worthy to be thy servant and handmaid, and to please you whom my heart
   loveth and desireth above all things. And thus this glorious marriage
   was made, whereof all the celestial court joyed and sang this verse in
   heaven: Sponsus amat sponsam, salvator visitat illam, with so great
   melody that no heart may express ne think it.

   This was a glorious and singular marriage to which was never none like
   before in earth, wherefore this glorious virgin, Katherine, ought to be
   honoured, lauded, and praised among all the virgins that ever were in
   earth. And then our blessed Lord, after this marriage, said unto the
   blessed Katherine: Now the time is come that I must depart into the
   place that I came from, wherefore what that ye will desire I am ready
   to grant to you, and after my departing ye must abide here with old
   Adrian ten days, till ye be perfectly informed in all my laws and will.
   And when ye shall be come home ye shall find your mother dead, but
   dread ye not, for ye were never missed there in all this time, for I
   have ordained there one in your stead, that all men ween it were
   yourself, and when ye come home, she that is there in your stead shall
   void. Now fare well, my dear spouse. And then she cried with a full
   piteous voice: Ah! my sovereign Lord God and all the joy of my soul,
   have ye ever mine on me. And with that he blessed her and vanished away
   from her sight. And then for sorrow of his departing she fell in a
   swoon so that she lay still a large hour without any life, and then was
   Adrian a sorry man, and cried upon her so long that at the last she
   came to herself and revived and lift up her eyes and saw nothing about
   her save an old cell, and the old man Adrian by her, weeping. For all
   the royalty was voided, both monastery and palace, and all the
   comfortable sights that she had seen, and specially he which was cause
   of all her joy and comfort; and then she sorrowed, l mourned, and wept
   unto the time that she saw the ring on her finger, and for joy thereof
   yet she swooned, and after she kissed it a thousand sithes with many a
   piteous tear, and then Adrian comforted her the best wise he could with
   many a blessed exhortation. And the blessed virgin Katherine took all
   his comforts and obeyed him as to her father, and dwelled with him the
   time that our Lord had assigned her till she was sufficiently taught
   all that was needful to her. And then she went home to her palace and
   governed her holily in converting many creatures to the christian faith
   of Jesu Christ, on whom all her joy was wholly set, and ever he was in
   her mind, and so dwelled still in her palace, never idle, but ever
   continued in the service of our Lord, full of charity, where awhile I
   let her dwell fulfilled of virtues and grace, as the dear and singular
   spouse of Almighty God.

   And then in this meantime Maxentius, that was then emperor, and vicious
   to God's law and cruel tyrant, considered the noble and royal city of
   Alexandria, and came thither and assembled all the people, rich and
   poor, for to make sacrifice to the idols, and the christian men that
   would not make sacrifice he let slay. And this holy virgin was at that
   time eighteen years of age, dwelling in her palace full of riches and
   of servants, alone, without parents and kin, and heard the braying and
   noise of beasts, and the joy that they made and sung, and marvelled
   what it might be, and sent one of her servants hastily to inquire what
   it was. And when she knew it, she took some of the people of her palace
   and garnished her with the sign of the cross and went thither, and
   found there many christian men to be led to do sacrifice for fear of
   death. Then was she strongly troubled for sorrow, and went forth
   hardily to the emperor, and said in this wise: The dignity of thine
   order and the way of reason have moved me to salute thee, if thou know
   the creator and maker of heaven, and wouldst revoke thy courage from
   the worshipping of false gods. And then she disputed of many things
   with Cæsar tofore the gates of the temple. And then she began to say: I
   have set my cure to say these things to thee as to a wise man,
   wherefore hast thou now assembled this multitude of people thus in vain
   for to adore the folly of the idols. Hast thou marvel of this temple
   that is made with man's hands? Wonderest thou on the precious ornaments
   which be as dust tofore the wind? Thou shouldst rather marvel thee of
   heaven, and of the earth, and of all the things that be therein, and of
   the sun, the moon, the stars, and of the planets that have been since
   the beginning of the world, and shall be as long as it shall please
   God; and marvel thee of the ornaments of heaven, that is to say, the
   sun, moon, stars, and planets, how they move from the orient to the
   occident and never be weary, and when thou shalt have knowledge of all
   these things, and hast apperceived it, demand after, who is most
   mightyof all, and when thou knowest him that is sovereign and maker of
   all things, to whom none is semblable ne like, then adore him and
   glorify, for he is God of gods, and Lord of lords. And when she had
   disputed of many things of the Incarnation of the Son of God much
   wisely, the emperor was much abashed and could not answer to her, but
   at the last when he was come to himself, he said to her: O thou woman,
   suffer us to finish our sacrifice, and after, we shall give thee an
   answer. Then commanded he that she should be led to his palace and to
   be kept with great diligence, and marvelled much of her great prudence
   and of her great beauty, for she was right fair to behold, unto the
   people. And after this the emperor came to the palace, and said to
   Katherine: We have heard thy fair speech and be marvellously abashed of
   thy wisdom, but we be so occupied in the sacrifices that we may not
   entend to understand all things. And we demand thee, first, of what
   lineage art thou? And the holy virgin Katherine said: Praise not
   thyself over much, ne blame thyself also, for so do fools that travail
   in vain glory. Nevertheless, I shall acknowledge to thee my lineage,
   not for any avaunting but by humility. I am Katherine, daughter of
   Costus the king, and howbeit that I was born in purple, and am informed
   in the arts liberal, yet have I despised all things and have given me
   wholly to our Lord Jesu Christ, and the gods that thou worshippest may
   not help thee ne none other. O ye cursed adorers of such gods, for when
   they be called in need they help not, in tribulation they succour not,
   and in perils they defend not. And the king said: If it be so as thou
   sayest, all the earth erreth and thou only sayest truth, and every word
   ought to be confirmed by the mouth of two or three witnesses. If thou
   wert an angel or a celestial virtue, yet thou oughtest not to be
   believed when thou art but one frail woman. To whom she said: O
   emperor, I beseech thee be not overcome with woodness, for in the
   courage of a wise man is no trouble, for the wise man saith: If thou
   governest thyself by good courage thou shalt be a king, and if thou
   governest thee otherwise thou shalt be a servant. And thou, as I see,
   ordainest to embrace us in thy mortal subtlety when thou labourest to
   draw us by the ensamples of the philosophers.

   And when the emperor saw that in no manner he could resist her wisdom,
   he sent secretly by letters for all the great grammarians and
   rhetoricians that they should come hastily to his pretorium to
   Alexandria, and he should give to them great gifts if they might
   surmount a maiden well bespoken. And then were there brought from
   divers provinces fifty masters which surmounted all mortal men in
   worldly wisdom. And then demanded they for what cause they were called
   from so far parts, and the emperor answered and said: We have a maiden,
   none comparable to her in wit and wisdom, which confoundeth all wise
   men, and she saith that our gods be devils, and if ye surmount them by
   honour I shall send you again into your country with joy. And one of
   them had hereof despite, and said by disdain: This is a worthy counsel
   of an emperor, that for one maid, young and frail, he hath done
   assemble so many sages, and from so far countries, and one of our
   clerks or scholars may overcome her. And the king said to them: I may
   well by strength constrain her to sacrifice, but I had liefer that she
   were overcome by your arguments.

   Then said they: Let her be brought tofore us, and when she shall be
   overcome by folly she may know that she never saw wise man. And when
   the virgin knew the strife of the disputation that she abode, she
   commended her all unto our Lord, and an angel came to her and said that
   she should keep her firmly for she should not be vanquished, but she
   should surmount them and send them to martyrdom. And when she was
   brought tofore the masters and orators she said to the emperor: What
   judgment is this to set fifty orators and masters against one maid, and
   to promise to them great rewards for their victory, and compellest me
   to dispute with them without hope of any reward? And God Jesu Christ,
   which is very guerdon of them that strive for him, shall be only with
   me, and he shall be my reward, for he is the hope and crown of them
   that fight for him. And when the masters had said that it was
   impossible that God was made man, ne that he had suffered death, the
   virgin showed to them that the paynims had said it tofore that he was
   made. For Plato said God to be all round and to be slain, and Sibyl
   said thus, that the ilke God should be blessed and happy that should
   hang on the cross. And when the virgin right wisely disputed with the
   masters, and that she had confounded their gods by open reasons, they
   were abashed and wist not what to say, but were all still. And the
   emperor was replenished with felony against them, and began to blame
   them because they were overcome so foully of one maid. And then one
   that was master above all the others said to the emperor: Know thou,
   sir emperor, that never was there any that might stand against us but
   that anon he was overcome. But this maid in whom the spirit of God
   speaketh hath so converted us that we cannot say anything against Jesu
   Christ, ne we may not, ne dare not. Wherefore, sir emperor, we
   acknowledge that but if thou mayest bring forth a more provable
   sentence of them that we have worshipped hitherto, that all we be
   converted to Jesu Christ. And when the tyrant heard this thing he was
   esprised with great woodness, and commanded that they all should be
   burnt in the midst of the city. And the holy virgin comforted them and
   made them constant to martyrdom, and informed them diligently in the
   faith, and because they doubted that they should die without baptism,
   the virgin said to them: Doubt ye nothing, for the effusion of your
   blood shall be reputed to you for baptism, and garnish you with the
   sign of the cross, and ye shall be crowned in heaven.

   And when they were cast into the flames of fire they rendered their
   souls unto God, and neither hair ne clothes of them had none harm ne
   were hurt by the fire. And when the christian men had buried them, the
   tyrant spake unto the virgin and said: Ah! right noble lady virgin,
   have pity of thy youth, and thou shalt be chief in my palace next the
   queen, and thine image shall be set up in the midst of the city, and
   shall be adored of all the people as a goddess. To whom the virgin
   said: Leave to say such things, for it is evil to think it. I am given
   and married to Jesu Christ, he is my spouse, he is my glory, he is my
   love, and he is my sweetness, there may no fair words ne no torments
   call me from him. And then he being full of woodness, commanded that
   she should be despoiled naked and beaten with scorpions, and so beaten
   to be put in a dark prison, and there was tormented by hunger by the
   space of twelve days.

   And the emperor went out of the country for certain causes, and the
   queen was esprised with great love of the virgin, and went by night to
   the prison with Porphyry, the prince of knights, and when the queen
   entered, she saw the prison shining by great clearness, and angels
   anointing the wounds of the holy virgin Katherine. And then S.
   Katherine began to preach to the queen the joys of Paradise and
   converted her to the faith, and said to her that she would receive the
   crown of martyrdom, and thus spake they together till midnight. And
   when Porphyry had heard all that she had said, he fell down to her feet
   and received the faith of Jesu Christ, with two hundred knights. And
   because the tyrant had commanded that she should be twelve days without
   meat and drink, Jesu Christ sent to her a white dove which fed her with
   meat celestial. And after this, Jesu Christ appeared to her with a
   great multitude of angels and virgins, and said to her: Daughter, know
   thy maker, for whom thou hast emprised this travailous battle; be thou
   constant, for I am with thee.

   And when the emperor was returned, he commanded her to be brought
   tofore him, and when he saw her so shining, whom he supposed to have
   been tormented bv great famine and fasting, and supposed that some had
   fed her in prison, he was fulfilled with fury and commanded to torment
   the keepers of the prison, and she said to him: Verily, I took never
   sith meat of man, but Jesu Christ hath fed me by his angel. I pray
   thee, said the emperor, set at thine heart this that I admonish thee,
   and answer not by doubtable words. We will not hold thee as a
   chamberer, but thou shalt triumph as a queen in my realm, in beauty
   enhanced. To whom the blessed virgin Katherine said: Understand, I pray
   thee, and judge truly, whom ought I better to choose of these two, or
   the king puissant, perdurable, glorious and fair, or one sick,
   unsteadfast, not noble, and foul? And then the emperor having disdain,
   and angry by felony, spake: Of these two choose thee one, or do
   sacrifice and live, or suffer divers torments and perish. And she said:
   Tarry not to do what torments thou wilt, for I desire to offer to God
   my blood and my flesh like as he offered for me; he is my God, my
   father, my friend and mine only spouse. And then a master warned and
   advised the king, being wood for anger, that he should make four wheels
   of iron, environed with sharp razors, cutting so that she might be
   horribly all detrenched and cut in that torment, so that he might fear
   the other christian people by ensample of that cruel torment. And then
   was ordained that two wheels should turn against the other two by great
   force, so that they should break all that should be between the wheels,
   and then the blessed virgin prayed our Lord that he would break these
   engines to the praising of his name, and for to convert the people that
   were there. And anon as this blessed virgin was set in this torment,
   the angel of our Lord brake the wheels by so great force that it slew
   four thousand paynims.

   And the queen, that beheld these things, came from above and had hid
   herself till then, descending anon and began to blame the emperor of so
   great cruelty, and then the king was replenished with woodness when he
   saw that the queen despised to do sacrifice, and did do first rend off
   her paps, and after smite off her head. And as she wasled unto
   martyrdom, she prayed Katherine to pray God for her, and she said to
   her: Ne doubt thee nothing, well-beloved of God; for this day thou
   shalt have the realm perdurable for this transitory realm, and an
   immortal spouse for a mortal. And she was constant and firm in the
   faith, and bade the tormentors do as was to them commanded. And then
   the sergeants brought her out of the city and erased off her paps with
   tongs of iron, and after smote off her head, whose body Porphyry took
   away and buried it. The next day following was demanded where the holy
   body of the queen was, and the emperor bade that many should be put to
   torment for to know where the body was. Porphyry came then tofore them
   all, and cried, saying: I am he that buried the body of the ancille and
   servant of Jesu Christ, and have received the faith of God. And then
   Maxentius began to roar and bray as a mad man, and cried, saying: O!
   wretched and caitiff, lo! Porphyry, which was the only keeper of my
   soul and comfort of all mine evils, is deceived; which thing he told to
   his knights, to whom they said: And we also be christian and be ready
   for to suffer death for Jesu Christ. And then the emperor, drunken in
   woodness, commanded that all should be beheaded and that their bodies
   should be cast to dogs, and then called he Katherine and said to her:
   Howbeit that thou hast made the queen for to die by thine art magic, if
   thou repent thee thou shalt be first and chief in my palace, for thou
   shalt this day do sacrifice or thou shalt lose thine head. And she said
   to him: Do all that thou hast thought; I am ready to suffer all. And
   then he gave sentence against her, and commanded to smite off her head.
   And when she was brought to the place ordained thereto, she lift up her
   eyes to heaven praying, and said: O! Jesu Christ, hope of and help of
   them that believe in thee! O beauty and glory of virgins! Good king, I
   beseech and pray thee that whosomever shall remember my passion, be it
   at his death or in any other necessity, and call me, that he may have
   by thy mercy the effect of his request and prayer. And then came a
   voice to her, saying: Come unto me, my fair love and my spouse; lo!
   behold the gate of heaven is open to thee, and also to them that shall
   hallow thy passion, I promise the comfort of heaven of that they
   require. And when she was beheaded there issued out of her body milk
   instead of blood, and angels took the body and bare it unto the Mount
   of Sinai, more than twenty journeys from thence, and buried it there
   honourably, and continually oil runneth out of her bones which healeth
   all maladies and sicknesses, and she suffered death under Maxentius the
   tyrant, about the year of our Lord three hundred.

   How Maxentius was punished for this felony and for others, it is
   contained in the history of the invention of the holy cross, but
   forasmuch as it was not known long after where this holy body was
   become, there was great sorrow and lamentation among christian men,
   saying: Alas! the most clear light of our faith, of wisdom, and the
   temple of the Holy Ghost, is gone from us, and besought God devoutly
   that it might please him to show to them this holy relic, which after
   came to knowledge in this manner.

   In the desert about the Mount of Sinai there were many christian
   hermits which were inflamed with great devotion toward this holy virgin
   S. Katherine, wherefore by common assent they ordained a chapel in
   which this holy virgin should specially remembered, which chapel was by
   the Mount of Sinai, not far from the hill, fast by the place whereas
   our Lord appeared in the bush to Moses. In which place the holy hermits
   lived in great abstinence and devotion a glorious life. To whom on a
   time the angel of God appeared and said: God hath beholden your
   effectual devotion from heaven, therefore he hath granted to you this
   grace that by you shall be found and known the holy body of the
   glorious virgin S. Katherine, to his sovereign honour and glory. And
   therefore arise ye up and follow me, and though it so be that ye see me
   not, yet the shadow of the palm that I bear in mine hand shall never
   depart from your sight. And then these hermits went forth and followed
   the angel till they came to the place where unnethe any creature might
   enter for straitness of the way and sharpness of the rocks; and when
   they came to the top of the hill they saw not the angel, but they saw
   evidently the shadow of the palm, that it seemed all the place had been
   shadowed by the leaves of the palm, by which they came unto the place
   where the body had lain one hundred and thirty years in a stone. And
   her flesh was dried up for length of time, but the bones were so
   compact and pure that they seemed to be kept by the cure of angels.
   Then they took up with great joy and reverence this holy body and bare
   it down into the chapel which they had made, and this was done by great
   miracle, for the place where she lay in was so steep, thick, strait,
   and so dangerous, that it seemed to man's reason impossible to come
   thereto. And these holy men, after they had brought this body with
   solemnity, ordained the feast of the invention of this holy body should
   be solemnised, which is yet there kept and is about the time of the
   Invention of the Holy Cross. Which place is greatly honoured, and our
   Lord showeth there many miracles, and out of the bones floweth out oil
   largely, by which many maladies be guerished. And it is said that
   tofore the body was found that a monk went to the Mount of Sinai and
   dwelled there by the space of seven years much devoutly in the service
   of S. Katherine, and on a time as he prayed with great devotion that he
   might have something of her body, suddenly there came a joint of one of
   her fingers of her hand, which gift he took joyfully of our Lord. It is
   read also that there was a man much devout to S. Katherine and oft
   called on her to his and, and by length of time he fell in foul
   thought, and lost the devotion that he had to the saint, and ceased to
   pray to her; and as he was on a time in prayer he saw a great multitude
   of virgins passing by him, among whom there was one more resplendissent
   than the other, and when she approached him she covered her visage and
   passed tofore him, her face covered. And he marvelled much of the
   beauty of her, and demanded what she was, and one of the virgins said
   that it was Katherine whom thou wert wont for to know, and because thou
   knowest ne rememberest her not, she passed tofore thee with face
   covered and without knowledge. It is to be noted that this blessed
   virgin S. Katherine seemeth and appeareth marvellous in five things:
   first, in wisdom, secondly, in eloquence, thirdly, in constancy,
   fourthly, in cleanness of chastity, and fifthly, in privilege of
   dignity. First she appeared marvellous in wisdom, in her was all manner
   of philosophy. Philosophy is divided in three, in theory, in practice,
   and in logic. Theory is divided in three, that is intellectual,
   natural, and mathematical. The blessed Katherine had science
   intellectual in knowledge of things divine, of which she used against
   the masters, to whom she proved to be but one very God only, and
   convanquished all the false gods. Secondly, she had science natural of
   which she used in disputing against the emperor. Thirdly, she had
   science mathematical, that is a science that be holdeth the forms and
   the manner of things, and this science had she in despising the earthly
   things, for she withdrew her heart from all earthly matter. She showed
   to have this science when she answered to the emperor, when he demanded
   who she was, and said: I am Katherine, daughter of king Costus, and how
   she had been nourished in purple. And hereof used she when she enharded
   the queen to despise the world and herself, and to desire the reign
   perdurable. The practice is divided in three manners, in ethic,
   economic, and politic. The first teacheth to inform manners and adorn
   him with virtues, and that appertaineth to all men. The second teacheth
   to rule and govern well his meiny, and that appertaineth to them that
   have men to govern. The third appertaineth to the governors of cities,
   for she teacheth to govern the peoples, the cities, and the commons.
   And these three sciences had the blessed Katherine. First, she had in
   herself all honesty of manners; secondly, she ruled her meiny laudably,
   which was left to her, thirdly, she informed wisely the emperor. Logic
   is divided in three, in demonstrative, in probable, and in sophistical.
   The first pertaineth to philosophers, the second to rhetors and
   logicians, and the third to sophisters, and these three sciences had
   Katherine in her, for she disputed with the emperor. Secondly, she was
   marvellous in eloquence, for she had fair speech in Katherine preaching
   as it appeared in her predications, she was right sharp in rendering
   reason, as when she answered to the emperor, she had sweet words in
   drawing the people to the faith, as it appeared in Porphyry and the
   queen, whom she drew to the christian faith by sweetness of her fair
   speech. She had right virtuous word in overcoming, as it appeared in
   the masters whom she vanquished so puissantly. Thirdly, she was
   marvellous in constancy, for she was most constant against the
   threatenings and menaces, for she despised them all and answered to the
   emperor: Tarry not to do the torments that thou hast purposed, for I
   desire to offer to God my blood, and make an end of that thou hast
   conceived in thy courage, I am ready to suffer all. Secondly, she was
   firm when great gifts were offered to her, for she refused all, and
   said to the emperor when he promised to hold her as second lady in his
   palace, and she said: Leave to say such things, it is felonous to think
   it. Thirdly, she was constant in the torments that were done to her.
   Fourthly, she was constant in cleanness of chastity, for she kept
   chastity among those things that chastity is wont to perish. For there
   be five things in which chastity may perish, that is in pleasance of
   riches, convenable opportunity, flowering youth, freedom without
   constraint, and sovereign beauty. And among all these things the
   blessed Katherine kept her chastity, for she had great plenty of riches
   as she that was heir of rich parents; she had convenable leisure to do
   her will, as she that was lady of herself, and conversed all day among
   her servants which were young of age; she had freedom without any that
   governed her in her palace, and of these four it is said before, and
   she had beauty, so much that every man marvelled of her beauty.
   Fifthly, she was marvellous in privilege of dignity, for certain
   special privileges were in some saints when they died, like as the
   visitation of Jesu Christ was in S. John the Evangelist, the flowing of
   oil in S. Nicholas, the effusion of milk for blood that was in S. Paul,
   the preparation of the sepulchre that was in S. Clement, and the
   hearing and granting of the petitions that was in S. Margaret, when she
   prayed for them remembering her memory. All these things together were
   in this blessed virgin S. Katherine as it appeareth in her legend. Then
   let us devoutly worship this holy virgin and humbly pray her to be our
   advocatrice in all our needs bodily and ghostly, that by the merits of
   her prayers we may after this short and transitory life come unto the
   everlasting bliss and joy in heaven whereas is life perdurable. Quod
   ipse præstare dignetur qui cum patre et spiritu sancto vivit et regnat
   deus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

        Here followeth the Life of S. Saturnine, and first of his name.

   Saturnine is said of saturare, that is to be filled, and of nux, that
   is a nut, for the paynims were filled for to martyr him, like as the
   squirrel that eateth the nut. For when the squirrel taketh the nut for
   to have it out of the hull, it seemeth to him bitter, then he goeth up
   on high on the tree and letteth it fall, and then the hull breaketh and
   the nut springeth out. And thus were the paynims filled in S.
   Saturnine, for he was bitter to them because he would not do sacrifice,
   and then they brought him up on high of the Capitol, and cast him down
   the steps or grees so that he brake his head, and the brain sprang out
   of it.

   Of S. Saturnine.

   Saturnine was ordained bishop of the disciples of the apostles, and was
   sent into the city of Toulouse, and when he entered into the city, the
   devils ceased to give answers, and then one of the paynims said but if
   they slew Saturnine they should have none answer of their gods. And
   they took Saturnine which would not do sacrifice, and bound him to the
   feet of a bull and drew him unto the highest place of the capitol and
   cast him down the degrees and steps to the ground, so that his head was
   all to-broken and the brain sprang out, and so he accomplished his
   martyrdom. And two women took his body and buried it in a deep place
   for fear of the paynims, and afterwards his successors took up the body
   and transported it into a more honourable place.

   There was another Saturnine whom the provost of Rome held long in
   prison, and after, he raised him in the torment named Eculee, and did
   do beat him with sinews, rods, and scorpions, and after, did do burn
   his sides, and then took him down and smote off his head, about the
   year of our Lord two hundred and ninety under Maximian.

   And yet there was another Saturnine in Africa which was brother of S.
   Satyra, S. Revocata, and S. Felicity his sister, and S. Perpetua, which
   was of noble lineage, which all suffered death together, of whom the
   passion is holden another time. And when the provost said to them that
   they should do sacrifice to the idols, they refused it utterly, and he
   then put them in prison. And when the father of S. Perpetua heard that,
   he came to the prison weeping, and said: Daughter, thou hast
   dishonoured all thy lineage, for till now was never none of thy lineage
   put in to prison. And when he knew that she was christian, he ran upon
   her and would have scratched out her eyes with his fingers, and crying
   loud and issued out. And the blessed Perpetua saw a vision which in the
   morning she said to her fellows: I saw, said she, a ladder of gold of a
   marvellous height erect to heaven, and was so strait that no man might
   go but one alone, and coulters and swords of sharp iron were fixed on
   the right side and left side, so that he that went up might neither
   look here nor there, but behoved always to behold right up to heaven.
   And a dragon of horrible great form lay under the ladder, which made
   every man to dread and fear to mount up, and she saw Satyra ascending
   by the same unto above and looking to usward, and said: Doubt ye
   nothing this dragon, but come up surely that ye may be with me. And
   when they heard this vision, they all gave thankings to our Lord God,
   for they knew then that they were called to martyrdom, and on the morn
   they were all presented to the judge, and after, he said to them: It
   behoveth you to be presented to the gods and do sacrifice to them. But
   when they would do no sacrifice, he made S. Saturnine to be taken from
   the women, and to be put among the other men, and he said to S.
   Felicity: Hast thou a husband? She said: I have one, but I set not by
   him, and then he said to her: Have mercy on thyself, woman, and live,
   specially sith thou hast a child in thy belly. To whom she said: Do to
   me what thou wilt, for thou mayst never draw me to thy will. The father
   and mother of S. Perpetua, and her husband, ran to her and brought her
   child to her, which yet sucked. And when her father saw her standing
   tofore the provost, he fell down and said to her: My most sweet
   daughter, have mercy on me, and on thy sorrowful mother, and also of
   this most wretch thy husband, which may not live after thee, and she
   stood still without moving, and then her father cast his arms about her
   neck, and he, her mother, and her husband, kissed her, saying:
   Daughter, have pity of us, and live with us. And then she put the
   little child from her, and them also, saying: Depart ye, and go ye from
   me, mine enemies, for I know you not, and then when the provost saw her
   constancy he made her long to be beaten, and afterwards to be put in
   prison. And then the other saints were sorrowful for S. Felicity, which
   had yet months to come of her childing, and prayed to God for her, and
   anon she began to travail and was delivered of a child alive and quick.
   Then one of her keepers said to her: What wilt thou do when thou comest
   tofore the provost, which art yet so grievously tormented? And Felicity
   answered: I shall here suffer pain for myself, and God shall suffer
   there for me. And then were these saints drawn out of prison, and were
   despoiled and led by the streets, and to them were let go beasts, and
   Satyra and Perpetua were devoured of lions, and Revocata and Felicity
   were slain of leopards, and S. Saturnine had his head smitten off. And
   this was about the vear of our Lord two hundred and fifty-six, under
   Valerian and Galien, emperors.

  Thus endeth the life of S. Saturnine.
     __________________________________________________________________

This feast is the last feast of the year for to begin at the feast of S. Andrew,
and hereafter shall follow divers feasts which be added and set in the said book
called the Golden Legend.
     __________________________________________________________________

                            Of S. James the Martyr.

   James the martyr had to surname Intercisus, and was of noble lineage,
   but more noble by his faith. He was born in the region of Persia in the
   city of Elapis, he was come of christian people and had a good
   christian wife, and was well known with the king of Persia and was
   chief among the princes. And it happed, for the great love that he had
   to the king, he was deceived and brought to adore the idols, to whom he
   kneeled, and when his mother and his wife heard that, anon they wrote
   to him a letter in this wise: Thou hast forsaken him that is life in
   obeying to him that is mortal, and in pleasing him that is but dust,
   thou hast left the odour perdurable, thou hast changed truth into
   leasing in obeying him that is mortal, and hast forsaken the judge of
   them that be dead and of them alive, and know thou that from henceforth
   we shall be to thee strange, ne we shall not dwell with thee in no
   manner hereafter. And when James had heard this letter he wept
   bitterly, and said: If my mother that bare me, and my wife, be made so
   strange to me, then how much more shall I be estranged from God. Aud
   when he had sore tormented himself for this error, there came a
   messenger to the prince that said that James was christian, and then
   the prince called him and said: Say to me if thou be Nazarene. And
   James said: Yea, verily, I am Nazarene. And the prince said: Then art
   thou an enchanter; and James said: I am none. And when the prince
   menaced him with many torments, James said to him: Thy menaces trouble
   me nothing, for it ne is but wind blowing upon a stone, thy woodness
   passeth lightly through mine ears. To whom the prince said: Demean thee
   not disordinately, lest thou perish by grievous death. To whom James
   said: This ought not to be called a death, but a sleep, for anon after
   we shall rise again. And the prince said: Let not the Nazarene deceive
   thee saying death is nothing but a sleep, for the great emperors doubt
   it. And James said: We doubt nothing the death, for we hope to go from
   death to life. And then the prince, by counsel of his friends, gave
   this sentence upon James, that he should be cut every member from
   other, for to fear the others. And then some had pity on him and wept,
   and he said to them: Weep not for me, for I go to life, but weep on
   yourselves, whom torments perdurable be due unto. And the butchers cut
   off the thumb of his right hand, and he cried and said: O thou
   deliverer of Nazarenes, receive the branch of the tree of thy mercy,
   for the overplus is cut off, of him that tilleth the vine, for to
   burgeon and bring forth fruit more plenteously. And the butcher said to
   him: If thou wilt consent to the prince, I shall spare thee and give to
   thee medicine. To whom James said: Hast not thou seen the stock of the
   vine, that when the branches be cut off, the knot that remaineth, in
   his time when the earth achauffeth it, germeth and bringeth forth new
   buds in all the places of the cutting? Then if the vine be cut because
   he should burgeon and bring forth fruit in his time, how much more
   ought a man burgeon more plenteously in the faith that he suffereth for
   the love of Jesu Christ which is the very vine? And then the butcher
   cut of the forefinger. Then said S. James: Lord, receive two branches
   which thy right hand hath planted, he cut off the third, and James
   said: I am delivered from three temptations: I shall bless the Father,
   the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and, Lord, I shall confess thee with the
   three children that thou savedst from the chimney of fire, and Jesu
   Christ, I shall sing to thy name in the quire of martyrs. And then the
   fourth was cut off, and S. James said: O protector of the children of
   Israel, which in the fourth blessing were pronounced, receive of thy
   servant the confession of the fourth finger, like as the benediction
   was Judah. And then the fifth finger was cut off, and he said: My joy
   is accomplished. And then the butchers said to him: Spare thy life that
   thou perish not, and anger thee not though thou hast lost one hand, for
   there be many that have but one hand that have much honour and riches.
   And the blessed James said to them: When the shepherds shear their
   sheep, they take not only the right side, but also the left side, then
   if the lamb, which is but a brute beast, will lose his fleece for his
   master, how much more then I, that am a man reasonable, ought to be
   smitten in pieces for the love of God. And then the felon butchers went
   to that other hand, and cut off first the little finger, and S. James
   said: Lord, when thou wert great thou wouldst be made little for us,
   and therefore I yield to thee body and soul, which thou madest, and
   redeemedst with thy proper blood. Then the seventh finger was cut off,
   and he said: Lord, I have said to thee seven times in the day
   praisings. Then they cut the eighth finger, and he said: Jesu Christ
   was circumcised the eighth day for to accomplish the commandments
   ceremonial of the faith, and, Lord, let the mind of thy servant go from
   these uncircumcised, and that I may have the prepuce undefiled that I
   may come and behold thy face Lord. Then the ninth finger was cut off,
   and he said: The ninth hour Jesu Christ rendered his spirit in the
   cross to his father, and therefore, Lord, I confess me to thee in the
   sorrow of the ninth finger, and thank thee. Then the tenth finger was
   cut off, and he said: The tenth number is in the commandments of the
   law. Then some of them that were there said: Right dear friend, confess
   thou our gods tofore our prince so that thou mayst live, howbeit that
   thy hands be cut off, there be right wise leeches that shall well heal
   thee and ease thee of thy pain. To whom S. James said: God forbid that
   in me should be any false dissimulation; no man that put his hand to
   the plough and looketh backward, is not convenable to come to the
   kingdom of heaven. Then the butchers having despite, cut off the great
   toe of the right foot, and S. James said: The foot of Jesu Christ was
   pierced and blood issued out. The second was cut off, and he said: This
   day is great to me tofore all other days; this day I converted, shall
   go soothly to the strong God. Then they cut the third and threw it
   tofore him, and S. James said, smiling: Go, thou third toe, to thy
   fellows, for like as the grain of wheat rendereth much fruit so shalt
   thou do with thy fellows, and shalt rest in the last day. The fourth
   was then cut off, and he said: My soul, wherefore art thou sorrowful,
   and why troublest me? Hope in God, for I shall confess to him that is
   the health of my cheer, and my God. The fifth was cut off, and he said:
   I shall now begin to say to our Lord digne praising, for he hath made
   me worthy fellow to his servants. Then they came to his left foot and
   cut off the little toe, and S. James said: Little toe be comforted, for
   the great and little shall have one resurrection, a hair of the head
   shall not perish, and thou shalt not depart from thy fellows. And after
   they cut off the second toe, and he said: Destroy ye the old house for
   a more noble is made ready. The third was cut off, and he said: By such
   cuttings shall I be purged from vices. And they cut off the fourth toe,
   and he said: Comfort me, God of truth, for my soul trusteth in thee.
   Then the fifth was cut off, and he said: O Lord, Lo! I offer and
   sacrifice to thee twenty times. And then they cut off his right foot,
   and S. James said: Now I shall offer a gift to God for whose love I
   suffer this. Then they cut off the left foot, and he said: Thou art he,
   Lord, that makest marvels; hear thou me, Lord, and save me. They cut
   off, after, his right hand, and he said: Lord, thy mercies help me.
   They cut off his left hand, and he said: Lord, thou art he that lovest
   the rightful. And they cut off the right arm, and he said: My soul,
   praise thee our Lord: I shall give laud to our Lord in my life, and
   shall sing to him as long as I shall live. And then they cut off the
   left arm, and he said: The sorrows of death have environed me, and I
   shall think against them. Then they cut off the right leg to the thigh,
   then S. James was grieved in great pain, and said: Lord Jesu Christ
   help me, for the wailings of death come about me, and he said to the
   butchers: Our Lord shall clothe me with new flesh so that your wounds
   shall never appear in me. And then the butchers began to fail and were
   weary. From the first hour of the day unto the ninth they had sweated
   in cutting his members. And after they came to themselves, and cut off
   the left leg unto the thigh, and then the blessed James cried and said:
   O good Lord, hear me half alive, thou Lord of living men and dead;
   Lord, I have no fingers to lift up to thee, ne hands that I may enhance
   to thee; my feet be cut off, and my knees so that I may not kneel to
   thee, and am like to a house fallen, of whom the pillars be taken away
   by which the house was borne up and sustained; hear me, Lord Jesu
   Christ, and take out my soul from this prison. And when he had said
   this, one of the butchers smote off his head. Then the christian men
   came privily and took away the body and buried it honourably. And he
   suffered death the fifth kalends of December.
     __________________________________________________________________

         Here followeth the Life of the holy and venerable priest Bede.

   The holy and venerable Bede was born in England, and when he was seven
   years of his age he was delivered to Benet Biscop of Jarrow, for to
   learn, and after his death he was put to Ceolfrith, abbot of the same
   place, and learned and profited much in holy life and conning. And the
   nineteenth year of his age he was made deacon, of John, bishop of York,
   and in the thirtieth year of his age he was made priest. Then began he
   to write and to study and to expound holy writ, whereupon he made many
   noble homilies, and notwithstanding his great business, was daily in
   the service of religion, as in singing and praying in the church. He
   had great sweetness and liking to learn, to teach and to write; he
   wrote seventy eight books; he accounted the books and years from the
   beginning of the world in Historia Anglicana. In the book of
   Polycronicon is rehearsed that is wonder, that a man that is without
   use of school made so many noble volumes in so sober words in so little
   space of his life time. It is said he went to Rome for to show there
   his books, for to see them according to holy writ and to the lore of
   holy church, but hereof some doubt, and say that he never went to Rome.
   Also it is said that when he was blind he went about for to preach, and
   his servant that led him brought him whereas were many hopples of
   stones, to whom he made a noble sermon, and when he had all finished
   his sermon the stones answered and said, Amen.

   Also it is said that he found a writing of three R's and three F's over
   the gate of Rome, which he expounded thus: The first R betokened regna,
   the second ruent, the third Rome, that is: Regna ruent Rome. And the
   first F betokened ferro, the second flamma, the third fame, that is:
   Ferro, flamma, famæque. Also pope Sergius wrote a letter to the abbot
   Ceolfrith and prayed for to have Bede come to Rome for to assoil
   certain questions that were there moved. Here is to be noted, that how
   noble and worthy the court of Rome held him, when so noble a court had
   need to have him for to declare and assoil the questions that were
   there moved. Also we ought to hold him noble and holy by the manner of
   his living and his teaching. He must needs be virtuous and eschew vices
   that was so well occupied in spending his wit and thought in expounding
   of holy writ, and his cleanness was much seen at his last end. For his
   stomach had indignation of meat seven weeks continually, and of drink,
   so that unnethe he might retain any meat, and was strait and
   short-breathed, but for all that he spared not the travail of lecture
   and of books, and every day among the detty travail of service and of
   psalms, he taught his disciples in lessons and in questions. He
   translated S. John's Gospel into English, and said to his scholars:
   Learn ye, my small children, whiles I am alive and with you; I wot not
   how long I shall abide with you, and alway among he said that saw of S.
   Ambrose: I have not so lived among you that me shameth to live, neither
   me dreadeth to die, for we have a good Lord.

   On night's time when he had no man to teach then would he devoutly be
   in prayers and thanking our Lord of all his gifts. The Tuesday tofore
   Ascension-day his death approached, and his feet began to swell; he was
   houseled, anointed and kissed his brethren, and prayed them all to
   remember him, and he gave to divers of his servants things that he had
   in privity. On the Ascension-day the hair was spread, and he laid him
   down thereon, and prayed for the grace of the Holy Ghost, and said: O
   king of bliss, and Lord of virtues, that hast the prize and art this
   day styed up above all heavens, leave thou us not fatherless, but send
   thou in to us that behest of the Father, the ghost of soothfastness.
   And when he had ended that, he gave up the last breath with a sweet
   dour and savour, and there he was then buried, but the common fame
   telleth that he now lieth at Durham with S. Cuthbert.

   There was a devout clerk, which laboured in his mind for to make his
   epitaph, and in no wise he could make true metre, wherefore on a time
   he went to the church and prayed God to give him conning to make a true
   verse. And after came unto his tomb and saw there written by an angel:

   Hic sunt in fossa
   Bedæ venerabilis ossa.

   Then let us pray to this holy man that he pray for us, that after this
   life we may come to everlasting life.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Dorothy.

   The glorious virgin and martyr S. Dorothy was born of the noble lineage
   of the senators of Rome, her father hight Theodore. In that time the
   persecution of the christian people was great about Rome, wherefore
   this holy virgin S. Dorothy, despising the worshipping of idols, count
   selled her father, her mother, and her two sisters, Christine and
   Celestine, to forsake their possessions, and so they did, and fled into
   the realm ol Cappadocia, and came into the city of Caesarea wherein
   they set S. Dorothy to school, and soon after she was christened of the
   holy bishop S. Appollinarius, and he named her Dorothy, and she was
   fulfilled with the Holy Ghost, and in great beauty above all the
   maidens of that realm. And she despised all worldly vanities, and
   burned in the love of Almighty God, and loved poverty, and was full of
   meekness and chastity, whereof the fiend having envy at her blessed
   living, provoked and set afire in her love the provost, so that he
   would have her to his wife, and anon sent for her in all haste, and
   when she came he desired to have her to his wife, and promised to her
   riches of worldly goods without number. And when this holy virgin
   understood his desire and request she refused it, and denied it
   utterly, and all his riches setting at nought; and moreover she
   acknowledged herself to be christian, and that she had vowed her
   virginity unto Jesu Christ, whom she had chosen to her spouse, and
   would never have other. And when the provost Fabricius heard this he
   was nigh from himself for anger, and commanded that she should be put
   in a tun of burning oil, wherein she was preserved by the power of her
   spouse Jesu Christ that she felt none disease ne harm, but a precious
   ointment of balm. And when the paynims saw this great miracle, many of
   them were thereby converted to the faith of Jesu Christ. And the tyrant
   said that she did all this by enchantment, and did do put her in a deep
   prison nine days long without meat or drink, but she was that while fed
   by angels' food of our Lord, so that at the end of nine days she was
   nothing appaired. Then the judge sent for her, supposing that she had
   been nigh dead and feeble, but when she came she was fairer and
   brighter to look on than ever she was before, whereof all the people
   marvelled greatly. Then the judge said to her: But if thou wilt worship
   and do sacrifice to the idols thou shalt not escape the torment of the
   gibbet. Then she answered to the judge: I worship Almighty God that
   made all things, and despise thy gods that be fiends. And then she fell
   down pat to the earth and lifted up her eyes to Almighty God,
   beseeching him that he would show his power tofore the people that he
   was only Almighty God and none other.

   Then Fabricius the judge let set up a pillar on high, and thereon he
   set his god, an idol, and anon there came a multitude of angels from
   heaven and cast down this idol, and all to-brake it, and anon the
   people heard a great noise of fiends crying in the air, saying: O
   Dorothy, why cost thou destroy us and tormentest us so sore? And for
   this great miracle many thousands of paynims were turned to the faith
   of Jesu Christ and were baptized, and after received the crown of
   martyrdom for the acknowledging of the name of Jesu Christ.

   Then the judge commanded that this holy virgin should be hanged on the
   gibbet, her feet upward and the head downward, and then her body was
   all to-rent with hooks of iron, and beaten with rods and scourges, and
   burnt her breasts with hot fiery brands, and as half dead she was set
   again into prison, and after, when she was brought again, she was all
   whole and strong, without any disease or hurt. Whereof the judge had
   great marvel, and said to her: O fair maid, forsake thy God and believe
   on our gods, for thou mayst see how merciful they be unto thee, and
   preserve thee, therefore have pity of thy tender body, for thou hast
   been tormented enough. And then the provost sent for her two sisters
   which were named Christine and Celestine, which for fear of death
   forsook the faith of Jesu Christ, and went to S. Dorothy and counselled
   her to obey to the provost's desire and forsake her faith. But this
   holy virgin rebuked her sisters. and after informed them by so fair and
   sweet language, that she withdrew them from their blind errors and
   established them in the faith of Jesu Christ; in such wise that when
   they were come to the judge they said they were christian and believed
   on Jesu Christ. And when Fabricius heard that, he was mad for anger,
   and commanded that the tormentor should bind their hands, and bind them
   both together back to back, and cast them in the fire so bound, and
   burnt them. And then he said to the virgin Dorothy: How long wilt thou
   trouble us with thy witchcraft? Or do sacrifice to our gods or else
   anon thy head shall be smitten off. And then said the holy virgin with
   a glad semblant: Do to me what torment thou wilt, for I am all ready to
   suffer it for the love of my spouse Jesu Christ, in whose garden full
   of delices I have gathered roses, spices, and apples. And when the
   tyrant heard that he trembled for anger, and commanded that her fair
   visage should be beaten with stones so that there should appear no
   beauty in her visage, but all disfigured, and so to be put in prison
   till the next day. And on the next day she came forth all so whole and
   sound as though she had suffered no disease, and was more fairer for to
   look on than ever she was tofore, by the grace of her blessed spouse
   Jesu Christ, for whose love she took on her these great and sharp
   torments. And then this cursed judge commanded to smite off her head;
   and as she was led to the place assigned where it should be done, a
   scribe of the realm, named Theophilus, said to her in scorn: I pray
   thee to send me some of thy roses and apples that thou hast gathered in
   the garden of thy spouse that thou praisest so much, and she granted to
   him his desire. And this was in the cold winter time when there was
   both frost and snow. And when she came to the place where she should be
   beheaded, she kneeled down on her knees and made her prayers to our
   Lord Jesu Christ, beseeching him that all they that worship her passion
   that they might be kept steadfast in the faith, and to take their
   tribulation patiently, and specially to be delivered from all shame,
   great poverty, and false slander, and at their last end to have very
   contrition, confession, and remission of all their sins. And also women
   with child that call to her for help to have good deliverance, the
   children to be christened and the mothers to be purified. Also she
   prayed to God that where her life was written or read in any house,
   that it should be kept from all peril of lightning and thunder, and
   from all perils of fire, from perils of thieves, and from sudden death,
   and to receive the sacraments of holy church at their last end for
   their most sovereign defence against their ghostly enemy the fiend.

   And when she had ended her prayer there was a voice heard from heaven
   that said: Come to me, my dear spouse and true virgin, for all thy love
   is granted to thee that hast prayed for, and also whom thou prayest for
   shall be saved; and when thou hast received the crown of martyrdom thou
   shalt come to the bliss of heaven without end, for thy labour. And this
   holy virgin bowed down her head, and the cruel tyrant smote it off.

   But a little before this appeared before her a fair child barefoot,
   clothed in purple, with crisp hairs, whose garment was set full of
   bright stars, bearing in his hand a little basket shining as gold, with
   roses and apples, to whom the virgin said: I pray thee, bear this
   basket to Theophilus the scribe. And thus she suffered death and passed
   and Lord full of virtues, the sixth day of February, the year of our
   Lord two hundred and eighty-eight, by Fabricius, provost under
   Diocletian and Maximian, emperors of Rome. And as this said Theophilus
   stood in the palace of the emperor, this child came to him and
   presented to him the basket, saying: These be the roses and apples that
   my sister Dorothy hath sent to thee from Paradise, the garden of her
   spouse, and then this child vanished away. Then he, considering the
   marvellous work of God in this holy virgin, said anon with a stern
   voice, praising the God of Dorothy for that great miracle which was
   showed to him of roses and apples that time, that he that sent to me
   these things is of great power, and therefore his name be blessed world
   without end, Amen. And then he was converted to the faith of Jesu
   Christ, and the most part of the people of the city. And when Fabricius
   knew this, anon, with great malice, he tormented Theophilus the scribe
   with many divers torments, and at the last hewed him into small pieces,
   and the pieces were cast to birds and beasts to be devoured. But he was
   first baptized and received the holy sacrament, and followed the holy
   virgin Dorothy into the bliss of heaven. Then let us devoutly pray to
   this blessed saint Dorothy that she be our special protectress against
   all perils of fire, of lightning, of thundering, and all other perils,
   and that at our end we may receive the sacraments of the church, that
   after this short life may come unto bliss in heaven whereas is life and
   joy perdurable, world without end. Amen
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Brandon.

   S. Brandon, the holy man, was a monk, and born in Ireland, and there he
   was abbot of a house wherein were a thousand monks, and there he had a
   full strait and holy life in great penance and abstinence, and he
   governed his monks full virtuously. And then within short time after,
   there came to him a holy abbot that night Birinus to visit him, and
   each of them was joyful of other. And then S. Brandon began to tell to
   the abbot Birinus of many wonders that he had seen in divers lands, and
   when Birinus heard that of S. Brandon, he began to sigh and sore weep,
   and S. Brandon comforted him the best wise he could, saying: Ye come
   hither for to be joyful with me, and therefore for God's love leave
   your mourning and tell me what marvels ye have seen in the great
   sea-ocean that compasseth all the world about, and all other waters
   come out of him which runneth in all parts of the earth. And then
   Birinus began to tell to S. Brandon and to his monks the marvels that
   he had seen, full sore weeping, and said: I have a son, his name is
   Mervok, and he was a monk of great fame, which had great desire to seek
   about by ship in divers countries to find a solitary place wherein he
   might dwell secretly, out of the business of the world, for to serve
   God quietly with more devotion, and I counselled him to sail into an
   island far in the sea, beside the mountain of stones which is full well
   known, and then he made him ready and sailed thither with his monks.
   And when he came thither he liked that place full well, where he and
   his monks served our Lord full devoutly.

   And then Birinus saw in a vision that this monk Mervok was sailed right
   far eastward in the sea, more than three days' sailing, and suddenly to
   his seeming there came a dark cloud and overcovered them, that a great
   part of the day they saw no light, and as our Lord would, the cloud
   passed away and they saw a full fair island, and thitherward they drew.
   In that island was joy and mirth enough, and the earth of that island
   shined as bright as the sun, and there were the fairest trees and herbs
   that ever any man saw, and there were many precious stones shining
   bright, and every herb there was full of flowers, and every tree full
   of fruit, so that it was a glorious sight and a heavenly joy to abide
   there. And there, there came to them a fair young man, and full
   courteously he welcomed them all, and called every monk by his name,
   and said that they were much bound to praise the name of our Lord Jesu,
   that would of his grace show to them that glorious place where is ever
   day and never night, and this place is called Paradise terrestrial. By
   this island is another island wherein no man may come, and this young
   man said to them: Ye have been here half a year without meat, drink, or
   sleep, and they supposed that they had not been there the space of half
   an hour, so merry and joyful they were there. And the young man told
   them that this is the place that Adam and Eve dwelt in first and ever
   should have dwelled here, if that they had not broken the commandment
   of God. And then the young man brought them to their ship again, and
   said they might no longer abide there, and when they were all shipped,
   suddenly this young man vanished away out of their sight. And then
   within short time after, by the purveyance of our Lord Jesu Christ,
   they came to the abbey where S. Brandon dwelled, and then he with his
   brethren received them goodly and demanded them where they had been so
   long, and they said: We have been in the land of Behest tofore the
   gates of Paradise, whereas is ever day and never night, and they said
   all that the place is full delectable, for yet all their clothes
   smelled of that sweet and joyful place.

   And then S. Brandon purposed soon after for to seek that place by God's
   help, and anon began to purvey for a good ship and a strong, and
   victualled it for seven years. And then he took his leave of all his
   brethren and took twelve monks with him, but ere they entered into the
   ship they fasted forty days and lived devoutly, and each of them
   received the sacrament. And when S. Brandon with his twelve monks were
   entered in to the ship, there came other two of his monks and prayed
   him that they might sail with him, and then he said: Ye may sail with
   me, but one of you shall go to hell ere ye come again, but not for that
   they would go with him. And then S. Brandon bade the shipmen to wind up
   the sail and forth they sailed in God's name, so that on the morrow
   they were out of sight of any land. And forty days and forty nights
   after they sailed plat east, and then they saw an island far from them,
   and they sailed thitherward as fast as they could, and they saw a great
   rock of stone appear above all the water, and three days they sailed
   about it ere they could get into the place, but at the last by the
   purveyance of God they found a little haven and there went aland every
   each one. And then suddenly came a fair hound, and fell down at the
   feet of S. Brandon and made him good cheer in his manner, and then he
   bade his brethren be of good cheer, for our Lord hath sent to us his
   messenger to lead us into some good place. And the hound brought them
   into a fair hall where they found the tables spread, ready set full of
   good meat and drink. And then S. Brandon said graces, and then he and
   his brethren sat down and ate and drank of such as they found, and
   there were beds ready for them, wherein they took their rest after
   their long labour.

   And on the morn they returned again to their ship, and sailed a long
   time in the sea after, ere they could find any land, till at last by
   the purveyance of God, they saw far from them a full fair island, full
   of green pasture, wherein were the whitest and greatest sheep that ever
   they saw. For every sheep was as great as an ox, and soon after came to
   them a goodly old man, which welcomed them and made them good cheer,
   and said: This is the island of sheep, and here is never cold weather,
   but ever summer, and that causeth the sheep to be so great and white;
   they eat of the best grass and herbs that is anywhere. And then this
   old man took his leave of them and bade them sail forth right east, and
   within short time by God's grace, they should come in to a place like
   Paradise, wherein they should keep their Eastertide.

   And then they sailed forth, and came soon after to that land, but
   because of little depth in some places, and in some places were great
   rocks, but at the last they went upon an island weeping to them that
   they had been safe, and made thereon a fire for to dress their dinner,
   but S. Brandon abode still in the ship, and when the fire was right hot
   and the meat nigh sodden, then this island began to move, whereof the
   monks were afeard, and fled anon to ship and left the fire and meat
   behind them, and marvelled sore of the moving. And S. Brandon comforted
   them and said that it was a great fish named Jasconye, which laboureth
   night and day to put his tail in his mouth, but for greatness he may
   not. And then anon they sailed west three days and three nights ere
   they saw any land, wherefore they were right heavy, but soon after, as
   God would, they saw a fair island full of flowers, herbs, and trees,
   whereof they thanked God of his good grace, and anon they went on land,
   and when they had gone long in this they found a full fair well, and
   thereby stood a fair tree full of boughs, and on every bough sat a fair
   bird, and they sat so thick on the tree that unnethe any leaf of the
   tree might be seen. The number of them was so great, and they sang so
   merrily that it was a heavenly noise to hear, wherefore S. Brandon
   kneeled down on his knees and wept for joy, and made his prayers
   devoutly to our Lord God to know what these birds meant.

   And then anon one of the birds fled from the tree to S. Brandon, and he
   with flickering of his wings made a full merry noise like a fiddle,
   that him seemed he heard never so joyful a melody. And then S. Brandon
   commanded the bird to tell him the cause why they sat so thick on the
   tree and sang so merrily; and then the bird said: Sometime we were
   angels in heaven, but when our master Lucifer fell down into hell for
   his high pride, we fell with him for our offences, some higher and some
   lower after the quality of the trespass, and because our trespass is
   but little, therefore our Lord hath set us here out of all pain, in
   full great joy and mirth after his pleasing, here to serve him on this
   tree in the best manner we can. The Sunday is a day of rest from all
   worldly occupation, and therefore that day all we be made as white as
   any snow for to praise our Lord in the best wise we may. And then this
   bird said to S. Brandon: That it is twelve months passed that ye
   departed from your abbey, and in the seventh year hereafter, ye shall
   see the place that ye desire to come to, and all these seven years ye
   shall keep your Easter here with us every year, and in the end of the
   seventh year ye shall come into the land of Behest. And this was on
   Easter day that the bird said these words to S. Brandon, and then this
   fowl flew again to his fellows that sat on the tree, and then all the
   birds began to sing evensong so merrily that it was a heavenly noise to
   hear. And after supper S. Brandon and his fellows went to bed and slept
   well, and on the morn they arose betimes, and then these birds began
   matins, prime, and hours, and all such service as christian men use to
   sing. And S. Brandon with his fellows abode there eight weeks, till
   Trinity Sunday was passed, and they sailed again to the island of sheep
   and there they victualled them well, and sith took their leave of that
   old man, and returned again to ship. And then the bird of the tree came
   again to S. Brandon and said: I am come to tell you that ye shall sail
   from hence into an island wherein is an abbey of twenty-four monks,
   which is from this place many a mile, and there ye shall hold your
   Christmas, and your Easter with us, like as I told you, and then this
   bird flew to his fellows again. And then S. Brandon and his fellows
   sailed forth in the ocean, and soon after fell a great tempest on them
   in which they were greatly troubled long time, and sore forlaboured,
   and after that they found by the time, and sore forlaboured, and after
   that they found by purveyance of God an island which was far from them,
   and then they full meekly prayed our Lord to send them thither in
   safety, but it was forty days after ere they came thither, wherefore
   all the monks were so weary of that trouble that they set little price
   by their lives, and cried continually to our Lord to have mercy on
   them, and bring them to that island in safety. And by the purveyance of
   God they came at the last into a little haven, but it was so strait
   that unnethe the ship might come in, and after they came to an anchor,
   and anon the monks went to land. And when they had long walked about,
   at the last they found two fair wells, that one was fair and clear
   water, and that other was somewhat troubly and thick. And then they
   thanked our Lord full humbly that had brought them thither in safety,
   and they would fain have drunk of that water, but S. Brandon charged
   them they should not take without licence. For if we abstain us a while
   our Lord will purvey for us in the best wise. And anon after came to
   them a fair old man with hoar hair, and welcomed them full meekly and
   kissed S. Brandon, and led them by many a fair well till they came to a
   fair abbey, where they were received with great honour and solemn
   procession with twenty-four monks, all in royal copes of cloth of gold
   and a royal cross was before them. And then the abbot welcomed S.
   Brandon and his fellowship, and kissed them full meekly, and took S.
   Brandon by the hand and led him with his monks into a fair hall, and
   set them down arow upon the bench, and the abbot of the place washed
   all their feet with fair water of the well that they saw before, and
   after, led them into the fraitour and there set them among his convent.
   And anon there came one by the purveyance of God which served them well
   of meat and drink, for every monk had set before him a fair white loaf,
   and white roots and herbs, which was right delicious, but they wist not
   what roots they were. And they drank of the water of the fair clear
   well that they saw before when they came first aland, which S. Brandon
   forbade them. And then the abbot came and cheered S. Brandon and his
   monks, and prayed them eat and drink for charity; for every day our
   Lord sendeth a goodly old man that covereth this table and setteth our
   meat and drink tofore us, but we know not how it cometh, ne we ordain
   never no meat ne drink for us, and yet we have been eighty years here,
   and ever our Lord, worshipped may he be, feedeth us. We be twenty-four
   monks in number, and every ferial day of the week he sendeth to us
   twelve loaves, and every Sunday and feast-day twenty-four loaves, and
   the bread that we leave at dinner we eat at supper, and now at your
   coming our Lord hath sent to us forty-eight loaves, for to make you and
   us merry together as brethren. And always twelve of us go to dinner
   whiles other twelve keep the quire, and thus have we done these eighty
   years, for so long have we dwelled here io this abbey. And we came
   hither out of the abbey of S. Patrick in Ireland, and thus as ye see
   our Lord hath purveyed for us, but none of us knoweth how it cometh,
   but God alone, to whom be given honour and laud world without end. And
   here in this land is ever fair weather, and none of us hath been sick
   sith we came hither. And when we go to mass, or to any other service of
   our Lord in the church, anon seven tapers of wax be set in the quire
   and be lighted at every time without man's hand, and so burn day and
   night at every hour of service, and never waste ne minish as long as we
   have been here, which is eighty years. And then S. Brandon went to the
   church with the abbot of the place, and there they said evensong
   together full devoutly, and then S. Brandon looked upward toward the
   crucifix, and saw our Lord hanging on the cross, which was made of fine
   crystal and curiously wrought. And in the quire were twenty-four seats
   for twenty-four monks, and the seven tapers burning, and the abbot's
   seat was made in the midst of the quire, and then S. Brandon demanded
   of the abbot how long they had kept that silence, that none of them
   spake to other, and he said: These twenty-four years we spake never one
   to another. And then S. Brandon wept for joy of their holy
   conversation. And then S. Brandon desired of the abbot that he and his
   monks might dwell there still with him. To whom the abbot said: Sir,
   that may ye not do in no wise, for our Lord hath showed to you in what
   manner ye shall be guided till the seven years be fulfilled, and after
   that term thou shalt with thy monks return into Ireland in safety, but
   one of the two monks that came last to you shall dwell in the island of
   ankers, and that other shall go quick to hell. And as S. Brandon
   kneeled in the church he saw a bright shining angel come in at the
   window, and lighted all the lights in the church, and then he flew out
   again at the window unto heaven, and then S. Brandon marvelled greatly
   how the light burned so fair and wasted not. And then the abbot said
   that it is written that Moses saw a bush all on afire and yet it burned
   not, and therefore marvel not hereof for the might of our Lord is now
   as great as it ever was.

   And when S. Brandon had dwelled there from Chrisunas even till the
   twelfth day was passed, then he took his leave of the abbot and convent
   and returned with his monks to his ship, and sailed from thence with
   his monks toward the abbey of S. Illaries, but they had great tempests
   in the sea from that time till Palm-Sunday, and then they came to the
   island of sheep, and there were received of the old man, which brought
   them to a fair hall and served them. And on ShereThursday after supper
   he washed their feet and kissed them, like as our Lord did to his
   disciples, and there abode till Saturday, Easter-even, and they
   departed and sailed to the place where the great fish lay, and anon
   they saw their caldron upon the fishes back, which they had left there
   twelve months tofore, and there they kept the service of the
   resurrection on the fishes back, and after, they sailed that same day
   by the morning to the island whereas the tree of birds was, and then
   the said bird welcomed S. Brandon and all his fellowship, and went
   again to the tree and sang full merrily, and there he and his monks
   dwelled from Easter till Trinity Sunday as they did the year before, in
   full great joy and mirth. And daily they heard the merry service of the
   birds sitting on the tree. And then the bird told to S. Brandon that he
   should return again at Christmas to the abbey of monks, and at Easter
   thither again, and the other deal of the year labour in the ocean in
   full great perils, and from year to year till the seven years be
   accomplished. Anrl then shall ye come to the joyful place of Paradise
   and dwell there forty days in full great joy and mirth, and after, ye
   shall return home into your own abbey in safety, and there end your
   life, and come to the bliss of heaven, to which our Lord bought you
   with his precious blood. And then the angel of our Lord ordained all
   thing that was needful to S. Brandon and to his monks in victuals and
   all other things necessary, and then they thanked our Lord of his great
   goodness that he had showed to them oft in their great need, and then
   sailed forth into the great sea ocean, abiding the mercy of our Lord in
   great trouble and tempests.

   And soon after came to them an horrible fish which followed the ship
   long time, casting so much water out of his mouth into the ship that
   they supposed to have been drowned, wherefore they devoutly prayed God
   to deliver them of that great peril. And anon after, came another fish
   greater than he, out of the west sea, and fought with him, and at the
   last crave him into three pieces, and then returned again. And then
   they thanked meekly our Lord of their deliverance from this great
   peril, but they were in great heaviness because their victuals were
   nigh spent; but by the ordinance of our Lord there came a bird and
   brought to them a great branch of a vine full of red grapes, by which
   they lived fourteen days, and then they came to a little island,
   wherein were many vines full of grapes, and they there landed and
   thanked God, and gathered as many grapes as they lived by forty days
   after, always sailing in the sea in many storms and tempests, and as
   they thus sailed, suddenly came flying towards them a great grip which
   assailed them and was like to have destroyed them. Wherefore they
   devoutly prayed for help and aid of our Lord Jesu Christ. And then the
   bird of the tree of the island where they had holden their Easter
   tofore, came to the grip and smote out both his eyes, and after slew
   him, whereof they thanked our Lord, and then sailed forth continually
   till S. Peter's day, and then sang they solemnly their service in the
   honour of the feast. And in that place the water was so clear that they
   might see all the fishes that were about them, whereof they were full
   sore aghast, and the monks counselled S. Brandon to sing no more, for
   all the fishes lay then as they had slept. And then S. Brandon said:
   Dread ye not, for ye have kept by two Easters the feast of the
   Resurrection upon the great fishes back, and therefore dread ye not of
   these little fishes. And then S. Brandon made him ready and went to
   mass, and bade his monks to sing the best way they could, and then anon
   all the fishes awoke, and came about the ship so thick that unnethe
   they might see the water for the fishes, and when the mass was done all
   the fishes departed so as they were no more seen. And seven days they
   sailed always in that clear water.

   And then there came a south wind and drove the ship northward, whereas
   they saw an island full dark and full of stench and smoke, and there
   they heard great blowing and blasting of bellows, but they might see
   nothing, but heard great thundering, whereof they were sore afeard, and
   blessed them oft. And soon after there came one starting out all
   burning in fire, and stared full ghastly on them with great staring
   eyes, of whom the monks were aghast, and at his departing from them he
   made the horriblest cry that might be heard, and soon there came a
   great number of fiends and assailed them with hooks and burning iron
   malles, which ran on the water, following their ship fast, in such wise
   that it seemed all the sea to be on fire. But by the pleasure of our
   Lord they had no power to hurt ne grieve them ne their ship, wherefore
   the fiends began to roar and cry, and threw their hooks and malles at
   them. And they then were sore afraid, and prayed to God for comfort and
   help, for they saw the fiends all about the ship, and them seemed then
   all the island and the sea to be on fire. And with a sorrowful cry all
   those fiends departed from them and returned to the place that they
   came from. And then S. Brandon told to them that this was a part of
   hell, and therefore he charged them to be steadfast in the faith, for
   they should yet see many a dreadful place ere they came home again. And
   then came the south wind, and drove them farther into the north, where
   they saw a hill all of fire, and a foul smoke and stench coming from
   thence, and the fire stood on each side of the hill like a wall all
   burning. And then one of his monks began to cry and weep full sore, and
   said that his end was come, and that he might abide no longer in the
   ship, and anon he leapt out of the ship into the sea, and then he cried
   and roared full piteously, cursing the time that he was born, and also
   father and mother that begat him, because they saw no better to his
   correction in his young age, for now I must go to perpetual pain. And
   then the saying of S. Brandon was verified that he said to him when he
   entered; therefore it is good a man to do penance and forsake sin, for
   the hour of death is uncertain. And then anon the wind turned into the
   north and drove the ship into the south, which sailed seven days
   continually, and they came to a great rock standing in the sea, and
   thereon sat a naked man in full great misery and pain, for the waves of
   the sea had so beaten his body that all the flesh was gone off, and
   nothing Ieft but sinews and bare bones. And when the waves were gone,
   there was a canvas that hung over his head which beat his body full
   sore with the blowing of the wind, and also there were two ox tongues
   and a great stone that he sat on, which did him full great ease. And
   then S. Brandon charged him to tell him what he was, and he said: My
   name is Judas that sold our Lord Jesu Christ for thirty pence, which
   sitteth here thus wretchedly, howbeit I am worthy to be in the greatest
   pain that is, but our Lord is so merciful that he hath rewarded me
   better than I have deserved, for of right my place is in the burning
   hell, but I am here but certain times of the year, that is, from
   Christmas to twelfth day, and from Easter till Whitsuntide be past, and
   every feastful day of our Lady, and every Saturday noon till Sunday,
   that evensong be done, but all other times I lie still in hell in full
   burning fire, with Pilate, Herod, and Caiaphas, therefore accursed be
   the time that ever I knew them. And then Judas prayed S. Brandon to
   abide still there all that night, and that he would keep him there
   still, that the fiends should not fetch him to hell. And he said: With
   God's help thou shalt abide here all this night; and then he asked
   Judas what cloth that was that hung over his head, and he said it was a
   cloth that he gave to a leper, which was bought with the money that he
   stole from our Lord when I bare his purse, wherefore it doth to me full
   great pain now, in beating my face with the blowing of the wind, and
   these two ox-tongues rhat hang here above me I gave them sometime to
   two priests to pray for me, them I bought with mine own money, and
   therefore they ease me because the fishes of the sea gnaw on them and
   spare me, and this stone that I sit on, lay sometime in a desolate
   place where it eased no man, and I took it thence and laid it in a foul
   way where it did much ease to them that went by that way, and therefore
   it easeth me now, for every good deed shall be rewarded and every evil
   deed shall be punished. And the Sunday, against even, there came a
   great multitude of fiends, blasting and roaring and bade S. Brandon go
   thence that they might have their servant Judas, for we dare not come
   into the presence of our master but if we bring him to hell with us.
   And then said S. Brandon: I let not you to do your master's
   commandment, but by the power of our Lord Jesu Christ I charge you to
   leave him this night till to-morrow. They said: how darest thou help
   him that so sold his master for thirty pence to the Jews, and caused
   him also to die the most shameful death upon the cross? And then S.
   Brandon charged the fiends by his passion that they should not noy him
   that night. And then the fiends went their way roaring and crying
   towards hell, to their master the great devil, and then Judas thanked
   S. Brandon so ruthfully, that it was pity to see, and on the morn the
   fiends came with a horrible noise, saying that they had that night
   suffered great pain because they brought not Judas and said that he
   should suffer double pain the six days following, and they took then
   Judas, trembling for fear, with them to pain. And after, S. Brandon
   sailed southward three days and three nights, and on the Friday they
   saw an island, and then S. Brandon began to sigh, and said: I see the
   island wherein S. Paul the hermit dwelleth, and hath dwelled there
   forty years without meat and drink ordained by man's hand. And when
   they came to the land, S. Paul came and welcomed them humbly. He was
   old and foregrown, so that no man might see his body, of whom S.
   Brandon said weeping: Now I see a man that liveth more like an angel
   than a man, wherefore we wretches may be ashamed that we live not
   better. Then S. Paul said to S. Brandon: Thou art better than I, for
   our Lord hath showed to thee more of his privities than he hath done to
   me, wherefore thou oughtest to be more praised than I. To whom S.
   Brandon said: We be monks, and must labour for our meat, but God hath
   provided for thee such meat as thou holdest thee pleased, wherefore
   thou art much better than I. To whom S. Paul said: Sometime I was a
   monk of S. Patrick's Abbey in Ireland, and was warden of the place
   whereas men enter into S. Patrick's purgatory, and on a day there came
   one to me, and I asked him what he was, and he said: I am your abbot
   Patrick, and charge thee that thou depart from hence to-morn early to
   the seaside, and there thou shalt find a ship into which thou must
   enter, which God hath ordained for thee, whose will thou must
   accomplish. And so the next day I arose and went forth and found the
   ship, in which I entered, and by the purveyance of God was I brought
   into this island the seventh day after. And then I left the ship and
   went to land, and there I walked up and down a good while, and then, by
   the purveyance of God, there came an otter, going on his hinder feet,
   and brought me a flint stone and an iron to smite fire with, in his two
   foreclaws of his feet, and also he had about his neck great plenty of
   fish, which he cast down before me and went his way, and I smote fire,
   and made a fire of sticks, and did seethe the fish by which I lived
   three days, and then the otter came again and brought to me fish for
   other three days, and thus he hath done these fifty-one years, through
   the grace of God. And there was a great stone, out of which our Lord
   made to spring fair water, clear and sweet, whereof I drink daily, and
   thus have I lived one and fifty years. And I was forty years old when I
   came hither, and am now one hundred and eleven years old, and abide
   till it please our Lord to send for me, and if it pleased him I would
   fain be discharged of this wretched life. And then he bade S. Brandon
   to take of the water of the well, and to carry into his ship: For it is
   time that thou depart, for thou hast a great journey to do, for thou
   shalt sail to an island which is forty days sailing hence, where thou
   shalt hold thine Easter like as thou hast done tofore, whereas the tree
   of birds is, and from thence thou shalt sail into the land of Behest,
   and shalt abide there forty days, and after return home into thy
   country in safety.

   And then these holy men took leave each of other, and they wept both
   full sore, and kissed each other; and then S. Brandon entered into his
   ship and sailed forty days even south in full great tempest, and on
   Easter even came to their procurator, which made to them good cheer as
   he had beforetime, and from thence they came to the great fish, whereon
   they said matins and mass on Easter day, and when the mass was done the
   fish began to move and swam forth fast into the sea, whereof the monks
   were sore aghast which stood upon him, for it was a great marvel to see
   such a fish, so great as all a country, for to swim so fast in the
   water, but by the will of our Lord this fish set all the monks aland in
   the paradise of birds, all whole and sound, and then returned to the
   place he came from. And then S. Brandon and his monks thanked our Lord
   of their deliverance of the great fish, and kept their Easter-tide till
   Trinity Sunday, like as they had done beforetime, and after this they
   took their ship and sailed east forty days.

   And at the forty days end it began to hail right fast, and therewith
   came a dark mist which lasted long after, which feared S. Brandon and
   his monks, and they prayed to our Lord to keep and help them. And then
   anon came their procurator and bade them to be of good cheer, for they
   were come into the land of Behest. And soon after that mist passed
   away, and anon they saw the fairest country eastward that any man might
   see, and it was so clear and bright that it was a heavenly sight to
   behold, and all the trees were charged with ripe fruit, and herb full
   of flowers. In which land they walked forty days, but they could see
   none end of that land, and there was always day and never night, and
   the land temperate, ne too hot ne too cold. And at the last they came
   to a fair river, but they durst not go over, and there came to them a
   fair young man and welcomed them courteously, and called each of them
   by his name, and did great reverence to S. Brandon, and said to them:
   Be ye now joyful, for this is the land that ye have sought, but our
   Lord will that ye depart hence hastily and he will show to you more of
   his secrets when ye come again into the sea, and our Lord will that you
   lade your ship with the fruit of this land, and hie you hence for ye
   may no longer abide here, but thou shalt sail again into thine own
   country, and soon after thou comest home thou shalt die. And this water
   that thou seest here departeth the world asunder, for on that other
   side of this water may no man come that is in this life, and the fruit
   that ye see here is alway thus ripe every time of the year, and always
   it is here light as ye now see, and he that keepeth our Lord's hests at
   all times shall see this land ere he pass out of this world. And then
   S. Brandon and his monks took of that fruit as much as they would, and
   also took with them great plenty of precious stones, and then took
   their leave, and went to ship weeping sore because they might no longer
   abide there. And then they took their ship and came home into Ireland
   in safety, whom their brethren received with great joy, giving
   thankings to our Lord which had kept them all those seven years from
   many a peril and brought them home in safety, to whom be given honour
   and glory, world without end. Amen. And soon after, this holy man S.
   Brandon waxed feeble and sick, and had but little joy of this world,
   but ever after his joy and mind was in the joys of heaven. And in a
   short time after he being full of virtues, departed out of this life to
   everlasting life, and was worshipfully buried in a fair abbey which he
   himself founded, where our Lord showeth for this holy saint many fair
   miracles. Wherefore let us devoutly pray to this holy saint that he
   pray for us to our Lord that he have mercy on us, to whom be given laud
   and honour and empire, world without end. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                Here followeth the Life of S. Erkenwold, Bishop.

   S. Erkenwold was born of noble lineage. His father was named Offa, and
   was king of east England, and he had also a sister named Alburgh. Which
   Erkenwold and Alburgh were of right perfect life, and howbeit that
   their father was a paynim, yet were these two children christian. And
   when Erkenwold was in perfect age he went into religion, and was made
   first abbot of Chertsey where he lived a holy life, and after, he was
   made bishop of London, and his sister Alburgh was his true follower in
   good works, and was a woman of religion, and for her holy life she was
   made abbess of Barking. This holy man, by the information of S. Austin
   and S. Melitus, was informed in the faith in such wise that he utterly
   forsook the world, and ordained and builded two monasteries, one for
   himself at Chertsey, and another for his sister at Barking, which,
   after her baptism, was named Ethelburga. And S. Erkenwold counselled
   his sister to flee worldly vanities, and so he did himself, and gave
   him into divine contemplation, and gave such goods as he had, besides
   them that he spent in the foundation and building of the said
   monasteries, to poor people. And he changed his earthly heritage, his
   worldly dignity and his great patrimony into the heritage and
   livelihood of holy church for to have his heritage in heaven. And he
   did all these expenses ere he was called to be bishop of London. And
   the holy Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury, did do consecrate him
   bishop of London, and his sister was set in Barking with other virgins
   for to be always occupied in the service of our Lord. And it happed on
   a time, as the artificers that builded the monastery at Barking were
   overseen in taking the measure of a principal beam, for it was too
   short, and would not accord to the place that it was ordained for,
   wherefore they made much sorrow. Then this holy man, S. Erkenwold, and
   his sister, seeing this misfortune, took the same beam between their
   hands and drew it out in such wise that it had sufficient length and
   accorded unto the proper place that it was ordained to, which miracle
   was anon known openly to the people. And at that time were no nuns in
   England, wherefore S. Erkenwold sent over sea for a devout religious
   woman named Hildelith, to whom he betook his sister for to be informed
   in the religion, as well in conning as in good manners and virtuous
   doctrine, in which she profited in such wise that she passed all her
   fellows in conning, and soon after she was made abbess and chief of all
   the monastery. And it happed soon after that the bishop of London died,
   whose name was Cedda, and by consent of the king and all the people,
   this holy man of God, Erkenwold was bishop of London, and whatsomever
   he taught in word, he fulfilled it in deed, for he was perfect in
   wisdom, soft and discreet in word, busy in prayer, chaste of body, and
   wholly given to God's lore, and was planted in the root of charity. And
   afterwards, when he had suffered much tribulation with many ghostly
   battles, he began to wax right sick; and then he commanded to make
   ready his chair that he might go and preach in the city the word of
   God; wherefore it was kept in custom long time after of his disciples,
   and many others, to touch him and kiss him, and whatsomever sickness
   that they had, they were anon delivered thereof, and were made
   perfectly whole.

   In a day of summer as this blessed saint Erkenwold rode in his chair
   for to preach the word of God, it fortuned that the one wheel of the
   chair fell off from the axletree, and that notwithstanding the chair
   went forthright without falling, which was against nature and reason,
   and a fair miracle, for God guided the chair and it was a marvel to all
   them that saw it. O merciful God and marvellous above all things, to
   whom all brute beasts be made meek, and wild things be obedient, who
   vouchsafest to call to thy mercy thy blessed servant, to make him
   partable of thy excellent joy, give thou us grace by his prayer, which
   knew by revelation that his soul should be loosed from the body by
   temporal death, to be preserved from all manner evil and everlasting
   death.

   When this blessed S. Erkenwold, as God would, came to Barking, he fell
   into a great sickness, in which he ended his temporal life; and
   forsomuch as he knew it before, he sent for his servants and such as
   were drawing to him, and gave to them wholesome and sweet lessons, and
   blessed them with great devotion, and among them he yielded up his
   spirit to Almighty God, in whose passing was felt a marvellous sweet
   odour, as the house had been full of sweet balm. And when the high
   canons of S. Paul's at London heard this, and the monks of Chertsey, so
   anon they came to this holy body for to have it. And the nuns said they
   ought to have the body because he died there, and also because he was
   their founder, and the monks said they ought rather to have him,
   because he was both their abbot and founder. Then the chapter of Paul's
   and the people said they strove in vain, for he should be brought to
   London into his own church. thus there was great strife, and at the
   last they of London took up the holy body, and bare it towards London,
   and as they went, there fell a great tempest, and so much water that
   they might not pass, but were constrained to set down the corpse, and
   in all the storm the tapers that were borne about the body were always
   bright burning; and then the nuns said that God showed well that they
   of London ought not to have him because of the tempest. And at the
   last, after many words, there was a clerk which had been longing to S.
   Erkenwold, and saw this strife, and stood up and commanded silence, and
   told to the people a great commendation of the virtuous life of this
   holy saint, and said it was not honest, ne according, to misentreat the
   holy body by violent hands, but let us beseech Almighty God, with good
   devotion and meekness of heart, for to show to us some token by
   revelation in what place this holy body shall rest. And all the people
   consented thereto, and kneeled down and prayed devoutly; and whiles
   they were in prayer they saw that the water divided as it did to Moses
   in the Red Sea, and the children going through into desert. In like
   wise God gave a dry path to the people of London for to convey this
   holy body through the water to the city; and anon they took up the body
   with great honour and reverence, and by one assent they bare it through
   the path, the water standing up on every side, and the people not
   wetting their feet. And so they came to Stratford, and set down the
   bier in a fair mead full of flowers, and anon after, the weather began
   to wax fair and clear after the tempest, and the tapers were made to
   burn without putting to fire of any man's hand, and thus pleased our
   Lord for to multiply miracles to the honour and worship of this holy
   saint, wherefore the people were full of joy and gladness, and gave
   laud to Almighty God. And then they took up the body and brought it to
   Paul's, and as many sick folks as touched his bier were made whole,
   anon as they touched the bier, of all their sicknesses by the merits of
   the holy bishop S. Erkenwold. And after they laid and buried the body
   honorably in S. Paul's church, whereas our Lord hath showed many a fair
   miracle, as in the delivering of prisoners out of their irons, sick
   folk to their health, blind to their sight, and lame men to their
   bodily strength: and among all others he hath been a special protector
   to the said church against fire, whereas on a time the church was
   burnt, and his shrine, which was then but tree, was saved through his
   bodily merits, in so much that the cloth which lay upon it was not
   perished. Another time when a great fire had burnt a great part of the
   city, and should have entered upon the church, S. Erkenwold was seen on
   the church with a banner fighting against the fire, and so saved and
   kept his church from burning. Then let us pray unto this holy saint
   that he be a special advocate for us to Almighty God that we may be
   preserved from all perils of fire and water, and that he so govern us
   between wealth and adversity in this present life, that we being
   assoiled from sin and vices, may be brought unto heavenly joy where
   laud, honour, and glory be given to the Blessed Trinity world without
   end. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

        Here followeth of the holy Abbot Pastor, and first of his name.

   Pastor is said of feeding, because that he feedeth his sheep, and this
   holy man Pastor fed his sheep spiritually, and they were his brethren
   by spiritual of words of doctrine and of manners of holy religion.

                           Of the holy Abbot Pastor.

   The Abbot Pastor was many years in great abstinence in desert, and
   tormened his flesh long time, and he shined in great holiness of
   religion. And his mother desired muchto see him and his brethren, and
   saw on a day that he and his brethren went to the church; they saw her,
   and anon they fled from her and entered into their cell, and shut the
   door against her, and she came to the door and sat there sore crying
   and weeping. And then Pastor came to the door and said: What criest
   thou there, thou old woman? And then she understood the voice of him,
   and she cried louder and said: I would see you my sons, why should I
   not see you, am I not your mother that bare you and gave you suck, and
   now am all hoar for age? To whom her son said: Whether wilt thou see us
   in this world or in another? And then she said: If I see you not here
   shall I see you there? And he said to her: If thou mayst suffer not for
   to see us here, without doubt thou shalt see us there, which then
   departed joyfully, saying: If I shall see you there I will not see you
   here. And then the judge would needs see the abbot Pastor, but he might
   not, and then he took his sister's son, as though he had been a
   malefactor, and put him in prison, and said: If Pastor will come and
   pray for him, I shall deliver him and let him go. And then the mother
   of the child came weeping to the door of Pastor, and prayed him to help
   her son; and when she could get none answer of hirn, then she said to
   him by great violence: If thine entrails be hard as iron, and hast no
   pity of nothing yet at the least oughtest thou to be moved and have
   pity of thine own blood, which is my son. And then Pastor sent to her
   and said that he had engendered no child. And then anon she departed
   for anger, and then said the judge: At the least let him command by
   mouth, and I shall let him go. And then the abbot Pastor sent him word
   that he should examine the cause according to the law, and if he were
   worthy to die, let him die, and if not do as it shall please thee. He
   taught his brethren and said: For to keep himself, to consider and have
   discretion, be works of the soul, poverty, tribulation and discretion
   be works of solitary life. It is written that these three men were so,
   Noah, Job, and Daniel. Noah representeth the person that possesseth,
   Job them that be troubled, and Daniel them that be discreet, and if a
   monk hateth two things, he may be free of this world. And one of his
   brethren asked him what they were, and he said: Fleshly covetise, and
   vain glory; and he said: lf thou wilt find rest in this world and in
   that which is to come, say in every case: Who am I? and deem no man.

   On a time when a brother had offended, of their congregation, the abbot
   by counsel of one that was solitary put him out, which wept as he had
   been in despair. Then the abbot Pastor made him to be brought tofore
   him, whom he comforting benignly, sent him to him that was solitary,
   saying: I hearing of thee, desire to see thee, labour therefore and
   come to me. And when he was come, Pastor said to him: There were two
   men which their two servants were dead, and that one of them left his
   own and went for to bewail the dead servant of that other. And when the
   solitary man heard him, anon he understood him, and wist by his words
   what he meant, and had compunction.

   There was a brother which was sore troubled, and would leave his place
   because he had heard certain words of another brother that they
   profited not; and Pastor said he should not believe those words, for
   they were not true; he affirmed again to him that they were true, for a
   true brother had told him so. To whom Pastor said: He is not true that
   said so to thee, and he said: I have seen it with mine eyes. Then he
   demanded him of the festue and of the beam, and he answered: A festue
   is a festue, and a beam is a beam. And Pastor said: Put in thine heart
   all that be thy sins and thou shalt find them like a beam, and the
   small sins of him be like a festue.

   There was a brother which had done a great sin, being in will to do
   penance three years, and asked him if it were much, which said: It is
   much; and then he asked if he would command him a year, and he said it
   was much. They that stood by demanded of forty days. He said it was
   much. And he said to them: I trow that if a man repent him with all his
   heart, and will return no more to his sin and doth penance three days,
   our Lord shall receive him to mercy. And then he was demanded of that
   word: That angered his brother without a cause; and he said: Of all
   that ever thy brother grieveth thee, be not angry with him till that he
   put out thy right eye, and if thou be wroth to him otherwise thou art
   angry without cause, but if any would depart thee from God, then be
   wroth with him. And yet he said furthermore: Who so complaineth is no
   monk, who that holdeth malice in his heart is no monk, who that is
   wroth is no monk, who doeth evil for evil is no monk, who that is proud
   and full of words is no monk. Whosomever is verily a monk is always
   humble, meek, full of charity, and always to have before his eyes the
   dread of God in every place, that he sin not. And also he said: If
   there be three together of whom that one resteth well and that other is
   sick, and the third serveth and administereth with pure will, these
   three be semblable as it were of one work.

   There was one of his brethren which complained him that he had many
   thoughts and perished in them, and he brought him in the air, and bade
   him hold up his lap and take the wind, and he said: I may not; and that
   other said: In like wise mayst thou not forbid thoughts to enter into
   thee, but it is thy part to withstand them. There was a brother that
   demanded of him what he should do with the heritage that was left him,
   and he bade him he should come again within three days; and when he
   came he said to him: If I said to thee: Give them to thy parents or
   friends thou shouldst have no meed thereof, and if I said give them to
   poor men, thou shalt be sure. Do what thou wilt, I have no part
   thereof. This is in Vitae Patrum.
     __________________________________________________________________

                       Here beginneth of the Abbot John.

   John, abbot, when he had dwelled forty years in desert with Episius,
   then Episius demanded how much he had profited, and then he said: As
   long as I have been solitary there was never sun that saw me eating.
   And John said: Ne me, being wroth. In like manner it is read that, when
   Epiphanius the bishop gave flesh to the abbot Hilary, he said: Pardon
   me, for sith I took this habit I never eat flesh ne fowl. To whom the
   bishop said: And sith I took mine habit, I suffered never none to sleep
   that had anything against me, ne I ne slept also as long as I was
   contrary to any other. To whom Hilary said: Father, forgive it me, for
   thou art better than I. John would have lived like unto angels, and
   entended always to serve God without any other thing doing, and he
   despoiled him, and was a whole week in desert. And when he was almost
   dead for hunger, and all stung with bees and wasps, he returned to the
   door of his brother and knocked, and he asked: Who art thou? and he
   said: I am John. And that other said: Thou art not he, for John is made
   an angel and is not among men. And John said: Truly I am he; but for
   all that he left him there till on the morn. And then he opened the
   door to him, and said to him: If thou be a man it is need that thou
   labour again for to be fed, and if thou be an angel, wherefore desires"
   thou to enter herein? And John said: O brother, forgive it me, for I
   have sinned. And when he should die his brethren prayed him that he
   would leave to them, instead of heritage, a word of health, and that
   short, and then he sighed and said: I did never yet mine own will ne I
   never did thing to any other but I did it first myself. Hæc in Vitis
   Patrum.
     __________________________________________________________________

                       Here followeth of the Abbot Moses.

   Moses, the abbot, said to a brother of his which demanded of him a
   sermon, to whom he said: Sit still in thy cell and it shall teach thee
   all things. There was an old man being sick which would go into Egypt
   because he would not grieve his brethren. The abbot Moses said to him:
   Go not thither, for if thou go out thou shalt fall into fornication,
   and he was angry, and said: My body is dead, why sayest thou so? And
   when he was gone, it happed that a maid served him for devotion, and
   kept him in his malady, and when he was whole he defiled her, and gat
   on her a child. And when the child was born the old man took the child
   in his arms, and came on a day of great feast into the church of Sixtus
   to a great multitude of people, and when his brethren wept, he said:
   Lo! see ye this child, this is the son of inobedience, therefore beware
   ye, brethren, for I have done this in mine old age, I pray you pray ye
   for me. And then he returned into his cell, and came again to his first
   estate. And in like wise as another old man said to another: I am a
   dead man, and that other said to him: Trust never to thyself till thy
   soul issue of thy body, for if thou say that thou art dead,
   nevertheless thine enemy the fiend is not dead. There was a brother
   which had sinned, and was sent by his brethren to the abbot Moses. And
   he took a basketful of gravel and came to them, and they demanded him
   what it was, and he said: These be my sins that run after me, and I see
   them not, and I am this day come to deem the sins of a stranger. They,
   hearing this, spared their brother. A like thing is read of the abbot
   tofore him, for when the brethren spake of a brother that was culpable,
   he held him still and spake not. And after took a sackful of gravel and
   bare it behind him the most part, and a little tofore him, and they
   demanded him what it was, and he said: The most part be my sins which I
   bear behind me, them I consider not, ne sorrow for them. And this
   little that I have before me be the sins of my brethren, which I
   consider all day and judge them, howbeit I should always bear mine own
   sins tofore me, and think on them, and pray to God for them that he
   would forgive me them. When the abbot Moses was made clerk, and the
   bishop had ordained the oflice, he said to him: Now, thou art made all
   white, and Moses said: Withinforth or withoutforth? Then the bishop
   would prove him, and said to his clerks that when he should come to the
   altar they should wrongfully put him from it, and follow him, and hear
   what he would say. And anon they put him away, and said to him: Go out
   thou Ethiopian, and as he went out he said: They have done well to the
   foul wretch for to defile and do despite to thee, for sith thou art no
   man, what presumest thou to be among the men. This said he to himself.
   Hæc in Vitis Patrum.
     __________________________________________________________________

                         Here followeth of S. Arsenius.

   When Arsenius was yet master in the palace of a prince, he prayed unto
   God that he would address him unto the way of health, so that in a time
   he heard a voice that said to him: Arsenius, flee the company of men
   and thou shalt be saved. Then he went and took upon him the life of a
   monk, and as he prayed there, he heard a voice saying: Arsenius, flee
   hence, speak not and rest thee. It is read in the same place as to
   coveting this rest, that there were three monks new made, and the first
   of them chose for to bring men that were at debate and in discord to
   rest and peace, the second for to visit sick men, and the third for to
   rest in wilderness and in desert. The first man, that laboured to set
   them at accord that were at debate, could not please all men, and was
   weary and grieved and half overcome, and he came to the second and
   found him all mat and failing for weariness, and might not perform that
   he had emprised, and then by assent they two came to the third that was
   in desert, and when they had told their tribulations to him he put
   water in a cup and said: Look, and behold this water, and they saw that
   it was thick and troubled, and soon after he said: See it now, how it
   is now fair and clear. And when they looked therein they saw their
   visages therein, and then he said: Whosomever dwelleth among the men,
   he may not, for the multitude of people see his sins, but when he
   resteth, then he may see his sins.

   And on a time there was a man found another in desert eating herbs and
   grass, all naked as a beast, and he ran after him, and that other fled,
   and he that followed said: Abide and tarry, for I follow thee for the
   love of God, and that other said: I flee from thee for God's sake, and
   that other cast away his mantle from him, and then he tarried and said:
   Because thou hast thrown the matter of the world from thee I have
   abiden thee. And then he asked of him: How shall I be saved? And he
   answered and said: Flee from the company of men, and say nothing.

   There was a noble lady, which was old, came for to see the abbot
   Arsenius by devotion, and Theophilus the archbishop prayed him that he
   would suffer that she might see him, but he would not grant him in no
   wise. And at the last she went into his cell, and found him without
   tofore his door, and she fell down to his feet, and he took her up with
   great indignation, saying to her: If thou wilt see my face, see, and
   she for great shame and confusion considered not his visage. To whom he
   said: How durst thou presume upon thee that art a woman to make such a
   voyage? Thou shalt now go to Rome and say to other women that thou hast
   seen Arsenius, and they shall also come for to see me. And she said to
   him: If God will that I return to Rome I shall never stir woman to come
   to thee, but only I pray thee that thou pray for me and always remember
   me. And he said to her: I pray to God that he put out of my heart the
   remembrance of thee. And when she heard that, she was much angry, and
   came into the city and began to tremble and shake for sorrow in the
   fevers or axes; and when the archbishop knew it, he went for to comfort
   her, and she said: I die for sorrow and heaviness, and the archbishop
   said to her: Knowest thou not that thou art a woman, and the fiend
   overcometh holy men ofttimes by women, and therefore the old man said
   to thee those words, howbeit he prayed always for thy soul? And then
   the woman was comforted and was all whole, and returned home to her own
   house.

   Also it is read of another old father, that when his disciple said to
   him: Thou art waxen all old, father, let us now go dwell near to the
   world, and he said: Let us go thither whereas no woman is, and his
   disciple said: Where is any place but that women be therein, save in
   desert? To whom he said: Then bring me into that desert. There was
   another brother which, when he bare his mother over the water, he wound
   his hands in his mantle, to whom she said: Wherefore hast thou covered
   thy hands so, my son? To whom he answered: The body of a woman is as
   fire that burneth, and because the mind of other women should not come
   in my remembrance, therefore I do it. And Arsenius all the days of his
   life, when he sat at the work of his hands, he had a linen cloth in his
   bosom for to dry the tears with, that ran fast from his eyes, and all
   the night he would not sleep, and in the morning, when he must sleep
   for weariness of nature, he would say to sleep: Come, wicked servant,
   and then would take a little sleep sitting, and would arise anon, and
   said: It sufficeth to a monk if he sleep an hour, if he be a fighter
   against vices.

   When the father of S. Arsenius, which was a great senator and a right
   noble man, should finish his life, he left to Arsenius by his testament
   much heritage, and one, Magistrianus, brought unto him the said
   testament, and when he had received it he would have broken it. Then
   Magistrianus fell down at his feet praying him that he would not do so,
   for his head then should he lose, for it should be smitten off. To whom
   Arsenius said: I was dead tofore him, he therefore that is but now
   dead, how may he make me his heir? And sent again the testament, and
   would nothing have. On a time there was a voice came to him and said:
   Come, and I shall show to thee the works of the men, and led him into a
   certain place and showed to him a man of Ethiopia, that is a black man,
   that hewed wood and made a great fardel, so great that he might not
   bear it, and always he hewed and put to the fardel, and thus he did
   long, and after he showed to him a man that drew water out of a lake
   and cast it into a cistern pierced, by which the water ran again into
   the lake, and he would fill the cistern and might not. And after, he
   showed to him a temple and a man on horseback which bare a long tree
   athwart, and would enter into the temple, and he might not because the
   tree lay athwart. Then he expounded him this thing, and said: He that
   beareth the tree is like the burden of justice with pride, and will not
   meek him, therefore he abideth without the realm of heaven. And he that
   heweth the wood is like a man that is in sin, and putteth none away by
   penance, but putteth always wickedness to wickedness. And he that
   draweth the water is a man that doeth good works here in this present
   world, but because that his evil works be meddled with them, he loseth
   his good works. And when the evensong time of the Saturday came, on the
   Sunday, he left all his works behind him, and held up his hands to
   heaven till the sun arose in the morning of the Sunday tofore his face,
   and so abode all the night in prayers and in orisons. And hæc in Vitis
   Patrum.
     __________________________________________________________________

                      Here followeth of the Abbot Agathon.

   Agathon the abbot bare three years a stone in his mouth till that he
   had learned to keep silence, and there was another which entered into
   the congregation that said within himself: Thou and an ass be of one
   kind, for like as an ass is beaten and speaketh not, and suffereth
   wrong without answering, right so doest thou. And another brother was
   put from the table, and he answered nothing, and afterwards he was
   asked, and he said: I have put in my heart that I am like to a hound,
   when he is chastised he goeth his way out. And it was demanded of
   Agathon what virtue was more than labour, and he answered: I trow there
   be no labour so great as to pray to God, for the fiend laboureth always
   to break his prayer, and in other labours a man hath some rest, and he
   that prayeth hath always need of great strife. A brother demanded of
   Agathon how he ought to dwell with his brethren, to whom he said: Like
   as the first day, and take on thee no trust but sufferance, for
   sufferance is not worse than trust, for sufferance is mother of all
   passions; and then keep thee from ire, for if the irous raised dead men
   it should not please God ne none other for his ire. There was a brother
   that was angry said to himself: If I were alone, I should not be so
   soon angry. On a time he filled a pot with water and poured it out
   again, and he filled it the second time and poured it out always, and
   then he was so moved for anger that he brake the pot. And then he
   advised himself, and knew that he was deceived of the devil of wrath
   and of ire, and said: I am alone and yet I am overcome by wrath, and
   therefore I shall return to my congregation, for over all is labour,
   and over all is patience, and need of the help of God.

   And two other brethren were contrary which had long conversed together
   and might not be moved to wrath. And on a time that one said to that
   other: Let us make contentions together like as men of the world do,
   and that other said: I wot not how contention is made. And that other
   said: I shall lay this sack in the middle between us, and I shall say:
   It is mine; and thou shalt say: It is not so, but it is mine, and thus
   shall the strife be made. And then that one laid the sack so and said:
   It is mine, and that other said: Nay, but it is mine, and that other
   said: Then thine be it, take it and go thy way, and thus they departed
   and could not strive together. The abbot Agathon was wise to
   understand, not slow to labour, scarce in meat and clothing, and said
   he had never slept, at his will, having in his heart any sorrow against
   any other, or any other against him.

   When Agathon should die, he held him three days without moving, holding
   always his eyes open to heaven. And when his brethren roused or stirred
   him he said: I am tofore the judgment of God. And they said: Why
   doubtest thou? And he said: I have laboured with all the virtue that I
   might to keep the commandments of God, but I am a man, and I wot not if
   my works shall please our Lord. And they said: Trustest not thou in thy
   works which thou hast done for God? And he said: I shall not presume
   till I come tofore him, for the judgments of God be other than the
   judgmenta of men. And when they would yet have asked him something, he
   said: Show to me charity, and speak no more to me, for I am occupied,
   and when he had said this, he yielded up his spirit with joy, and they
   saw our Lord and his angels receiving his spirit and saluting, like as
   a man saluteth his friends. All this is written in Vitis Patrum.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth of Barlaam the Hermit.

   Barlaam, of whom S. John Damascene made the history with great
   diligence, in whom divine grace so wrought that he converted to the
   faith S. Josaphat. And then as all India was full of christian people
   and of monks, there arose a puissant king which was named Avennir,
   which made great persecution to christian men and specially to monks.
   And it happed so that one, which was friend of the king and chief in
   his palace, by the inspiration of divine grace left the hall royal for
   to enter into the order of monks And when the king heard say that he
   was christian he was wood for anger, and did do seek him through every
   desert till that he was found with great pain, and then he was brought
   tofore him. And when he saw him in a vile coat and much lean for
   hunger, which was wont to be covered with precious clothing and
   abounded in much riches, he said to him: O thou fool and out of thy
   mind, why hast thou changed thine honour into villainy and art made the
   player of children? And he said to him: If thou wilt hear of me reason,
   put from thee thine enemies. Then the king demanded him who were his
   enemies, and he said to him, ire and covetise, for they empesh and let,
   that truth may not be seen, ne to assay prudence and equity. To whom
   the king said: Let it be as thou sayst, and that other said: The fools
   despise the things that be, like as they were not, and he that hath not
   the taste of the things that be, he shall not use the sweetness of
   them, and may not learn the truth of them that be not. And when he had
   showed many things of the mystery of the incarnation, the king said to
   him: If I had not promised thee at the beginning that I should put away
   ire from my counsel I should cast thy body into the flre. Go thy way
   and flee from mine eyes that I see thee no more, and that I now
   distress thee not. And anon the man of God went his way all heavily
   because he had not suffered martyrdom. Thus then, in this meanwhile, it
   happed that to the king which had no child, that there was a fair son
   born of his wife, and was called Josaphat. And then the king assembled
   a right great company of people for to sacrifice to his gods for the
   nativity of his son, and also assembled fifty-five astronomers, of whom
   he enquired what should befall of his son. And they said to him that he
   should be great in power and in riches. And one, more wise than
   another, said: Sire, this child that is born shall not be in thy realm,
   but he shall be in another, much better without comparison, and know
   thou that I suppose that he shall be of christian religion which thou
   persecutest. And that said not he of himself, but he said it by
   inspiration of God. And when the king heard that, he doubted much, and
   did do make without the city a right noble palace, and therein set he
   his son for to dwell and abide, and set there right fair younglings,
   and commanded them that they should not speak to him of death ne of old
   age, ne of sickness, ne of poverty, ne of no thing that may give him
   cause of heaviness, but say to him all things that be joyous, so that
   his mind may be esprised with gladness, and that he think on nothing to
   come. And anon as any of his servants were sick the king commanded for
   to take them away, and set another, whole, in his stead, and commanded
   that no mention should be made to him of Jesu Christ.

   In that time was with the king a man which was secretly christian, and
   was chief among all the noble princes of the king. And as he went on a
   time to hunt with the king, he found a poor man lying on the ground,
   which was hurt on the foot by a beast, which prayed that he would
   receive him, and that he might of him be holpen by some means. And the
   knight said: I shall receive thee gladly, but I wot not how thou mayst
   do any profit. And he said to him: I am a leech of words, and if any be
   hurt by words I can well give him a medicine. And the knight set it at
   ought, all that he said, but he received him only for God's sake and
   healed him. And then some princes, envious and malicious, saw that this
   prince was so great and gracious with the king, and accused him to the
   king and said that he was not only turned to the christian faith, but
   enforced to withdraw from him his realm, and that he moved and
   solicited the company, and counselled them thereto. And if thou wilt
   know it, said they, then call him secretly and say to him that this
   life is soon done, and therefore thou wilt leave the glory of the world
   and of thy realm, and affirm that thou wilt take the habit of monks,
   whom thou hast so persecuted by ignorance, and after, thou shalt see
   what he shall answer. And when the King had done all like as they had
   said, the knight, that knew nothing of the treason, began to weep, and
   praised much the counsel of the king, and remembered him of the vanity
   of the world, and counselled him to do it as soon as he might. And when
   the king heard him say so, he supposed it had been true that the other
   had said to him, howbeit he said nothing. And then he understood and
   apperceived that the king had taken his words in evil, and went and
   told all this unto the leech of words all by order. And he said to him:
   Know thou for truth that the king feareth that thou wilt assail his
   realm. Arise thou to-morrow and shave off thine hair and do off thy
   vestments, and clothe thee in hair in the manner of a monk, and go
   early to the king. When he shall demand thee what thou meanest, thou
   shalt answer: My lord, king, I am ready to follow thee; for if the way
   by which thou desirest to go be hard, if I be with thee it shall be the
   lighter unto thee, and like as thou hast had me in prosperity so shalt
   thou have me in adversity; I am all ready, wherefore tarriest thou? And
   when he had this done and said by order, the king was abashed, and
   reproved the false men and did to him more honour than he did before.

   And after this the king's son, that was nourished in the palace, came
   to age and grew and was plainly taught in all wisdom. And he marvelled
   wherefore his father had so enclosed him, and called one of his
   servants, which was most familiar with him, secretly, and demanded him
   of this thing, and said to him that he was in great heaviness that he
   might not go out, and that his meat ne drink savoured him not ne did
   him no good. And when his father heard this he was full of sorrow. And
   anon he let do make ready horses and joyful fellowship to accompany him
   in such wise that no thing dishonest should happen to him. And on a
   time thus as the king's son went, he met a mesel and a blind man, and
   when he saw them he was abashed, and enquired what them ailed, and his
   servants said: These be passions that come to men. And he demanded if
   those passions come to all men, and they said: Nay. Then said he: Be
   they known which men shall suffer these passions without definition?
   And they answered: Who is he that may know the adventures of men? And
   he began to be much anguishous for the incustomable thing thereof. And
   another time he found a man much aged which had his cheer frounced, his
   teeth fallen, and was all crooked for age. Whereof he was abashed, and
   he desired to know the miracle of this vision. And when he knew that
   this was because he had lived many years, then he demanded what should
   be the end, and they said: Death; and he said: Is then death the end of
   all men or of some? And they said for certain that all men must die.
   And when he knew that all should die, he demanded them in how many
   years that should happen, and they said: In old age of four score years
   or a hundred, and after that age the death followeth. And this young
   man remembered oft in his heart these things, and was in great
   discomfort, but he showed him much glad tofore his father, and he
   desired much to be informed and taught in these things. And then there
   was a monk of perfect life and good opinion that dwelled in the desert
   of the land of Senaar named Barlaam. And this monk knew by the Holy
   Ghost what was done about this king's son, and took the habit of a
   merchant, and came unto the city and spake to the greatest governor of
   the king's son, and said to him: I am a merchant and have a precious
   stone to sell, which giveth sight to blind men, and hearing to deaf
   men. It maketh the dumb to speak and giveth wisdom to fools, and
   therefore bring me to the king's son and I shall deliver it to him. To
   whom he said: Thou seemest a man of prudent nature, but thy words
   accord nothing to wisdom, nevertheless if I had knowledge of that
   stone, show it me, and if it be such as thou sayst, and so proved, thou
   shalt have right great honours of the king's son. To whom Barlaam said:
   My stone hath yet such virtue that he that seeth it and hath none whole
   sight and keepeth not entire chastity if he haply saw it, the virtue
   visible that it hath, he should lose it, and I that am a physician see
   well that thou hast not thy sight whole, but I understand that the
   king's son is chaste, and hath right fair eyes and whole. And then the
   man said: If it be so, show it not to me, for mine eyes be not whole,
   and am foul of sin. And Barlaam said: This thing appertaineth to the
   king's son, and therefore bring me to him anon, and he anon told this
   to the king's son, and brought him anon in. And he received him
   honorably, and then Barlaam said to him: Thou hast done well, for thou
   hast not taken heed of my littleness that appeareth withoutforth, but
   thou hast done like unto a noble king, which when he rode in his chair,
   clad with clothes of gold, and met with poor men which were clad with
   torn clothes, and anon he sprang out of his chair and fell down to
   their feet and worshipped them, and after arose and kissed them, and
   his barons took this evil, and were afraid to reprove him thereof, but
   they said to his brother, how the king had done things against his
   royal majesty, and his brother reproved him thereof. And the king had
   such a custom that when one should be delivered to death, the king
   should send his crier with his trump that was ordained thereto. And on
   the even he sent the crier with trump tofore his brother's gate, and
   made to sound the trump, and when the king's brother heard this, he was
   in despair of saving of his life, and could not sleep of all the night,
   and made his testament. And on the morn early he clad him in black and
   came weeping with his wife and children to the king's palace, and the
   king made him come tofore him, and said to him: O fool that thou art,
   if thou hast heard the messenger of thy brother, to whom thou knowest
   well thou hast not trespassed, and doubtest so much, how ought not I
   then doubt the messengers of our Lord, against whom I have so often
   sinned, which signified unto me more clearly the death than the trump,
   and showed to me horrible coming of the judge. And after this he did do
   make four chests, and did do cover two of them with gold withoutforth,
   and did do fill them with bones of dead men and of filth. And the other
   two he did do pitch and did do fill them with precious stones and rich
   gems. And after this the king did do call his great barons, because he
   knew well that they complained of him to his brother, and did do set
   these four chests tofore them, and demanded of them which were most
   precious, and they said that the two that were gilt were most of value.
   Then the king commanded that they should be opened, and anon a great
   stench issued out of them. And the king said: They be like them that be
   clothed with precious vestments and be full withinforth of ordure and
   of sin. And after, he made open the other and there issued a marvellous
   sweet odour. And after, the king said: These be semblable to the poor
   men that I met and honoured, for though they be clad of foul vestments,
   yet shine they withinforth with good odour of good virtues, and ye take
   none heed but to that withoutforth, and consider not what is within.
   And thou hast done to me like as that king did, for thou hast well
   received me.

   And after this Barlaam began to tell to him a long sermon of the
   creation of the world, and of the day of judgment, and of the reward of
   good and evil; and began strongly to blame them that worship idols, and
   told to him of their folly such an example as followeth, saying that:
   An archer took a little bird called a nightingale, and when he would
   have slain this nightingale there was a voice given to the nightingale
   which said: O thou man, what should it avail thee if thou slay me? Thou
   mayst not fill thy belly with me, but and if thou wilt let me go, I
   shall teach thee three wisdoms, that if thou keep them diligently thou
   mayst have great profit thereby. Then he was abashed of his words and
   promised that he would let him go if he would tell him his wisdoms.
   Then the bird said: Study never to take that thing that thou mayst not
   take. And of things lost which may not be recovered, sorrow never
   therefor. Ne believe never thing that is incredible. Keep well these
   three things, and thou shalt do well. And then he let the bird go as he
   had promised. And then the nightingale flying in the air said to him:
   Alas! thou wretched man, thou hast had evil counsel, for thou hast lost
   this day great treasure. For I have in my bowels a precious margaret
   which is greater than the egg of an ostrich. And when he heard that, he
   was much wroth and sorrowed sore because he had let her go, and
   enforced him all that he could to take her again, saying: Come again to
   my house and I shall show to thee all humanity, and give to thee all
   that shall need thee, and after shall let thee go honourably whereas
   thou wilt. Then said the nightingale to him: Now I know well that thou
   art a fool, for thou hast no profit in the wisdoms that I have said to
   thee. For thou art right sorrowful for me whom thou hast lost which am
   irrecuperable, and yet thou weenest to take me where thou mayst not
   come so high as I am; and furthermore where thou believest to be in me
   a precious stone more big than the egg of an ostrich, when all my body
   may of not attain to the greatness of such an egg. And in like wise be
   they fools that adore and trust in idols, for they worship that which
   they have made, and call them whom they have made keepers of them. And
   after he began to dispute against the fallacies of the world and
   delights and vanitiee thereof, and brought forth many ensamples and
   said: They that desire the delights corporal, and suffer their souls to
   die for hunger, be like to a man that fled tofore an unicorn that he
   should not devour him, and in fleeing he fell into a great pit, and as
   he fell he caught a branch of a tree with his hands and set his feet
   upon a sliding place, and then saw two mice that one white and that
   other black, which without ceasing gnawed the root of the tree, and had
   almost gnawed it asunder. And he saw in the bottom of this pit a
   horrible dragon casting fire, and had his mouth open and desired to
   devour him. Upon the sliding place on which his feet stood he saw the
   heads of four serpents which issued there, and then he lifted up his
   eyes and saw a little honey that hung in the boughs of the trees, and
   forgat the peril that he was in and gave him all to the sweetness of
   that little honey. The unicorn is the figure of death which continually
   followeth man and desireth to take him. The pit is the world which is
   full of wickedness. The tree is the life of every man, which by the two
   mice, that the day and night and the hours thereof, incessantly be
   wasted and approached to the cutting or gnawing asunder. The place
   where the four serpents were, is the body ordained by the four
   elements, by which the jointure of the members is corrupt in bodies
   disordinate. The horrible dragon is the mouth of hell which desireth to
   devour all creatures. The sweetness of the honey in the boughs of the
   tree is the false deceivable delectation of the world, by which man is
   deceived so that he taketh no heed of the peril that he is in.

   And yet he said: That they that love the world be semblable to a man
   that had three friends, of which, he loved the first as much as
   himself, and he loved the second less than himself, and loved the third
   a little or naught. And it happed so that this man was in great peril
   of his life and was summoned tofore the king. Then he ran to his first
   friend and demanded of him his help and told to him how he had always
   loved him, to whom he said: I have other friends with whom I must be
   this day, and I wot not who thou art, therefore I may not help thee,
   yet nevertheless I shall give to thee two slops with which thou mayst
   cover thee. And then he went away much sorrowful, and went to that
   other friend and required also his aid, and he said to him: I may not
   attend to go with thee to this debate for I have great charge, but I
   shall yet fellowship thee unto the gate of the palace, and then I shall
   return again and do mine own needs. And then he being heavy and as
   despaired, went to the third friend, and said to him: I have no reason
   to speak to thee, ne I have not loved thee as I ought, but I am in
   tribulation and without friends, and pray thee that thou help me. And
   that other said, with glad cheer: Certes, I confess to be thy dear
   friend and have not forgotten the little benefit that thou hast done to
   me, and I shall go right gladly with thee tofore the king, for to see
   what shall be demanded of thee, and I shall pray the king for thee. The
   first friend is possession of riches, for which man putteth him in many
   perils, and when the death cometh he hath no more of it but a cloth for
   to wind him for to be buried. The second friend is his sons, his wife,
   and kin, which go with him to his grave and anon return for to entend
   to their own needs. The third friend is faith, hope, and charity, and
   other good works which we have done, that when we issue out of our
   bodies they may well go tofore us and pray God for us, and they may
   well deliver us from the devils our enemies.

   And yet he said according to this, that in a certain city is a custom
   that they of the city shall choose every year a strange man and unknown
   for to be their prince, and they shall give him puissance to do
   whatsomever he will and govern the country without any other
   constitution. And he being thus in great delices and weeping ever to
   continue, suddenly they of the city should arise against him and lead
   him naked through the city, and after send him into an isle in exile,
   and there he should find neither meat ne clothes, but should be
   constrained to be perished for hunger and cold. And after that, they
   would enhance another to the kingdom, and thus they did long. At the
   last they took one which knew their custom, and he sent tofore him into
   that isle great treasure without number during all his year. And when
   his year was accomplished and passed, he was put out and put to exile
   like the other, and whereas the other that had been tofore him perished
   for cold and hunger, he abounded in great riches and delices. And this
   city is the world, and the citizens be the princes of darkness which
   feed us with false delectation of the world, and then the death cometh
   when we take none heed, and that we be sent in exile to the place of
   darkness, and the riches that be tofore sent, be done by the hand of
   poor men.

   And when Barlaam had perfectly taught the king's son, and he would
   leave his father for to follow him, Barlaam said to him: If thou wilt
   do thus, thou shalt be semblable to a young man that when he would have
   wedded a noble wife he forsook her and fled away and came into a place
   whereas he saw a virgin, daughter of an old poor man, that laboured,
   and praised God with her mouth. To whom he said: What is that thou
   doest, daughter, that art so poor and always thou thankest God like as
   thou hadst received great things of him? To whom she said: Like as a
   little medicine oft delivereth a great languor and pain, right so for
   to give to God thankings, always of a little gift is made a giver of
   great gifts, for the things that be withoutforth be not ours, but they
   that be within us be ours, and therefore I have received great things
   of God, for he hath made me like to his image. He hath given to me
   understanding, he hath called me to his glory, and hath opened to me
   the gate of his kingdom, and therefore for these gifts it is fitting to
   me to give him praising. This young man seeing her prudence asked of
   her father to have her to wife, to whom the father said: Thou mayst not
   have my daughter, for thou art the son of rich and noble kin, and I am
   but a poor man. But when he sore desired her, the old man said to him:
   I may not give her to thee, sith thou wilt lead her home into the house
   of thy father, for she is mine only daughter, and I have no more. And
   he said: I shall dwell with thee, and shall accord with thee in all
   things. And then he did off his precious vestments and did on him the
   habit of an old man, and so dwelling with him took her unto his wife,
   and when the old man had long proved him he led him into his chamber
   and showed to him great plenty of riches, more than ever he had, and
   gave to him all. And then Josaphat said to him: This narration toucheth
   me convenably, and I trow thou hast said this for me. Now say to me,
   father, how many years art thou old, and where conversest thou, for
   from thee I will never depart. To whom Barlaam said: I have dwelled
   forty-five years in the desert of the land of Senaar; to whom Josaphat
   said: Thou seemest better to be seventy years, and he said: If thou
   demandest all the years of my nativity, thou hast well esteemed them,
   but I account not of the number of my life them specially that I have
   dispended in the vanity of the world, for I was then dead toward God,
   and I number not the years of death with the years of life. And when
   Josaphat would have followed him into desert Barlaam said to him: If
   thou do so I shall not have thy company, and I shall be then the author
   of persecution to my brethren, but when thou seest time convenable thou
   shalt come to me. And then Barlaam baptized the king's son and informed
   him well in the faith, and after, returned into his cell.

   And a little while after, the king heard say that his son was
   christened, wherefore he was much sorrowful. And one that was his
   friend, named Arachis, recomforting him said: Sir King, I know right
   well an old hermit that resembleth much Barlaam, and he is of our sect.
   He shall feign him as he were Barlaam and shall defend first the faith
   of christian men, and after, shall leave and return from it, and thus
   your son shall return to you. And then the king went into desert as it
   were to seek Barlaam, and took this hermit and feigned that he had
   taken Barlaam. And when the king's son heard that Barlaam was taken he
   wept bitterly, but afterwards he knew by revelation divine that it was
   not he. Then the king went to his son and said to him: Thou hast put me
   in great heaviness, thou hast dishonoured mine old age, thou hast
   darkened the light of mine eyes, son, why hast thou done so? Thou hast
   forsaken the honour of my gods. And he answered to him: I have fled the
   darkness and am come to the light, I have fled error and know truth,
   and therefore travailest thou for nought, for thou mayst never withdraw
   me f'rom Jesu Christ. For like as it is impossible for thee to touch
   the heaven with thy hand, or for to dry the great sea, so is it to thee
   for to change me. Then the father said: Who is cause hereof but I
   myself that so gloriously have do nourished thee, that never father
   nourished more his son? For which cause thine evil will hath made thee
   wood against me, and it is well right, for the astronomers in thy
   nativity said that thou shouldst be proud and disobedient to thy
   parents, but and thou now wilt not obey me thou shalt no more be my
   son, and I shall be thine enemy for a father, and shall do to thee that
   I never did to mine enemies. To whom Josaphat said: Father, wherefore
   art thou angry because I am made a partner of good things? What father
   was ever sorrowful in the prosperity of his son? I shall no more call
   thee father but and if thou be contrary to me, I shall flee thee as a
   serpent.

   Then the king departed from him in great anger, and said to Arachis his
   friend all the hardness of his son. And he counselled the king that he
   should give him no sharp words, for a child is better reformed by fair
   and sweet words. The day following the king came to his son and began
   to clip, embrace, and kiss him, and said to him: My right sweet son,
   honour thou mine old age, son, dread thy father. Knowest thou not well
   that it is good to obey thy father and make him glad, and for to do
   contrary it is sin, and they that anger them sin evil? To whom Josaphat
   said: There is time to love and time to hate, time of peace and time of
   battle, and we ought in no wise love them ne obey to them that would
   put us away from God, be it father or mother. And when his father saw
   his steadfastness he said to him: Sith I see thy folly and that thou
   wilt not obey me, come and we shall know the truth, for Barlaam which
   hath delivered thee, is bounden in my prison, and let us assemble our
   people with Barlaam, and I shall send for all the Galileans that they
   may safely come without dread and dispute, and if that ye with your
   Barlaam overcome us, we shall believe and obey you, and if we overcome
   you, ye shall consent to us. And this pleased well to the king and to
   Josaphat, and when they had ordained that he that named him Barlaam
   should first defend the faith of Christ, and suffer him after to be
   overcome, and so were all assembled. Then Josaphat turned him towards
   Nachor, which feigned him to be Barlaam and said: Barlaam, thou knowest
   well how thou hast taught me, and if thou defend the faith that I have
   learned of thee, I shall abide in thy doctrine to the end of my life,
   and if thou be overcome I shall avenge me anon on thee my injury, and
   shall pluck out the tongue out of thine head with mine hands, and give
   it to dogs, to the end that thou be not so hardy to put a king's son in
   error. And when Nachor heard that, he was in great fear, and saw well
   that if he said contrary, he were but dead, and that he was taken in
   his own snare. And then he advised that it were better to take and hold
   with the son than with the father, for to eschew the peril of death.
   For the king had said to him, tofore them all, that he should defend
   the faith hardily and without dread. Then one of the masters said to
   him: Thou art Barlaam which hast deceived the son of the king, and he
   said: I am Barlaam which have not put the king's son in any error, but
   I have brought him out of error. And then the master said to him: Right
   noble and marvellous men have worshipped our gods, how darest thou then
   address thee against them? And he answered: They of Chaldee, of Egypt,
   and of Greece, have erred and said that the creatures were gods, and
   the Chaldees supposed that the elements had been gods which were
   created to the profit of men, and the Greeks supposed that cursed men
   and tyrants had been gods, as Saturn, whom they said ate his son, and
   Jupiter which as they say gelded his father and threw his members into
   the sea, whereof grew Venus, and Jupiter to be king of the other gods
   because he transformed oft himself in likeness of a beast for to
   accomplish his adultery. And also they say that Venus is goddess of
   adultery, and sometime Mars is her husband and sometime Adonides. The
   Egyptians worship the beasts, that is to wit a sheep, a calf, a swine,
   or such other, and the christian men worship the son of the right high
   king that descended from heaven and took nature human. And then Nachor
   began clearly to defend the law of christian men, and garnished him
   with many reasons, so that the masters were all abashed and wist not
   what to answer. And then Josaphat had great joy of that, which our Lord
   had defended the truth by him that was enemy of truth. And then the
   king was full of woodness, and commanded that the council should
   depart, like as he would have treated again on the morn of the same
   fait. Then Josaphat said to his father: Let my master be with me this
   night, to the end that we may make our collation together for to make
   to-morrow our answers, and thou shalt lead thy masters with thee, and
   shalt take counsel with them, and if thou !ead my master with thee thou
   doest me no right. Wherefore he granted to him Nachor, because he hoped
   that he should deceive him. And when the king's son was come to his
   chamber and Nachor with him, Josaphat said to Nachor: Ne weenest thou
   not that I know thee? I wot well thou art not Barlaam, but thou art
   Nachor, the astronomer. And Josaphat preached then to him the way of
   health, and converted him to the faith, and on the morn sent him into
   desert, and there was baptized, and led the life of a hermit.

   Then there was an enchanter named Theodosius. When he heard of this
   thing, he came to the king and said that he should make his son return
   and believe in his gods. And the king said to him: If thou do so I
   shall make to thee an image of gold and offer sacrifices thereto, like
   as to my gods. And he said: Take away all them that be about thy son
   and put to him fair women and well adorned, and command them always to
   abide by him, and after I shall send a wicked spirit that shall inflame
   him to luxury, and there is nothing that may so soon deceive the young
   men as the beauty of women. And he said yet more:

   There was a king which had with great pain a son, and the wise masters
   said that if he saw sun or moon within ten years he should lose the
   sight of his eyes. Then it was ordained that this child should be
   nourished within a pit made in a great rock. And when the ten years
   were passed, the king commanded that his son should be brought tofore
   him because he should know the names of all things, and then they
   brought tofore him jewels, horses, and beasts of all manners, and also
   gold, silver, precious stones, and all other things, and when he had
   demanded the names of everything, and that the ministers had told him,
   he set nought thereby. And when his father saw that he recked not of
   such things, then the king made to be brought tofore him women quaintly
   arrayed, and he demanded what they were, for they would not so lightly
   tell him, whereof he was annoyed, and after the master squire of the
   king said, japing, that they were devils that deceive men. Then the
   king demanded him what he liefest had of all that he had seen, and he
   answered: Father, my soul coveteth nothing so much as the devils that
   deceive men. And therefore I suppose that none other thing shall
   surmount thy son but women, which move men always to lechery. Then the
   king put out all his ministers, and set therein to be about his son
   right noble and fair maidens, which always him admonished to play, and
   there were none others that might speak ne serve him. And anon the
   enchanter sent to him the devil for to inflame him, which burned the
   young man withinforth, and the maidens withoutforth. And when he felt
   him so strongly travailed, he was much angry and recommended himself
   all to God, and he received divine comfort in such wise that all
   temptation departed from him. And after this that the king saw that the
   devil had done nothing, he sent to him a fair maiden, a king's
   daughter, which was fatherless. To whom this man of God preached, and
   she answered: If thou wilt save me and take me away from worshipping
   the idols, conjoin thee unto me by coupling of marriage, for the
   patriarchs, prophets, and Peter the Apostle had wives. And he said to
   her: Woman, these words sayest thou now for naught. It appertaineth
   well to christian men to wed wives, but not to them that have promised
   to our Lord to keep virginity. And she said to him: Now be it as thou
   wilt, but if thou wilt save my soul grant to me a little request, lie
   with me only this night and I promise to thee that to-morn I shall be
   made christian, for as ye say the angels have more joy in heaven of one
   sinner doing penance, than on many others. There is great guerdon due
   to him that doth penance, and converteth him. Therefore grant to me
   only this request, and so thou shalt save me. And then she began
   strongly to assail the tower of his conscience. Then the devil said to
   his fellows: Lo! see how this maid hath strongly put forth that we
   might not move. Come then and let us knock strongly against him sith we
   find now time convenable. And when the holy young man saw this thing,
   and that he was in that caitifness that the covetise of his flesh
   admonished him to sin, and also that he desired the salvation of the
   maid by enticing of the devil that moved him, he then put himself to
   prayer in weeping, and there fell asleep, and saw by a vision that he
   was brought into a meadow arrayed with fair flowers, there where the
   leaves of the trees demened a sweet sound which came by a wind
   agreeable, and thereout issued a marvellous odour, and the fruit was
   right fair to see, and right delectable of taste, and there were seats
   of gold and silver and precious stones, and the beds were noble and
   preciously adorned, and right clear water ran thereby. And after that,
   he entered into a city of which the walls were of fine gold, and shone
   by marvellous clearness, and saw in the air some that sang a song that
   never ear of mortal man heard like. And it was said: This is the place
   of blessed saints. And as they would have had him thence, he prayed
   them that they would let him dwell there. And they said to him: Thou
   shalt yet hereafter come hither with great travail if thou mayst
   suffer. And after they led him into a right horrible place, full of all
   filth and stench, and said to him: This is the place of wicked people.
   And when he awoke, him seemed that the beauty of that damosel was more
   foul and stinking than all the other ordure. And then the wicked
   spirits came again to Theodosius and he then blamed them, to whom they
   said: We ran upon him tofore he marked him with the sign of the cross,
   and troubled him strongly, and when he was garnished with the sign of
   the cross he persecuted us by great force. Then Theodosius came to him
   with the king and had hoped that he should have perverted him, but this
   enchanter was taken of him whom he supposed to have taken, and was
   converted and received baptism and lived after a holy life. And then
   the king was all despaired and by counsel of his friends he delivered
   to him half his realm, and howbeit that Josaphat desired with all his
   thought the desert, yet for to increase the faith he received the realm
   for a certain time, and made churches, and raised crosses, and
   converted much people of his realm to the faith of Jesu Christ, and at
   the last the father consented to the reasons and predications of his
   son, and believed on the faith of Jesu Christ and received baptism, and
   left his realm wholly to his son, and entended to works of penance, and
   after, finished his life laudably. And Josaphat oft warned the king
   Barachius that he would go in to desert, but he was retained of the
   people long time, but at the last he fled away in to desert, and as he
   went in a desert he gave to a poor man his habit royal and abode in a
   right poor gown. And the devil made to him many assaults, for sometimes
   he ran upon him with a sword drawn and menaced to smite if he left not
   the desert; and another time he appeared to him in the form of a wild
   beast and foamed and ran on him as he would have devoured him, and then
   Josaphat said: Our Lord is mine helper. I doubt no thing that man may
   do to me.

   And thus Josaphat was two years vagrant and erred in desert, and could
   not find Barlaam. And at the last he found a cave in the earth, and
   knocked at the door, and said: Father, bless me, and anon Barlaam heard
   the voice of him, and rose up and went out, and then each kissed other
   and embraced straitly and were glad of their assembling. And after
   Josaphat recounted to Barlaam all these things that were happened, and
   he rendered and gave thankings to God therefor. And Josaphat dwelled
   there many years in great and marvellous penance, full of virtues. And
   when Barlaam had accomplished his days, he rested in peace about the
   year of our Lord four hundred and eighty. Josaphat left his realm the
   twenty-fifth year of his age, and led the life of a hermit thirty-five
   years' and then rested in peace, full of virtues, and was buried by the
   body of Barlaam. And when the king Barachius heard of this thing, he
   came unto that same place with a great company, and took the bodies and
   bare them with much great honour into his city, where God hath showed
   many fair miracles at the tomb of these two precious bodies.
     __________________________________________________________________

 Here followeth the history of S. Pelagius the Pope, with many other histories
       and gestes of the Lombards, and of Mahomet, with other chronicles.

   Pelagius the Pope was of much great holiness, and demeaned him laudably
   in the See of Rome, and in his last end he ended in our Lord full of
   virtues; but this was not that Pelagius the predecessor of S. Gregory
   but another tofore him. To this Pelagius succeeded John the Third, and
   to John, Benedict, to Benedict, Pelagius, to Pelagius, Gregory. In the
   time of this Pelagius came the Lombards into Italy, and because many
   know not this history I have ordained it to be set here like as it is
   set in the history of the Lombards which Paul, the historiographer of
   Lombards, hath compiled and expounded in divers chronicles. He saith
   that there was a multitude of people of Germany issued from the rivage
   of the sea ocean, and sailed towards the north from the isle of
   Scandinavia, and environed many countries and made many battles, and at
   the last they came into Pannonia, and durst not go farther, and there
   established to hold their perpetual habitation. These men were called
   Huns, and afterwards they were called Lombards.

   And yet as they were in Germany, Agilmud, king of the Lombards, found
   seven children cast into a piscine for to be drowned, which were born
   at one burden of a common woman. And when the king had found them by
   case of adventure, he marvelled much, and with his spear he began to
   turn and move them, and one of the children took and held the spear
   with his hand, and when the king saw that he was abashed, and made him
   to be taken and nourished, and called him great Lamissio, and said that
   he should be of so great puissance that after the death of the king of
   the Lombards he should be made king of them. About that same time, in
   the year of our Lord four hundred and eighty, there was a bishop of the
   heresy Arian, as saith Eutropius, which would have baptized one named
   Barnabas, and when he said Barnabas, I baptize thee in the name of the
   Father, by the Son with the Holy Ghost, by which he would show the Son
   and the Holy Ghost to be less than the Father, and anon the water
   vanished away, and he, that should have been baptized, fled to the
   church for to be baptized.

   In that time flourished Medard and Gildard brethren, both of one burden
   and born in one day, and both made bishops in one day, and in one day
   both they died in our Lord. And tofore this time it is said in a
   chronicle about the year of our Lord four hundred and one, as the
   heresy Arian grew in France, the unity of the substance of three
   persons was showed by open miracle like as Philibert rehearseth. For as
   the bishop sang mass in the city of Vasacence he saw three drops right
   clear, all of one greatness, which were upon the altar, and all three
   ran together into a precious gem, and when they had set this gem in a
   cross of gold all the other precious stones that were there fell out.
   And this gem was clear to them that were clean out of sin, and it was
   obscure and dark to sinners, and it gave health to them that were sick,
   and increased them that worshipped the cross.

   After this reigned a king upon the Lombards which was named Alboin, a
   strong man and a noble, which had a battle with the king of the
   Gebidains, and destroyed their host and slew their king, wherefore the
   son of the king that was slain succeeded his father, and came with a
   great puissant army against Alboin for to avenge his father. And Alboin
   moved his strength against him and surmounted him and slew him, and led
   away with him Rosamond his wife in captivity, but after he took her to
   his wife, and he did do make a cup of the skull of that king and closed
   it in fine gold and silver, and drank out of it. In that time Justinian
   the Less governed the empire, which had a prince chaste named Narses,
   which was a noble man and strong, which went to battle against the
   Goths that then had taken all Italy. And he surmounted them and slew
   their king and made peace in all Italy, and after, yet for all his
   great victory and weal he suffered great envy of the Romans, for he was
   falsely accused unto the emperor, and the wife of the emperor, named
   Sophia, did to him so great despite that she sent him word that she
   should make him to spin and clip wool with her chamberers. To whom
   Narses sent her answer, saying: I shall so purchase to set such a cloth
   in thy looms that during thy life thou shalt not finish it ne take it
   down. Then Narses went to Neapolin, and sent to the Lombards that they
   should leave that poor land of Pannonia, and that they should pursue
   the right plenteous land of Italy. And when Alboin heard this thing he
   Ieft Pannonia and entered with his Lombards into Italy the year of our
   Lord six hundred and sixty eight, and they were accustomed to have long
   beards, wherefore on a time, as it is said, certain spies came to espie
   them, whereof Alboin had knowledge, and commanded that all the women
   should unbind their hair and bind it under their chins in such wise
   that they should seem men. And therefore were they called Longebards,
   and so after, Lombards, and all because of long beards. And others say
   when they ought to fight with the Vandelians or Vandals, they went to a
   man that had a spirit of prophecy for to pray for them, and that he
   should bless them, and by counsel of his wife they should put them by
   the window whereas he prayed towards the orient. And the women put
   their hair about their chins instead of beards, and when he opened his
   window and saw them, he escried and said: Who be these longbeards? And
   then his wife said to him that he should give the victory to them that
   he had named. Then entered they into Italy and took almost all the
   cities, and slew all the inhabitants and assieged three years Pavia and
   at the last they took it. And the king Alboin had sworn that he should
   slay all the christian men. And as he should enter into Pavia his horse
   kneeled tofore the gate of the city, and could not make him to arise
   with his spurs, ne in none other manner, till by the warning of a
   christian man he had changed his oath. And from thence came the
   Lombards to Milan, and in a little time they subdued to them all Italy
   save Rome and Romaniole, which always was adherent to Rome, for it held
   always with Rome. And when the king Alboin came to Verona and had
   ordained a great feast, he commanded to bring forth the cup that he had
   do make of the head of the king, and did drink thereof, and gave it to
   Rosamond his wife, and said: Drink with thy father, and when Rosamond
   knew it, she had great disdain and hate toward the king. And the king
   had a duke which held and lay by a damsel of the queen, and on a time
   she was out, and the queen entered into her chamber and sent for the
   duke in the name of the same damsel. And when he was come and had done
   his will, she said to him: Wotest thou who I am? and he said: Ye are my
   love, and she said: Nay, I am Rosamond the queen, wherefore my husband
   shall be angry, but I pray thee that thou wilt avenge me on him, for he
   hath slain my father, and hath do make a cup of his head, and hath made
   me for to drink thereof. And he would not grant her, but promised to
   her that he should find one that should do it. Then when he should come
   she took away the king's arms, and bound fast his sword in the sheath
   so that he might not draw it out, which hung at his bed's head, and
   when the king was asleep in his bed, the homicide enforced him to enter
   into the chamber, and when the king felt him he sprang up and took his
   sword, but he might not draw it out, and began strongly to defend him
   with a stool. But that other which was well armed prevailed on the king
   and slew him and took all his treasure, and went with Rosamond to
   Ravenna. And when Rosamond was in Ravenna she saw a fair young man
   which was provost of the town, and desired to have him to her husband,
   and she gave to her husband to drink, and anon he felt the bitterness
   of the venom and commanded to Rosamond for to drink the residue; which
   she refused. And he took his sword and constrained her to drink it, and
   thus they perished and died both together. And after this the Lombards
   made a king named Adalaoth which was baptized, and received the faith
   of Christ. And Theodolina, queen of the Lombards, a devout and most
   christian lady, ordained at Modena a much fair oratory. To whom S.
   Gregory sent the books of dialogues, and she converted Agisulphe, her
   husband, to the faith, which had first been Duke of Turin, and after
   was king of the Lombards. And he made peace to be had with the emperor
   and with the church. And the peace was made between the Romans and the
   Lombards the day of the feast of S. Gervase and S. Prothase, and
   therefore established S. Gregory to sing the office in the mass:
   Loquetur dominus pacem. And in the nativity of S. John Baptist the
   peace was all confirmed, and this Theodolina had a special devotion to
   the blessed S. John, and said that by the merit of him her people was
   converted, and to him she made the said oratory at Modena, and it was
   shewed by revelation, unto a holy man, that S. John was patron and
   defender of her people. And when Gregory was dead Sabine succeeded
   after him, and to him succeeded Boniface the third, and to him Boniface
   the fourth, at whose request Phocas the emperor gave to the church of
   Christ the temple of Pantheon, about the year of our Lord six hundred
   and ten, and he, at the request of the third Boniface, established the
   See of Rome to be chief and head of all the church. For tofore, the
   church of Constantinople wrote herself greatest of all other churches.
   And when Phocas was dead Heraclius reigned. And about the year of our
   Lord six hundred and ten Mahomet the false prophet, and an enchanter,
   deceived the Hagarenes or Ishmaelites, that is to say the Saracens, in
   this manner as it is read in a history of him in a certain chronicle.
   There was a clerk much renowned at Rome which could not come to the
   worship that he desired, and in great disdain departed thence in to the
   parts over the sea, and drew to him by his simulation much people, and
   found Mahomet, and said to him that he would make him lord and chief of
   all the people. And after, he nourished a dove, and laid wheat and
   other corn in the ears of Mahomet, and set the dove upon his shoulder,
   and fed him out of his ear, and was so used and accustomed that always
   when he saw Mahomet he flew on his shoulder and put his bill or beak in
   his ear, and then this clerk called the people and said that he would
   make him lord over them all on whom the Holy Ghost should descend in
   the likeness of a culver or a dove. And then he let the dove fly
   secretly, and he flew upon the shoulder of Mahomet which was among the
   others, and put his beak in his ear. And when the people saw this thing
   they supposed that the Holy Ghost had descended on him, and had showed
   unto him in his ear the word of God, and thus deceived Mahomet the
   Saracens, which with his adherents assailed the realm of Persia and all
   the parts of the Orient unto Alexandria.

   Thus it is said commonly, but this that shall here follow is had from
   more truer history. For then Mahomet made and feigned his laws to be
   made of the Holy Ghost, which in the sight of the people oft came unto
   him in the form of a dove, and in his laws he put some things of the
   Old and New Testament. For when he was in his first age he haunted
   Egypt and Palestine, and was a merchant and led camels, and conversed
   oft with Jews and with christian men, of whom he had taken the Old
   Testament and the New. And after the custom of the Jews the Saracens be
   circumcised, and eat no swine's flesh. And Mahomet told them that the
   cause was that the swine was made of the dung of the camel after Noah's
   flood, and therefore it ought to be eschewed as an unclean beast, of
   clean people. And to christian men they accord whereas they believe on
   God Almighty Maker of all things. And this false prophet, meddled and
   affrmed some true things with the false. He said that Moses was a great
   prophet, but Christ was greater and most sovereign of the prophets, and
   was born of the Virgin Mary without seed of man. And he saith in his
   book, that is called Alkoran, that when Christ was a child he made
   birds of the slime of the earth. But he meddled venom with his words,
   for he said that Jesu Christ was not verily dead, ne arose not again,
   but that it was another in likeness of him that he had put in his
   stead. There was a lady named Cadygam which was lady of a province
   named Corocania, and saw that this Mahomet was keeper and governor of a
   great company of Saracens and Jews and supposed that divine majesty had
   been in him hid. And she was a widow, and she took Mahomet to her
   husband, and thus was Mahomet prince of all that province. And after,
   by false demonstrances, he deceived not only this lady, but he deceived
   Jews and christian men, so that he said to them openly that he was
   Messias that was promised in their law. And after this Mahomet fell oft
   in the epileptical passion, and when the lady his wife saw him oft
   fall, she was much sorrowful that she had wedded him. And he thought to
   please her, and appeased her in this wise, and said that he oft saw the
   angel Gabriel which spake to him, and that he might not suffer the
   brightness of him, wherefore he must fall because he might not sustain
   him, and his wife and others supposed and believed that it had been
   true. And in another place it is read that it was a monk named Sergius,
   a heretic, that introduced Mahomet, which monk because he fell into the
   heresy of Nestorius was expulsed from his monastery, and came into
   Arabia, and abode with Mahomet. Howbeit, it is said in another place
   that he was archdeacon in Antioch, and as some say he was a Jacobite
   and preached the circumcision, and said that Christ was not God but he
   was a holy man conceived only of the Holy Ghost and born of a virgin,
   and that believe the Saracens.

   And the said Sergius taught to Mahomet many things of the Old and New
   Testament. And when Mahomet was orphan of father and mother he was
   under the governance of his uncle, and by long time adored idols with
   the people of Arabia, as he witnesseth in his Alkoran that God should
   say to him: Thou wert an orphan and I have taken thee. Thou abodest
   long in the error of idolatry and I brought thee out thereof. Thou wert
   poor and I have enriched thee. All the people of Arabia, with Mahomet,
   worshipped Venus for a goddess, and thereof cometh it that the Saracens
   hold the Friday in great honour, like as the Jews do the Saturday, and
   christian men the Sunday. And when Mahomet was enriched with the riches
   of this widow Cadygam, he mounted in so great folly of thought that he
   thought to usurp to him the realm of Arabia. And when he saw he might
   not do it by violence, and also that he was despised of his fellows,
   which had been always great with him, then he feigned him to be a
   prophet, and them that he might not draw to him by might he drew to him
   by feigned holiness. And then he began to believe the counsel of that
   Sergius, which was a much subtle man, and inquired all that he should
   do secretly, and reported it to the people, and called him Gabriel. And
   thus Mahomet in feigning himself to be a prophet held all the seigniory
   of all that people, and all believed by their agreement, or for fear,
   or for doubt of sword. That thing is more true than that which is said
   of the dove and is more to be holden. And because that this Sergius was
   a monk, he would that the Saracens should use the habit of a monk, that
   is to wit a gown without a hood, and in the guise of monks they should
   make many kneelings, and that they should adore ordinately. And because
   that the Jews worship towards the west, and the christian men towards
   the east, therefore he would that his people should adore towards the
   south, and so do yet the Saracens. And Mahomet published to them many
   of the laws that the said Sergius taught him, and took many of Moses
   laws. For the Saracens wash them oft, and specially when they should
   pray, for then would they wash all the members of their body, because
   they should pray the more clean, and in their praying they confessed
   one only God to whom is none like, and they say that Mahomet is his
   prophet. And they fast every year a whole month, and when they fast
   they eat nothing but in the night, and fast all the day. And as soon as
   the day cometh, as when they may discern black from white, they begin
   to fast, and fast till the sun be down, and night. And in that while
   none of them dare eat ne drink, ne have to do with his wife, but they
   that be sick be not constrained to this. It is also commanded to them
   that once a year they should come unto the house of God for to adore,
   and in vestments without seam to go about, and cast stones between
   their thighs for to stone the devil therewith. Which house they say
   that Adam made it for all his children for to pray in, and left it to
   Abraham and Ishmael, and at the last it was left to Mahomet and to all
   his people. They might eat all manner of flesh, save swine's flesh, and
   blood, and flesh that had been strangled or found dead. Each man might
   have four wives wedded at once, and refuse and repudiate three times
   and take them again, but not the fourth time. And he might have no more
   than four wives lawfully, but he might have concubines and such women,
   as many as he may buy and as many as he might keep, and them he may
   sell but if she be with child. And it is granted to them that they may
   have wives of their own lineage that their kindred may be the stronger
   among them in friendship. And as to their possessions, he that
   demandeth must have witness to prove his demand, and the defendant
   shall be believed by his oath. When they be found in adultery they be
   stoned both together, and when they do fornication they shall have four
   score lashes.

   Mahomet said that the angel Gabriel had showed to him that it was
   granted to him of our Lord that he might go to others men's wives for
   to engender men of virtue, and prophets. And one of his servants had a
   fair wife, and he defended and forbade his wife that they should not
   speak with his lord, Mahomet. And on a day he found her speaking with
   him, and then anon he put her from him, and Mahomet received her and
   set her among his other wives. And then he doubted the murmur of the
   people, and feigned that a writing was sent to him from heaven, in
   which was written: If any man repudiated his wife that he that received
   her should have her to his wife which thing the Saracens keep for a law
   to this day. A thief that is taken among them is beaten the first and
   second time, the third time his hand is cut off, the fourth time his
   foot is smitten off. It is forbidden to them to drink wine, and as they
   affirm, our Lord hath promised paradise to them that keep these laws
   and others, that is to wit a garden or a place of delices environed
   with running water. In which paradise they shall have seats perdurable,
   ne they shall have neither overmuch heat ne cold, and they shall use
   and eat all manner meats, and whatsomever they desire they shall anon
   find ready tofore them. They shall be clad in clothes of silk of all
   colours, they shall be conjoined to right fair virgins, and always they
   shall be in delices, and the angels shall come as butlers with vessels
   of gold and silver, and shall give in them of gold, milk, and in them
   of silver, wine, and they shall say to them eat and drink in gladness.
   And Mahomet saith they shall have three floods or rivers in Paradise,
   that one of milk, that other of honey, and the third of right good
   wine, with right precious spices. And that they shall see there right
   fair angels and so great that from that one eye to that other is the
   space of a day's journey. Unto them that believe not to God and
   Mahomet, as they affirm, is ordained the pain of hell without end, and
   to them that in whatsomever sin have sinned and been bounden therein,
   if in the hour of their death they believe in God and to Mahomet, in
   the day of doom when Mahomet shall come, they shall be saved. And the
   Saracens, enveloped in darkness, affirm that Mahomet, the false
   prophet, to have had the spirit of prophecy above all other prophets,
   and they say that he had ten angels obedient to him, which kept him.
   And they say yet that, tofore God created heaven and earth the name of
   Mahomet was tofore God, but if Mahomet should not have been, heaven, ne
   earth, ne paradise, had never been made. Also they lie saying that the
   moon came to him, whom receiving into his bosom he departed into two
   parts, and after joined them again together. And they say that there
   was a lamb of flesh offered to him, which spake unto him, and said:
   Beware that thou eat me not, for there is venom within me. And yet
   nevertheless after certain years there was venom given by which he
   died.

   But now let us return to the history of the Lombards, for then the
   Lombards were much contrary to the church of Rome, and to the empire,
   how be it they had received the faith, and then Pepin, the greatest
   prince of the house of France, was dead, and Charles his son succeeded
   him, which was also named Eutides, and he did many battles, and had
   many victories, and left two sons, princes of the royal hall, Charles
   and Pepin. But Charles, leaving the pomp of the world, was made a monk
   of Cassinense and Pepin governed much nobly and worshipfully the house
   of France. And forasmuch as Childeric the king was not profitable,
   Pepin came unto the Pope and asked counsel whether he should be king
   that had but only the name of the king, or he that governed the realm.
   And then the Pope answered that he ought to have the name of the king
   that governed well the realm. And the Frenchmen were enharded with this
   answer, and made Pepin king, and closed Childeric in a monastery, about
   the year seven hundred and fifty. And then when Astolphus, king of the
   Lombards, had despoiled the church of Rome of her possessions and
   seigniory, Stephen the Pope, which came after Zachary required aid and
   help of Pepin the king of France against the Lombards, and came himself
   into France. And then Pepin assembled a much great host, and came into
   Italy, and besieged the King Astolphus, and vanquished him, and took of
   him forty hostages that he should restore again to the church of Rome
   all that he had taken away, and that he should no more torment it. But
   when Pepin was departed he did nothing of that he had promised, and
   soon after as he went on hunting he died suddenly, and Desiderius
   succeeded him, about the year of our Lord seven hundred and fifty-six.

   Dagobert, king of France, as it is contained in a chronicle, which had
   reigned long time tofore Pepin, began from his childhood to have S.
   Denis in great reverence, for when he feared the anger of his father
   Lothair he fled anon to the church of the blessed S. Denis, and after,
   when he was made king, he loved and honoured him strongly, and after,
   when he was dead, it was showed to a holy man in a vision that his soul
   was brought to the judgment, and many saints opposed against him that
   he had robbed her churches, and as the wicked spirits would have
   ravished and led him to pain, the blessed Denis came and delivered him,
   or peradventure the soul of him was restored to the body and did
   penance. The King Clodoveus of France uncovered Denis more dishonestly
   than he ought to do, and brake the bones of his arm and bare them away
   covetously, and anon he waxed mad.

   In that time was Bede the honourable clerk in England, and how be it
   that he is accounted in the catalogue of saints, yet he is not called
   of holy church Saint Bede, but worshipful Bede, and this for double
   cause. The first is, for his old age he was blind, and he had one that
   led him by towns and castles, whereas he preached the word of our Lord
   in every place, and on a time he led him by a valley full of great
   stones, and his leader mocking him said that there were assembled much
   people that were still for to hear his predication. And then began he
   to preach much ardently, and at the last end he concluded with: Per
   omnia secula seculorum, and anon the stones answered with a high voice:
   Amen, our honourable father; and because that the stones called him
   honourable so the church may say well that he is honourable. The second
   cause is that after his death, a much devout clerk desired to make a
   verse to set on his tomb, and began in this wise: Hac sunt in fossa,
   and was ended with Bedae sancti ossa, but it was no true verse, and
   when he could not bring it to a true metre he was full of thought all a
   night, and on the morn he found graven on his tomb by the hands of
   angels the verse full made in this manner:

   Hac sunt in fossa
   Bedae venerabilis ossa.

   Whose body is worshipped by great devotion in Genoa.

   In the time of about the year of our Lord seven hundred, Rachortus,
   King of Frisia, should have been baptized, and had then one foot in the
   fontstone and that other without, and demanded whether the more part of
   his predecessors were in hell or in heaven, and when he heard that more
   of them were in hell than in heaven, he said: It is more holy to follow
   the more part than the less, and withdrew his foot that was in the
   font, and so was he deceived of the devil, which promised unto him
   goods without number, and the fourth day he died suddenly and perished
   perdurably.

   In the campagna of Italy wheat, barley, and corn fell down from heaven
   like rain. It is read that in the same time, the year of our Lord seven
   hundred and forty, when the body of S. Benedict was brought into the
   monastery of Floriacence and the body of S. Scolastica his sister was
   brought to Ceromane, Charles the monk would have borne the body to the
   castle of Cassinense, but by miracles that were showed it was
   forbidden. In that time was a great trembling of the earth by which
   cities were turned and sunken, and others, with mountains and hills,
   were borne and transported whole and safe seven miles thence. The body
   of S. Pernelle, daughter of S. Peter the apostle, was transported from
   thence where it was, and was found written in marble by the hand of S.
   Peter: This is the tomb of the golden Petronelle my daughter. And as
   Sigebert saith they of Tyre tormented them of Armenia, and when the
   pestilence had been sometime in their land, they of the country, by the
   admonishments of christian men, shaved their heads in manner of a
   cross, and because that by that sign they received their health they
   retained that manner of shaving.

   At the last Pepin after many victories was dead, and Charles the Great,
   his son, succeeded him in his reign. And in his time Adrian the pope
   sat in his See at Rome and sent messengers to Charles the Great and
   required him of help against Desiderius, king of the Lombards, which
   tormented strongly the church like as Astolphus his father did. And
   Charles obeyed to the Pope and assembled a great host and entered by
   the mountains into Italy, and assieged puissantly the royal city of
   Pavia and took Desiderius, and his wife, and his princes, and sent them
   in exile into France and re-established to the church all the droits
   and rights that had been taken from them. In that time were in the host
   of Charlemagne, Amys and Amelion, which were two right noble knights of
   our Lord Jesu Christ, of whom be read marvellous acts, which fell and
   died at Mortaria whereas Charles overcame the Lombards. And there then
   failed the reign of the Lombards, for after that time they had never
   king, but such as the emperors gave to them. And then went Charles to
   Rome, and the pope assembled a synod of one hundred and fifty-three
   bishops, in which synod the pope gave to Charles power to choose the
   pope and to ordain the See of Rome, and also he granted to him the
   investiture to give to archbishops and bishops tofore their
   consecration. His sons were made kings, and were all anointed at Rome,
   that is to wit, Pepin, King of Italy, and Louis, King of Aquitaine or
   Guienne; and then flourished Alcuinus master of Charles. And then
   Pepin, son of Charles, began to rebel against his father, whereof he
   was convicted, and was shorn a monk.

   About the year of our Lord seven hundred and eighty-three in the time
   of Irene, Empress, and of her son Constantine, there was a man digging
   in a long wall, as it is read in a certain chronicle, and he found a
   chest of stone, and found therein a man lying and letters containing
   this following: Christ shall be born of Mary the virgin, and I believe
   in him; under Constantine and Irene the Empress, son, thou shalt see me
   again. And when Adrian was dead Leon was set upon the See of Rome and
   was Pope, and a man right honourable in all things. And the kinsman of
   Adrian had and bare heavy heart towards him, and on a time as he read
   the greater Litanies, they moved the people against him, and drew out
   his eyes and cut off his tongue, but God by miracle reestablished again
   his tongue and his sight, and after, he fled to Charles and he remised
   him in his seat and punished the culpables.

   Then the Romans by admonishments of the pope, the year of our Lord
   seven hundred and eighty-four left the empire of Constantinople, and
   they made Charles emperor, and crowned him by the hand of Leo the pope,
   and called him Cæsar Augustus. And anon, after Constantine the great,
   the see imperial was in Constantinople, and because the foresaid
   Constantine had given and left Rome to the vicars of S. Peter the
   apostle, and had ordained the same for their see, nevertheless for the
   dignity they be called Emperors of Rome, and so were they till the
   Empire of Rome came to the kings of France and after that the others
   were called Emperors of Constantinople, or Emperors of the Greeks, and
   the others be called Emperors of Rome. And it was much marvel of this
   Emperor Charles, for as long as he lived he would never marry none of
   his daughters, and said he might in no wise forbear their company. And
   Alcuin, his master, wrote unto him upon this thing, and said: Howbeit
   that thou be blest in other things, yet in this thou art unhappy in
   fortune, and declared to him what he would say upon that matter. And
   nevertheless the Emperor did by dissimulation so as there should be no
   suspicion thereof, but nevertheless it was much spoken among the
   people, and wheresomever he went he led them with him.

   In the time of this Charles, the office of S. Ambrose was much left,
   and the office of S. Gregory was solemnly published, and the authority
   of the emperor helped much thereto. For as S. Austin rehearseth, in his
   book of Confessions, S. Ambrose had many persecutions of Justina the
   Empress, which was of the heresy Arian, and was awaited in the church,
   both he and his folk catholic, and therefore established he to sing the
   hymns and the psalms after the custom of them of the Orient, lest the
   people should abide in the slough of error, and afterwards it was
   ordained through all the church. And then Gregory came forward and
   changed many things and added some thereto, and some he took away. The
   holy fathers might not see all that longed at the beginning to the
   beauty of the office, but divers fathers ordained divers things. For
   the mass hath three beginnings. For it began sometime at the lesson, as
   it is done on the holy Saturday on Easter Even.

   Celestine the pope ordained to sing a psalm at the introit of the mass,
   and S. Gregory ordained the introit of the mass to be sung, and a verse
   of the psalm that was sung. And sometimes they sang psalms about the
   altar, and was environed of clerks in manner of a crown, and sang by
   accord together, and thereof was said chorus, a quire or company. But
   Flavianus and Theodorus established that there should be sung on one
   side one verse, and another on that other side, and this held they of
   Ignatius which was divinely taught. S. Jerome ordained psalms, epistles
   and gospels, and for the more part the daily service and office and
   nightly, save the song. Ambrose, Gelasius, and Gregory added thereto
   collects and songs to the lessons and gospels. Grails, tracts and
   Alleluia, Ambrose, Gelasius, and Gregory, established to be sung at the
   mass. Hilarius added to Gloria, In excelsis Deo: Laudamus te, and so
   forth as followeth. Nocherius, Abbot of S. Gall, made the sequences
   psalms instead of pneuma of Alleluias, and Pope Nicholas ordained that
   they should be sung at mass. Hermanus of Almaine made: Rex omnipotens,
   Sancti Spiritus assit nobis gratia, Ave Maria, et antiphonam: Alma
   redemptoris mater et Simon Bariona. Peter, Bishop of Compostella made
   Salve Regina, and as Sigebert saith, Robert king of France made the
   sequence of Sancti Spiritus nobis assit gracia, etc.

   And as Turpin rehearseth, Charles was fair of body, cruel of sight,
   eight foot long of his stature, his face a palm and a half long, his
   beard a palm long, his forehead a foot large, he smote with one stroke
   a man armed on horseback from the top of his head unto the sengles or
   girths of the horse. He drew, and stretched out of length lightly, four
   horses shoes of iron. He would lift up from the earth, with his one
   hand, an armed man right up to his head. He would eat a hare all whole,
   or two hens, or a whole goose, he drank little or nothing, and that was
   wine with water. He drank so little at his dinner that he would drink
   but three times. He founded many abbeys and monasteries, and at the
   last he made Jesu Christ heir of all his goods, and finished his life
   laudably. And Louis his son succeeded him in the empire, which was a
   man right debonair, about the year of our Lord eight hundred and
   fifteen. In whose time the bishops and the clerks left their girdles
   tissued with gold, and their outrageous and disguised clothing and
   array they put off, and laid it apart. And Theodulphus, Bishop of
   Orleans, was falsely accused to the emperor and was sent to Angiers to
   prison, and, as it is contained in a chronicle, on Palm Sunday as the
   procession passed tofore the house where he was in prison, he opened
   the window, and when he heard that they were in peace and sang not, he
   began to sing the fair verses that he had made, that is to wit: Gloria,
   laus et honor tibi sit rex Christe. And the Emperor was present, and it
   pleased so much to the Emperor that he took him out of prison and
   re-established him into his see.

   The messengers of Michael the Emperor of Constantinople brought gifts
   to Louis the son of Charles, and among all others they brought the
   books of S. Denis of the Hierarchy of Angels, translated out of Greek
   into Latin, and he received them with great joy. And then were there
   about twenty sick men of divers maladies, which all were healed that
   night in the church of S. Denis.

   And when Louis was dead, Lothair held the empire. And Louis and Charles
   his brethren made a battle against him, where there was so great
   occision of one and other that there had never tofore been such in no
   time in France. And at last it was accorded that Charles should reign
   in France, and Louis in Almain, and Lothair in Italy, and in the part
   of France which is named Lorraine. And after that he left the empire to
   Louis his son, which was emperor after him, and he took the habit of a
   monk.

   And it is said in a chronicle that Sergius was then pope which tofore
   was named Osporci, that is to say the mouth of a swine, but his name
   was changed, and was called Sergius, and from then forthon it was
   ordained that all the popes should change their names because our Lord
   changed the name of him that he chose to be prince of the apostles. For
   as they be changed in name, so should they be changed in perfection of
   life, and because that this man was chosen into a noble office, he
   should not be defouled by a dishonest name.

   In the time of this Louis, in the year of our Lord eight hundred and
   fifty-six, as it is said in a chronicle, in the parish of Magonce a
   wicked spirit smote on the walls of the houses as it had been with
   hammers, and spake openly in sowing discords, and tormented so the
   people that in what house he entered, anon the house burned. And when
   the priests said the litanies, he cast at them stones and grieved them
   cruelly, and at the last he confessed that, when holy water was cast,
   he hid him under the cope of a certain priest as his familiar, accusing
   him that he had sinned with the daughter of the procurour.

   In that time the king of Bulgaria was converted unto the faith, and was
   of so great perfection that he made his oldest son king, and he himself
   took the habit of a monk, but his son governed him so youngly that he
   took again the rite and law of the paynims. And then his father
   reprised his knighthood and pursued his son, and took him and put him
   in prison, and then he ordained his other son to be king, and reprised
   his habit again.

   It was said that in Italy that time in the city of Brescia it rained
   blood three days, and that same time came into France, breezes or
   locusts innumerable which had six wings, six long feet, and two teeth
   harder than any stone, and fled by companies, as armed men, by the
   space of a day's journey, stretching a four or five miles broad, and
   they devoured all thing that was green in trees and in herbs, and came
   unto the sea of Brittany, but in the end they were drowned in the sea
   by force of the wind, but the heat of the ocean sea threw them on to
   the rivage, and the air was corrupted of their rotting, and thereof
   ensued a great famine and great mortality, that almost the third part
   of the people perished and died.

   And after this, the first Otto was emperor, in the year of our Lord
   nine hundred and thirty-eight. And as this Otto, on an Easter day, had
   ordained a great feast to his princes, tofore they were set, a son of
   one of the princes, in the manner of a child, took one of the messes of
   the meat from the board, and the carver smote the child with his fist
   and slew him. And he that had the child in keeping saw that, and slew
   him anon that had slain the child. And when the emperor would have
   condemned him without audience, he took the emperor and threw him to
   the ground, and would have strangled him, and with great pain he was
   taken from his hands. And after, the emperor made him to be kept, and
   said that he himself was culpable and to blame, and for the honour of
   the feast he let the man go freely his way.

   And after this first Otto, the second Otto succeeded, and when the
   Italians had oft-times broken the peace between them and the Romans, he
   came and made a great common feast to all the barons, bishops, and
   great lords. And when they were all set at dinner he environed them all
   with men of arms, and then he made his complaint and did do name them
   that were culpable by writing, and anon did do smite off their heads
   there, and unto all the others he made good cheer, and much honoured
   them.

   And Otto the third came after him, the year of our Lord nine hundred
   and ninety, and he had to surname: The Marvel of the World. And, as it
   is said in a chronicle, he had a wife which would have been love or
   leman unto an earl, and he would not consent to her. Wherefore she had
   so great malice unto him that she defamed him in such wise unto her
   husband the emperor that he commanded to smite off his head without
   having any audience. But tofore he was beheaded he prayed his good wife
   that she should show him innocent and not guilty by the proof of hot
   iron. And then after, came a day that the emperor should do right to
   widows and to orphans. And then this widow came and brought the head of
   her husband between her arms, and demanded of what death he ought to
   have that had slain a man wrongfully. And he said that he ought to have
   his head smitten off, and then she said: Thou art he that hast slain my
   husband by the false enticements of thy wife, innocently, and that I
   shall prove that I say truth by the bearing of this burning iron. And
   when the emperor saw that, he was all abashed and gave himself to be
   punished into the hands of the woman. Nevertheless by the prayer of the
   bishops and of the barons, the emperor took term of ten days, and after
   of eight, and after of seven, and after of six, till the cause was
   examined and the truth known. Then the emperor the cause examined and
   the truth known, did do burn his wife all quick, and gave to the widow
   four castles for his redemption, which castles be in the bishoprics of
   Lunensis, and be called the terms of the days, ten, eight, seven, six.

   After this emperor reigned Henry, which was duke of Bavaria in the year
   ten hundred and two, and gave his sister named Ghisela to the king of
   Hungary in marriage. And that same king and all his people she
   converted to the faith, and the king was named Stephen, which was of so
   great holiness that God ennobled him by many miracles. And this Henry
   the emperor and his wife Cunegonde were both clean virgins, and lived a
   holy life, and rested after in peace. And him succeeded Conrad, a duke
   of France, which had wedded the niece of S. Henry. In that time was
   seen a beam in heaven full of fire burning, and was much great, and was
   above the sun, which was seen falling to the earth. This emperor put
   some of the bishops in prison, and burnt the suburbs of Milan because
   that the archbishop of Milan fled out of prison. And on Whitsunday, as
   the emperor was crowned in a little church, there was so great thunder
   and so horrible, that some issued out of their wit, and others died for
   fear, and Bruno, the bishop, that sang the mass, and the secretary of
   the emperor, said that they had seen S. Ambrose right in the secret of
   the mass, which menaced and threatened the emperor.

   In the time of this Conrad, the year ten hundred and twenty-five, as it
   is said in a chronicle, that the Earl Leopold and his wife fled into a
   forest dreading the ire of the king, and there hid them in a little
   house. And as the emperor went for to hunt in the same forest the night
   came upon him, and he must needs abide there in that little house all
   night. And the lady, being great with child, as well as she might
   administered such thing as was necessary, the best wise that she might.
   And that night she was delivered of a son, and a voice came to the
   emperor, which said to him three times: Conrad, the child that is now
   born shall be shine heir and gendre, that is son-in-law. And when he
   arose in the morning, he called to him two of his squires and said to
   them: Go ye and take away this child from the mother by force and hew
   it in pieces and bring them to me; and anon they went hastily, and took
   away the child from the mother's lap. And when they saw the child of so
   fair a form, they had pity and were moved with mercy, and laid him upon
   a tree that he should not be devoured of wild beasts. And they took a
   hare and slit him, and took out his heart, and brought it to the
   emperor. And the same day a duke passed by the forest and heard the
   child cry, and did it to be brought to him, and because he had no son
   he made it to be borne to his wife, and made it to be nourished, and
   feigned that he had engendered it, and named him Henry. And after, when
   he was nourished, he grew and was of right fair form and well bespoken,
   and gracious and courteous to everybody. And when the emperor saw him
   that he was so fair and wise, he required him of his father, and made
   him to dwell in his court. And when he saw that this child was so
   gracious and courteous that he was praised of every man, he doubted
   that he should reign after him, and it were he whom he had commanded to
   have been slain, and wrote letters to his wife with his own hand, and
   they contained these words following: As much as thou lovest thy life,
   as soon as thou hast received this letter, that thou slay this child.
   And as he went he was lodged in a church, and he being weary rested him
   upon a bench, and his purse hung down in which his letters were. Then
   there was a priest there which desired much to see what was in his
   purse, and opened it and saw the letters sealed with the king's seal,
   and without breaking off the seal he opened them, and reading the
   felony, he abhorred it, and subtly he erased it. And whereas it said:
   Thou shalt slay him, he wrote: Thou shalt give our daughter to this
   child for to be his wife. And when the queen saw these letters, sealed
   with the king's seal, and that they were written with his own hand, she
   called the princes and solemnised the matrimony, and gave her daughter
   to him to be his wife. And the marriage was done at Aix-la-Chapelle.
   And when it was told to the emperor that the marriage of his daughter
   had been solemnly made, he was much abashed, and when he knew the truth
   of the two esquires and of the duke that found the child, and of the
   priest that had set in the letter the things above said, he apperceived
   well that the ordinance of God ought not to be contraried. And anon he
   sent for the child, and retained him as his son, and established him
   for to be his heir and to reign after him. And in the place where this
   child was born he founded a noble nnonastery, which is at this day
   named Ursine.

   This Henry put out of his court all the jongleurs, and gave to poor men
   all that was wont to be given to minstrels. In that time was so great
   discord in the church that there were three chosen to be pope, and a
   priest named Gratian gave to the others much money, and they left the
   See to him and he was pope. And as Henry the emperor came to Rome for
   to appease the strifes, Gratian came against him and offered to him a
   crown of gold for to be to him debonair. And he passed forth by and
   feigned all these things, and did do hold a cene in which he condemned
   Gratian of simony, and set another in his place. Howbeit, it is said in
   another place, in a letter that he sent to Matilda the countess, that
   the said priest was much simple, and that he had by money gotten to him
   the papacy, and that after, he knew his error, and by the means of the
   emperor, he deposed himself.

   And after this Henry, was emperor the third Henry, and in his time
   Bruno was chosen to be pope and was called Leo, and as he went to Rome
   for to take the See, he heard the voice of angels singing: Our Lord
   saith: I am he that knoweth the thoughts of peace. This pope made the
   life of many saints.

   In that time the church was troubled by Berengarius, which affrmed the
   body and blood of our Lord not to be verily in the altar, but
   figuratively, against whom wrote Lanfranc, prior of Beccanse. And
   Anselm came to him out of Burgundy for his doctrine, which was much
   adorned with virtue and wisdom, and was there prior after him.

   In this time was Jerusalem taken of the Saracens, and after was
   recovered by christian men, and the bones of S. Nicholas were brought
   into Bari. Thereof it is said: When there should be sung a new history
   of S. Nicholas, in a church which was of the holy cross, and was
   subject to the church of our Lady of Tarentino, the brethren prayed
   much instantly their prior that they might sing this new history, which
   he in no wise would grant to them, and said they ought not change their
   old for no new. And yet the brethren prayed him more instantly, and he
   in despite said: Go your way, for in no manner shall ye never have
   licence of me that this new song shall be sung. And when the feast of
   S. Nicholas came, the brethren said their matins all in heaviness, and
   their vigils. And when they were all in their beds, S. Nicholas
   appeared visibly and much fearfully to the prior, and drew him out by
   the hair, and smote him down on the pavement of the dortour, and began
   to sing the history: O pastor eterne; and at every note he smote him
   with a rod that he held in his hand right grievously on his back, and
   sang melodiously this anthem unto the end, and then the prior cried so
   loud that he awoke all his brethren, and was borne to his bed as halt
   dead, and when he came to himself, he said: Go ye and sing the new
   history of S. Nicholas from henceforth.

   In that same time the abbot of the convent of Molesine, and twenty-one
   monks with him, went for to dwell in desert for to keep more straitly
   the profession of their pale, and there established a new order out of
   the old.

   Hildebrand, prior of Cluny, was made pope and called Gregory, and when
   he was in the lesser orders, and was sent as a legate, he convanquished
   marvellously at Lyons the archbishop of Ebronycence of simony. For this
   archbishop had corrupted all his accusers so that he might not be
   convanquished. And then the legate commanded him that he should say: In
   nomine Patris et Filii, and he might not say: et Spiritus Sancti,
   because he had sinned in the Holy Ghost. And then he confessed his sin
   and was deposed, and named then the Holy Ghost with clear voice. And
   this miracle rehearseth Bruno in his book, that he made to Matthew the
   emperor. And when this Henry was dead it was written on his tomb
   whereas he was buried with other kings: Here lieth Henry, the son of
   Henry the father, Henry the belfather, Henry the old belfather. And
   after this Henry, reigned Henry the fifth, in the year of our Lord
   eleven hundred and seven, which took the pope with the cardinals, and
   let them go when he had of them right of investiture of bishops and of
   abbots with the ring and the staff pastoral. In that time Bernard and
   his brethren took the religion of Citeaux. In the parish of Liege a sow
   bare a pig having the visage of a man, and a hen had a chicken with
   four feet.

   And after this Henry, succeeded Lothair, in whose time a woman in Spain
   childed a monster which had a double body and that one joined to that
   other by the backs, and tofore had the semblance of a man whole of body
   and members ordinately, and behind was the semblance of a woman whole
   in all properties.

   After Lothair reigned Conrad. the year eleven hundred and thirty-eight.
   That time died Hugh of S. Victor, which was a right excellent doctor in
   all science and devout in religion, of whom it is said that when he was
   in his last infirmity, and that he might retain no meat, yet he
   required always to have the body of our Lord with great devotion. And
   then his brethren would please him and brought to him a simple host
   unsacred in manner of the body of our Lord, and he knew it well in
   spirit, and said: God forgive you, brethren, wherefore would ye deceive
   me? This is not my Lord that ye bring to me. And anon they were
   abashed, and ran and fetched to him the body of our Lord, and then he
   saw him whom he might not receive, and lifted up his hands to heaven
   and said: Now I see the Son ascend to the Father, and the spirit to God
   that made him, and with these words he gave up his spirit and the body
   of our Lord vanished away from them that held him.

   Eugene, Abbot of S. Anastasius, was established pope, but he was put
   out of the city because the senators had made another pope. And then he
   came into France and sent S. Bernard tofore him which preached the way
   of our Lord, and did many miracles. And then flourished Gilbert
   Porretanus. Frederick, nephew of Conrad, was emperor in the year of our
   Lord eleven hundred and fifty-four, and at that time flourished Master
   Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris, which compiled the book of sentences,
   the gloss of the psalter, and of the epistles of Paul, much profitably.
   And in that time were seen three moons in heaven, and in the midst of
   the three was the sign of the cross, and it was not long after that
   three suns were seen also. And then was Alexander chosen rightfully for
   to be pope, and against him were chosen Octavian, Johannes Cremensis of
   the title of S. Calixtus, and Johannis Strumetensis, successively to
   the papacy, and were ennoblished, by the favour of the emperor, to the
   See, and this discord and schism endured eighteen years, within which
   time the Almains, which dwelled in Tusculum for the emperor, assailed
   the Romans, which were at Mountport, and slew from noon to evensong so
   much people that there were never so many Romans slain, howbeit that in
   the time of Hannibal there were so many slain that three bushels were
   filled with gold rings that were taken off their fingers, which
   Hannibal did do send to Carthage. And many of them were buried at S.
   Stephen's and S. Laurence's. And it was written upon their sepulchre
   that they were ten times a thousand and ten thousand, and ten times
   sixteen hundred and a half. And when the emperor Frederick visited the
   Holy Land and washed him in a river, there he perished and died, and as
   others say he watered his horse, and his horse fell down in the water
   and so he died.

   Henry was emperor after him in the year eleven hundred and ninety. In
   that time was so great rains, thunders, and lightnings, and tempests,
   that never had been so great that any man might remember. For stones
   fell as great as eggs and were square, which were meddled with the
   rain, and destroyed the vines, trees, and the corn, and slew men,
   beasts, crows, and other birds, and some fowls were seen flying by the
   air in that tempest, which bare coals burning in their bills and beaks,
   and set fire on houses. And this Henry was always a tyrant against the
   Church of Rome, and therefore when he was dead, Innocent the Pope,
   opposed against Philip his son that he should not be emperor, and held
   with the party of Otto, son of the Duke of Saxony, and make him to be
   crowned King of Almain at Aix-la-Chapelle. In that time many barons of
   France went over the sea for the deliverance of the Holy Land, and they
   took Constantinople. In that time began the order of friars preachers
   and of the minors.

   Innocent the Third sent messengers to Philip, King of France, for to
   assail the land of the Albigeois for to take from them the heresies,
   and he took them all and did do burn them. And after this, Innocent the
   Third crowned Otto emperor and took of him an oath that he should keep
   the rights of holy church, and anon he did against his oath that same
   day, and did do rob and despoil them that came to Rome on pilgrimage,
   wherefore the pope cursed him and deposed him from the empire.

   In that time was S. Elisabeth, daughter of the King of Hungary, which
   was wife to the Landgrave of Thuringia and Hesse, which, among other
   innumerable miracles, she raised sixteen dead men and gave sight to one
   that was born blind, out of whose body oil floweth unto this day.

   When Otto was deposed, Frederick, son of Henry, was chosen, and was
   crowned of Honorius the Pope. And this man made right noble laws for
   the liberty of the church and against heretics, and this emperor
   abounded above all others in glory and in riches, but he abused them
   evilly by pride, and was a tyrant against the church, and set two
   cardinals in prison, and such prelates as Pope Gregory had do be
   assembled at the council, he took them, and therefore he was accursed
   of the same pope. And after Gregory died, which was oppressed with many
   grievous tribulations. And then was Innocent the Fourth made pope,
   which was of the nation of Genoa, and he assembled a council at Lyons
   where he deposed the emperor, and then was the empire void.
     __________________________________________________________________

                          Here followeth of S. Simeon.

   S. Simeon was born in Antioch and was much virtuous, and from the time
   that he was in his mother's belly he was chosen of God, and when he was
   twelve years old he kept his father's sheep. And on a time he beheld
   the church, and anon, as he that was replenished with the Holy Ghost,
   left his sheep and went to the church. And he accompanied him with a
   good ancient man, and said to him in this manner: Fair father, what
   thing is that that is here read? I pray you enseign and teach it me for
   I am simple and ignorant. Then the good ancient man began to speak of
   the virtues of the soul, and how this poor present life ought to be
   despised, and nowithstanding that the virtues be accomplished of many
   truly and laudably, and by the help of God in religion they be
   accomplished more lightly. Then S. Simeon fell to the feet of this good
   old man and said to him: Verily from hence forthon thou shalt be my
   father and my mother, for thou art master of good works, and after this
   good counsel I shall go into the church whereas God shall ordain for
   me. And then he expounded to him the rule and order of religion and
   told him how he must have much pain and affliction, and him behoved to
   have much patience and perseverance. Then anon he took leave of him,
   and went to the church of S. Timothy, and laid him tofore the gate and
   abode there three days and three nights without meat or drink. Then the
   abbot came and lifted him up and demanded Therefore he was come
   thither. Then S. Simeon answered to him and said: I desire much to be
   servant of our Lord, I pray thee that thou receive me into thy
   monastery, and that thou command me to serve all thy brethren. He was
   received of the abbot, and was there six months obeying to the brethren
   humbly. When the others fasted from morn to evensong time, he after
   seven days took his refection, and the other days he gave his provender
   to poor people. On a time he came to the pit of the place, and found
   there a cord, which he took and bound fast about his body from his
   reins to his shoulders; he strained so sore and fast that his flesh
   rotted under the cord so much that the cords went to the bones, and
   unnethe might the cord be seen. On a day one of the brethren
   apperceived that he gave his meat unto the poor people. He and the
   others told it to the abbot, and also they said that so great a stench
   issued out of his body that none might abide by him, and that the
   vermin that came out of it had filled all his bed. The abbot was much
   angry and bade him despoil him naked, and when he saw the cord he
   escried, saying: O man, from whence comest thou? Me seemeth that thou
   wilt destroy the rule of our religion, when thou wilt not serve God by
   discretion as others do. I pray thee depart hence and go where thou
   wilt. With great pain they took off the cord with which he was bounden
   and healed him. After, he departed from the place without witting of
   any of them, and entered into a pit in desert without water, whereas
   wicked spirits dwelled. That night the abbot had a revelation that a
   great multitude of men of arms had environed the abbey and said with a
   high voice: Give to us the man of God or else we shall burn thee and
   all the abbey, for thou hast driven away the man just and debonair. The
   abbot told this to his brethren, and the next night came the semblable
   vision. He was all abashed and sent his monks for to search and fetch
   him, and they found him not. Then the abbot went with them and they
   came to the pit and there made their prayers, and descended therein,
   and brought him again by force to the abbey. The brethren of the abbey
   kneeled tofore him, and asked him forgiveness. And after, he abode a
   whole year, and after, secretly he departed again and went unto a
   mountain of stones fast by a cloister and dwelled so three years. Then
   his neighbours came thither by devotion and enhanced his pillar four
   cubits of height, and there he dwelled seven years after, and after,
   they made to him another of twelve cubits of height, in which he
   dwelled, and after that they made another of twenty cubits, and after
   that another of thirty, and there he abode four years, and beside him
   he did do make two chapels, and many sick men were healed by his
   virtue, and he converted many Saracens to the faith. After this, his
   thigh rotted a whole year, and all that year he held him on that other
   foot, but the vermin fell to the ground from his thigh. He had a fellow
   which was called Anthony, which wrote his life and held him company,
   which gathered up the vermin and delivered them to him, and he took
   them and laid them upon his sore, saying: Eat ye this that God hath
   given you.

   There was a king, a Saracen, named Basilike that heard the fame and
   renown of him, and came to him in very faith, and whiles the holy man
   prayed, one of the vermin fell out of his thigh, and the heathen king
   took it up, and when he looked on it, it was a precious stone. Then
   said to him this holy man: O man this is not happened ne made by my
   merit, but it is made by thy faith, and then he thanked God and
   departed.

   Seven years after, his mother came and would visit him, but it was
   forbidden her, for no woman might enter into that place. Then the holy
   man said to his mother: Abide a little and we shall see you if it
   please God, and she weeping three days and four nights received her
   son, and then it happed that she slept, and the holy man prayed for her
   and she died. After this there was made to him another pillar of forty
   cubits, whereon he dwelled seven years after, that is to wit unto his
   death.

   In which time there was a dragon right venomous which was in a cave
   nigh to him, which infected so the place that nothing grew about him.
   In whose right eye it happed that a stake entered, and he came all
   blind to the door of the monastery and lay there as to ask help. He set
   his right eye by the pillar, and was there three days without doing any
   harm to anybody. Then commanded S. Simeon that they should take earth
   and lay water on it, and lay it thereupon. And when they had so done,
   anon issued out of his eyes a stake of a cubit long, and when the
   people saw this miracle they glorified God. But notwithstanding they
   fled for dread that they had of the dragon, and the dragon abode there
   till all the people were gone. Then he arose and adored at the gate of
   the monastery almost two hours, and after went in to his cave without
   doing harm to anybody.

   Another time a woman drank out of a cruse by night wherein was a little
   serpent, and it avaled down into her body, wherefore she went to divers
   medicine and physicians, but it availed to her nothing. Many years
   after, she was brought to this holy man, the which commanded to take of
   the earth and water and lay it on the mouth of the woman, and anon the
   serpent issued out, which was three cubits long, and anon cleft
   asunder, which was hanged up there the space of seven days, many men
   seeing it.

   On another time many folk and beasts died for default of water, and at
   his prayer suddenly the earth opened, and there was found a pit of
   right good water for to drink, which endureth unto this day.

   Another time other people abode long while he was in his prayer, and
   went a little aback under the shadow of a tree, and they saw a hart
   pass by, whom they commanded thus, saying: We conjure thee by the
   prayers of S. Simeon that thou tarry a while, and so he did, and they
   took him and slew him, and as they ate of him they became lepers and
   mesels. Then they went with the skin unto S. Simeon and were there two
   years, and unnethe might they be healed, and for witness thereof they
   hung up the skin of the hart.

   There was a leopard there about, which destroyed the people of the
   country. Then this holy man commanded to take of the water of that
   monastery and to sprinkle it on the ground all about whereas he went,
   and when they had so done, anon after they found the leopard dead. He
   exhorted all them that he knew that they should not swear by him,
   humble sinner, nevertheless all they of the Orient, and the barbarians
   of that country sware by him.

   There was a thief named Jonathas, which was chased of many knights, and
   he entered into the monastery and embraced the pillar, and began to
   weep. Then S. Simeon demanded what he was, and he answered: I am
   Jonathas the thief, that am come hither to do penance; and anon came
   thither the officers of Antioch, and said to this holy man: Give us
   this evil man, for the beasts be ready to devour him. Then S. Simeon
   answered: I may not, for I doubt that he that sent him to me, which is
   greater than ye, will be wroth. And seven days long he embraced the
   pillar, and after, said to the holy man: If thou wilt I will go my way.
   Then he said to him: Wilt thou go yet for to do harm? He answered: Nay
   sir, but my time is accomplished. And so saying he gave up his soul and
   died.

   And S. Simeon inclined down to make his prayer like as he had been
   accustomed, and the people abode him three days for to have his
   blessing. Then Anthony came to him saying: Arise up, sir, and give us
   thy blessing; and he went, and heard him not drawing his breath, but an
   odour as of a precious ointment issued out of his body. Then he began
   to weep strongly, kissing his eyes and his beard, and said: Alas, sir!
   why hast thou forsaken me? I never heard thy doctrine angelic, what
   answer shall I give to the sick people that shall require thee? Ne of
   what covering shall I cover thy body? And there by force of heaviness
   fell asleep. Then appeared to him this holy man, saying: I shall not
   leave this house ne this holy mountain in which I have been enlumined,
   but go down and sanctify and appease the people, and show in Antioch
   that I am in rest. And cease not thou to serve God in this place here,
   and God shall render and give to thee a good reward. Then he awoke, and
   began strongly to weep again, in saying: What relics shall I take of
   thee, sir, in remembrance of thee? Then he removed the body much
   strongly, and then had Anthony much more dread, and durst not touch
   him, but went down anon, and went unto Antioch to the bishop, and told
   him of the death of this holy man, and anon he came with three other
   bishops and the master of the knights of the town, and hung curtains
   about the pillar, and bare his body by the altar tofore the pillar. And
   anon the birds assembled about the pillar and Rew like as they would
   have asked their meat, and cried so strongly that men and beasts
   enforced them to cry and weep at the voice of the birds. The mountains
   and the fields showed signs of heaviness, so that the complaint was
   heard seven miles, and there came thereabout a cloud black and dark,
   and Anthony saw an angel come from heaven for to visit, which had his
   face clear as fire, and his vestments white as snow. And about ten of
   the clock he saw seven ancient men that spake to him, but he knew not
   the mystery that they said. The prelate of Antioch would have had his
   beard to put in his relics, and as soon as he put his hand for to take
   it, anon his hand was dry, but they made there so many prayers for him
   that he was healed. Then bare they the body into Antioch, and the
   bishop sware that never person should have nothing of his body. When
   they were come into a street, that was called Merce, five miles from
   Antioch, the body abode there, so that no man might move it.

   A man that had been deaf and dumb the space of forty years because he
   had defiled a woman in his house, which woman loved him not, he came
   and fell down tofore the bier suddenly, and began to cry and say: Ah!
   man and servant of God, thou art welcome to point for me, for thy
   coming hath guerished me and given to me health. Then he arose and took
   one of the staves that bare the bier and anon was all whole, and served
   him all the days of his life. Anon issued out of the town all the
   people of Antioch, and received the body much solemnly in singing,
   psalmonising and glorifying God, and with great plenty of lights
   burning, bare the body into the great church, which is called the
   church of penance. Many other miracles hath our Lord showed at his
   sepulchre, and more were showed after than tofore by his life. Then let
   us pray to this holy S. Simeon that he pray for us unto our Lord that
   he have mercy on us. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                Here followeth the Life of S. Polycarp, Martyr.

   S. Polycarp was disciple of S. John the Evangelist, and S. John
   ordained him bishop of Smyrna. And there were at Rome then two
   heretics, that one was called Marcian and that other Valentine, the
   which had deceived much people by their false doctrine. Then S.
   Polycarp went to Rome on Easter-day, and there by his predication he
   brought again to the faith them that they had deceived. He wrote to the
   Philippians a much fair epistle, and much profitable, the which is yet
   read in Asia unto this day. It happened that in the time that Marcus
   Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius reigned, which was the year of grace one
   hundred and sixty-two, was made the fourth persecution on christian
   people, after the Emperor Nero, through all Asia.

   S. Polycarp heard how the people cried and was moved, he therefore was
   never moved, but abode without dread. And he was gracious and courteous
   in manners and pleasant in regard, and tarried always in the city as an
   hardy champion of God. He was so much required of the people that he
   departed from the city with their familiar friends, that he went to the
   field nigh unto the city, and there he prayed all the night for the
   peace of all holy church. And thereof had he a custom all the days of
   his life. It happed that three days before that he was taken, as he
   prayed in a night he had a vision, that seemed that his hair was burnt,
   and when he awoke he told to them that were with him the vision, and
   expounded it to them, saying that: For certain he should be burnt for
   love of God. When he saw that they approached him that would have taken
   him, he went to meet them and right gladly received them, whereof they
   were much abashed that they were commanded to take so good a man. And
   anon he laid the table to his enemies, and made to them as good cheer
   as they had been his friends, and gave to them largely wine and meat,
   and get of them leave to pray an hour, and all that hour he prayed much
   devoutly for all the state of holy church. When the hour was passed he
   mounted upon an ass, and was brought into the city, and as they led
   him, Herod came, which wwas provost of the country, and his father with
   him, and they took him into a chariot with them, and said to him much
   sweetly: Wherefore do ye not sacrifice as the others do? What harm is
   it to call Cæsar his lord, and to do sacrifice to the gods for to live
   surely? And when they saw that it availed not, and that always he was
   firm and constant in the law of God, they were much wroth with him and
   did to him much harm in the chariot, and as he approached the city a
   great multitude of people began to murmur against him. Anon a voice
   descended from heaven saying unto him: Polycarp be strong and constant.
   That voice was heard of many but none saw it. Then anon it was told to
   the provost all openly, that Polycarp had three times confessed to be
   christian. When these tidings were heard all the people of the city of
   Smyrna, paynims and Jews, began to cry in great ire: This is the master
   and doctor of all the christian people that be in Asia, and hath
   destroyed all our gods, we require that he be burnt all quick. Then the
   people assembled much wood and brought him to a stake. And when they
   brought him to the stake they would have bound him thereto, and nailed
   the bonds with great nails. Then he said to them: Let me alone, for he
   that hath ordained me to suffer this torment of fire shall give to me
   virtue of patience, without moving me from this place, for to endure
   and suffer the flame of the fire.

   Then the tyrants left the nails, and bound him with cords to the stake,
   and his hands bound behind him. And as in his passion he praised and
   blessed our Lord, and the fire was burning and a great flame shining, a
   much notable miracle was showed right there to much people, which God
   showed to the end that it should be showed unto all other. And the
   miracle was this, that the flame departed all about him in manner of a
   chamber by virtue of a sweet wind that came from heaven, and the body
   of the martyr was not as flesh burnt in the flame, but as fair as it
   had been purified in a furnace, and they that were about him felt an
   odour so sweet as it had been incense or precious ointment. When the
   tyrants saw that the fire might not consume the body of the glorious
   martyr, they made the ministers to approach and did them to smite him
   through the body with a spear, and then issued out of his glorious body
   so great abundance of blood that it quenched the fire. And when the
   people saw the miracle they departed, having much marvel that they did
   so much cruelty to the friends of God. And with this glorious martyr
   were twelve other martyrs martyred, for to get the joy of heaven. The
   which grant us the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                  Here followeth the Passion of S. Quiriacus.

   In the time that Julian the apostate went for to fight against them of
   Persia, he came into Jerusalem and did do seek S. Quiriacus the bishop,
   which of his friends was called Judas, but the Queen, S. Helen, after
   he was baptized did do call him Quiriacus. And when he was brought
   tofore Julian, he promised to him many riches and honours so that he
   would do sacrifice unto the idol of Jupiter, and because Quiriacus
   would not do it, Julian commanded to strain him on a bank, and with a
   fork of iron he made to open his mouth and put in molten lead burning,
   for to burn his entrails. Quiriacus suffered it much patiently without
   making of any cry, looking always up toward heaven. And about two hours
   after, when they that were there supposed he had been dead, he lifted
   up his voice saying: Jesus, Father eternal, resplendent light which
   never may be extinct, I bless thee, for thou hast made me worthy to
   have participation with thy friends. Therefore I require thee that the
   pride and elation of this evil tyrant may not overcome me, but that thy
   puissance always confirm me in steadfast constancy of faith. And when
   he had accomplished his orison, Julian said to him: Quiriacus, lo! how
   I let thee jangle! I have heard oft such words; do sacrifice to our
   lord Jupiter and then thou shalt do wisely. Then Quiriacus answered to
   him: I believe and have believed him that is very God that shall
   destroy thee and thy pride. Then Julian did do bring a grabat of
   copper, and did do lay and stretch out the body thereon, and put under
   it burning coals, and did do strew salt on the body, and above that did
   do beat him with rods, to the end that his belly and entrails should
   have the more pain and travail. And after, they turned his belly
   towards the fire and beat his back with rods, and then he with a high
   voice began to pray in Hebrew. The tyrant was much amarvelled of the
   great patience that he had, and did do shut him in a little house unto
   the time that he had devised of what death he might make him to die.
   And about two years after, S. Anne, the mother of S. Quiriacus, came to
   him and exhorted him to suffer patiently for the love of God. Anon the
   ministers of the devil went and told to the tyrant, the which commanded
   that she should be brought to him. And when he saw that she would in no
   wise do sacrifice to the idols, he commanded that she should be hanged
   by the hair, and as she hung, he made to tear off all her nails or
   ongles, and in this torment she was four hours without speaking. Then
   Julian said to her: What is this that they do to thine ongles? And then
   she answered to him: O hound out of thy wit, worker of all iniquity, if
   thou have any greater torments give them to me, for I am all ready to
   fight against thy father the devil, over whom I have hope to have
   victory, moyenant on him the name of Jesu Christ. Then the tyrant
   commanded to take great lamps burning and setting them to her sides;
   the holy woman cried unto God, and making her prayers she rendered up
   her spirit unto our Lord. The christian people that were there buried
   her. After this Julian commanded that Quiriacus should be brought
   tofore him, and said to him: Quiriacus, say to me of what enchantments
   and what evil craft hast thou used by which it seemeth that thou
   feelest no torment, and therefore thou wilt not sacrifice to the idols?
   Then Quiriacus answered to him: O cursed fool and indigne hound that
   pervertest the might of God to enchantments and evil works, wherefore
   thou shalt be beaten by wound celestial. Then commanded Julian to make
   a great pit, and by enchanters did do assemble all manner of serpents
   and venomous beasts, and did do put them into the pit. And after, he
   made to cast the holy man in the midst of them, and as they threw him
   therein he began to say: Right sweet Jesus, I yield to thee grace and
   thankings for not only in thee wouldst thou verify and apply the
   prophecy of David, but in us that be thy little creatures which thou
   hast created and hast willed to have thy grace, for lo! here it
   pleaseth thee, that we go upon the serpents, and that we march and
   tread on the lion and on the dragon. And as he said so, Julian
   commanded to burn all the beasts. Then a knight called Amon said to the
   Emperor Julian: O king out of thy wit and wood, how hast thou the will
   to put this man to death? Thine enchanters and thy gods which be
   deceivable may not make the marvels that he doth, and in truth now
   forthon I am certain that the God of christian men is much mighty. For
   which words, Julian commanded to smite off his head; and as he was led
   unto the place for to be beheaded, he began to say: Jesu Christ, which
   art the God of Quiriacus, receive my soul in peace, and so saying he
   stretched forth his neck and was beheaded and thus finished his
   martyrdom. Julian called Quiriacus, and prayed him and exhorted him
   that he should reny the crucifix. Then Quiriacus answered trim: O heart
   perverted, evil and without pity, that seest nothing, that wouldst that
   I should leave my God which giveth to me and to other creatures so many
   goods, and that I should become mechant and semblable to thee. Then
   Julian was much angry, and commanded to hang a great caldron of oil
   upon the fire which oil was so hot that they were there about unnethe
   might endure the fume that issued. And he commanded to set S. Quiriacus
   therein, which entered therein in making the sign of the cross, and
   said: Lord Jesu Christ which hast sanctified the flom Jordan and hast
   given to me the holy sacrament of baptism by water, see now where I
   shall be yet baptized in oil. Yet have I the third martyrdom to do by
   the washing of effusion of blood, which I have long tarried for. Then
   the tyrant, replenished of wrath and of ire more than tofore, commanded
   that he should be smitten with a sharp dart into the breast. And as he
   was so smitten he prayed God that he might depart out of the world, and
   then gave up his soul unto our Lord, which was the fourth nones of May.
   This S. Quiriacus of whom we speak, was the same Judas properly by whom
   S. Helen found the very holy cross. And after that he was baptized S.
   Helen recommended him unto the bishopric of Jerusalem, which was at
   that time when the said bishop was dead. Helen that then was in
   Jerusalem went to Rome to the pope Eusebius, which ordained Judas to be
   bishop of Jerusalem in changing his name and called him Quiriacus. To
   whom God gave so much grace that he enchased away the fiends by his
   prayer. S. Helen delivered to him many fair gifts for to distribute and
   depart to the poor. And at the prayer and request also of her was made
   a fair feast of the Invention of the holy cross. And ye ought to know
   that when the very cross was found, and by virtue thereof a dead man
   was raised, the devil, which is of all good envious, was heard crying
   in the air: O Judas! by thee I am chased out and diminished, but I know
   well that I shall be avenged against thee. I shall raise another king
   that shall reny the crucifix, the which by my counsel and by my
   exhortment shall make thee to suffer so many torments that thou thyself
   shalt reny the crucifix. Then said Judas to him: He that properly hath
   power to raise dead men, put thee in the deep bottom of hell in fire
   perdurable. S. Quiriacus suffered martyrdom, as said is, for the love
   of our Lord, by which he hath gotten the glory perdurable, the which he
   grant to us that for us suffered death and passion. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                 Here followeth the life of S. Thomas Aquinas.

   S. Thomas Aquinas, of the order of the friars preachers, was a right
   sovereign doctor, high and of noble lineage, which was born in the
   realm of Sicily, and tofore that he was born he was shewed by divine
   purveyance. For in those parts there was a holy man in work and in
   renomee which with many other hermits led a right holy life, and all
   the people had him in great reverence. This holy man, replenished of
   the Holy Ghost, came to the lady and mother of this holy child, not yet
   born, and with great joy said to her that she had conceived a son, and
   she supposed that she had not conceived. Then the holy man said to her:
   Lady, be thou glad, for thou shalt bring forth a child which shall be
   called Thomas, and shall have great name and renomee through all the
   world in science and in holy life, and he shall be of the order of the
   friar, preachers. All the which things like as the holy hermit has said
   were accomplished in the name of the Saviour of the world, and to the
   glory of his glorious saint. When the child was born he was called
   Thomas by his right name. He had the world and the vanity thereof in
   despite, and for to live in the more holy and clean life he entered
   into the order of the friars preachers, and after, he was drawn out
   thereof by his brethren, and was closed up in a chamber in a tower two
   years. And because that by menaces ne fair words his brethren might not
   change his good purpose ne revoke it in no manner, they put in to his
   chamber a young damsel to the innocent child, for to subvert his good
   courage, and anon he took a brand of fire, and drove the damsel out of
   the chamber, which was come for to deceive him.

   And after that, he put him in humble prayers, devoutly beseeching our
   Lord that by his benign grace he would always maintain his chastity.
   Anon as he had made his prayers two angels in marvellous habit appeared
   to him, saying that his prayer was heard of God, and they distrained
   him by the reins, saying: Thomas, we be sent to thee by the commandment
   of God, and in his name we gird thee with the girdle of chastity, which
   shall never depart from thee, ne shall be broken. The which gift was
   given to him of special grace, and was in him so fast and firm that he
   never after felt pricking of his flesh, and so kept him as long as he
   lived, as it appeared hereafter in his life. When he surmounted one of
   his adversaries with his ministers, his good mother considering and
   having mind of that which the good man had told to her, and shewed how
   he should be of the order of the friars preachers, and let him to be
   led to them peaceably, notwithstanding that tofore his brethren would
   have empeshed him of the entering in to the order, and of his study.
   For when he was returned in to the order by consent of his good mother
   he began to study, which was as sweet to him as it is to the bee to
   make the honey, and like as of the bee the honey is multiplied, right
   so in like wise was by this glorious doctor the honey of holy
   scripture. Whereof he made marvellous books in theology, logic,
   philosophy, natural and moral, upon the evangiles, in so much that the
   holy church throughout all the world of his holy science is
   replenished. And as he thus profited he was sent to Paris. Then his
   brethren, heard that he should depart, anon came after him, saying that
   it appertained not that a child of so great lineage as he was, should
   be in the order of mendicants ne of truants, and all to-rent his coat
   and cope, and would have taken him away from his good purpose. And when
   he was restored to the order to serve and give praising to our Lord, he
   set all his intent to study, in thinking on God when he was in
   contemplation that his thought was replenished with great joy. For many
   times were, as he was in a secret place and set all his intent in
   prayer, he was seen lifted up many times without aid of anything
   corporal. This then is well a holy doctor, for thus as he set not his
   thought in this world, he set all his heart and his thought toward God,
   and was enhanced as he that had not had no flesh ne bone, ne any
   weight. We read that the blessed doctor desputed, read, or wrote, or
   argued, or did some other virtuous thing, and after when his prayer was
   past, anon he had in his mouth that which he should dispute or write as
   if he had tofore long studied in many books. All which things he shewed
   secretly to his fellow, named friar Reynold. To whom privily he shewed
   all his other secrets as long as he lived, and would that none other
   should know it, to the end that the vain glory of the world should not
   surprise him. For the science that he had was not of human study, but
   was of the administration divine by the prayers and service that he did
   to our Lord. This holy man is then as Moses was, which was given to the
   daughter of Pharaoh. For like as he was taken out of the sea and saved
   and rendered unto the said daughter, right so the blessed doctor, not
   withstanding that he was born of the great lineage of the Earl of
   Alquin was by the purveyance of God rendered to his mother holy church,
   and cast out of the flood of this world, and enhanced and nourished by
   the paps and mammels of the scripture of holy church. And like as Moses
   made many marvellous signs tofore the children of Israel, in Iike wise
   hath this blessed doctor and his science and blessed doctrine in
   destroying errors always preached verity and truth, as his holy life
   witnesseth.

   As on a night this glorious doctor was in his orisons and prayers, the
   blessed apostles Peter and Paul appeared to him and induced him in holy
   scripture, and especially of the prophecy of prophets all entirely and
   holy. This then is a holy doctor to whom the chancellor of heaven and
   the doctor of divine scripture have opened the gate; and he that was
   ravished to heaven hath shewed to him the secret of all the verity. And
   thus this blessed doctor is taken from the world and made burgess of
   heaven he being yet in the earth.

   On another time as he was in the convent of his order at Naples, being
   in the church in devout prayers he was enhanced and lifted up from the
   ground the height of two cubits and more. Then a friar that saw him was
   much abashed and amarvelled, and after, was heard a clear voice of the
   image of the crucifix tofore whom the holy man was turned and made his
   prayer, the which voice said unto him: O Thomas, thou hast written of
   me, what reward wilt thou have for thy labour? S. Thomas answered to
   him: Lord, I will none other reward but thyself; for he himself wrote
   in his time and made the service and office of the precious sacrament
   of the altar. And for as much as on a time a question was moved among
   the scholars of Paris how the accidents might by right be without
   subject, and hereof made they doubt, and determined all wholly unto
   that which the glorious doctor should say, which thing he clearly
   shewed to them. And for so much as said is that the demand or question
   was moved of our Lord, it was given to understand of the end of his
   life which was nigh. And as he was sent for of the Pope Gregory the
   tenth, he went by Champagne into the realm of Sicily, he began to be
   sick in such wise that he lost entirely his appetite. And in passing by
   the abbey called Fossenew of the order of the Cistercians, he was
   prayed greatly of the monks that it would please him to come to their
   abbey. His sickness began for to increase from day to day, and yet
   notwithstanding his malady, he ceased not to sow and spread his holy
   doctrine of divine scripture and sapience, and then he was prayed of
   the monks for to expound to them the canticles.

   And that time it happed that in that monastery was seen a star three
   days tofore his death in manner of a sun, whereof they were abashed
   what it might signify, but certainly it signified that the holy man
   should depart out of this world within three days, and that appeared
   well, for when the holy man was dead the star was no more seen, and it
   was in the year of our Lord twelve hundred and fifty-four. And anon
   brother Reynold, his fellow, witnessed in truth, part saying and openly
   preaching in this wise; I, friar Reynold, have heard many times and
   now, the confession of this glorious doctor, and have always found him
   clean and net as a child of five years of age, for he never consented
   ne had will in mortal ne deadly sin. And it is not to be forgotten what
   marvellous tokens were shewed when the blessed doctor should depart out
   of this world and of the entry of the perdurable felicity which was
   granted to him. For a friar, much devout, saw in the hour of his death
   the holy doctor reading in the school, and S. Paul entering into him.
   And S. Thomas demanded him if he had had good and true understanding in
   his epistles. Then S. Paul answered to him: Yea, as good as any
   creature living might have. And above that S. Paul said to him: I will
   that thou come with me and I shall lead thee to a place where thou
   shalt have of all things more clear understanding. And it seemed to the
   friar that S. Paul drew S. Thomas out of the school by his cope. Then
   this friar began to cry, saying: Help brethren, for friar Thomas is
   taken from us, and by the voice of this friar the other friars awoke
   and demanded that friar what he had. Then he told to them and expounded
   this said vision, and the friars made inquisition of the truth, and
   found that it was so as the friar had said, for in the same hour that
   the friar had so cried, the holy doctor departed out of this world. And
   like as he had had in divine sapience and science a doctor and teacher,
   right so in his passing he had a leader unto the glory perdurable. And
   long after that he was put in his sepulchre, the monks doubted that the
   holy corpse should have been taken away against their will, for the
   glorious doctor had commanded that his body should be borne to Naples,
   forasmuch as he was of that place. Wherefore the monks translated his
   body from one place to another, wherefore the prior of the abbey was in
   the night grievously reproved in a vision of S. Thomas. The prior,
   which doubted the judgment and sentence divine, commanded that the body
   of the Saint should be remised in the place that they had taken it
   from, and as soon as the sepulchre was opened there issued so great and
   sweet an odour that all the cloister was replenished therewith, and it
   seemed not that anybody had been buried there, but it seemed that there
   had been all manner of spices, which body they found all whole in all
   his members. The habit of his order, his cope, his scapulary and coat,
   were all without any evil corruption, and the odour of his precious
   body and his habit were sweet smelling by evident witnesses seven years
   after that he was translated, and the body was translated all whole.
   Our blessed Lord hath honoured his blessed saint with many marvellous
   signs and miracles. By his benefits and merits he hath raised some from
   death and some from wicked spirits, and from the puissance of the
   fiend, and many from divers maladies, which have been brought to health
   by the grace of God and the merits of this glorious saint.

   We read also that there was a friar much devout, called brother Albert,
   which on a day was much devoutly in prayers tofore the altar of the
   Virgin Mary, and two reverend persons, marvellously shining, appeared
   to him. That one of those twain was in the habit of a bishop and the
   other in the habit of friars preachers, which had a crown on his head
   round beset with precious stones, and about his neck two collars, one
   of silver, the other of gold, and on his breast he had a great stone
   which of his brightness cast out many rays of clearness and illumined
   all the church, his cope that he had on was full of precious stones,
   his coat and scapulary were all shining of whiteness. When the friar
   saw this sight he marvelled much. Then he, that was in the habit of a
   bishop, said to him: I am Austin, that am sent to thee to the end that
   I may show the glory of brother Thomas Aquinas which is in heaven in
   glory like unto me, but he precedeth me in the order of virginity, and
   I him in dignity pontifical. Many other signs and miracles hath our
   Lord showed unto the honour and glory of his glorious saint, S. Thomas,
   whose merits be unto us aidant and helping. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                      Here followeth the life of S. Gaius.

   That time when Diocletian and Maximian reigned emperors, Gaius, that
   was pope of Rome, called and made to assemble all the christian people
   together, and said to them: Our Lord hath ordained two degrees or
   states to them that believe on him, that is to wit, confessors and
   martyrs. And therefore if some of you be fearful and in doubt that they
   shall not mowe suffer martyrdom, let them ever have true and very
   confession and be steadfast in the faith, and go must they with
   Cromatius and Tiburtius for to save themselves. And they that are
   willing for to abide with me within this city, in the name of God let
   them abide, for the separation of the persons in far countries may not
   separate that the divine charity hath assembled. Then escried to him
   Tiburtius saying: Holy father, I beseech thee that thou leave me not to
   turn my back, fearing the persecutors. For to me it shall be great joy
   and comfort to suffer bodily death, for to get and enjoy life eternal.
   When S. Gaius saw the faith of Tiburtius and his constant courage he
   began to weep for joy. There abode with him Marcellius, Mark their
   father, Tranquilinus, Sebastian, Tiburtius and S. Nicostratus, with him
   his brother Castor and his wife Zoe, also Claudian and Victorian hii
   brother, with them his son Symphorian. The bishop ordained unto deacons
   S. Mark and Marcellius and made priest Tranquilinus. He did ordain S.
   Sebastian defensor of the Church, and the others he ordained and made
   subdeacons. Night and day they were continually in great devotion,
   fasting, weeping and saying their prayers and orisons, and devoutly
   prayed our Lord that of his benign grace he would make them able and
   worthy to be accompanied with the martyrs by very patience, and there
   by their prayers many one were healed of their sickness. Many a blind
   person was restored of sight, and many enemies or devils were put out
   from many a creature.

   So as Tiburtius went through the town he saw a man that was fallen from
   high unto low, insomuch that he was all to-burst and broken of all his
   members, and men would have made his grave for to bury him. Soon
   Tiburtius approached and began to say Pater noster over him, fair and
   soft, and incontinent after, he was whole, and rendered him in to good
   health to his parents. And soon after, he had him aside from the people
   and converted and baptized him. So as Zoe was devoutly in orison and at
   her prayers she was taken and led by the paynims unto a statue of Mars,
   for to have constrained her to sacrifice to the idols. She then
   answered: Ye will constrain a woman for to sacrifice unto the statue of
   Mars for to show that your Mars delighteth and taketh his pleasure in
   women, and howbeit that he may do his will of the shameful Venus,
   neverthelatter he shall not have the victory of me, for I bear the
   victory of me at my forehead. Then she was taken and led into a prison
   right dark and much obscure; and there she was five days without sight
   of any light, without drink, and without meat, and without the sight
   and hearing of any body, but only of him that had closed or shut her
   therein, who often said to her: By famine, or by fault and lack of
   meat, thou shalt die here in tenebres or darkness if thou sacrifice not
   unto our mighty gods. The sixth day she was had out of prison, and
   hanged she was by her hairs to a high tree, and under her they made a
   smoke of dung and of ordure or filth, which rendered a horrible stench.
   And by this torment of martyrdom she expired and rendered her soul unto
   our Lord, confessing ever his right holy name.

   After, the tyrants took the holy corpse and at the neck of it they hung
   a great stone, and cast it within the river of Tiber, to the end that
   the christians should not take it to make of it a goddess. And after
   that she thus had received her martyrdom, she appeared before S.
   Sebastian and recounted to him how she had suffered martyrdom for the
   love of our Lord. The which thing, as S. Sebastian rehearsed it to his
   fellows, Tranquilinus escried and said: The women precede us to the
   crown of glory, why live we so long?

   On the seventh day after this, Tranquilinus alone, high and public,
   began to denounce the name of God, and anon he was taken and cast with
   stones, and when he had rendered his soul to God he was cast into the
   water of Tiber. And as Nicostratus and Claudian, with them Castor,
   Victorian and Symphorian were about to have out of the river of Tiber
   the bodies of the martyrs, they were taken and led unto the prefect or
   judge Fabian, which invited them to sacrifice unto the idols by the
   space of ten days, one time by menaces, that other time by fair words,
   weening to have brought them to this idolatry. But ever they were
   steadfast and constant in the faith, which Fabian, when he saw them so
   constant, he went and told it to the emperor, and the emperor commanded
   that they should be forthwith tormented by divers torments. But when he
   saw their steadfast belief, he commanded that without delay they should
   be cast into the midst of the sea. Anon Fabian, for to accomplish the
   commandment of the emperor, made to be hanged at the neck of each one
   of them a great stone, and thrown they were unto the bottom of the sea.
   Thus were consumed or ended their martyrdoms, flourishing as lilies
   before God, in sempiterna secula, where we all may have part. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Arnold.

   S. Arnold was father of Pepin and grandfather of Charles the great, as
   a doctor recounteth, named Peter Damian, and held a duchy in Lorraine,
   which did put from him all worldly affections, as riches, wife and
   children, and haunted the deserts for to lead best solitary life. On a
   day, so as he passed over the river of Meuse, and that he was about the
   midst of the bridge where the water was more deeper than in any other
   place, he took a ring that he had and cast it within the water saying:
   Whensomever I shall receive and have again this ring, then shall I
   believe that I shall be assoiled of all my sins. And after, from thence
   he departed and went into a desert, where he was long time as dead to
   the world and living with God. In that time died the bishop of Metz,
   and happed that S. Arnold was chosen for to be bishop there. So then on
   a time as he abstained him from eating of any flesh, as he ever did
   while that he was in the desert or wood, was presented unto him a fish,
   and as his cook dressed and slit it, he found within his belly the said
   ring, and went and showed it to the holy bishop, whereof he was right
   joyful and glad. And ye ought to wit that from the place where the holy
   man had cast the said ring into the water, unto the place where the
   said fish was presented to him, was four and twenty miles by water. And
   when the holy man advised him, and that well he knew for certain the
   said ring, he thanked God of it, that he gave to him knowledge of the
   remission of his sins. From thence forthon, ever from better unto
   better, devoutly and by holy perseverance he intended to serve our
   Lord, and yet as now is the said ring within the palace of Metz. Men
   may be marvelled and marvelling to magnify and praise God, how in this
   present life they may not live without perils, but he is born in a good
   hour that acquireth graces of God, and that maketh justice on his own
   flesh as long as he is living in it. I say this because of this holy
   man that was at so good an hour born, that so much of graces he gat and
   acquired toward our Lord, that he was certified and ensured of the
   remission and pardon of all his sins, as tofore ye heard say.

   Soon, when he was possessing his bishopric, he did distribute and
   departed to the poor so much and so largely of his own goods that, the
   poor folk came thither from far countries and cities for to be
   counselled and helped by alms. He was also busily tending to all good
   works, and in especial to receive religious folk, monks, and poor
   pilgrims. He himself washed their feet, he clothed them of new, and to
   them gave silver enough to pass on their way, and as soon as others of
   new came, he was as ready for to help them as he tofore was, for the
   honour and reverence of God. In watching, in fasting, in devout prayers
   and in orisons he employed ever the time. None might not duly rehearse
   ne tell the great abstinences that he made, for when he had fasted the
   space of three days, he was content to have a little bread made of
   barley and a little water, and ever most secretly that he could he ware
   under his clothes the hair, in so much that by force of abstinence he
   right greatly had made lean his flesh.

   On a time, during the three days which he fasted, he did do make a
   procession whereat many creatures were, which much devoutly prayed. And
   so as the procession was in doing, there was a woman tormented and sore
   vexed by the devil, that began to cry loud and high. When the holy man
   saw this woman, he made the sign of the cross over her, and soon after
   she was delivered from the enemy that so tormented her.

   In the time of Dagobert king of France, so as he was within his palace,
   a leper came there that began to cry after the holy man and demanded
   meat and clothing. Soon commanded the holy man that he should be led
   home, and so as he ministered and took to him that was needful and
   necessary to him he did demand of him if he were baptized, for he was
   of Barbary. Then answered the leper to the holy man: Alas, sir, nay,
   for I that am a poor creature have not found none that hath given to me
   the precious gift of baptism, and anon the holy man baptized him, and
   incontinent after, his sickness left him and departed from his body,
   and so he that tofore had been a sinner and sore sick, by the merit of
   the holy man was left and made whole both of body and of soul.

   On another time a man, named Noddo, which was drunk and full of wine,
   began to mock, and dispraised the holy man, saying that he was not the
   man of God, but that he was full lusty and ready to all delices.
   Wherefore it happed that so as he and his son went to bed, suddenly, by
   the will of God, their clothing were all about on fire and began to
   burn. Then they cried and called for water, but the water did nought to
   it, so that the fire took on their shirts towards the genitories, and
   from them they might not have off their clothes; and when they saw that
   no remedy they might put to it, they went out of their chamber and
   began to lay themselves as swine down into the ordure or filth, and
   into foul or stinking waters, but all this availed them naught, for
   from more into more their genitories did burn. And so as I believe at
   that same hour was verified that that our Lord said by the mouth of
   David the prophet, saying: Detrahentem secreto proximo suo hunc
   persequebar; that is to say in English: Those that secretly blame and
   dispraise their neighbours them I shall persecute. That same Noddo died
   in this estate and acknowledged his sin, and so died his son by the
   said sentence.

   So as the holy man was persevering in virtues for to keep and eschew
   the vainglory of this world, he departed from the city and went unto a
   place not far from it, where he did do make a little house, and made
   himself to be closed and shut therein and there he was continually in
   prayers of and orisons lifting his hands towards heaven. It happed by
   adventure that the fire took the house of the king, and so much it grew
   that the houses there about began to burn fast. Suddenly the people
   were moved when they saw that all the city was esprised on a fire and
   flame, and they went forthwith to the cell of the said holy man where
   he was devoutly in his orisons and prayers thus as he was accustomed to
   be. Anon one that was called Romancius took him by the hand and said:
   Rise thou from hence, man of God, to the end that this fire consume ne
   damage thee not with the city. Then the holy man answered: I will not
   depart, but lead me nigh the fire, and if God will that I shall be
   burnt I am in his hands, here as I am. Then they of the city came with
   him hand in hand unto the fire, and after commanded that each one of
   them should fall in prayers. And when the holy man had made his prayers
   they rose up all and then he lift up his hands and made the sign of the
   cross, and then anon the fire quenched, and made after no manner of
   damage. And after that hour, one of his brethren saw in a vision
   towards heaven, the sign of the very cross in a manner as flame, and at
   the other side he heard a voice that said: Seest thou this cross? By
   that hath the bishop Arnold delivered the city from fire this night.

   After this S. Arnold relinquished and left the world all entirely, and
   went into a desert among the wild beasts, where he made a little house
   with some monks that were dwelling there, where he held him ever in
   holy meditation and divine praisings, and when any poor people came
   there, he friendly received and served them, their hosen he did pull
   off, their feet he washed, and made clean their shoon, and also much
   benignly he made their beds, and made their meat ready, and so he was
   both cook and bishop together. Hunger and thirst suffered he many times
   so that he might of his own meat feed his fellows. He set apart all
   precious raiment, and much dear he held the hair that was rough and
   hard. In these two deeds doing, the good man rendered his soul to God,
   and after his obsequies done, the bishop his successor that had to name
   Goericus, assembled together a great company of people, two bishops and
   many clerks also, and altogether they went into the desert. And when
   they came unto the place thereas the corpse was, saying vigils much
   solemnly; and after, they took the corpse and bare it away with great
   honour and reverence unto the city. And as they came to a ruisel or
   channel and would have passed it, it happened that they which bare the
   corpse behind fell down, but as I suppose the angels sustained the
   corpse in the air, for they that bare it before went ever and letted
   not, and they that were fallen had no harm, but stood up anon and bare
   the corpse again as they did before. In the time that this holy man was
   on life, there was a man that lived much lecherously; the holy man
   reproved him many times thereof and prayed him that he would leave that
   life and do penitence, or that he should die in that state.

   It so happed that as the holy corpse was borne to the city, and as they
   passed through the said man's ground, the same holy corpse at the
   entrance of the said man's ground stood still, insomuch that they that
   bare it could not move it from thence, wherefore the bishops, the
   priests, the clerks, and all the people that were there, were much
   marveled and sore troubled, also because that the night was nigh, and
   they wist not where they might be lodged. Then a duke that was in the
   company, named Noddo, said thus to them: Ye see how he refuseth to
   enter within the ground of this sinner, my town is here nigh, I counsel
   that we return thither for to abide and rest us there all night. For
   also we ne have here what to feed this people withal, for of all
   provisions or store I ne have but a little beer within a little vessel
   and a little bread, if it please to God and to the holy corpse that we
   might be there ere the night come. And howbeit that far away as it was
   thence, nevertheless by the will of God they were there right soon, and
   them seemed that the holy corpse bare himself, and namely that they
   were borne thither where they came by daylight. And then said Noddo to
   them: I pray to S. Arnold that by his grace he will feed us all this
   night, for well I wot that at his prayer we shall have all that to us
   needeth. And soon, with that little drink and bread that they had, by
   the grace of God and of the saint they were all fed and rassassied that
   night, and yet much remained of it both of drink and of bread. On the
   morn next, with great joy they walked and bare the holy corpse into the
   city. They of the city also came to meet the corpse in procession, with
   great reverence, as he that had been their pastor or guide of their
   souls, which of long time they had not seen, and much reverently they
   buried the

   holy corpse in the church of the apostles. A woman that Julia had to
   name, which of long time had lost her sight, came to the sepulchre of
   S. Arnold, and frequently her prayer there made, by him recovered her
   sight. Another woman on a Sunday wrought. God punished her, for her two
   hands were stiff and counterfeit. She came into the church where the
   holy corpse lay, besought the saint with faithful heart, sore weeping,
   and anon recovered health. The solemnity of this glorious saint is
   celebrated the seventeenth day of the kalends of August in the honour
   of God, that liveth and without end reigneth. In seculorum secula.
   Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                      Here followeth the life of S. Tuien.

   S. Turien was Archbishop of Dole in little Bretagne, and was born in a
   town nigh to the said city, where was a church. His father and his
   mother were issued of noble lineage. In that time a man of holy life,
   confessor and friend of God, was archbishop of the said city, and was
   named Sampson. So then as the vessel of holiness, that is to wit
   Turien, that yet was but a child of age, but he was by virtue of the
   Holy Ghost filled with grace, relinquished and left for love of our
   Lord all his parents, which were of great estate, and the fair
   livelihood also that he should have, and came into the city of Dole
   towards S. Sampson. When S. Sampson saw him, he ordained and set him to
   keep his kine and his other beasts. This prefigured he to him gladly,
   signifying that he should be, in time to come, pastor or guide of the
   sheep of our Lord, when he should receive the dignity of archbishop.
   And in this estate, keeping the beasts, esprised of the love of God and
   not of nothing human, he did call every clerk that passed before him
   and prayed him that he would write some letters within a little pair of
   tables that he had. for to learn and know them. When he began to know
   well enough his letters, it pleased our Lord that he should learn and
   know the art of grammar, and so much of grace gave God to him that he
   had a melodious and fair voice at church, more than any of his other
   fellows, and so as by many a time his voice pleased much to the
   archbishop, he retained and took him still with him, and of him he made
   as of his own adopted son, and much endeavoured him to make him to
   learn the divine scripture, and sweetly governed him. So much grew and
   fructified the child in resplendour or light of all good virtues, by
   good doctrines and examples, that the said archbishop ordained him
   master of the clerks of his chapel. The weal of this child Turien
   multiplied ever from better to better in the love and grace of our
   Lord. The Archbishop S. Sampson, that as then was old, considering the
   holy life that Turien led, the good virtues of which he was filled, and
   that he was in age perfect, ordained him archbishop in his place, and
   namely, he yet living, would see him to be possessor of the dignity of
   the archbishop. And so when by the consecration divine he was chosen to
   the said dignity, all the people made joy thereof, for well they
   perceived that he was full of the grace of God.

   On a time, as he lifted up his eyes towards heaven, he saw a window
   wide open and the angels in paradise that bare the ark of the testament
   of God. And then he said to all the people: I see heaven open and the
   angels bearing the ark of God, and yet I see our Lord Jesu Christ
   sitting on his tribunal. And when the people had heard him, they all
   together, to the more and less, began of one voice, of one heart, and
   of one mouth to praise, to glorify, and to magnify the name of our
   Lord, and from that time forthon they honoured more the holy man than
   they had done before. The holy man then commanded that a cross should
   be made of wood, dressed and set in the same place where he saw the
   foresaid vision.

   On another time as he preached nigh to a church called Carnifrut before
   a cross made of stone, whereas much people were assembled to hear his
   predication, the which cross had been sometime made in the honour and
   reverence of our Lord Jesu Christ, and of the glorious archangel S.
   Michael, on which cross sometime he descended from the shoulders of the
   said archbishop, it happed that a young maid dead was brought thither
   for to be buried, the which by his prayer at the request of the people
   was raised to life. Of the history of this glorious saint, I ne may
   find more of it, but we shall all pray to him that toward our Lord he
   will be our good intercessor and friend. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Fiacre.

   S. Fiacre, the glorious hermit, made many virtuous deeds in the
   territory or country of Meaux in the protection of S. Pharon, that time
   bishop of the city of Meaux. Many miracles needful and necessary as
   then he made in this world, as the legend of the lessons of his faits
   show clearly enough, and to the end that this present narration that
   maketh of it mention, be not too much prolonged, and that the life of
   S. Fiacre and of S. Pharon assembled together may appear to them that
   shall read it, it is good as to me seemeth, that at this beginning I
   make mention of the excellence of S. Fiacre, how for the love of our
   Lord he left his country, both father and mother, and all his goods,
   and came into the parts of France. On that time that the glorious S.
   Pharon left and relinquished the worldly knighthood, and that he was
   ordained and made bishop of Meaux, the same monk named Fiacre, of the
   nation of Scots, being in his country, and moved by devotion to serve
   our Lord more straitly, departed with such fellowship as fortune gave
   to him, and came unto Meaux in France, where he prayed the holy bishop
   there that he might dwell under his protection. When Pharon had heard
   his demand, right gladly he accorded to it, and as a piteous pastor,
   granted that Fiacre should dwell with him after his own pleasure as
   long as he would. When the hermit Fiacre had impetred his petition or
   demand, he went and cast his sight low towards the earth, and onely,
   with all his heart and thought, and without speaking, made his prayer
   to God that of his grace he would have pity on him. And so fervently he
   besought and prayed that his face rendered great drops of water, and
   was over red and sore chauffed. And when the blessed S. Pharon saw him
   in such estate, he began to be marvelled, and weened that he was
   aggrieved of something, and anon he called to him one of his servants
   and said to him: Go to yonder man and make him come secretly to speak
   with me. The messenger did as to him was commanded, and led S. Fiacre
   unto the bishop. When he was before his presence, the holy man Pharon,
   full of virtuous thoughts, to the end that better he might declare his
   intention, said to Fiacre in this manner: My brother, I require thee
   that thou wilt put from thee this sorrow and heaviness which is in
   thine heart, to the end that thou mayst better receive my words. Then
   said S. Fiacre to him; Fair father reverend, if thou wilt have pity and
   compassion on me, thou shalt mowe make me to cease this heaviness at
   thy commandment, but to the end that thou mayst the better understand
   my answer, proceed forth on thy demand. Then the right reverend bishop
   Pharon, beholding on Fiacre said to him: First, my right dear brother,
   I require of thee to tell me in what land thou wert born, and the cause
   why thou departedst from thy country, also where thou art bound for to
   go, and what thy name is. Furthermore if thou have need of counsel, of
   words, or of other things that I may do, I call God to my record that
   right gladly I shall endeavour me to fulfil it. S. Flacre then,
   kneeling, rendered to him thanks and mercies, and after said to him: My
   father and my mother engendered or begat me in an isle of Scotland
   named Ireland, and forasmuch that I desire to lead my life solitary, I
   have relinquished and left my land and my parents, and I do seek a
   place for to lead my life hermitic and solitarily, and by my right name
   I am called Fiacre, and therefore meekly I beseech thine high and
   ineffable paternity that, if there be in some part of thy bishopric a
   little place within a wood where I might use and employ my life in
   prayers and in orisons, that thou wilt not defer to me the grant of it.
   When S. Pharon heard this, he was thereof joyful and glad, and said to
   S. Fiacre: I have a wood far enough from hence which is within our own
   heritage, and is called by the folk of the country Brodile, the which
   wood, as I suppose, is convenable for to lead life solitary, and if it
   be so that thy desire is to see it, let us two go thither together for
   to behold and see the place. Then answered S. Fiacre: So as thy
   paternity commandeth, I desire that it be done anon. Then the piteous
   and holy bishop, as soon as he might, led Fiacre unto the right desired
   place. And when they were come thither S. Pharon said to S. Fiacre: My
   brother, this place is belonging to me by mine own heritage, coming
   from mine ancestry, and if it seem to thee good and pleasant for to
   dwell and abide in, as much of it as behoveth to thee, devoutly and
   with good heart I present it to thee, and full gladly I give it to thee
   for to do withal thy good pleasure. And when thus he had granted and
   said, Fiacre fell to his feet, and for great joy weeping, rendered to
   him graces and thankings, saying: O right blessed father, the same
   place only of right pleaseth me and delighteth right greatly, for it is
   a holy place and far from abiding of any folk. After these words they
   took their refection or food of nouriture divine, and soon after
   returned together unto the city of Meaux. And on the morn next, S.
   Fiacre took his leave of S. Pharon, which gave to him his blessing, and
   when S. Fiacre had received it, he departed and went to the place
   beforesaid, where he founded a church in the honour and reverence of
   our Blessed Lady, and beyond it, a little way thence, he builded a
   little house wherein he dwelled, and there harboured he the poor that
   passed foreby. When then he had done and accomplished all that to him
   seemed necessary for the time, this very friend of God, Fiacre,
   continually without cease laboured and watched into the service of our
   Lord Jesu Christ, and ever in good virtues from better to better
   multiplied, and much victoriously against his adversary the enemy
   resisted, and against his flesh, and that that he had, right heartily
   to the poor gave and distributed. If some there were that time that had
   lost their strength, or that were dumb, deaf, counterfaited, blind or
   vexed with the enemy, or of whatsomever sickness that it had been, they
   all came, or made them to be borne, to this holy man, and anon after
   that he had laid his hands on them, by the grace of our Lord, and by
   his prayers, they returned homewards as whole as ever they were; and in
   such wise flourished the odour of the renomee of the miracles that our
   Lord showed by him through all the bishopric of Meaux, that they began
   all to have great hope in his suffrages and prayers. Among all other
   things it happed that a holy man named Killenus, born in Scotland, that
   was come from Rome as a pilgrim, and was arrived within the territory
   or country of Meaux, when he heard speak of the good renomee of the
   holy man Fiacre, he anon went towards him, and S. Fiacre much benignly
   received him, and when he understood that they were both of one land,
   and by affinity of blood nigh parents, instantly prayed him that he
   would abide with him certain days, which Killenus accorded to it, and
   as they were together, and that they had rehearsed the extraction of
   their parents, and spake of the sweet sentences of the holy scriptures
   wherewith they nourished and fed themselves by the great joy that they
   took when they spake of it, they recommended each other to our Lord,
   and took leave to depart one from the other. And for certain, the
   renomee of him grew so much, and flew so far that, from far countries
   much people came daily to him for to recover their health in so much
   that the holy man saw that of needs he must make his habitation or
   housing more spacious and greater than it was, and thought to him good
   and necessary to make a great garden, wherein he should have all manner
   of herbs good for to make pottage with, for to feed the poor when they
   should return towards him, and so he did.

   And howbeit that S. Pharon before that time gave to him leave to take
   as much of his wood as to him needed, nevertheless he durst not take on
   him the hardiness for to make his house greater ne more than it was
   tofore till he had spoken again with S. Pharon, for to demand leave of
   him to throw down the trees and other things growing about his house,
   to whom the venerable and courteous bishop gave of his wood as much as
   he might pick and delve, and throw down with his own hands, to do
   withal as of his own livelihood. S. Fiacre then inclined his head and
   rendered thanks to S. Pharon and took his leave of him, and returned
   into his hermitage. And when he had made his prayer he drew his staff
   over the earth. Now may ye understand thing much marvellous and of
   great miracle, for, by the will of our Lord, wheresoever the holy
   hermit Fiacre drew his staff, the trees fell down both on one side and
   on other, and round about where he drew his staff was a ditch suddenly
   made. And in the meanwhile that he drew so his staff, there came a
   woman which marvelled much how the earth clave and ditched by itself
   only by the touching of the holy man's staff, and with great haste she
   ran towards Meaux, and denounced this thing to the bishop Pharon,
   testifying and insuring that the holy man Fiacre was full of wicked and
   evil art, and not servant of the sovereign God; and when she thus had
   said she returned forthwith towards the holy man, and with an evil
   presumption went and said many injuries and villainies to Fiacre,
   contumelying and blaspheming him, and commanded him by the bishop that
   he should cease of his work, and that he were not so hardy to be any
   more about it, and that for the same cause the bishop should come
   there.

   When the holy man saw that he was thus accused to the bishop by a
   woman, he ceased his work that he had begun, and made no more of it,
   and sat on a stone much thoughtful and wroth. Wherefore if our Lord had
   before showed great miracles by him, yet greater and more marvellous
   miracle was made for him, for the stone whereon he sat, by the will of
   God waxed and became soft as a pillow to the end that it should be more
   able and easy for him to sit on, and it was caved somewhat as a pit
   thereas he sat on, and for testification and proof of this miracle, the
   said stone is as yet kept within his church, and many sick folk have
   been and are daily healed there of divers sicknesses only to touch and
   to have touched the said stone. The bishop then by the provocation of
   the said woman's words came towards the holy man Fiacre, and when he
   saw the marvels that God showed by him, as well of the trees that by
   themselves were thrown down to the earth of either part, also how the
   earth only by fraying of his staff was ditched about, as of the stone
   that was thus caved and made soft like a pillow, he knew well that he
   was a man of great merit towards our Lord; and from thence forthon he
   loved the hermit S. Fiacre more than before, and honoured him much. The
   ditches, beforesaid, be yet as now showed to them that go to visit his
   church. When then Fiacre, as is above said, sat on the stone, full
   sorry and wroth that the woman had so accused and blasphemed him to the
   bishop, also for the injuries and villainies that she had said to him,
   he made his prayer to our Lord that no woman should never enter into
   his church, without she be punished by some manner of sickness.

   Wherefore it happed on a time that a woman, of much noble and rich
   estate, desired to know what thereof should befall if a woman had
   entered into his church. The which woman took her maiden or servant and
   shoved her suddenly within the chapel. And anon, seeing all they that
   were there, the said woman lost one of her eyes, and the maid innocent
   as to the deed, came out again with her plein health.

   On another time, another woman of Latininak put one of her feet within
   the said chapel or church, but her foot swelled by such manner that all
   the leg, knee, and thigh of it was grieved with sickness. And many
   other miracles have been thereof showed, wherefore the women shall ne
   ought not enter into it. The good and holy S. Fiacre in his lifetime
   resplendished by miracles and virtues, and after, rendered right
   gloriously his soul unto our Lord, and sith after his temporal death,
   at his own grave by his merits and prayers, our Lord showed, and as yet
   now showeth, many miracles, as to restore in good health the poor sick
   folk languishing of their members of whatsoever sickness or languor
   that it be, who with good and contrited heart cometh to the church
   where the said grave or tomb is, and devoutly beseecheth and prayeth
   God, and the good and holy S. Fiacre, the which by his glorious merits
   may be unto us good friend toward our said Lord and God. Amen
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Justin.

   S. Justin was born in the city of Naples, and his father was called
   Cryspobachia, and was a right great philosopher, which laboured
   strongly for the christian religion, insomuch that he composed many
   fair books, much profitable, as recounteth S. Jerome and Hugo. He
   betook to the emperor Antoninus a book which he composed of the
   christian religion, and so much he laboured toward the said emperor
   that he had pity and compassion of the christian people, and not only
   the emperor himself, but also all his children, and all the senators of
   Rome. And the said emperor made sithe a commandment that no paynim
   should not be so hardy as have in despite the sign of the very cross.
   Item Pompey the Trogan, which was of the Spanish nation, composed into
   forty-four books all the histories that were through all the world from
   the time and reign of Minim that was king of Assyria, unto the time and
   reign of the Emperor Caesar, and wrote them in Latin, the which history
   S. Justin abbreviated or shorted, and also composed many other books
   which were too long to rehearse. To him was divinely revealed or told
   that much he should suffer before his death, for to maintain truth, as
   it appeareth by a writ or letter, which he sent to the emperor
   Antoninus, where he saith thus: I shall have enough of persecutions of
   staves of iron, by them against whom I battle or fight for to maintain
   the estate of truth, but when that shall be, I then shall have
   knowledge that they be not philosophers, that is to wit, loving art and
   science, but that they may be lovers of all vanities, for he is not
   worthy to be called a philosopher which publicly affirmeth and
   attesteth that which he knoweth not, and that saith that the christians
   are without a god, and put in greater error those that already are in
   error. All the which thing was thus accomplished, so as S. Jerome
   recounteth and Eusebius also. For when the said emperor was passed to
   God from this world, after him reigned two other emperors, the which
   were named Antonin and Aurelian, that were great persecutors of
   christian people, and so as Justin persevered in holy living and in
   holy doctrine he composed the second book for to defend therewith the
   religion christian. It happed so that many other philosophers were,
   that great envy had at Justin as much for his holy life and honest
   conditions whereof he was filled, as for his great science, accused him
   to the emperor, saying he was christian, and that he would destroy
   their law. Then was Justin taken, and made to suffer many torments and
   divers pains, in which because that he constantly reclaimed ever the
   name of God, they sprinkled and shed his blood by such manner that he
   rendered and gave his soul to our Lord Jesu Christ with whom he resteth
   in peace, and shall rest without end in seculorum secula. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                    Here followeth the Life of S. Demetrius.

   While that the Emperor Maximian had the lordship of Thessalonica, he
   made all the auditors of the christian faith to be put to death, among
   which was Demetrius that made himself to be manifested and known of all
   without any fear or dread. For sith the time of his youth he had ever
   been steadfast and constant in all good operations or works, and ever
   endoctrined and taught the others how the divine Sapience was descended
   in the earth, who by his own blood had quickened or raised from death
   the man, which by his sin was put to death. And as he preached, some of
   the ministers and sergeants of the emperor that were committed and
   ordained for to take the christian men, took S. Demetrius, and would
   have presented him unto the emperor Maximian, but it happed so that the
   emperor was gone to see a battle that should be done, for much he
   delighted him to see shedding of human blood. In the same battle was a
   man named Lineus, which because of the victories that he in his days
   had had, was much loved of the emperor, but as fortune changeth oft, it
   happed that this Lineus was there wounded to death. And when the
   emperor was returned into his palace, sorrowful and angry at the death
   of the same Lineus, mention of Demetrius was made unto him. Then was
   the emperor sore moved against him, insomuch that in the same prison
   where he was, sore fettered and hard holden, he made him to be sticked
   through and through his body with sharp spears. The which S. Demetrius
   thus ever witnessing the name of Jesu, consummated there his martyrdom.
   Many miracles were made by his merits and by his good virtues on all
   them that with good faith devoutly reclaimed him. A man that was called
   Lemicius, who heartily loved and served God, gave much of his goods to
   the house where the holy corpse of S. Demetrius was buried, and made
   the place more greater than it was tofore, and builded there an oratory
   or chapel in the honour of the said martyr Demetrius.

   One of the prefects or judges of Thessalonica that named was Manam, was
   much agreeable to God, and to the world, on which the enemy had great
   envy for his good works, and began to tempt him sore and strong. And
   first he tempted him of the seven deadly sins, but God would that he
   never should overcome him. When the devil saw that he might not deceive
   him, he took from him all his temporal goods and finally smote him with
   such a sickness that he had no member wherewith he might help him, save
   only his tongue, with which he praised and thanked ever our Lord. After
   this, the enemy appeared to one of his servants in likeness of a man,
   and showed to him a schedule saying thus to him: If thy master did put
   once this schedule or scroll on him he should be anon all whole of his
   sickness, for it containeth within written the names both of the gods
   and of the angels. Anon went forth the servant and told it to his
   master, which answered to him: God that made me may save me if it
   please him, and without his pleasure nothing may be done, all is his,
   and all thing lieth in his hands, he may well take that is his,
   therefore let his will be done. Soon after these words he fell in a
   sleep, and as he would sleep he heard the voice of S. Demetrius, that
   commanded him that he should make himself to be borne within his
   church, and that he should there recover his health. And when he was
   borne thither he fell yet again on sleep, and heard S. Demetrius that
   said: God that created thee and that restoreth to the folk their
   health, when he will, send to thee comfort and help. When he was awaked
   from sleep he rehearsed how Demetrius told him in his sleep: God that
   healeth sick folk send to thee comfort and help, and how at those words
   our Lord sent to him health and rendered to him the force and strength
   of all his members and stood upon his feet, and forthwith kneeled and
   thanked our Lord and the glorious martyr also. The solemnity of this
   glorious martyr S. Demetrius, that many virtues hath made, is
   celebrated the eighth ides of the month of October, and his life was
   translated out of Greek into Latin by S. Anastasius, and sent it to
   Charles the Emperor, to the praising and reverence of God, who by the
   merits of the said glorious martyr S. Demetrius healeth us of all our
   sins. Amen
     __________________________________________________________________

                    Here followeth the Life of S. Rigobert.

   S. Rigobert was Archbishop of Rheims, ever filled with holiness, and
   reigned in that time in which two noble kings did reign in France, that
   is to wit Childebert and Dagobert, and was extract or come out of the
   most excellent lineage that was in all the region. His father had tu
   name Constantine, and his mother was called Francigene which was of the
   country of Porcien. S. Rigobert from the time of his youth gave and
   abandoned himself to heavenly and celestial discipline. He loved
   chastity, he was ready in watchings and prayers, true both in word and
   in deed. Charitable, full of abstinence, founded in humility, adorned
   of sapience, in justice true and just, prudent and wise in counsel, and
   honest in all conditions and in all good virtues. He proceeded thus as
   he grew and persevered ever from better to better in spiritual deeds,
   and that he was of age perfect, by election celestial he was chosen and
   enhanced into the dignity of Archbishop of Rheims, in which dignity by
   the grace of our Lord he maintained and governed him so that he was
   both loved and dreaded of all folk. It was no marvel if the good people
   loved him, for much they desired to hear his good doctrines and
   monitions spiritual, and humbly to serve him. Ne no marvel it was if
   the evil folk doubted him, which for their sins doubted much to be
   reproved of him. S. Remy writeth that by him was as it was by S. Peter,
   that did appear to them that thought to do well much debonairly, and as
   S. Paul, that to the sinners showed him increpatively, for he promised
   misericord to them that were in sin, to the end that they should amend
   themselves, and to the good folk he promised pain without end if they
   fell from their good works. He feared the good folk to the end that
   they should take no vain glory within themselves for their good deeds,
   and the sinners he recomforted to the end that for their sins and
   malice they should not be despaired, but that they should be diligent
   to put from them their sins, and to fall in penance. Therefore by his
   good and diligent predication he invited many a one to do good works.
   By the multiplication also of his good doctrines many a one led a life
   of holy conversation. By his good ensamples many a one he withdrew unto
   his holy company. Thus he gave himself to all folk, travailing always
   for their salvation. He was Archbishop of Rheims, after a man that was
   full of great virtues, that men called Reole, which was nigh cousin to
   him as some folk say. When the foresaid Reole was dead, the siege of
   Rheims was recant and void by many years, for cause of many things that
   were destroyed, which by long process of time had been gotten, and with
   great devotion and diligence founded. All the which things the same
   glorious S. Rigobert repaired and restored into their first estate, for
   he ordained a religion on canons and clerks after the number that they
   had been in time before passed, and sufficiently ordained for their
   living, to the end that they should tend and wait busily and diligently
   to the divine service. They took not the canonic breed, for the canons
   that were at that time were not of such rule as the canons be in time
   present, but they governed themselves after the rule of S. Austin.
   Nevertheless he gave to them many things which they kept as their own
   good to the end that perpetually they might help them with at their
   need. He was also the first Archbishop of Rheims that first ordained a
   common treasure in their church, and general to all their usages
   necessary in time to come. These works he made and many more
   innumerable virtues and miracles, and he, filled with benewred ancienty
   of days, by holy perseveration rendered his soul unto our Lord, cui
   honor et imperium.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Landry.

   S. Landry, of whom hereafter we joyfully shall make memory and
   solemnity, was right glorious bishop of Paris. We read in the catalogue
   that is made and written of the succession, and of the number of
   bishops in Paris, how S. Denis was received by S. Clement, the which S.
   Denis waited ever for to go thereas he wist the error of the paynims
   reigned most. God that guided him brought him to Paris and there he was
   the first bishop, and there he ordained clerks and officers for to
   serve the church. After S. Denis was the ninth bishop S. Marcel, after
   S. Marcel the ninth was S. Germain, and S. Landry was the ninth bishop
   after S. Germain and thus it appeareth that he was the twenty-seventh
   bishop after S. Denis. He sat in the chair of the church cathedral of
   Paris in that time that the noble Clovis reigned king in France, which
   by the great and fervent love that he had to the church of S Denis gave
   to the same many gifts, and made the said church much rich, as the
   privileges of the religious there testify to this day, twenty-six
   bishops were in the chair of the church of Paris before S. Landry as
   above is said, of whom the names be written in the privileges of the
   said church, and nevertheless none of them all was made archbishop. All
   the intention of S. Landry whiles that he lived in this world was to
   accomplish misericord, and he himself departed or dealt the alms to the
   poor at all times.

   We have seen and known that a man which men call Raoul Gracard was
   smitten suddenly, and had the head much great and swollen, and was so
   red in the face of him that all folk that saw him deemed and held him
   for a leper Which man with great haste came to the presence of S.
   Landry, and there he confessed him much devoutly, receiving much
   benignly his penance, and after he came to the sudary of the saint and
   with great devotion kissed it, and when he had done his offering and
   vow with much great faith and hope he returned, and unnethe he was come
   to his house when he became as whole as ever he was. Be therefore the
   name of God praised, who for his good friend S. Landry he healed so
   promptly the foresaid patient.

   Upon another time a squire fell of palsy so much that he could not help
   himself with foot ne with hands. His friends seeing him so oppressed of
   this sickness made a bargain with a physician for to help him. It
   happed so that on a day as this poor man saw himself so oppressed with
   the said sickness and no remedy might be found to it, he began for to
   weep and to reclaim S. Landry saying: O blessed S. Landry, vouchsafe to
   behold on my misery, and then he prayed that they would bear him unto
   the sepulchre of S. Landry, which did as he prayed them. Then the
   bishop of Paris named Maurice, that was there, seeing the devotion of
   the said sick man, prayed to S. Landry that health he would impetre
   unto God for him by his glorious merits, and with one of the teeth of
   the saint touched the places on his body that most grieved him, making
   the sign of the cross, and anon he became all whole.

   Item, it is read of a knight named Gilbert that had a thorn within his
   knee, whereto he found no remedy by no manner of medicine and was as
   desperate, not only for the dolour and pain that he suffered, but also
   for fault of hope to be healed, the which knight made him to be borne
   into the church of S. Landry, and with his sudary did to be made over
   him the sign of the cross, and anon after, the thorn issued out from
   his knee, and was all whole, healed by the merits of the saint, whom we
   beseech to pray God for us. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                    Here followeth the Life of S. Mellonin.

   In the time of the emperor Valerian, S. Mellonin, which was born in the
   Great Britain, came to Rome to pay the tribute of his land, and for to
   serve the emperor. When he came thither, so as of custom was, he went
   into the temple of Mars for to sacrifice with his fellows. He then
   heard the pope Stephen with a few christian folk, to whom he preached
   the faith of Christ and the Evangile. He tended and opened his ears to
   understand his words, and anon he believed on God and required to be
   baptized. This Mellonin then was baptized by the pope Stephen, and also
   taught in the Catholic faith, and anon he sold away all such good as he
   had, and gave all to the poor for the love of God. The pope promoted
   him into all the degrees of the order of priesthood, insomuch that he
   himself made S. Mellonin priest, and so as in prayers, in watching, and
   in fastings he persevered.

   On a time as he said his mass, both the pope and he together saw at the
   right side of the altar an angel that took to him a staff pastoral,
   saying in this manner: Mellonin take this staff, under the which thou
   shalt rule and govern the city of Rouen, for all the people there is of
   God, and all ready to thy service and commandment, and, notwithstanding
   that it is far from hence, and that the way is to thee right grievable,
   because thou knowest not the country, nevertheless thou oughtest not to
   doubt no thing, for Jesu Christ shall ever keep thee under the shadow
   of his wings. And then after these words he took and received the
   pope's blessing and went on his way. And when the even came, and he
   held the said staff in his hand, he met with a man that was hurt in his
   foot, which was slit asunder. This holy man made his prayer, and anon
   he healed him. From thence he came to Rouen, where he accomplished well
   and holily his office, and made there many virtues and miracles. The
   which glorious saint rested in peace the eleventh day of the kalends of
   the month of November to the honour of God that liveth and reigneth in
   finita secula. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                           Here followeth of S. Ives.

   S. Ives was born in little Britain in the diocese of Trygvier,
   engendered or begotten of parents noble and catholic, and it was
   revealed to his mother in her sleep that he should be sanctified. In
   his first age he was of right good conditions, and right humbly and
   devoutly frequented the churches, hearing ententively the masses and
   the sermons. Much of his time he employed to study busily the holy
   letters, and read much curiously the lives of the saints, and pained
   himself much with all his power for to ensue them, the which by process
   of time was adorned of right great wisdom and renowned full of great
   science both in right civil and in canon law, and also in theology well
   lettered as it appeared sith, as well in contemplation and judgment, as
   giving counsel to the souls upon the fait of their conscience. For
   after that he had occupied and exercised much holily and devoutly the
   fait of advocacy in the bishop's court of Trygvier, ever pleading
   without taking any salary the causes of the miserable and poor persons,
   exposing himself to it with his good gree, and not required by them for
   to defend their questions and differences, he was chosen into the
   office of the official, first in the court of the archdeacon of Rennes,
   and afterwards in the said court of the bishop of Trygvier, which
   lawfully, justly, and diligently accomplished all such things that be
   pertaining to the said office. He succoured them that were oppressed
   and that had had wrong, and to every each one rendered his own by
   right, without any acception or taking of money, nor none other good.
   The which then, called to the government and guiding of souls, bare
   ever with him the Bible and his breviary or portos, and so he, made and
   ordained in the order of priesthood, celebrated as every day, and heard
   much humbly, devoutly, and dilgently the confessions of his
   parishioners. He visited the sick folk without difference, and
   recomforted them right wisely, and taught to them the way of their
   salvation, and devoutly administered unto them the precious and blessed
   body of our Lord Jesu Christ, and for certain in all things
   appertaining to the cure of the people of our Lord Jesu Christ
   committed to him, he in all and over all accomplished duly and right
   worthily his mystery. He profited ever, going busily from virtue into
   virtue, and was pleasant both to God and to the world, insomuch that
   the folk were full loth to depart from his words, and from his
   fellowship, and much abashed were they that saw him for cause of his
   friendly manner and for wonderful holiness. What marvel he was of
   admirable or wonderful humility which he showed over all in habit or
   clothing, in deed, in words, going, coming, and being in divers
   companies. He spake ever to the folk both more and less sweetly, and
   full meekly looking on the earth, his hood before his face, that he
   should not be praised of the folk and to eschew all vanities. And by
   the space of fifteen years before his death he ne ware but coarse
   cloth, russet or white, such as poor folk of the country be accustomed
   to wear. He held the ewer and also the towel while the poor washed
   their hands, and after with his own hands administered to them the meat
   that they should eat, and setting himself on the ground ate with them
   of the said meat, that is to wit brown bread, and sometimes a little
   pottage. And among them that ate with him he had no prerogative, but
   the most deformed and most miserable he set nigh him. He lay all night
   on the ground and had for his bedding, for sheets, for coverlet, and
   for hanging, only a little straw. Ever before the celebration of his
   mass, ere he revested him, he kneeled down before the altar, and
   devoutly made his prayer, weeping and piteously sighing, and oft-times
   as he celebrated his mass plenty of tears fell from his eyes along his
   face. The humility of whom pleased much unto our Lord as once it
   appeared by a columbe or dove of marvellous splendour which openly was
   seen flying within the church of Trygvier about the altar, where this
   holy S. Ives said mass. And certainly full patiently he suffered all
   injuries and blasphemies, for when men did mock him or said evil to
   him, he answered nothing, but having his thought on God sustained their
   evil words patiently and with great joy. A man he was of tranquillity,
   for he loved peace, and never he was moved to no strife, indignation,
   or ire for nothing that ever was done to him. He said no words tumelous
   or contumelious, ne other disordinate words. He was defensor, without
   dread, of the liberties of the church, whereof it happed that as a
   sergeant of the king's had taken and led with him the bishop's horse of
   Trygvier for the encheson of the centime of the goods of the foresaid
   bishop, S. Ives then being in the office of official, virtuously took
   the said horse join the said sergeant and led him again unto the
   bishop's place. And how be it that men deemed and weened that great
   evil or damage should fall therefor, as well to S. Ives as to the
   church, seeing that the sergeant was about to have procured it,
   nevertheless no manner of damage came never thereof, neither to the
   saint nor to the church. Which thing was holden and reputed for a
   miracle, and not without cause attributed to the merits of the said S.
   Ives, for it is believed and testified that he was chaste both of flesh
   and in thought all the time of his life, and also chaste both in words
   and of eyes, and lived always so honestly and so chastely that never no
   tokens of worldly manners appeared on him, but certainly ever he
   abhorred and cursed the sin of lechery, and he being accustomed to
   preach against the said sin, made many a person to flee from it. He was
   never found slothful ne negligent, but ever ready to orison or
   predication, or else he was studying in the holy scriptures or doing
   works of charity and pity. Ever he occupied himself in weal after the
   doctrine of the apostles. He profited him to God in all things privable
   and without confusion in his works. He treated to right the word of
   virtue and of truth, and ever eschewing all vain words, spake but
   little and with pain, save the words of God and of salvation
   perdurable. And he, preaching the word of God right well and boldly,
   brought oft them that heard him to compunction of heart and evermore
   unto tears, and he exercising and occupying him in this holy operation
   or work thereas he might be heard by the leave of the bishops and
   diocesans, ever going on foot, preached sometimes upon a day in four
   churches, much far from one another. And to the end that he should not
   leave the custom of his abstinence, he after this great labour returned
   fasting unto his house, and would never accord with no man to dine with
   him. He had the spirit of prophecy, for he prophesied that a recluse
   should be seen among men by the vice of covetise. The which thing
   happed not long after, for the meschant recluse leaving the way of
   salvation and of penitence, went out from his cell, and took a worldly
   and damnable way. This holy S. Ives laboured ever to appease all
   discordance and strife after his power, and the folk which might not
   accord by his persuasion and admonishings, were called soon to concord
   after his orison by him made to God.

   It may not be recounted, ne never it was seen in our time, the great
   charity, pity, and misericorde that he had towards the poor indigent
   and suffretous, towards the widows and to the poor children both
   father- and motherless all the time of his life. All that he received
   or might have, as well of the church as of his patrimony, he gave to
   them before said without any difference, when he was dwelling at
   Rennes, and promoted to the office of official there at the court of
   the archdeacon. Also ere he changed his manner of living, he made upon
   the great and solemn holidays plenty of meat to be dressed and ready
   for to eat, and at dinner-time he called and made to be called the poor
   folk to dinner, and to them administered meat with his own hands, and
   after, he ate with two poor children which for the love of our Lord
   Jesu Christ he sustained at school, for ever he was right courteous to
   help children, both father- and motherless, and as their father sent
   them to school, and with his own sustained them and paid also the
   salary to their masters. He revested right courteously the poor naked
   of our Lord. It happed once that a gown and a hood both of like cloth
   which he had do make for himself to wear, and so he taking greater care
   of the poor naked than of his own body, gave the said gown and hood to
   a poor man. He held hospitality indifferently for the poor pilgrims in
   a house which he did make for the nonce, to the which he administered
   both meat and drink, bed and fire for to warm them in winter. In
   wheresoever a place that he went the suffretous and poor, that ran to
   him from all sides, followed him, for all that he had was ready to
   their behoof as their own. He gave sudaries for to bury with the dead
   bodies, and with his own hands helped to bury them. A poor man once
   came against him, and he having as then nothing ready to give him, took
   his hood and gave it to the said poor man, and went home barehead. He
   chastised his flesh much sharply, for he was so accustomed to be in
   orisons and in prayers and to study, that the most part of the time he
   passed without sleep both day and night. If he were sore travailled by
   study, orisons, or going, that he as constrained must sleep, and when
   he must sleep, he slept on the earth, and instead of a pillow he laid
   under his head sometimes his book, and sometimes a stone. He ware ever
   the hair under his shirt, whiles that yet he was in the office of the
   official in the city of Trygvier. He used brown bread and porridge such
   as commonly use poor labourers, and none other meat he ne had, and to
   his drink used cold water, and there lived with such meat and drink by
   the space of eleven years, till he came to his death. He fasted eleven
   Lents and all the Advents of our Lord, and from the Ascension unto
   Pentecost, all ember days, all vigils of our Lady, and of the apostles,
   and all other days stablished by holy church for to fast, he fasted
   with bread and water. And above all this during the eleven years
   aforesaid, he fasted three days in the week with bread and water, that
   is to wit Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, and on the other days he ate
   also but once a day, and used bread and pottage, such as followeth
   except, the Sundays, Christmasday, Easterday, Whitsunday, and All
   Hallows' day, on which days he ate twice. His bread was rustical brown,
   made of barley or oats, his pottage was of great coles or of other
   herbs or beans, or of radish root savoured only with salt without any
   other liquor, sauf that sometimes he put in it a little flour and a
   little butter, and on Easterday above his accustomed pittance he ate
   two eggs. He never within the space of fourteen years before his death
   tasted of no wine, save only at mass after that he had taken the body
   and blood of our Lord, or else sometime when he dined with the bishop,
   for then within his water he put a little wine only for to change the
   colour. He fasted once by the space of seven days without any meat or
   drink, ever being in good health.

   The foresaid S. Ives lived fifty years or thereabout, and in his last
   sickness he ceased not to teach them that were about him, and he
   preached unto them of their salvation, and coming beneurely unto his
   last days, took humbly the sacraments of the body of our Lord and last
   unction, lying on his noble bed beforesaid, adjousted always to the
   same with great instance of his friends, a little straw. Three days
   before his death he had on his hood instead of kerchief about his head,
   and had on his gown, and refusing all other things, he was covered with
   a little and bad coverlet, saying that he was not worthy to have any
   other parements on him. The pure and clean saint then, having the hair
   on his flesh, covered with his shirt and issuing out of this world in
   the year of grace thirteen hundred and three, the nineteenth day of
   May, that was on the Sunday after the Ascension of our Lord Jesu Christ
   went up unto heaven, and like as he had been asleep without any sign or
   token of whatsoever dolour he took the right beneurous rest of death.
   And who that could recount all the miracles done by him, howbeit that
   to none ne is possible but alone to him which can number or tell the
   multitude of stars, and imposeth to each one their names, but because
   that, to one right great inconvenience and dishonour were, if by sloth
   he refrained himself from uttering, and kept still such things that are
   and appertain to the praising and laud of our Lord, and namely thereas
   plenty and abundance of his praising is or should be, that the said
   miracles are infinite or without end, nevertheless we shall rehearse
   some of them.

   Then as it is recorded in the book long since made and accomplished of
   his life and of his virtues, that at his invocation by vows and
   prayers, by some devoutly made unto God, and to the Saint in divers
   places were fourteen dead raised, reckoned always in the said number
   two children living within their mother's womb and dead before their
   baptism which sithe received life. And at the invocation of the said S.
   Ives ten demoniacs, mad folk, or filled with wicked spirits, were
   delivered from their forsenery or madness, and from all wicked spirits.
   Thirteen contracts, or filled with paralysis, were by the same restored
   in good health. Three blind were by him illumined. Divers folk, in ten
   places, all with their goods were kept and saved from drowning in the
   sea. One perfectly hydropic or filled with dropsy was entirely cured.
   Another that had the stone great as an egg, and the genitors as great
   as a man's head, was restituted unto health. One condemned to be hanged
   fell three times from the gallows, and all whole was delivered and let
   go. A woman to whom the milk wanted within her paps were filled full of
   it. Things lost by divers persons and in divers places were found and
   recovered by miracles. Two dumb childien and divers others that had
   lost the use of the tongue were restituted of their speaking. Three or
   four women, with all their birth, were delivered from the peril of
   death. The fire taken in three divers places was quenched and put out,
   and both men, women, and children, and goods kept from burning without
   to be hurted, ne in no manner of wise damaged. A woman sore aggrieved
   with an axes took a little bread that before had been wet in water by
   the hands of the saint, ate it and recovered health. The saint himself
   giving foison alms, the corn multiplied in his garret, and the bread in
   his hand sometimes. Many sick folk were healed of divers sicknesses and
   dolours only to have touched his hood. A man dressing the wheel of his
   water-mill, on whom suddenly the water came from high rushing, and he
   besought the holy S. Ives, and anon he was saved from drowning. On a
   time, as the said saint said mass, while he celebrated and held up the
   body of our Lord, a great resplendor appeared about it, which soon
   after the elevation was done, disappeared and vanished away. A post
   ordained to the work or making of a bridge, not convenable to the said
   work for fault of half a foot of length, after the prayer of the
   carpenters done unto the saint, was the said post found long enough and
   convenable to the foresaid work. In time of a great inundation or
   flowing, which covered the ways and places, the sign of the cross made
   with the said holy man's hand on the water it ceased and ebbed away.
   The hood which he gave to a poor man, as above is said, and went
   barehead homeward, God that had himself in form or likeness of a poor
   man received the said hood, as it may be believed, sent to him again
   the said hood, whereof was great and marvellous miracle. On a time when
   he had given all his bread to poor folks, loaves of bread were brought
   to him enough to suffice him and the poor people in his fellowship
   withal, by a woman unknown, the which after her present delivered,
   vanished away and never was seen after. On another time, as he had
   received a poor man appearing right foul and disformed, and over foul
   in clothing, and had made him to eat and set hand at his own dish with
   him, this poor man departing and saying: God be with you and at your
   help, his gown that before was wonder foul, as it is said became so
   white, and of so great resplendor and shining, and his face so fair
   appeared and so bright, that all the house was replenished and filled
   with great light. The archbishop of Narbonne was vexed with a strong
   axes, and by the feebleness of his nature was reputed and holden as for
   dead of all them which about him were, for his eyes were shut in manner
   of a dead man. At the invocation or calling to S. Ives made for the
   salue of the said archbishop by his parents and friends, with weepings,
   vows, devotions, was the foresaid archbishop through the merits of the
   saint restored unto life, sight and good health, by the grace and
   virtue of him of whom it is written that he enlumineth the eyes, giveth
   life, health and blessing, light, sapience, the which God, creator,
   enluminator, and saviour be thanked, praised and worshipped by all the
   siecle and siecles. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Morant.

   The king Theodoric commanded to S. Morant of Douay, which was in Paris,
   son of Aldebaulte a noble Frenchman, and of S. Rotrud of Marchiennes,
   the which had three daughters, virgins and saints, that is to wit
   Clotende, Eusebe, and Ellysente. S. Rotrud dwelled at Marchiennes in a
   nunnery with Clotende and Ellysente her daughters, by the ordinance of
   S. Amand, and with many others, and there she passed from this world.
   And Eusebe her other daughter dwelled in an abbey of nuns in Hanegau
   with the grandmother of S. Aldebault her father, the which was called
   Gertrude, and the abbey Nivelle, of the gift and foundation of S.
   Amand. And in the same country were many abbeys of monks, whereof, as
   to come to our purpose, S. Morant and Rotrud his mother did build and
   make an abbey on their own ground and put monks therein, and gave to
   them rents and possessions for to live on, and called the place Bruell.

   The king Theodoric that well wist of it, commanded to S. Morant that he
   should make S. Omer to be led as prisoner from Peronne unto the said
   new abbey, and to do him to be kept that he should not escape from
   thence and go somewhere in other place. S. Morant came to Peronne, and
   from thence brought with him S. Omer through Cambray. And S. Omer
   whiles that they made the dinner ready there, he went to our Lady of
   Cambray and made there his prayers kneeling. He took off both his
   gloves and his habit, and cast them nigh to a glass window, but the
   rays or beams of the sun sustained them from the ground as they had
   hanged upon a staff. And the holy man which ever looked humbly downward
   perceired it not. S. Morant followed him soon after to the church, and
   when he came there, and saw the miracle he was all abashed, and prayed
   him mercy of that he had brought him thither like as a prisoner, and
   besought him that from thence forthon he would become his father in
   God, and that to his commandments he would obey. S. Omer then, which
   recked not for that, lifted himself up and revested on him his habit
   and gloves, and thanked much S. Morant, and said to him that he should
   obey the king, for thereto he was holden, and that as for him he should
   obey to our Lord and should bear in all patience his adversities, and
   that gladly he would go with him thereas he was ordained for to go. S.
   Morant then led S. Omer at Bruell in Hanegau, where many holy minsters
   or abbeys were separated and governed by the disciples of S. Amand,
   which were all saints. There was S. Omer like as he were in paradise
   terrestrial; all the country thereabout replenished with saints both
   men and women in great penances, servants and friends of God. Every one
   forced himself to pass his fellow in weal, without evil and wicked
   envy, and with great charity, and gave example to another for to do
   well.

   When S. Morant and S. Rotrud his mother knew and enough wist the
   devotion, humility, patience, and doctrine of S. Omer, they prayed him
   that he would emprise or undertake the cure or government of the abbey
   of Bruell, which they had founded on their patrimony. They gave their
   own selves, their abbey, and all their goods to him, and S. Omer
   received them meekly and dwelled there together peaceably. All the
   other holy men there desired much to hear his doctrine. S. Omer
   exhorted and taught so much S. Morant that he made him clerk, and
   ordained him unto deacon, and made him abbot of his own house, founded
   in the honour of God our Lord and of S. Peter. S. Omer did do make a
   chamber joining to the church for his oratory, wherein he rested him
   with our Lord, not sleeping but watching, fasting and continually
   praying. There made the holy man his holy penitence as long as he
   lived, and when our Lord would call him unto his company, he received
   his rights, and took leave of S. Morant and of the other friars, and so
   died there and was buried within the church of S. Peter of Douay, and
   rendered and gave his soul to our Lord about the year of grace seven
   hundred. I have said before that which I now say, the lives of saints
   were nigh lost and all their legends, by the Normans, which wasted and
   spilt the land with two hundred and fifty-two ships of men of arms,
   which arrived and came in that same land, and walked through France
   unto Romania, going and coming by the space of forty years, and began
   about the year eight hundred and fiftyone. If one escaped there were
   twain lost, and yet over all other divers wars were, that marvel it is
   how we know of none. Therefore we shall pray to our Lord Jesu Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

              Here followeth the Life of S. Louis, King of France.

   S. Louis, sometime the noble king of France, had to his father a king
   right christian, named Louis. This Louis father battled and fought
   against the heretics and Albigenses and of the country of Toulouse, and
   extirpated their heresy, and as he returned into France he passed unto
   our Lord. Then the child of holy childhood fatherless, abode and
   dwelled under the keeping of the queen Blanche his mother, sometime
   daughter to the king of Castile, and as she that loved him tenderly
   betook him for to be learned and taught under the cure and governance
   of a special master in conditions and in letters, and he also, as the
   young Solomon child, wise and disposed to have a good soul, profited
   right greatly in all things, more than any child of his age. Of which
   good life and childhood his debonair mother enjoying herself, said
   ofttimes to him in this manner: Right dear son, rather I would see the
   death coming on thee than to see thee fall into a deadly sin against
   thy creator. The which word the devout child took and shut it so within
   his courage, that, by the grace of God which defended and kept him, it
   is not found that ever he felt any atouchment, tache or spot of mortal
   crime. In the end, by the purveyance of his mother, and of the barons
   of the land, to the end that so noble a realm should not fail of
   succession royal, the holy man took a wife, of the which he received
   and gat on her fair children, which by sovereign cure he made to be
   nourished, endoctrined, and taught to the love of God and despite of
   the world, and to know themselves by holy admonishing and ensamples.
   And when he might tend secretly to them, visiting them and requiring of
   their profit as the ancient Tobias, gave to them admonishing of salute,
   teaching them over all things to dread God and to keep and abstain them
   assiduously from all sin. Garlands made of roses and of other flowers
   he forbade and defended them to wear on the Friday, for the crown of
   thorns that was on such a day put on the head of our Lord. And because
   that he wist well and knew that chastity in delices, pity in riches,
   and humility in honour often perish, he took and gave his courage to
   sobriety and good diet, to humility and misericorde, keeping himself
   right curiously from the pricking sautes and watch of the world, the
   flesh and the devil, and chastised his body and brought it to servitude
   by the ensample of the apostles. He forced himself to serve his spirit
   by diverse castigation or chastising, he used the hair many times next
   his flesh, and when he left it for cause of over feebleness of his
   body, at the instance of his own confessor, he ordained the said
   confessor to give to the poor folk, as for recompensation of every day
   that he failed of it, forty shillings. He fasted always the Friday, and
   namely in time of lent and advent he abstained him in those days from
   all manner of fish and from fruits, and continually travailed and
   pained his body by watchings, orisons, and other secret abstinences and
   disciplines. Humility, beauty of all virtues, replenished so strong in
   him, that the more better he waxed, so, as David, the more he showed
   himself meek and humble, and more foul he reputed him before God. For
   he was accustomed on every Saturday to wash with his own hands, in a
   secret place, the feet of some poor folk, and after dried them with a
   fair towel, and kissed much humbly and semblably their hands,
   distributing or dealing to every one of them a certain sum of silver,
   also to seven score poor men which daily came to his court, he
   administered meat and drink with his own hands, and were fed abundantly
   on the vigils solemn. And on some certain days in the year to two
   hundred poor, before that he ate or drank, he with his own hands
   administered and cerved them both of meat and drink. He ever had, both
   at his dinner and supper, three ancient poor, which ate nigh to him, to
   whom he charitably sent of such meats as were brought before him, and
   sometimes the dishes and meats that the poor of our Lord had touched
   with their hands, and special the sops of which he fain ate, made their
   remnant or relief to be brought before him, to the end that he should
   eat it; and yet again to honour and worship the name of our Lord on the
   poor folk, he was not ashamed to eat their relief. Also he would not
   use scarlet, ne gowns of rich cloth, ne also furring of over great
   price and cost, and namely sith he came from the parts of beyond sea
   the first time again, he coveted by great desire the growing up of the
   faith. Wherefore he, as very lover of the faith and covetous for to
   enhance it, as he yet that of late convalesced and issued out of a
   grievous sickness, lying at Pontoise, took the cross with great
   devotion from the hands of the bishop of Paris, led with him three of
   his brethren with the greatest lords and barons in his realm, and many
   a knight and other people with him, appliked on his way, and with right
   great host arrived into Egypt, the which, setting foot on ground,
   occupied and took by force of men of arms that same city renowned which
   is called Damietta, and all the region about. Then after, the christian
   host, esprised and beat with a much great and wonderful sickness by the
   just judgment of God, many christian men died there, insomuch that of
   the number of two and thirty thousand fighting men, ne was there left
   on live but six thousand men. And God, father of misericorde, willing
   himself showed wonderful and marvellous on his saint, gave and betook
   the same king, champion, or defensor of the faith, into the hands of
   the evil paymms, to the end that he should appear more marvellous. And
   as the debonair king might have escaped by the next ship nigh thence,
   always he yielded himself with his good gree, to the end that he might
   deliver his people through the encheson of him.

   He was put to great ransom, which paid, he would yet abide prisoner for
   the payment or ransom of other his lords and barons, and then after, he
   put and left so as Joseph out of the chartre or prison of Egypt, not as
   fleeing or dreadful returned anon unto the proper or own parts, but
   first abode continually by the space of five years in Syria, where he
   converted many paynims to the faith, and he being there, the christians
   out of the paynim hands ditched and fortified many towns and castles
   with strong walls. He found then about Sidon many dead bodies of
   christian men, of which many one was dismembered and eaten with beasts
   and stank over much; the which he gathered and assembled with his own
   hands, with the aid and help of his meiny, which unnethe might endure
   ne sufler the stench of them, and humbly and devoutly betook them to
   the burying of holy church.

   And after this, understanding the sickness of the queen his mother, by
   the cousel of his barons he assented to return into France. And as he
   was upon the sea, on the third night after, nigh the rising of Aurora,
   the ship where the king was in, hurted and smote twice against the rock
   so strongly that the mariners and other there weened that the ship
   should have broken and been plunged in the sea. And then the priests,
   clerks, and the other folk there, abashed with so great hurting of the
   said ship, found the holy king devoutly praying before the body of our
   Lord, wherefore they firmly believed that God Almighty, by the merits
   and prayers of this holy king, had saved them from the foresaid peril
   of death. Then the said saint, so returned into France, was received of
   all there with great joy, and the more ardently or burningly profiting
   from virtue into virtue, became to all manner perfection of life. And
   howbeit that miseration and pity was growing in him from his youth,
   nevertheless he showed then more evidently his charitable deeds on the
   poor folk, succouring them profitably, so as he might at their need.

   He began then to build and found hospitals or houses for poor people to
   lie in, edified minsters of religion, and gave yearly to other poor
   sufferers in divers places in the realm much money, pecunies or silver.
   He founded many convents of the order of friars preachers, and to many
   other poor religious builded churches, cloisters, dortoirs, and other
   edifices convenable, gave for God largely alms to the blind, beguines,
   daughters of God, and releved the minster of many a poor nunnery. He
   enriched many a church founded by him with great revenues and rente, in
   which he many times exercised the office of charity and of marvellous
   humility, humbly and devoutly serving the poor The with his own hands
   by great misericorde.

   When he came in Paris, or in other cities, he visited the hospitals and
   other small houses where poor people lay in, and without abomination of
   deformity ne of ordure or filth of some patient or sick, administered,
   many times kneeling, giving meat to the poor with his own hands. In the
   abbey of Royalmont, which he founded and endowed with great revenue and
   rents, is showed notorily that such and semblable alms he made there
   many times.

   And yet greater marvel, a monk of the said abbey, a leper, an
   abominable, and as then deprived both of nose and eyes by corruption of
   the said sickness, the blessed S. Louis administered, humbly putting,
   kneeling, with his own hands both meat and drink within the mouth of
   the said leper without any abomination. The abbot there present which
   unnethe might see that, wept and sighed piteously. And howbeit that to
   all indigent he opened the bosom of misericorde, nevertheless to them
   that watched in divine services, and that prayed for souls, he made
   greater alms and ofter. And by the great alms that he dealt every year
   to the convents in Paris, both of the friars predicators and minors,
   said sometime to his familiars: O God, how this alms is well set or
   bestowed on so much and so great number of friars affluing and coming
   to Paris out from all lands for to learn the divine scriptures, and to
   the end they might show and utter them through all the world to the
   cure and salvation of souls.

   Other alms that he did through the year, no tongue should suffice for
   to rehearse it. He worshipped the holy relics with much great devotion,
   and assiduously grew the cultiving of God and the honour of the saints.
   He builded in Paris a fair chapel within the palace royal, in which he
   purposed and put right diligently the holy crown of thorns of our Lord,
   with a great part of the holy cross. Also the iron or head of the spear
   wherewith the side of our Lord was opened, with many other relics which
   he received of the emperor of Constantinople. He would speak to nobody
   while that he was at church hearing the divine service, without it were
   for great need or great utility of the commonweal, and then with short
   and substantious words uttered that he would say, to the end that his
   devotion should not be letted. He might not hear, ne forbear the
   reproaches or blasphemies done to the christian faith, but he,
   enamoured of the love of God, as Phineas, punished them right
   grievously.

   Whereof it befell that a citizen of Paris who loathly swearing had
   blasphemed Jesu Christ, against the act or statute royal, which S.
   Louis by the counsel of the prelates and princes had ordained and made
   for the swearers and blasphemers, at the commandment of the said saint
   he was marked or tokened, at the lips of him with a hot and burning
   iron, in sign of punition of his sin, and terror and dreadfulness to
   all others. And how for cause of that, he hearing some say and cast in
   on him many cursings, said: I would fain sustain on my lips such
   laidure or shame as long as I shall live, so that all the evil vice of
   swearing were left and cast out from all our realm.

   He had the signacle or figure of the holy cross in so great reverence
   that he eschewed to tread on it, and required of many religious that,
   within their churchyard and tombs they ne should from thence forthon
   portray ne depict the form or figure of the cross and that the crosses
   so portrayed and figured, they should make to be planed. O how great
   reverence he had! He also went every year on the good Friday to the
   chapel within the palace royal for to worship there the holy cross,
   kneeling, both feet and head bare.

   Of diligent discussing of causes and matters he rendered or yielded
   just judgment. Of very dilection or love, he doubting that the strife,
   actions and pleadings of the poor should come only to the presence and
   knowledge of his councillors, he went and presided among them at the
   least twice in a week for to hear the plaints which lightly he made to
   be discussed and soon after justly urged. He stablished also, for to
   have away the burning covetise of the usurers, that no justicer should
   compel ne constrain them that were bounden to the Jews or to other
   public usurers by letters, ne by none other manner, to pay or yield to
   them their usury or growing.

   In the end, after the course or running of many years, understanding
   that by true report knowing the desolation and perplexity and perils of
   the holy land, as another Maccabeus with his sons, not willing that the
   christian folk and holy persons should sustain ne bear any longer evil
   or pain, inspired with the Holy Ghost, he passed and sailed again over
   the high sea unto the Holy Land accompanied with the nobles and much
   commonalty of his realm; and when the ships were ready for to sail, S.
   Louis, beholding his three sons and specially dressing his words
   towards the eldest, said: Son, consider thou must, how as now I am
   farforth in age, and that once I have passed over the sea, also how
   that the Queen thy mother is of great age, proceeding nigh her last
   days, how now, blessed be God, we possess peaceably our realm, without
   any war, in delices, riches and honours, as much as pleaseth to us or
   appertaineth, look then that for the love of Jesu Christ and his church
   I ne spare mine old age, and have no pity of thy discomforted and
   woeful mother, but I leave both delices and honours, and expose mine
   own self to peril for Jesu Christ. Which things I will thou hear and
   know, to the end that when thou comest to the succession of the realm
   thou do so. The ships then ready, sailed on the sea so long that the
   host arrived at the haven of Carthage in Africa, where by force of arms
   the christian men took the castle, and enjoyed the land thereabout. And
   betwixt Tunis and Carthage they dressed their tents for to dwell there
   a little time. And in this meanwhile S. Louis after so many virtuous
   works, after so many pains and labours which he had suffered for the
   faith of Jesu Christ, God, that would benewrely consume his life for to
   yield to him fruit glorious for his labours and benefits, sent to him
   an axes continual, and then the holy enseignments or teachings, which
   before he had written in French, exposed diligently to Philip his
   eldest son and commanded that soon they should be accomplished. And
   then, he being thought of sight and hearing whole, saying his seven
   psalms and calling on all the saints devoutly, took all the sacraments
   of the church, and at the last, he coming to the last hour, stretching
   his arms in manner of a cross, and proffering the last words: I commend
   my soul into thine hands, died and passed unto our Lord, the year
   twelve hundred and seventy. The corpse of the glorious S. Louis was
   transporte unto the sepulchre of his fathers and predecessors at S.
   Denis in France, there to be buried. In which place, also in divers
   others, this glorious saint resplendisseth of many miracles.

   On that day that S. Louis was buried, a woman of the diocese of Sens
   recovered her sight, which she had lost and saw nothing, by the merits
   and prayers of the said debonair and meedful king. Not long after, a
   young child of Burgundy both dumb and deaf of kind, coming with others
   to the sepulchre or grave of the saint, beseeching him of help,
   kneeling as he saw that the others did, and after a little while that
   he thus kneeled were his ears opened and heard, and his tongue
   redressed and spake well. In the same year a woman blind was led to the
   said sepulchre, and by the merits of the saint recovered her sight.
   Also that same year two men and five women, beseeching S. Louis of
   help, recovered the use of going, which they had lost by divers
   sickness and languors.

   In the year that S. Louis was put or written in the catalogue of the
   holy confessors, many miracles worthy to be prised, befell in divers
   parts of the world at the invocation of him, by his merits and by his
   prayers. Another time at Evreux a child fell under the wheel of a
   water-mill. Great multitude of people came thither, and supposing to
   have kept him from drowning, invoked God, our Lady and his saints to
   help the said child, but our Lord willing his saint to be enhanced
   among so great multitude of people, was there heard a voice saying that
   the said child, named John, should be vowed unto S. Louis. He then,
   taken out of the water, was by his mother borne to the grave of the
   saint, and after her prayer done to S. Louis, her son began to sigh and
   was raised on life. It befell the same time in the diocese of Beauvais
   that ten men were broken within a quarry there, as they did fetch out
   great stones for to build withal, for on them fell a great quantity of
   earth insomuch that they were covered with it. A clerk then that passed
   there foreby, heard their sighing, and having pity on them that were
   nigh dead, kneeled down to the earth, and remembering the new
   canonisation of the blessed S. Louis, sore weeping, made for the
   foresaid men his prayer to him, and after his prayer was done he saw
   folk coming that way. He called them, and forthwith they delved with
   such staves as they had, so much that by the merits of the saint to
   whom they trusted much, they had out of the quarry the foresaid ten
   men, the which were found unhurt, and as whole as ever they were
   before, howbeit that in certain they were dead.

   It happed on another time that a great wall fell on a child which was
   reputed as dead by all the folk, his mother vowed him to the said
   saint, made the stones that covered him to be had away, and found her
   child laughing, and whole of all his members. A woman aggrieved with a
   sickness which men call the fire of S. Anthony came to Poissy, thereas
   S. Louis was born, and before the font wherein the said saint was
   baptized, she kneeled, and sore weeping made her prayer there to God
   and to the saint, by the merits of whom her body was clean delivered
   from the foresaid sickness. Item two days after this, a worshipful man
   which of long time had been oppressed and beaten with sickness of feet,
   that he could not go ne stand without he had two crutches or staves
   under his arms, came unto the said font, made there his prayer, left
   his staves there, and home he returned as whole as ever he was. And yet
   sithe were there, and are as now done, many other miracles through the
   prayers and merits of S. Louis to the glory and praising of our
   redeemer.
     __________________________________________________________________

               Here followeth the Life of S. Louis of Marseilles.

   S. Louis of Marseilles was born of royal lineage, and had to his father
   Charles, King of Sicily, and to mother Marie, Queen of Sicily. And
   loving humility, he refused and forsook the highness of regality and
   his noble lineage, and howbeit that all the worthy faits of his holy
   life with few words may not be recounted, nevertheless some we shall
   rehearse, to the profit and teaching of them that shall read or hear
   them. This glorious saint then, as testified it is of many, digne of
   faith or worthy to be believed, being of young age, was with his
   brethren bolden and kept under the cure and religious diligence of his
   master, and howbeit that he was tender and young of age, yet seemed to
   be ancient in manners, conditions and courage, and when he was led into
   Catalonia, a province of the realm of Arragon with his two brethren in
   hostage or pledge for the deliverance of the said king their father, he
   gave himself so firmly to the study, that in seven years while he was
   pledge, he profited so much in the seven sciences and in holy scripture
   that the same God's man, resplendishing in wit might not only dispute
   subtly in public, and a part of the said sciences, but also durst and
   could propose the word of God solemnly unto the people and before
   clerks, insomuch that men supposed and believed better that God had
   sent and inspired him with such science than it had been gotten by him
   humanly. He confessed him oft and diligently, and heard the divine
   service devoutly, and on the solemn and high holy days, with great
   preparation he received the body of our Lord, and when he was priest he
   celebrated as daily and hearkened much ententively the word of God, and
   for the nourishing of his soul he gladly and oft studied the holy and
   devout scriptures. From the time of his childhood he loved chastity, so
   that for the most sure keeping of himself he fled and eschewed the
   company of all women, insomuch that he spake to none save only to his
   mother and with his sisters and that seldom. He chastised his body by
   abstinence of meat and drink and made it lean and disciplined it, as
   another S. Paul, with chains of iron right oft with his own hands, and
   he putting his flesh under the servitude of the spirit, ware for a
   shirt a stamin or strainer's cloth, and for girdle he girded him on his
   bare flesh with a cord. This holy man then remembering his vow to enter
   in to the order of the friars minor, by him made being in hostage as it
   is said in the province of Catalonia, purposed to accomplish it, but he
   seeing that, for fear of the said king his father, the friars durst not
   receive him, he solemnly renewed the said vow, and by no manner of
   persuasion and admonishing ne for any provision that pope Boniface had
   made and given to him, he would not assent to forsake it. Which
   devotion considered, by the assent of the said pope, this holy S. Louis
   took the habit of religion of the said friars minor, and kneeling, made
   express profession in the presence of John Bishop of Portuence which as
   then was minister general of the said order. Marvellous and much
   wonderful thing it is, and not accustomed to be seen, for the same holy
   saint, filled with virtues renounced to the right of the first-born,
   and despised the pomp and worship of the siege royal, and for the realm
   temporal and corruptible changed and gat the realm perdurable, and full
   of all manner delices.

   He had marvellous compassion on the poor people, to whom largely he
   dealt his alms. This holy S. Louis, as God's pleasure was, the pope
   Boniface promoted him to the dignity of bishop. And notwithstanding he
   never changed his habit, but diligenely exercised the office of a
   bishop. He celebrated devoutly, the orders examined diligently in life,
   in conditions, and in the articles of the faith, willing and ever ready
   to enhance it, persuaded and admonished ententively the Jews and
   paynims to baptism. And at the last, this glorious saint, tending to
   God, fountain quick and living, nigh the term of his days, lying on his
   bed, sick with his last sickness, took and devoutly received the
   precious body of our Lord, and howbeit that he was right feeble, he
   issued from his bed against his creator, and anon after he passed right
   gloriously out of this world to the glory of paradise. Wherefore it was
   well behoveful and reasonable thing that he, in whose life during God
   adorned with so many virtues and good conditions, should be ennobled
   and honoured of many miracles after his death. The which miracles are
   approved and testified by the worthy people of the faith, and are
   declared hereafter to the honour and glory of the said saint.

   A maiden of two years of age, the which was aggrieved with a strong
   axes which she had suffered by the space of two years, died and passed
   from this world. Her father besought the saint for her life and anon by
   the merits of the saint she was raised and restored on life.

   A child of five years of age by over great force of an axes died, but
   by a vow his father made for him to the saint was restored again unto
   life. A maiden of seven years of age, which had suffered an axes
   continual, died, and vow made unto the same saint by her parents,
   recovered the spirit of life and lived long after. A woman conceiving
   two daughters one of the which for cause of a fall that her mother
   received against her belly, died within the womb of her mother, time
   came that the mother should be delivered of her birth. This child dead,
   and as then all rotten, by help and mystery of midwifery was had out
   one piece after another, and, vow made by the father to the saint, the
   child so dismembered was restored to life and lived after seven months.
   Another child which under a bed was found dead, vow made to the same
   saint, was the child restored tolife. A woman which by great sickness
   was passed out of this world, vow made for her by her parents unto the
   saint, recovered the spirit of life and sithence lived long. With these
   miracles and many others would God his saint to be magnified and
   rendered honourable to all the world. Therefore let us pray the holy
   saint Louis of Marseilles that he will pray God for us. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                Here followeth the Life of S. Aldegonde Virgin.

   In the time of Dagobert king of France, which reigned about the year
   six hundred, was born S. Aldegonde of lineage royal. This holy
   Aldegonde was nourished in the service of God, and yet I may say that
   our Lord himself nourished her in his service and endoctrined her as
   well himself present by noble visions and wonderful, as by his angels,
   men and women religious and holy, as well by her own holy sister as by
   others, as it appeareth in her legend. None ought not then to be
   marvelled if she lived holily that was scholar of such a school. When
   then this holy Aldegonde was of age competent, her father and mother
   would have married her to a noble man rich and mighty, but in
   conclusion she answered that none other she would take to her lord and
   spouse but our Lord Jesu Christ, to whom of bounty, beauty, noblesse,
   puissance, riches and wit may none be compared. S. Wautrud of Mons
   which, after the decease of her husband S. Vincent of Longuys, made her
   profession in the Abbey of nuns at Mons which she had founded, wrote
   and prayed to her mother that she might have Aldegonde her sister with
   her for her disport, comfort and company in very love and charity.
   Aldegonde the holy virgin was sent thither, and was taught and
   endoctrined by her sister in the manner of holding religion. Ten days
   after, her mother, yet supposing to have married her, went there where
   both her daughters were, and to Aldegonde gave a piece of linen cloth,
   such as princes wear, and commanded to her that therewith she should
   make shirts, sheets and kerchiefs for her paramours. The good virgin,
   weeping that her mother had meant her spouse Jesu Christ, took the said
   cloth and thereof she made chrisms which are put on new-born children's
   heads when they be borne to the fonts, there to be baptized, to whom
   the priest saith: Take thou this white clothing, which thou shalt bear
   tofore the siege tribunal of our Lord. Wherefore the said holy virgin,
   to the end that the shirts of her own shaping and making should be
   borne to her spouse Jesu Christ, she made chrisms with her mother's
   cloth, and when she had made them much fair and rich, as for king's
   sons, she with a merry countenance gave them to her mother, saying that
   she had done it in the best wise that she could. When her mother saw
   the chrisms and her linen cloth thus employed, she was much wroth and
   evil apaid, and fette a rod for to beat her daughter withal. But the
   blessed saint fled unto the forest of Maubeuge, that was there nigh,
   and there she made her penitence with the comfort and help of our Lord.

   It is said that he, which by the assent and grant of her mother should
   have had her to his wife, came in to the said forest for to have
   ravished her by force, but he could never find ne see her, all went he
   nigh her. There she abode unto the time that her mother was dead, and
   after, she went to Mons, where she was sacred unto a nun by the hands
   of S. Obier and of S. Amand, and anon after she builded and founded her
   abbey of Maubeuge.

   There was once brought to this holy virgin a great fish which she put
   into a fountain for to be kept there. It happed, as such great fishes
   be accustomed to do, that he leapt so high from the water that he fell
   on the ground and could not return in to the fountain. On him came a
   great raven which would have eaten of it, but there came a lamb that
   kept the fish from harm, and fought against the raven so long that this
   lady's nuns of the place, perceived the battle. Some of them came to
   the fountain and took the fish and brought it with them. The said lamb
   ever followed them unto the time the fish was before the presence of S.
   Aldegonde, and never would depart till the holy virgin said to him: Ye
   have done right well, go to your herd again.

   On a night as S. Aldegonde, with her sister, together speaking secretly
   of their spouse our Lord Jesu Christ, their candle fell from the
   candlestick and was put out. S. Aldegonde took it, and as God would, it
   lighted by itself again. Item, on a time they two went together towards
   the Church of S. Peter about the hour of sixte, the gates, that as then
   were shut, suddenly opened before them at the instance of their orisons
   and prayers. Item, once as she had thirst, was water brought to her
   which was turned into wine by the grace of him that in Galilee did turn
   the water into wine. S. Wautrud saw in a vision, five daya before the
   death of the holy Aldegonde her sister, the blessed Virgin Mary, both
   S. Peter, and S. Paul, princes of the apostles, accompanied with many
   saints and a great legion of angels, which led her sister Aldegonde
   into paradise. She therefore came to the place where her sister lay
   sick, and was present when she rendered her soul to her spouse, our
   Lord Jesu Christ, to whom we shall pray that through the merits of the
   blessed virgin Aldegonde, of which the miracles both in her life and
   after her death be without number, we may come there as she is, in
   glory without end. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                     Here followeth the Life of S. Albine.

   Saint Albine was born of noble lineage in the parts of Italy. In his
   childhood he loved and served God ententively and with so great will
   that he left both his father and his mother, his parents and friends,
   land, and all worldly riches, and became a monk in an abbey, called in
   Latin Tincillacensis Monasterium, where he ne did show of his noblesse,
   but only the good conditions. He was humble and serviceable unto all,
   and was ever in continual prayers and replenished with all virtues,
   ready and apparelled to flee and eschew all vices. When S. Albine came
   to the age of thirty years he was made abbot of the same abbey, which
   he governed both temporally and spiritually by the space of
   five-and-twenty years, so that our Lord was at all times well and
   devoutly served, and all goods temporal daily grew there. The bishop of
   Angers died that time, and then this holy S. Albine, by the grace and
   will of our Lord, and by the common and concordable assent of all the
   chapter, was promoted to the dignity of bishop there, whereas he was
   afterwards known so perfect and so charitable that doubtless his
   promotion was cause of the salvation of many souls.

   A woman there was in the city of Angiers which had her hands as lame
   and counterfeited for cause of a sickness that men called the gout,
   wherewith she was sore vexed. And she made her prayer and demanded help
   of the saint, and soon she was holpen and relieved from that sickness
   only by that he handled three times her hands.

   And on a time as S. Albine went through a town within his diocese, he
   saw the father and mother weeping over their child dead, took on them
   pity, made his prayer unto our Lord, and suddenly their child was
   raised to life. Item a blind man demanded help of S. Albine, and the
   Albine holy bishop made the sign of the cross over him, and anon he was
   enlumined again. Item as S. Albine did pass on a time before the prison
   house at Angers, the prisoners cried and besought him for help. The
   holy bishop having on them great compassion went unto the bailey and
   prayed him for them, but nought availed there his prayer, wherefore he
   went to his church, and soon after, his prayer made to God, kneeling
   before the high altar, a great part of the prison wall fell down and so
   escaped every prisoner there.

   A woman vexed with a wicked spirit was brought before this holy bishop,
   and as soon as the enemy perceived the holy man, he put himself into
   the woman's eye in form of a little whelk, red as any blood, to whom S.
   Albine, making the sign of the cross said: Thou wicked spirit, thou
   shalt not destroy the eye which thou madest not nor canst make. And
   anon the same little whelk began to bleed as one had slimed it. The
   enemy then went from her, which in good health was left and of her wit
   restored.

   After our English tongue, Albinus is as much for to say as primo: as he
   was white, quia albinus dicitur quasi albus, and thus this holy saint
   was all white by purity of clean living. Secundo: as he that in himself
   hath bounty or goodness: sic albinus dicitur quasi bonus, and verily
   this holy bishop was good. Tercio: as he that by vigour or force flyeth
   to the spiritually: sic albinus dicitur alias binas habens, that is to
   wit, hope and faith, therewith this holy saint was replenished.

   It is read that S. Albine had two wives, that is to wit two nurses,
   which did nourish him, whereof the process or tale is such. S. Albine
   lying in his cradle was left alone, doubting none inconvenience, in a
   garden, and a she-wolf came and ravished the child and bare it into the
   fields. Tvvo maidens then passed that way, perceived the child, and
   came thither as he lay on the earth, and having pity on him, one of
   them said: Would to God I had milk to foster thee withal, and these
   words thus said, she saw her paps that grew, rose up and were filled
   with milk. She then took the child and gave him suck. Semblably said
   and prayed the other maid, and anon she had milk as her fellow had, and
   so they two nourished the holy child Albine.

   It happed on a time that the Normans in great number of men of arms
   came into the country where the holy corpse of S. Albine rested, and
   the people there, so sore they travailled that they, ne wist where to
   become and flee. And a man armed all in white came among the said
   people and said: Why doubt you to saute and befight your enemy so that
   ye have S. Albine to your help and defence? And that said he vanished
   away. Wherefore the people took courage and armed them and went against
   their enemies and discomfited them. S Albine was buried at Angers, and
   when his successor would have translated him into a greater chapel in
   the presence of S. Germain and many other more, came thither four men
   counterfaited and lame in all their members, also two blind men which
   all six were there by the merits of S Albine relieved into their good
   health, that is to wit, the counterfaited redressed of their members,
   and the blind enlumined. This holy saint Albine was bishop of Angers by
   the space of twenty years and six months, whose soul took his siege in
   paradise the year of his nativity four score, thereas by the merits of
   him may lead us the Father the Son and the Holy Ghost. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

        Here beginneth the noble History of the Exposition of the Mass.

   For heart devout to understand what it is to say mass, also to
   conscrate the body of our Lord, the precious sacrament of the altar, it
   is to know that the mass may be comprised in four parts principal. The
   first part dureth from the beginning of the mass unto the offering, the
   second dureth from the offering to the Pater Noster said, the third
   part dureth from the Pater Noster unto the perception, and the fourth
   part dureth from the perception unto the end of the mass. As touching
   the first part, that is, the beginning of the mass unto the offering,
   it is to understand that the priest, which is as he that showeth the
   way of God to the people, ere he revesteth him with the chasuble, he
   beginneth and saith a psalm that is in the third nocturn of the
   psalter, the which psalm beginneth: Judica me deus et diseerne, and in
   the same psalm he asketh four things. The first is that he may be
   parted from all evil company, the second is that he may be delivered
   from all evil temptation, the third is that he may be of the Holy Ghost
   enlumined, and the fourth is that Jesu Christ give himself to be
   consecrated by him. And to the entent he may the more surely and
   devoutly consecrate the said sacrament, he confesseth himself generally
   of all his sins, saying his confiteor, by the which confiteor he
   showeth four things. First, he showeth himself worthy of redargution or
   rebuke, secondly, he showeth himself plein of contrition, thirdly, he
   requireth aid of them that are about him, that he may have remission of
   his sins, and fourthly, he demandeth of our Lord very absolution.

   The priest, after, kisseth the altar, the which kissing signifieth
   unity and direction in showing how our Lord would unite or join our
   humanity to his divinity by great love, and take the church for his own
   spouse, wherefore the holy church may say thus: Quasi sponsam decoravit
   me corona, et quasi sponsam ornavit me monilibus. That is to say, that
   our Lord as his proper spouse, hath adorned or clad me with things
   precious.

   The priest, after that, draweth him to the right part or side of the
   altar, signifying how God when he had taken our humanity, after his
   passion, by the virtue of his resurrection he translated him on the
   right hand of the Father, and there the priest beginneth the introit of
   the mass, the which signifieth the coming of our Lord Jesu Christ, how
   he would come into the world, the which coming the ancient fathers,
   prophets, and patriarchs, and the faithful people of our Lord desired
   much ardently, and for that they cried with a high voice and said:
   Emitte agnum domine dominatorem terrae; saying thus to God the Father:
   Sir, we pray thee that thou wilt send the sweet lamb, having domination
   in all the earth. And to God the Son they said thus: Veni domine et
   noli tardere, that is for to say: We pray thee that thou wilt come
   hastily and tarry not. Secondly, the said introit signifieth how the
   priest oweth to enter the service of God. And for this followeth a
   verse of the psalter after the said introit, such as appertaineth to
   the day, the which verse signifieth how we ought to put our hands
   jointly, praying to him devoutly, for he is made as our proper brother
   in taking our humanity for to show us the way of truth. After,
   followeth: Gloria Patri, the which signifieth praising and laud to the
   Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for after good works ought to
   follow lauding and praising. After that the priest repeateth the
   introit of the mass, to the end that the desires of the ancient
   fathers, prophets, and patriarchs may the better be showed.

   After, the priest beginneth and saith three times: Kyrie eleison, that
   is to understand to the Father, and three times Christe eleison, to the
   Son, and three times Kyrie eleison to the Holy Ghost, calling upon the
   mercy of God to the end that holy church be accompanied with nine
   orders of angels reigning in the company of God, and this showeth the
   signification of these words before said. For when men say Kyrie
   eleison, that is: Lord, have thou mercy on us, and that is to
   understand the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are called by these
   words only, Kyrie eleison, for cause that they be of one nature, and
   the misericorde of God the Son is called by this other word here,
   Christe eleison. For howbeit that the Son, as touching the divinity be
   of one nature with the Father and the Holy Ghost, and not that
   withstanding he would take with this nature another nature, that is our
   human, for us to give the life perdurable.

   After that, the priest beginneth: Gloria in excelsis, the which giveth
   witness of the nativity of our Lord. For when the angels of God had
   knowledge that God was born, then they all together enjoyed thereof,
   crying with a high voice: Glory and laud is in heaven to the Trinity,
   and also peace is in earth to all creatures that are of goodwill. For
   before that, all creatures were in no peace, for this, that then war
   was betwixt God and creatures, betwixt the angels and creatures,
   betwixt creature and creature. The inobedience of Adam caused the first
   war, of that he had offended God, whereof followed the two other wars.
   Therefore he that is very peace would be born in the earth for to show
   and set among us very peace, and therefore all the company of the
   angels of paradise sang with a high voice, Gloria in excelsis sit inter
   angelos, that is to say, Glory and lauding be among the angels in
   heaven, peace and concord be in earth betwixt creatures and God. For
   therefore he would take nature of God and man, for to render us peace
   and to him be reconciled. Therefore creature may, and oweth, to say of
   good heart to the ensample of angels of paradise these words following:
   Laudamus te, benedicimus te, glorificamus te, that is to say: We laud
   thee, we bless thee, we glorify thee, and for thy great glory we yield
   to thee graces and thanks. Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of God the
   Father, thou that takest away the sins of the world have mercy on us,
   thou that takest away the sins from the world wilt receive our prayers,
   thou that sittest on the right hand of the Father have mercy upon us,
   thou that art holy thou alone art Lord, thou only art highest, Jesu
   Christ, in the glory of God the Father with the Holy Ghost. And all
   these laudings doth the priest with his prayers in saying: Gloria in
   excelsis, etc., for all holy church.

   After, when the priest hath said: Gloria in excelsis, he turneth him
   toward the people and saluteth them saying: Dominus vobiscum, and that
   signifieth salut which our Lord gave to his apostles after his blessed
   resurrection, when he appeared to them and said: Pax vobiscum, that is
   to say: Peace be with you, and for this, in that representing, he
   salueth the people, saying: Dommus vobiscum, to the end that the
   creature have his thought towards God; and the people answer: Et cum
   spiritu tuo, signifying that we ought for to pray for him that hath to
   say the orison, and that prayeth for us, to the end that his orison may
   be heard of God and enhanced.

   Then returneth the priest towards the altar and sayeth: Oremus, that
   signifieth how yet again he inciteth us to pray, for in such manner did
   our Lord to his disciples, saying: Orate ne intritis in tentationem,
   that is to say: Honour and pray to God the Father to the end that ye
   enter not in evil temptation; and after, the priest goeth and prayeth,
   saying the orison for all creatures for the which he entendeth and hath
   in memory to pray for, and for this that our Lord hath said in the holy
   Evangel, all that ye shall ask of my Father in my name ye shall have.
   And after, the priest saith at the end of his orison: Per dominum
   nostrum Jesu Christum, as he would say: This that we pray thee of, we
   pray in the name of our Lord Jesu Christ, reigning with the Father and
   the Holy Ghost. And it is to wit that sometimes the priest also saith
   an orison the which signifieth unity of faith or unity of sacrament.
   Sometimes the priest saith three orisons to signify the Holy Trinity,
   or else for this, that our Lord in his passion honoured and prayed to
   God the Father three times. Sometimes he saith five orisons, in
   signifying the five wounds of our Lord.

   Sometimes he saith seven, in signifying the seven gifts of the Holy
   Ghost. And oweth every one to wit and know that as many as the priest
   saith of orisons at the beginning of the mass, as many he saith in his
   secret, and as many at the end of the mass, and for this same cause, as
   it shall appear more plainly at the second part.

   After these orisons the epistle followeth, the which is as much worth
   as a message sent to some other by letter, and it signifieth the
   doctrine of the apostles of our Lord, the which were sent to our Lord
   for to teach and endoctrine the people unto the way of truth. It may be
   said also that this epistle signifieth the predication of S. John
   Baptist, the which was sent of God for to announce the coming and
   doctrine of him. In which lore he saith thus: Penitentiam agite,
   appropinquabit enim regnum celorum. That is to say: Do you penitence
   for the realm of heaven shall come nigh to you. And of his sweet coming
   saith yet S. John: Ecce agnus Dei, etc., that is to say: Here is the
   Lamb of God, here is he that taketh away the sins from the world. This
   same epistle may also give us testimony that our Lord will descend unto
   the precious sacrament of the altar for to sacrifice, as it shall
   appear in the second part of the mass, for after this that S. John had
   taught in his predication that we should do penitence for to acquire
   and have the realm of heaven, followeth the grail that may signify
   lamentation and embracement of penance. And after that the creature
   devout hath heard the predication of God, he oweth to put the hand to
   the works and to do after his power. For this grail here came out of
   Greek tongue, and signifieth how a creature oweth to mount or go up
   before God from degree to degree, by virtue of humility. And it is to
   wit that betwixt the octaves of Easter and Pentecost the grail is not
   said, for this that the grail signifieth, penance and lamentation or
   mourning. And in this time of Pasque our mother holy church ne doth but
   joy and maketh solation for the resurrection of Jesu Christ, and
   therefore is then said: Alleluia, which signifieth joy and consolation,
   for after that creature hath done penance by virtue of humility in
   weepings and lamentations he must lead after, joy and very consolation.
   For our Lord saith thus: Beati qui lugent, quoniam ipsi consolabuntur,
   that is to say: Blessed be those that weep by contrition, for they
   shall have very consolation. And it is to wit that this word alleluia
   is expounded in four manners after four doctors, the first is S.
   Austin, which exposeth it thus: Alleluia, id est, salvum me fac domine,
   Sir, save thou me. S. Jerome exposeth it thus: Alle, id est cantate,
   lu, id est laudem, ye, id est deum vel dominum, that is to say: Sing
   you lauding to our Lord Jesu Christ. S. Gregory exposeth it thus: Alle,
   id est aeter, lu, id est filius, ye, id est spiritus sanctus. That is
   to say: The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Or thus he himself
   exposeth it: Alle, id est lux, lu, id est vita, ya, id est salus.
   Alleluya then, by the same exposition, is as much for to say as light,
   life, and health. Fourthly, Master Peter Antissidorensis expoundeth it
   much well, and saith thus: Alle, id est, altissimus levatus est in
   cruce, lu, id est, lugebant apostoli, ya, id est, jam surrexit. lt is
   as much for to say: The right high is lift on the cross, for the which
   thing the apostles have wept, and soon after he is risen. In the which
   exposition three things are showed to us. The first is the cruel
   passion of our Lord Jesu Christ. The second is the sorrow and anguish
   of the apostles, and the third is the mirth and joy of us, for he saith
   that our Lord is risen, and in tokening of that men sing, Alleluia.
   After this Alleluia, he saith the verse which signifieth all sweetness,
   and virtuous work, by the which men return to very jubilation, and
   therefore he repeateth the Alleluia after that the verse is said: for
   by good work men return again to very consolation, and it is to wit
   that from the Septuagesima unto Easter day, men owe not to say
   Alleluia, and instead of it they say the tract, the which tract
   signifieth weeping and lamentation, for the passion of our Lord Jesu
   Christ, that cometh nigh that time, that is to wit the holy time of
   Lent, and therefore a creature devout with all his heart, oweth to draw
   to think on that same holy passion; and during that time men say no
   sequence, for the sequence signifieth joy and consolation. And that
   time of Lent ne signifieth but mournings, and it is to wit that the
   sequence is said after Alleluia, and it is said specially on holy days
   and solemn, in signifying the plenty and the multitude of mirths and
   consolations that is signified by the said Alleluia and sequence. For
   inasmuch that the day is more solemn than other days, the more oweth
   creature to lead and make greater joy in lauding the holy Trinity.

   After all these things, the priest translateth his book to the sinister
   part of the altar, for to say the evangel, in signifying how our Lord
   when he came down in earth for to expose the holy Evangel to all
   creatures, he drew him to the sinister part, that was toward the Jews,
   for to announce to them the holy Evangel, for at that time the Jews had
   drawn themselves to the left side, and for this the priest in that
   place may represent our Lord preaching and announcing the law. And to
   the end that he may exercise or do that office more perfectly, at the
   beginning of it he saith softly an orison that beginneth thus: Munda
   cor meum, etc., in the which orison he prayeth our Lord that he will
   make clean his heart, for to announce his predication. After that he
   demandeth the blessing of our Lord, saying: Jube domine benedicere,
   that is as much to say: Lord command thou that I may have thy blessing,
   and anon he, as lieutenant of our Lord, answereth and saith thus: Our
   Lord be in my heart and in my lips so that I may worthily and
   competently announce the holy Evangel of God in the name of the Father,
   the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

   And after, the priest saluteth the people saying: Dominus vobiscum, for
   two causes. The first cause is to the intent that the people be the
   more incited to hear the word of God, and therefore the people draweth
   toward the Evangel and standeth on their feet after the ordinance of
   Anastasius, then pope, and signifieth that the people ought to be ready
   and apparelled to sustain the faith of God and very love.

   After, for this, that yet the people be more incited to hear the
   Evangel of God the priest representeth the place of God and saith:
   Sequentia sancti evangelii, et cetera, in making the sign of the cross
   to the end that the enemy may not empesh him. Then the clerks and the
   people answer: Gloria tibi domine, in glorifying God that hath sent to
   them the word of salute, saying: To the Lord be lauding given by thy
   word to us showed.

   Then the priest saith the Evangel, the which signifieth, as said is,
   the predication of our Lord God, the which finished and said, the
   priest warneth himself with the sign of the cross, to the intent that
   the enemy may not take away from the creatures hearts the word of God.

   After followeth the creed, that is as the testimony and confirmation of
   the foresaid Evangel, the which was made and composed by the apostles
   of our Lord Jesu Christ, in signifying that this that the apostles
   said, firmly they believed, and believing announced it. And it is to
   wit that, the creed is said on the holy days of them that composed it,
   that is the apostles of our Lord Jesu Christ, and on the holy days of
   which mention is made within the same creed, that is to wit, all
   Sundays of the year, Christmas-day, Epiphany or twelfth day,
   Shere-thursday, Easter-day, Whitsunday, Trinity Sunday, and also in all
   holy days of our Lady, and of many others of which men make mention.
   And this may suffice as to the first part of the mass.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Second Part of the Mass.

   As for the second part of the mass, that is from the offering unto the
   Paternoster, every one oweth to understand that after the creature hath
   heard the word of God, that is the holy Evangel, and he adjousteth to
   it firm or steadfast faith, which is figured by the creed, he oweth
   then to offer or give his heart to God, for therefore followeth the
   offering. And to the end that the people be the more incited, the
   priest returneth him toward the folk, and saith: Dominus vobiscum, that
   is to say: Our Lord be with you, even so as he would say: If our Lord
   be not with you, ye can do no good work ne good offering toward him,
   and after the priest saith; Oremus, inciting us to honour and to pray
   God, then he saith the offertory.

   After, the priest taketh the lid of the chalice on which is the host,
   which oweth to be converted to the body of our Lord, and offereth it to
   God the Father, saying: Suscipe sancte Pater, etc., Father wilt thou
   receive this hostie without tache or spot, the which I, thy servant
   unworthy, offer to thee as to my God, very and certain, for all the
   sins that I have done without number, and also for all them that are
   here about me, and for all the fiables of God that are alive, and for
   all them that are passed out of this world to the intent that this
   oblation may be profitable to me and to them, to the salvation of our
   souls in the life permanable or everlasting.

   After, the priest maketh commixtion of wine and water together, and
   here it is to wit that, by the said water is understood the people, and
   the wine representeth our Lord, in signifying that the said water and
   wine show to us humility, and also the commixtion that the people oweth
   to have with God. It may be said also that this water is meddled with
   the said wine for this, that both blood and water issued out of the
   side of our Lord, and for this he saith: Deus qui humanæ substantiæ,
   etc., in the which orison he prayeth for all, to the end that by the
   virtue of the same mixion the people may be united to God by very love
   and direction.

   After, the priest offereth the chalice to God, saying: Offerimus tibi,
   in signifying how our Lord Jesu Christ offered himself to God the
   Father crucified on the altar of the cross for our health.

   After, the priest covereth the chalice, for this, that none ordure
   should touch to that holy sacrifice, and after maketh a cross over the
   hostie, and over the chalice, saying: Veni sanctificator, etc., that is
   at much to say as: King Almighty, I pray thee that thou wilt bless or
   hallow this sacrifice in thy sweet name, for heart devout to have
   pardon.

   After, the priest draweth himself to the right side of the altar, in
   representing our Lord, and there he receiveth the offerings of the
   creatures. Then the people by devotion come and offereth to the
   ensample of the people of God, which people offered within the temple
   of Solomon to God. One offered gold, the other silver, others offered
   bread, and others offered wine, and others divers manners of offerings.
   After, the priest washeth his hands, for it appertaineth that so
   precious a sacrament be worthily and cleanly made.

   After, he draweth himself even, in the midst of the altar, and there he
   maketh a deep inclination, saying: Suscipe sancta Trinitas, etc. And
   the same inclination may signify the inclination of God, which inclined
   him after the sacrament to the feet or the apostles, and prayed to God
   the Father. After, he kisseth the altar, in signifying that the virtue
   of the passion peaceth the creatures to him. After, the priest
   returneth himself toward the folk and saith: Orate pro me fratres,
   etc., and in this he prayeth the people that they will pray God for
   him. For that is none other thing to say but: Right dear brethren, pray
   you God that I may make this sacrifice worthily, so that I may see God
   joyously.

   After, the priest returneth him towards the altar and beginneth his
   orisons secret, the which are said for the same cause for which the
   first orisons be said, and as many in number, and it is to wit that
   these orisons are said softly and secretly, for this that the priest is
   nigh the sacrament, and therefore he will have none other empeshment or
   letting, neither by voice ne by manner, for our Lord, to the intent he
   might more secretly honour and pray, he went from his disciples as far
   as a stone might be thrown. These orisons here be also said low or
   secretly for this, that when our

   Lord had raised Lazarus, the Jews would have slain him, wherefore he
   drew himself into the city of Ephraim, in a place all alone, and from
   that time he ceased his predication, unto Palm Sunday even. Then he
   came to the house of Simon and openly began to preach, and for this the
   priest at the end of his orisons in dressing his hands upon high saith:
   Per omnia secula seculorum, and for this, that he is as messenger to
   God for the people. The people hearing this message, answereth: Amen.
   And there the priest beginneth the Preface, the which is so called, for
   that it is the preparation or first apparel that goeth before the
   sacrifice principal, and therefore he saluteth in saying: Dommus
   vobiscum, in saying that we prepare or make us ready so that our Lord
   may be and dwell with us, and the people answereth: Et cum spiritu tuo.
   And thus the people and the priest both pray each for other.

   After, the priest inciting us saith: Sursum corda, that is to say that
   the people heave their hearts upon high toward God. Then answereth the
   people: Habemus ad dominum, that is to say: We heave them to God, and
   therefore the people, that there in such hour or in that time hath not
   set their hearts to God may of light lie.

   After, the priest saith: Gratias agamus domino deo nostro, that is to
   say: Yield we graces and thankings to God! For if the people in that
   time hath some devotion, they ought to laud and thank God therefor, and
   for this, the clerk, for all the people, answereth: Dignum et justum
   est, right even so as we would say: Worthy and lawful thing is to laud
   God, just thing is to honour him, and there the priest maketh mention
   how the angels and archangels and all the court of heaven praise and
   laud God. And for this at the end he prayeth, that with that foresaid
   company we all may praise and laud God, saying with firm devotion:
   Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, the which words follow after the preface,
   for right even there the priest representing our mother holy church,
   having hope to be accompanied with both angels and archangels,
   confirmeth himself to them and saith: Sanctus, etc. And it is to wit
   that this sanctus is divided in two parts, the first part containeth
   the lauding of the angels, and the second containeth the lauding of the
   people. The priest then, as to the first part he may represent the
   angels of heaven, of the which it is read in the book of Isaiah the
   prophet that the seraphim cried with a high voice one to another:
   Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, etc., in praying to the Trinity, saying:
   Holy Father, Holy Son, and Holy Spirit, all earth is replenished with
   thy glory. As to the second part, he may represent the people of
   Israel, of the which we read that, when our Lord descended from the
   mountain of Olivet, and he came to the city of Jerusalem, they cried
   with a high voice: Benedictus qui venit in nomine domini, etc., that is
   as much to say: Blessed be he that cometh in the name of God, of him we
   require pardon, and for this benediction or blessing, which is so
   sweet, the priest maketh a cross, the which representeth to us that it
   is our Lord that cometh to be sacrificed on the holy cross, and there
   he descendeth and will be consecrate, to the end that men may see him
   presently, and therefore verily of the devout people that heareth the
   mass right there, oweth to draw themselves within the chamber of their
   conscience to the end that they may cherish thereon that sweet Lamb by
   devout orison, praying that his goodly coming be consolation and joy
   unto every creature. And there also they owe to think and consider on
   their evil deeds and offences, to the end that they may show and
   declare them by firm and steadfast contrition to him that presently
   cometh there, and thus the creature shall mowe thank and regracie God
   by devout contemplation. After all these things followeth the canon,
   which is so named canon for the mystery of the precious sacrament that
   is made and consecrated, and this same canon is said low or secretly
   for the virtue of the words, to the end that they be not held in filth.
   For anciently they were preferred and said high, wherefore it was known
   of the most part of the folk, and they sang it through the streets.
   Wherefore we find that sometimes shepherds took some bread and put it
   on a stone, and on it they said the words that are written in the
   canon, and that same bread was turned and converted into a piece of
   flesh, and soon after, by the will of God, fire descended from heaven
   upon them, and they were all combusted and burnt. And therefore the
   holy fathers stablished these words to be said low, also that none
   should say them without he were a priest.

   That same canon containeth nine parts. As to the first part, the priest
   inclineth himself before the altar, the which inclination signifieth or
   betokeneth the humility of our he inclined himself at the cross, and
   there thepriest speaking to our Lord saith thus: Te igitur
   clementissime, etc., that is to say: Father, right debonair, we thee
   pray thou wilt Lord. which he showed when accept and bless these sweet
   oblations and these holy sacrifices without corruption. And there the
   priest kisseth the altar, signifying the compassion that he hath of the
   passion of our Lord Jesu Christ, and after, he maketh three times the
   sign of the cross, both over the bread and over the wine, and these
   three crosses signifieth how our Lord was given and offered in three
   manners: First of God the Father for our redemption, secondly of Judas
   to the Jews by great treason, thirdly of the Jews to Pilate by great
   detraction.

   After, in the second part, the priest prayeth for all holy church
   universally, saying: Offerimus, etc., that is to say: We offer, and
   therefore the priest speaketh not in his own person but in the person
   of holy church. There nis none so wicked and evil, after that he is
   priest, but he may consecrate the precious body of our Lord Jesu
   Christ.

   After, in the third part, the priest hath in a special mind all the
   subjects of holy church, and specially in that passage he saith joining
   his hands: Memento etiam domine famulorum, etc. That is to say: Sir,
   have thou mind on thy servants. And there the priest resteth, and hath
   special memory of all the creatures for whom he entendeth for to pray,
   and he hath also mind particular on the persons whom he is bound to
   pray for, and it is to wit that this memory is for the persons that be
   on live. After, he prayeth for all them that hear his mass with faith
   and devotion.

   After, in the fourth part, to the end that he himself, and they also
   which he hath had memory of, may have participation in the glory of
   paradise with the angels, holy apostles, and martyrs, he saith a devout
   orison that beginneth thus: Communicantes, etc. In the which orison the
   priest maketh special commemoration of the Virgin Mary, of the twelve
   apostles of Jesu Christ, and of many martyrs.

   After, in the fifth part, the priest inclineth him and saith an orison
   that beginneth thus: Hanc igitur oblationem, etc. In which orison he
   doth four things: first he prayeth to God that he will receive our
   service, the second is that we may have very peace in God, the third is
   that he from damnation will keep us. The fourth is that with his chosen
   he will lead us.

   And after, the priest coming nigh to the principal consecration, he
   saith: Quam oblationem, and there the priest maketh five times the sign
   of the cross over the bread and over the wine, in the remembrance and
   tokening of the five wounds of our Lord, and of his prayer the sentence
   may be such: Sire, with heart we pray that of the same this oblation be
   made and consecrate, approved and confirmed in a hostie right
   reasonable, and in sacrifice acceptable, so that this bread be
   transferred into thy body, and this wine translated into the blood of
   thy right dear Son that for us suffered great torment.

   And therefore he saith after in the sixth part of the canon of the mass
   as hereafter followeth. And here it is to wit that all that the priest
   doth as to the consecration, representeth or betokeneth all that our
   Lord did to his disciples the day of the Cene, that is on
   Sherethursday, where he took bread, and yielding graces to God the
   Father, broke and gave to his disciples, saying: Take and eat, here is
   mine own proper body. And in the same manner doth the priest in the
   sixth part, except that right there he bruiseth not the bread, but to
   that signification or tokening the priest inclineth it both to one side
   and the other. Then the priest wipeth first these three fingers on the
   corporal, to the intent that the more cleanly he may take the precious
   hostie. And after, he taketh it, looking upward on high for to render
   graces to God, in teaching and tokening that when we enterprise a good
   work for to do, we ought to lift upward to God the eyes of our heart as
   to him that is beginning and principal of all good works. After, he
   blesseth the bread, making the sign of the cross, which signifieth the
   blessed passion of our Lord on the holy cross.

   And after, the priest saith the words that our Lord said: Take you and
   eat, this is mine own body, saying five words sacramental, and soon
   therewith is the bread converted into the proper and own body of Jesu
   Christ, that upon the cross died for us. After, our Lord in his supper
   took the wine before his disciples and yielding graces to God the
   Father, he blessed and gave it to his disciples saying: Take you and
   drink, for this is the chalice of my proper and own blood that is the
   confirmation both of the new and old testament and mystery of faith,
   which shall be spilt for you and for my people in remission of your
   sins. And as many times ye shall do this that I show you here, ye shall
   do it in the memory of me.

   And therefore, in the seventh part of the canon of the mass, the
   priest, when he hath laid down the body of our Lord, he taketh the
   chalice, and after looking upward, he blesseth it, and saith: Take you
   and drink, for here is the chalice of mine own proper blood, and right
   soon after the priest hath said these foresaid words in Latin, in mind
   of our Lord, the wine is converted into the proper and own blood of
   Jesu Christ, that same ass which he spilt for us on the rood tree. And
   here it is to wit that in this precious sacrament we may consider nine
   miracles much marvellous, the which may be approved by some semblance
   or likeness of nature.

   The first is that the substance of the bread and of the wine is changed
   into the substance of the body and precious blood of Christ, and this
   is showed to us by such a similitude or likeness naturally, that is,
   that of food of bread and wine, both flesh and blood are engendered in
   creature, much more stronger our Lord that is sovereign nature, may do
   by virtue of his words that the bread and the wine is converted into
   his own body and into his precious blood. The second miracle is, that
   every day, oft and many times, the bread is converted into the proper
   and own body of our Lord, and notwithstanding none augmentation or
   increase is done in God. Ensample of nature. For if I wot a thing
   secret, I may utter and rehearse in it many and divers places, and
   notwithstanding I ne wot it the more ne better than I did tofore. The
   third is that, every day our Lord is parted and eaten, and hath no
   diminishing. That is to say that God nor the sacrament is not less
   therefore. Reason natural. For if I have a candlelight, every one may
   take of the light of it without it be lessed or diminished therefore.
   Also, every one may take that holy sacrament without diminishing of it,
   but who that taketh it unworthily, he diminisheth himself. The fourth
   miracle is that, when the hostie is parted, God is in each part
   entirely. Ensample of the glass. For when the glass is parted or broken
   into pieces, in every part of it appeareth the figure of the thing that
   is presented before in it. The fifth miracle is that, if this precious
   sacrament be taken of an evil and sinful creature, the sacrament of
   itself is not fouled therefor. For we see that the beams of the sun
   pass through and over ordure or filth, and the sun is nothing foul
   therefor, but rather the ordure or filth is made clean thereof. Thus it
   is that, sometimes when the creature hath received the body of our Lord
   unworthily, considering that he hath misdone to have received his
   Saviour into so great ordure or filth of sin, he conceiveth by
   bitterness or smarting so great a coutrition that he therefore
   returneth to grace, and thus he is purged or made clean of his sin. The
   sixth miracle is, that the body of our Lord Jesu Christ is food of
   death to the sinners. For S. Paul the Apostle saith that, he that
   eateth it unworthily, he eateth it to his damnable judgment, for right
   even so as strong wines or strong meats are unprofitable or letting to
   sick people, right so is the body of our Lord Jesu Christ nuisable and
   letting to the sinners. The seventh miracle is, that so great a thing
   which all the world may not comprehend is contained in so little a
   hostie, for we see that a great hill may be comprised and perceived
   with an eye, much more stranger it is that the virtue divine may be by
   his puissance comprised and contained in a little hostie. The eighth
   miracle is, that our Lord all entirely in divers places at once is
   perceived of divers persons. In such manner we see and perceive that
   the word of a creature is known and perceived in divers places at once
   of many and divers creatures. The ninth miracle is, when the bread is
   converted into the precious body of our Lord, the accidents abide, that
   is to wit, whiteness, roundness, and savour, and not therefore it is no
   bread, but it is the body of Jesu Christ, the which is given under the
   likeness of bread, for this, that that might be great horror, a priest
   to eat raw flesh, and also to drink blood.

   After this consecration these miracles are contained, and saith the
   priest in the eighth part of the canon an orison that beginneth thus:
   Unde ut memores, etc. In the which orison the priest inciteth us to
   have mind of the passion of our Lord Jesu Christ, of his resurrection,
   and of his glorious ascension, to the end that, by his passion we be
   incited to charity, by his holy resurrection we be incited to faith,
   and by his glorious ascension to hope of our health; for his passion
   showeth to us charity, for this, that by his charity he would suffer
   death for us. And therefore the priest, in that orison, he maketh five
   times the sign of the cross, in the memory and mind of the five wounds
   that our Lord received on the cross, and there that time every creature
   ought to set his heart to think on the passion of Christ. And thus
   doing, the creature shall acquire very faith by the knowledge of the
   holy resurrection, and very hope by his glorious ascension. After, in
   this same part the priest prayeth that our Lord will accept the
   sacrifice in such manner as he did of Abel, of Abraham, and of
   Melchisedech. For especially these three were accepted of God as
   special frrends.

   After, in the ninth part of the canon of the mass, the priest inclineth
   him, which inclination representeth or betokeneth this, that our Lord
   after his supper went to the mountain of Olivet, and there he inclined
   himself praying to God the Father, saying: Sire, I thee pray, if it may
   be, that thou transfer from me this bitter chalice. And therefore he
   saith an orison that thus beginneth: Supplices te rogamus, in the which
   the priest remembereth and maketh mention of thee for the foresaid
   prayer, and when he cometh to say a word that is: Ex hac altaris
   participatione, etc., he kisseth the altar, the which kissing
   betokeneth this that Judas made when he betrayed his master our Lord
   Jesu Christ and caused him to be taken. After, in this same orison the
   priest maketh three times the sign of the cross, for this, that our
   Lord prayed in the said mountain of Olivet and sweat blood along his
   body, and therefore he maketh the first cross over the body of our Lord
   Jesu Christ, and the second cross over the blood, for the sweating of
   blood, and the third before his own face, for this, that our Lord
   praying had his face inclined, and therefore the priest maketh it
   before his face. This is then the end of the orison, where he prayeth
   that we be blessed of all blessings, and that we be replenished of all
   grace.

   After, in the tenth part, the priest with joined hands saith: Memento
   etiam domine, famulorum, etc., the which memento is principally
   ordained for them that are passed out of this world, and for that, even
   there the priest resteth and hath a general memory for dead folk, and
   in especial for the creatures for whom he is bound or entendeth to pray
   for, to the end that by the misericorde of God they may have very light
   and very peace in the glory of paradise. After, in the eleventh part of
   the canon of the mass the priest beateth his breast saying: Nobis
   quoque peccatoribus, etc., and that signifieth the contrition and
   repentance that the thief that hung on the cross at the right hand of
   God had, when he said: Memento mei domine cum veneris in regnum tuum,
   that is to say: Lord I pray thee that thou be remembered of me when
   thou comest into thy realm. Then answered God to him: Amen dico tibi:
   hodie mecum eris in paradiso, that is to say: I tell thee that thou
   shalt this day be with me in paradise. And therefore the priest in this
   orison speaking for all sinners, having hope on the misericorde and
   mercy of God, he prayeth that we may have the perdurable or everlasting
   life with the company of the apostles, of martyrs, and with all the
   holy saints in heaven. And in this orison the priest maketh three
   crosses over the bread and over the wine, the which crosses betoken
   this, that the Jews cried three times to Pilate, speaking of the
   blessed Son of God: Crucify, crucify, crucify him, for he is
   deathworthy. And therefore maketh the priest these three first crosses,
   and after, he taketh the precious body of our Lord and maketh five
   times the sign of the cross, the three on the chalice over the blood,
   and the other twain betwixt the chalice and himself. The three crosses
   made over the chalice may signify the three principal torments or
   despisings that our Lord suffered in his passion. The first is, that
   before he was put on the cross he had much pain and suffered many
   spittings and many other grievous martyrdoms and torments that the
   proud and fell Jews did to him. The second is the despite and the
   torment that he for us suffered on the cross for to buy us from the
   pains and torments of hell, and the third is that, when he was dead on
   the cross Longinus thrust the spear-head into his precious side, and
   therefore the priest maketh the three other crosses over the precious
   blood. Or else it may be said that these three crosses betoken the Holy
   Trinity, saying: by the Father, by the Son, and by the Holy Spirit, all
   honour and glory. The priest maketh two crosses, and these two crosses,
   made betwixt the chalice and the priest may betoken the two liquors
   that issued out of the side of our Lord, that was blood and water, that
   is to wit, blood of redemption and water of regeneration.

   After, the priest saith: Per omnia saecula saeculorum, and that saith
   he on high. That may represent or signify to us this, that our Lord
   crying with a high voice, rendered his soul to God the Father. Or it
   may be said, that the priest saith that on high to the end that the
   folk know the end of the canon and answer: Amen, lamenting and
   sorrowing the death of our Lord, to the ensample of the women that nigh
   the cross lamentably and piteously sorrowed and wept sore for Jesu
   Christ that they loved so much.

   After, the priest saith: Oremus. Praecepti salutaribus moniti, etc.,
   and here he inciteth us to honour and prayer, after the ensample of our
   Lord that taught his apostles, and therefore he saith: Praecepti, that
   is to say: we incite or admonish the commandments of salute, and in
   form of divine instruction, worship we and heartily pray we: saying:
   Pater noster, etc. And so ensueth the Pater noster, which was made and
   instituted by our Lord Jesu Christ, for that same he commanded his
   apostles to say, and therefore it is called Oratio dominica, that is to
   say: Orison of our Lord. And therefore veritably here oweth the
   creature to say devoutly this same orison: Pater noster, and howbeit
   that our Lord knoweth well what is best for us, and what we will have,
   notwithstanding he will that both with heart and mouth we pray him for
   many reasons. First for to incite us to devotion and for all even so as
   the blowing embraseth or fryeth the coal, right so the orison said with
   heart and mouth enflameth the devotion. Secondly, for to give good
   ensample to others, for our Lord saith: Luceat lux vestra coram
   hominibus ut videant, etc., that is to say: Let your light be shining
   tofore the men, so that they may perceive and see your good works, not
   by hypocrisy ne simuling, but by right jealousy of devotion. Thirdly
   for this, that all even so as we by the tongue sin, right so the devout
   orison ought to be made and said with tongue, to the end we may make
   satisfaction to the king of heaven, for the scripture saith: Sicut enim
   exhibuistis membra vestra servire immunditiae, et iniquitati ad
   iniquitatem, ita nunc exhibete membra vestra servire justitiae in
   sanctificationem, that is to say: As ye have given your members to
   felony and wickedness or corruption, ye must so obey both to justice
   and sanctification. Fourthly, that thing which is demanded with good
   heart is of light granted. Of this petition or asking here, speaketh
   our sweet Saviour Jesu Christ in the holy Evangile, that saith thus:
   Petite et dabitur vobis, etc., that is to say: My friends, ask you and
   ye shall have. And for this veritably every creature ought well to pray
   devoutly with good heart saying this devout orison: Pater noster, for
   the great mystery that it containeth. The mystery of this devout
   orison, Pater noster, is that it containeth seven petitions or askings.
   The first is of the eternal goods, that we may have them; and therefore
   saith he: Pater noster qui es in coelis, sanctificetur nomen tuum, that
   is as much for to say: Father that art reigning in heaven thy sweet
   name be blessed. The second petition is of the goods spiritual that we
   may receive them and therefore saith he: Adveniat regnum tuum: That is
   to say, May thy realm come to us, whereas we may see thee. The third
   petition is: Fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo et in terra, that is to
   say: Over all be thy will fulfilled and done so that into heaven my
   soul be led. The fourth petition is: Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis
   hodie, and this petition here is demanded of the name of fortune, which
   is a gift of the Holy Ghost. And the asking is this: Lord give us this
   day food, so that of thine we may have cure, that is to say that our
   Lord God will give us our living, so that for lack of it we leave not
   the service of God, whereof also we may part and deal to the poor folk,
   members of God. The fifth petition is: Et dimitte nobis debita rostra,
   sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nostril; that is to say; Pardon to
   us our misdeeds and faults, as we forgive others the misdeeds by them
   done to us. The sixth petition is: Et ne nos inducas in tentationem.
   That is to say, And lead us not into temptation. And here is to be
   known that we be tempted principally of three things, the first is God,
   for to approve our power, secondly our flesh, for to have our appetite
   and lust, thirdly is the enemy for to deceive us. Of the first saith
   our Lord: Beatus vir qui suffest tentationem, etc., Blessed is he that
   suffereth temptation in the tribulation that God sendeth, for if he be
   approved, in heaven he shall be crowned. Of the second temptation
   speaketh S. James and saith: Unusquisque vero tentatur a concupiscentia
   sua, etc.: Every one is oft tempted for to pursue his desires. Of the
   third saith the Scripture: Sathanas temptavit cor tuum, etc., Satan
   hath made thee to fall in villainy. The seventh petition is: Sed libera
   nos a malo, that is as much for to say: Deliver us from all evil that
   letteth us for to love thee. After followeth: Amen, hoc est fiat, that
   is to say: The petitions before demanded be confirmed and granted. And
   here saith the priest: Amen, along, for this, that they that pray know
   not that they be heard and enhanced, whereby they leave not to pray to
   God. For creatures devout ought ever to to persevere in their prayers
   and orisons, to the end that they may have their petitions and askings,
   which are contained in the Pater noster as before is said.
     __________________________________________________________________

And here followeth the Third part of the Mass.

   After followeth the third part principal of the mass. After that the
   priest hath said the Pater noster, whereas these petitions before said
   are contained, he saith an orison that thus beginneth: Libera nos
   quaesumus Domine ab omnibus malis, praeteritris, praesentibus, et
   futuris, etc., and this orison the priest saith alow, for this
   signifieth that our Lord was buried in the sepulchre at compline time,
   and howbeit that the body rested in the sepulchre, notwithstanding he
   descended into hell, whereout he had his friends, and delivered them of
   all evils, past, present, and to come. And therefore in this
   signification or betokening, the priest saith this orison: Libera nos
   quaesumus, etc. The which orison is as the exposition of his last
   petition of the Pater noster, that is, Libera nos a malo, that is as
   much for to say: Lord, deliver thou us from all evil, and in this
   orison the priest showeth from what evil he will be delivered, that is,
   of the evil past, now being, and to come. And therefore he saith:
   Libera nos quaesumus Domine, ab omnibus malis, praeteritis,
   praesentibus et futurist. That is to say: Lord, we pray that thou wilt
   deliver us from all evil, past, present, and to come, and by the means
   of thy blessed mother the Virgin Mary, and of all apostles, S. Peter,
   S. Paul, and S. Andrew, and of all saints in heaven, give us peace to
   the end that we may be holpen of thy misericorde and mercy from all
   sins delivered, and of all torments ensured from. The priest taketh
   then the chalice lid and kisseth it, and that signifieth to the intent
   he may receive that precious sacrament in peace and in charity. And
   after, the priest taketh the precious body of our Lord Jesu Christ and
   parteth it over the chalice, and this may to us be signified that our
   Lord parted himself to his disciples upon Sherethursday as before is
   said, and is that holy hostie parted in three, which three parts may
   betoken three manners of folk. The first part may signify the creatures
   that are in paradise. And this first part the priest layeth on the
   chalice lid in betokening that these be those that are set in peace
   with God. The second part may signify the creatures that are in
   purgatory, the which are ensured and certain that once they shall have
   paradise, therefore is this other part set with the first. The third
   part may signify the creatures that be in this life mortal, and this
   third part the priest holdeth over the chalice and saith on high: Per
   omnia saecula saeculorum, and that he saith with a high voice for this,
   that the people hearing the priest, who as vicar of God oweth to
   announce peace, and the people answereth: Amen. And there the priest
   enhancing his voice saith: Pax Domini sit semper vobiscum, that is to
   say: The peace of God be ever with you, for so said our Lord after his
   holy resurrection to his apostles: Pax vobis, peace be with you. And
   there the priest maketh three times the sign of the cross, saying: Pax
   Domini sit semper vobiscum. And these three crosses may betoken the
   three days that our Lord lay in the sepulchre. Or these crosses may
   signify the three Marys seeking our Lord. And when the priest hath
   said: Pax domini sit, etc., the people answereth: Et cum spiritu tuo,
   praying that in such manner wise as the people desireth peace, the
   priest may have it. And anon the priest saith: Haec commixtio, etc. And
   that commixtion betokeneth two things, that one is that, the body of
   Jesu Christ was not without blood, ne the blood was not without the
   body. The second is that the sacrament is consecrated under the
   likeness of bread and of wine. The third thing may be that the third
   part of the hostie signifieth the creatures that are in this world, as
   said is. And therefore it is lawful to them ere they come to God that
   they have mind and be remembered of the blessed passion and of the
   precious body of our Lord Jesu Christ, to the end that they be meddled
   and Joined unto his precious sufferance, and of his precious blood
   aroused by virtue and unity of soul. And thus creature devout shall
   mowe arouse his heart with that precious blood, keeping himself from
   evil thoughts, and his five wits natural for to keep him from all evil
   beholding, from light hearing, from foolish and vain speaking, from
   pleasant smelling, his hands from evil work, and his feet from evil
   place. And thus doing creature devout shall mowe feel the sweet dawning
   of this precious blood and blessed body meddled together. And it
   appeareth by these verses following that the three parts of the hostie
   signify the three manners of creatures before said, Tres partes signant
   de Christi corpore sancto. Prima suam carnem. Sanctosque secunda
   sepultos. Tertia viventes, haec est in sanguine tincta. Martirii
   calicem gustant in carne fideles.

   After, followeth Agnus Dei, and here it is to wit that the pnest saith
   three times Agnus Dei, and at the third time at the end of it he saith:
   Dona nobis pacem, and it nis none other thing to say than: Lamb of God,
   that taketh away the sins of the world, have mercy on us, and this is
   said two times, to the intent that our Lord be understood going on
   earth for to have us from our sins, and resting in the sepulchre for to
   deliver us from the pains of hell. And therefore in these two first
   Agnus Dei the priest saith: Miserere nobis, and the third Agnus Dei
   betokeneth this, that our Lord be understood being in heaven for to
   give perfect peace, and thereforth saith the priest at the end of the
   Agnus: Dona nobis pacem. Lord, give us peace. Saying Agnus Dei, the
   priest inclineth himself, beating his breast at every time, signifying
   that with humility and compassion he saith that same orison.

   After, it is to know that at a mass of requiem the priest saith not at
   the two first Agnus Dei, Miserere nobis, ne at the third Agnus Dei he
   saith not: Dona nobis pacem, but the priest saith instead of that: Dona
   eis requiem, for this, that three manners of rest be worthy for the
   fiables of God, dead. First, that all pain be had away from them.
   Secondly, that glory with God be given to them. Thirdly, that the soul
   with the body together be crowned. And therefore saith the priest at
   the last Agnus Dona eis requiem sempiternam.

   After this the priest devoutly inclineth him and saith a devout orison
   that beginneth thus: Domine Jesu Christe, etc., and that is as much for
   to say: Lord Jesu Christ that said to thine apostles: I give you my
   peace, I leave you my peace, therefore I thee pray instantly that thou
   wilt not consider my misdeeds and sins, but consider thou the faith of
   the holy church, and wilt it unite and peace after thy will, thou that
   reignest with the Father in the realm of heaven. And after, the priest
   taketh peace, kissing the corporal, or the lid of the chalice, or the
   body of our Lord Jesu Christ, and that is to teach and show to us that
   through the holy passion of our Lord very peace is given to us of God,
   and also to all human ligneage.

   And the priest giveth the pax to the minister or clerk that helpeth to
   say the mass, and that same minister or clerk beareth it through the
   church to the folk, and there the creatures kiss it, each after other,
   in token of love and concord, to the end that even so as flesh joineth
   itself to flesh, and spirit to spirit, right so we be allied together
   by virtue of love. And here it is to wit that for this that our Lord
   said to his disciples: Take ye all of this bread and eat it, it is mine
   own body, therefore in this manner every one was wont in time past to
   be houseled every day. And for this that many one took it indiscreetly,
   and few reverently, for that, it seemed to them that it was not well
   for to do so, therefore it was ordained to be taken but one time in a
   week, that is to wit on the Sunday, or to take it three times in the
   year, or at the least one time in the year and in that place where this
   should be done, should be the pax given every day in token of love and
   of very steadfast alliance.

   And it is to wit that, when men say mass for the dead, men bear not the
   pax for this that the fiables of God be out from all the tribulations
   of this world.
     __________________________________________________________________

Hereafter followeth the fourth part of the Mass.

   After followeth the fourth part of the mass principal, and first the
   perceptions. And here is to wit that after the priest hath taken the
   pax, and sent the pax to the people, to the intent that he may receive
   the more devoutly the body of our Lord, he saith, bowing his knees, two
   orisons instituted by the ancient fathers. The first orison beginneth:
   Domine Jesu Criste, qui ex voluntate patris, etc. And is as much for to
   say: Jesu Christ that by the will of God the Father and wit of the Holy
   Ghost wouldst redeem the world by thine own death, and them to have
   again in joy and bliss with thee, wilt my body deliver from all evil,
   have away all my sins from me, and that I may so keep thy commandments
   that I may be and dwell with thee in heaven where thou mayst reign as
   God with the Father and Holy Ghost. Amen. The second orison that the
   priest saith in his perception is this, Perceptio corporis tui, etc.,
   and may be the understanding of this orison such: Jesu Christ that
   perfect life hast in heaven, with heart I thee pray that the sweet
   perception of thy precious body which by jealousy of love I do take, be
   to me eschewing of damnation, and that by thy compassion it may be
   compunction to my soul, that in such place he may come where he may be
   accepted and granted. Amen.

   After, the priest meditating and thinking on the passion of our Lord
   Jesu Christ, saith: Panem coelestem accipiam, et nomen domini invocabo,
   etc. That is to say: I shall take the heavenly bread and I shall call
   the name of our Lord. After all these foresaid things, the priest
   holding the precious body of our Lord, saith three times: Domine, non
   sum dignus ut intres sub tectum meum: sed tantum dic verbo, et
   sanabitur anima mea. It is as much for to say: Lord, I am not worthy
   that thou enterest my house, but say thou the word and my soul shall be
   healed. And there the priest beateth at every time his breast,
   betokening that with right very contrition and in steadfast devotion he
   will receive his salvation. After, the priest making the sign of the
   cross of the body of our Lord, saith: Corpus domini nostri Jesu Christi
   custodiat animam meam in vitam aeternam, etc. It is none other thing to
   say than: The precious body of our Lord Jesu Christ will keep my soul
   in life perdurable or everlasting, that is to wit, in the company of
   our Lord. And sith, the priest with joined hands taketh the body of our
   Lord and useth it the most devoutly he can.

   After, the priest inclineth himself and taketh the chalice wherein is
   the precious blood of our Lord and saith: Quid retribuam domino pro
   omnibus quae retribuit mihi? Calicem salutaris accipiam et nomen domini
   invocabo, and all nis other thing to say but: What shall I retribue or
   yield to our Lord of all his benefits and goods by him done and given
   to me? After, he taketh the chalice saying: Calicem. etc. I shall take
   the chalice of my health and shall call the name of God. Lauding him
   and calling our Lord I shall be delivered and kept from all mine
   enemies, that is to wit from all my sins and evil temptations of the
   devil. After, the priest making the sign of the the cross, saith over
   the chalice: Sanguis domini nostri Jesu Christi custodiat animam meam
   in vitam aeternam. Amen. That is to say: The precious body and blood of
   our Lord will keep my soul in everlasting life. Amen. And sithe,
   devoutly and reverently the priest taketh the blood of Jesu Christ, and
   after, he draweth himself to the corner of the altar where he taketh
   wine, wetting his fingers over the chalice, to the intent that nothing
   ne may remain of that precious sacrament, and that doing, the priest
   saith two orisons, the first beginneth thus: Quod ore sumpsimus,
   domine, etc., that is to say: Lord, this that we have taken with mouth,
   wit that we feel it with heart, to the end it may be remedy to us
   against all temporal and wicked thoughts. The second orison is: Corpus
   tuum quod ego indignus, etc., that is as much for to say: Lord, I pray
   thee that the precious body and precious blood that I have taken as
   unworthy, me will in such manner clarify, that none ordure or filth, ne
   no fault may remain or abide within me.

   After these two orisons finished that are before said, the priest
   inclineth him and rendereth graces to God saying: Agimus tibi gracias,
   etc., that is to say thus: Lord that art reigning in heaven, we render
   and yield to thee graces and laudings of all thy benefits received of
   us.

   After, he washeth his hands at the piscine or laver, for this, that
   nothing of the sacrament ne may abide at his hands, and therefore that
   water there ought to be cast in the piscine, or into some clean place
   where men may not tread on it. And it is to wit that the priest washeth
   his hands three times at mass, that is to wit at the beginning of it,
   the second, at midst of the mass that is to wit at offering, and the
   last is after the perception of the mass. And this purgement or washing
   may signify the purity and cleanness that the priest ought to have; in
   heart by good thoughts, in mouth by good and honest speaking, and in
   his needs or businees to work truly and well.

   And after, the priest saith the post communion, which is so named post
   communion for this, that it is said after the priest hath received the
   precious sacrament of the altar; and that signifieth the joy that our
   Lord gave to his disciples. For the apostles and disciples of God had
   great joy of the holy resurrection, whereof is said in the holy
   Evangile, Gavisi sunt ergo discipuli, viso domino, etc., that is as
   much to say: The disciples of God be fain and glad because they have
   seen our Lord.

   After the perception the priest kisseth the altar, in betokening that
   in very love he assenteth and consenteth to believe firmly all the
   mystery of that precious sacrament, and right there he returneth
   himself and saluteth the people saying: Dominus vobiscum, to the end
   that the people be incited to make devout orison, and therefore he
   saith: Oremus, and there the priest saith as many orisons as he said at
   the beginning of the mass, and for that same cause, betokening that in
   all good work orison ought to be the beginning, middle, and end of it.

   And at the end of these orisons the priest concludeth, saying: Per
   dominum nostrum, etc., and in betokening that this that we ask is in
   the sweet name of our Lord, reigning with the Father and with the Holy
   Ghost, and there the people answereth: Amen. After, the priest kisseth
   yet again the altar, and sithen returneth him and saluteth the people,
   saying: Dominus vobiscum, and these two last salutes may represent and
   signify this, that our Lord after his resurrection saluted his apostles
   two times, saying thus: Pax vobis et iterum, Pax vobis; Peace be with
   you by unity of great love, and yet again, Peace be with you, sweet and
   good, in the glory and bliss of paradise.

   After all these orisons beforesaid ensueth, Ite missa est. And here is
   to wit that the mass finisheth in three manners. First, the mass
   finisheth by, Ite missa est, and that is at all times that Gloria in
   excelsis is said. And the understanding may be such, saying: Creature,
   go after our Lord, and ensue him by good works. It may be said also
   that Ite missa est betokeneth this, that when the angel had announced
   the shepherds the joy and mirth of the holy nativity of our Lord Jesu
   Christ, they went to the place where our Lord Jesu Christ was, right
   even so as they had understood: Ite, missa est, Go ye for our Lord is
   sent for your redemption, and therefore the shepherds regracied and
   lauded God with all their virtue and force; and therefore the people
   answereth and saith: Deo gracias, that is to say: God be lauded and
   regracied of it. Secondly, the mass finisheth by: Benedicamus domino,
   right so the priest would say: Bless we God of all his goods, and with
   heart laud and praise we him. And upon this the people answereth: Deo
   gracias, God be graced and thanked. Thirdly, the mass finisheth with:
   Requiescant in pace, and that is at a mass said for the dead, to the
   end that the souls for whom the priest hath said the mass may have rest
   in life perdurable, and therefore the people answereth Amen, that is to
   say: Thy prayer be heard and enhanced. After that, the priest blesseth
   the people, the which blessing may signify this, that the Holy Ghost
   was sent to the Apostles for the promise of God that he had done to
   them, saying: Accipietis virtutem spiritus sancti venientis in vos,
   etc. That is to say: Ye shall take the virtue of the Holy Ghost coming
   in you, and because that the Holy Ghost was sent by the Trinity,
   therefore maketh the priest that same blessing in the name of the
   Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Secondly, that the blessing
   whereof our Lord speaketh to his apostles, and saith: Venite benedicti
   patris mei, percipite regnum, etc., that is to say: Come after me, the
   blessed of God my Father, and take the possession of my realm. Thirdly,
   the said blessing may signify that blessing that our Lord made when he
   would ascend unto heaven, to the end that by devout orison he may
   ascend after him into the bliss of paradise, and therefore he soon
   inclineth himself, and saith an orison that thus beginneth: Placeat
   tibi sanctaTrinitas. That is as much for to say Holy Trinity, I pray
   you that ye vouchsafe to take this holy sacrifice acceptable for me,
   and also for them for whom I have consecrated the body of our Lord: Per
   Christum dominum nostrum. Amen. And here is the end of the mass, but
   some priests while they take from them the vestments, they say S.
   John's gospel, and some say the office of our Lady. S. John's gospel is
   said for the mystery in it containing, for in the tenour of it S. John
   maketh mention how our humanity was joined and united to the divinity,
   and how he was sent for to be testimony or witness of the divine light,
   of the which light all creatures were illumined. After, the priest
   saith his graces, lauding and thanking God of all his benefit.
   Whosoever will know and understand well and perfectly the noble virtue
   and noble mystery that in the exposition of the mass is, let him well
   consider and imprint right perfectly within his heart all those things
   that herebefore are contained, and the creature thus doing shall mowe
   have certain knowledge of God, and shall mowe ordain and dress his
   conscience after that before is said. And so we pray God that he give
   to us grace to do such service and so good prayers that we therewith
   may acquire and get the holy bliss of paradise. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                 Here follow the Twelve Articles of our Faith.

   These be the twelve articles of the christian faith, that every
   christian man and woman ought to believe steadfastly and firmly, for
   otherwise they may not be saved, sith they have wit and reason. And
   twelve articles they be after the number of the apostles that made
   them, and stablished to be holden and kept. Of which the first longeth
   to the Father, the seven to the Son, and the other four to the Holy
   Ghost. For it is the foundation of the faith to believe on the Trinity,
   that is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, one God in three
   persoos. And all these articles are contained in the creed. The first
   is this:

   I believe on God the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth. This
   first article laid S. Peter in the creed. The second appertaineth to
   the Son as to his godhead, that is to say in this, that he is God and
   it is such:

   I believe on Jesus Christ our Lord, only Son of God the Father. And
   this ought men to understand and believe, that he is semblable, like,
   and equal, to the Father in all things that are belonging to the
   godhead. And he is one self and like thing with the Father, save of
   person, that is not like the person of the Father. This article made
   and laid it in the creed S. John the Evangelist. The third and fourth
   articles that follow after in the creed appertain to the Son after his
   humanity, that is to say after that man is mortal.

   In which third article is contained that he was conceived of the Holy
   Ghost and born of the Virgin Mary by virtue and work of the Holy Ghost,
   and not by man's work, and that the Virgin Mary abode ever virgin
   before and after his birth. And this article laid S. James, brother to
   S. John the Evangelist, in the creed.

   The fourth article belongeth to his passion, that is to say, he
   suffered under Pontius Pilate, that was paynim and judge at that time
   in Jerusalem, instituted by the Romans. Under the which was Jesu Christ
   judged wrongfully at the request of the felon Jews, crucified, dead,
   and put in the sepulchre. This article laid S. Andrew.

   The fifth article is that he descended into hell after his death, for
   to have out and deliver the souls of the holy fathers, and of all them
   that from the beginning of the world died in very contrition and
   repentance, in faith and hope that they should be saved by him. For
   because of the first man's sin, all must descend into hell, there to
   abide the good and certain hope of Jesu Christ the son of God, that
   should come to deliver them after that he had promised by his prophets.
   And for this reason he would descend into hell, that is to understand,
   into that part of hell where they that were damned were not, the which
   were dead in their sins, and those same he drew not out of hell, for
   they be damned perdurably and for ever. And this article laid in the
   creed S. Phillip.

   The sixth article is of his resurrection, that is to wit that on the
   third day after his death for to consume and accomplish the scriptures,
   he rose from death unto life again and appeared to his disciples, and
   approved to them his resurrection in many manners by the space of forty
   days. And this article laid S. Thomas.

   The seventh article is this, that on the fortieth day after his
   resurrection, when he ate with his disciples, before them all appertly
   he ascended above all creatures into heaven, unto the right hand of the
   Father, where he sitteth. And this article laid S. Bartholomew in the
   creed.

   The eighth article is that he shall come on doomsday to judge both
   living and dead, the good and evil, and shall render or yield to every
   one this that he shall have deserved in this world. These be the
   articles that are longing to the Son. And that last article beforesaid,
   laid S. Matthew the Evangelist in the creed.

   The ninth, and the three last articles, belong to the Holy Ghost. These
   articles here require that men believe the Holy Ghost is the gift and
   love of God the Father and of the Son, from whom come to us all weal
   and grace, and that he is one same God, and one same thing with the
   Father and with the Son, save the person, that is other than the
   persons of the Father and of the Son. This article laid in the creed S.
   James, the brother of S. Simon and S. Jude.

   The tenth article is this: I believe on the holy church general, and in
   the communion of saints, that is to say the company of all saints and
   of true men, that be and shall be unto the consuming or end of the
   world, and that were from the beginning of the world together with the
   faith of Jesu Christ. In this article are understood the seven
   sacraments of holy church, that is to wit baptism, confirmation, the
   sacrament of the altar, the sacrament of marriage or wedlock, penance,
   confession, and the last is the holy unction. This article laid S.
   Simon.

   The eleventh article is to believe the remission of sins that God
   giveth by virtue of the sacraments of holy church. This article laid S.
   Jude, that was the brother of S. Simon, and not that Jude that betrayed
   our Lord Jesu Christ.

   The twelfth article is to believe the general resurrection of both the
   souls and bodies perdurable or everlasting, that is the glory of
   paradise that God shall give to them that shall deserve it by good
   faith, and through good works. This article giveth also to understand
   his contrary, that is, death and the pain perdurable or without end,
   that God hath apparelled for them that shall be damned. This article
   ought to be understood in such manner that every one, be they good or
   evil, shall be judged on doomsday and raised from death to life again
   in his own proper body, and he shall receive his reward and guerdon
   both in body and in soul together, after he shall have deserved being
   in this life mortal, and therefore at that day the good creatures shall
   be glorified both in body and soul in life that ever shall last. This
   article laid S. Matthias, apostle and friend of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Thus endeth the legend named in Latin Legenda Aurea, that is to say in
   English, the Golden Legend. For like as gold passeth in value all other
   metals, so this legend exceedeth all other books, wherein be contained
   all the high and great feasts of our Lord, the feasts of our Blessed
   Lady, the lives, passions, and miracles of many other saints, and other
   histories and acts, as all along here afore is made mention. Which work
   I hare accomplished at the commandment and request of the noble and
   puissant earl, and my special good lord, William, earl of Arundel, and
   have finished it at Westminster the twentieth day of November, the year
   of our Lord fourteen hundred and eightythree, and the first year of the
   reign of King Richard III.

   By me William Caxton.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    APPENDIX

   The Life of S. Erasmus does not occur in the first edition of the
   Golden Legend' from which this reprint was originally made, but is
   found in all subsequent issues till the final black-letter edition of
   1527. There is a chapel dedicated to S. Erasmus in Westminster Abbey.
   His aid was specially invoked by persons suffering from intestinal
   disorders, and it was probably for this reason that seafarers placed
   themselves under his special protection, in the hope of avoiding or
   mitigating sea-sickness.

   The text here given is that of Wynken de Worde's edition of 1527.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Life of the holy Bishop and Martyr, S. Erasmus.

   The holy man, S. Erasmus, was come of noble and of great kindred, and
   he was not only gentle by his birth but also in deed and conditions.

   In the time that Diocletian the emperor reigned, which was a great
   persecutor of Christ's people, then came this holy man S. Erasmus in
   the land of Campania, which was under the jurisdiction of the said
   Diocletian, and there this holy man preached to the people the word of
   God, and taught unto them the christian faith, and he baptized them in
   the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Then was this
   holy man chosen and made bishop of all the land of Campania, and
   preached and taught the people how they should serve God and love him,
   and avoid sin. Then it came to the knowledge of the emperor that S.
   Erasmus had converted all the land of Campania into his belief and to
   his God that he called Jesu Christ, that was born of a pure virgin that
   hight Mary. Then was the emperor sore troubled, and sent forth his
   knights for this holy man, S. Erasmus, and commanded them that they
   should constrain him to forsake his God that he called Jesus Christ,
   and if he would not do that, then they should torment him with the
   greatest pain that they could imagine. So it happened that they found
   this holy man, and they bound him as though he had been a thief or a
   manqueller, and brought him before the judge, and with a fell and
   spiteful mood the judge said to him: Thou rude and unbelieving man,
   wherefore cost thou with thy devilish works convert all the people from
   their belief to thy belief, and to thy God? Wherefore believest thou
   not upon the same god that Diocletian and we believe upon? I tell thee
   for truth if thou wilt not forsake and deny thy God, that thou namest
   Jesus Christ, and pray to the wise god, we will hang thee so horribly
   that all the veins of thy body shall break. Then answered the good S.
   Erasmus meekly and softly, and said: Almighty God, that made all
   things, hath wrought heaven and hell and all that is therein, him will
   I not forsake for no thhlg that can or may be done to me, for his
   goodly grace hath given to me such grace, and to other his chosen
   friends, that he was made man and hath tasted and suffered the bitter
   death for me and for all sinners. As the judge heard that of this holy
   man, he swelled upon him for anger, and made him for to be beaten upon
   his head, and spitting upon his blessed face, and besprinkled on him
   with foulness that he seemed a leprous man. When this tyrannous judge
   saw that this good S. Erasmus thus patiently suffered, and that always
   he thanked our Lord Jesu Christ of all then went he in great cruelness
   and did that holy man to be beaten so cruelly with leaden malles, that
   all his veins must break and burst, of which he cared nothing, for he
   suffered it heartily, thinking for Christ's sake. Then commanded the
   cruel judge that this holy man should be put into a deep pit, that was
   full of snakes, adders, paddocks, and other worms, and after that he
   did take brimstone and oil, and did seethe it, and did do cast this
   holy man therein, and he lay therein as he had lain in cold water,
   thanking and louing God. When this unmerciful judge saw that this no
   thing him perished, then waxed he more angry, and took sodden pitch and
   oil, and did put it in to his holy mouth, sitting alway in the pit or
   furnace, thanking and louing God. Then rose there so great tempest of
   thundering and lightning, that the fumace burned that S. Erasmus sat
   on, and he no thing grieved nor hurt, but all the other cruel people
   that were by were burned up with the same fell weather. When the
   emperor heard this he was so angry that for wrath he did make great
   chains and bolts of iron, and smote it about his holy neck, and did him
   so to be cast into the foresaid pit that was full of worms, for that
   they should eat this holy man Erasmus. Then came there an angel from
   God and did light all the pit and did slay all the worms. And then was
   this holy Erasmus throughly whole, and fulfilled greatly with the grace
   of God, and against the will of the evil people he came again out of
   that pit, and went again and preached the word of God so long, till the
   cruel emperor Diocletian died, and then came another emperor, that
   hight Maximian, and he was much worse than was Diocletian; and when
   this Maximian heard of the life of this holy Erasmus, then he did him
   to be taken and would have made him to forsake his God and his belief.
   And when he saw that he would not change his belief, then he did do
   this good man to be put into a pan seething with rosin, pitch,
   brimstone lead, and oil, and did pour it into his mouth, for which he
   never shrinked. And when this cruel emperor saw that this pain hurt him
   no thing, then made he a cloak of metal as brass or copper, and made it
   glowing hot, and put it upon his holy body. And as soon as that cloak
   had touched his holy body the cloak burned and consumed all the evil
   and wicked people that were by. By which miracle many folk were turned
   unto the christian faith. Then appeared to him the angel of God, and
   comforted him in his great tribulation, and made him whole and strong,
   and carried him thence, and said to him: O Saint Erasmus, the most
   chosen friend of God, be strong in thy tribulation, for through thy
   great martyrdom shall many come to the eternal life, therefore believe
   steadfastly in God and forsake him not. When S. Erasmus heard this, he
   went again gladly and preached and converted much people unto the
   christian belief, more than ever he did before. And when the emperor
   understood this, he pursued the holy man still, and ordained for him a
   coat of iron, and he commanded that it should be made glowing hot, and
   so put it upon the naked body of the holy man. And when they had found
   S. Erasmus preaching, they took him and said: If thou wilt not forsake
   thy God and thy false belief, and pray and worship our god, we will put
   on thy naked body this burning coat. Then answered the good Erasmus and
   said: My Lord and my God hath for me so much done and suffered more
   than I have deserved. Wherefore I will suffer all that I may suffer for
   him, for he hath deserved it so highly against me and against all
   sinners, therefore I tell you for certain that I will never forsake
   him, suffer all that I may suffer for his holy name, and I commit me
   wholly to his holy grace. Then they with great wrath put this burning
   coat upon his blessed naked body. Then he kneeled down and called
   meekly upon God and said: O Almighty God, have mercy upon me. And
   forthwith burst the burning harness from his blessed body and burned
   all them that so wrathfully would have punished him, by the which
   miracle many a man was converted and was christened of S. Erasmus. Then
   appeared to him again the angel of God and said: O Erasmus, God s
   champion, thou shalt go again into Campania, and there shalt thou
   suffer passing great pain, and God commandeth thee to convert there
   much people, and what thing thou desirest of him to thy soul's health,
   it shall be granted. Then kneeled S. Erasmus meekly down and said: O
   Almighty God, Father of heaven, thy will be fulfilled in me. Then went
   he again gladly into the land of Campania and there preached he again
   the word of God, and converted many folk to the christian faith. Then
   then this emperor Maximian did do take this holy man, and let him be
   brought before him, and he commanded him to be led to the false gods,
   and he should worship them. And when this holy man came before the
   false gods, then might they no longer stand, but fell down and brake
   all in pieces, and consumed into ashes or dust. And when this came to
   the knowledge of the emperor then was he sore aggrieved, and then he
   ordained a tun to be cast full of iron nails, and did this holy man to
   be put therein naked, and closed it fast, and let it fall down from a
   high hill. And then came the angel of God and comforted this holy man
   and holp him out of the tun and made him whole, and said to him: O
   Erasmus the very chosen servant of God, cease not, but go and preach
   again, and take heed of no pain. Which commandment he meekly obeyed.
   Then the emperor did do take him again, and commanded his teeth to be
   plucked out of his head with iron pincers. And after that they bound
   him to a pillar and carded his skin with iron cards, and then they
   roasted him upon a gridiron, and as he lay he spake to the tormentors
   merrily: I lie here better than I am worthy, for I lie upon a bed well
   strewed with sweet roses, and I see the light everlasting, the Son of
   God, sitting on the right hand of his Father. Then spake the cruel
   emperor. As this is a very tarrier of time, and he mocketh us and our
   gods, he deserveth to be brought to the most cruel death that we can
   for him imagine. Then took they this holy man and did put him in a deep
   pit that was full of stench. And then this fell and cruel emperor took
   counsel what martyrdom and pain that they might do to this holy man to
   bring him to death. Then found they in their minds that they vvould
   bring this holy man to death though they should martyr and pain him a
   year long, and so they did before and after every Sunday, with new pain
   the heaviest and sharpest that they could for him imagine. When the
   emperor had thus taken his shrewd counsel, then took they this holy
   Erasmus out of that stinking pit, and did smite sharp nails of iron in
   his fingers, and after, they put out his eyes of his head with their
   fingers, and after that they laid this holy bishop upon the ground
   naked and stretched him with strong withes bound to horses about his
   blessed neck, arms, and legs, so that all his veins and sinews that he
   had in his body burst. Then let they him lie in the field that the
   beasts should eat him. Then came a voice from heaven, and said: O
   Erasmus lift up thine eyes, the crown of everlasting life is ready for
   thee. And with that he lift up his holy eyes unto heaven, and he saw
   the everlasting joy open, and said: O God, where hast thou been?
   blessed be thy name. Then was the holy man whole and sound, and an
   angel brought him a purple cloth from heaven, and commanded him that he
   should go again and preach the word of God, which he did more strongly
   than he did before. And when the emperor with his false council
   understood this, he waxed out of his wit for anger, and called with a
   loud voice like as he had been mad, and said: This is the devil, shall
   we not bring this caitiff to death? Then found he a counsel for to make
   a windlass, and that was upon the last Sunday of the year, and they
   laid this holy martyr under the windlass all naked upon a table, and
   cut him upon his belly, and wound out his guts or bowels out of his
   blessed body. But when this cruel emperor saw that they could not bring
   this holy man to death with all these pains and torments, they chained
   and bolted him hands and feet with great irons, and with great woodness
   cast him into a foul stinking pit, and let it be shut with great iron
   bolts, so that he would never more see him. Then appeared to him an
   angel of God with great clearness and said: O Erasmus stand up. And
   forthwith fell from him all his irons and bands, and he was brought
   into a town called Fremyana, and there he raised a child from death to
   life which was a gentleman's child, the father hight Anastasius, by the
   which miracle many thousands of people were converted to the christian
   faith; in which town this holy man abode seven days, preaching the word
   of God and strengthened the people in the christian belief. And when
   the hour was come that this holy bishop and martyr of God should depart
   out of this world, then was preferred a Ioud voice perfectly, coming
   from heaven saying Erasmus, my true servant, thou hast done me true
   service, wherefore come with me and go and enter into the bliss and joy
   of thy Lord, and I promise thee and all people that think upon thy
   great pain and call upon thy holy name, and thee sue and worship every
   Sunday, what that they ask of me in thy name for the weal of their
   souls, I shall grant it. Now come, my true and chosen friend, be glad
   and comforted with mine ascension. I will that thou arise with me and
   come sit upon the right hand of my Father. Then was this holy man right
   glad and joyful, and he cast his eyes upward to heaven, with lifting up
   his hands, and there he saw, a clear shining crown come from heaven
   upon his blessed head. Then gave he louing and thanking to Almighty God
   with bowing his head and kneeling, and both his hands upward to heaven,
   and meekly said: O Lord in thy hands yield I my spirit, and this Sunday
   receive my soul into thy peace and rest. And with saying these words he
   yielded up his ghost, which was seen with many men s eyes, shining
   clearer than the sun, and how that he was received of the holy angels,
   and was led through the height of heaven into the uppermost plan of
   heaven: there he standeth with God, with all the holy company, and is
   there a true helper to all them that call truly to S. Erasmus for
   ghostly health, which joy and ghostly health let us pray that he for us
   all of our Lord God may obtain.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    GLOSSARY

   adjusted (Fr. ajorter), added. among, adv., meanwhile. ancille, n.,
   handmaid. ankers, n., anchorites. avaled, v. intr., went down. axes,
   n., agues.

   benewrely, adv. (Fr. bienheureux), happily. benewred, adj., blessed.

   cene, n., council. centime, n., tenth. chartre, n., dungeon. cheer, n.,
   face. coles, n., cabbages. crisp, adj., curly. cruel, adj., stern.

   detrenched. pp. hewed in pieces. detty, adj., due.

   empesh (Fr. empècher), hinder. encheson, n., for cause of.

   fait, n. business. faitour n., malefactor. fardel n., burden. ferial,
   adj., ordinary. festue, n., a straw. fet, v. fetched. fiables n., the
   faithful. flom, n., river. foison, n., plenty. fraitour, n., refectory.
   frounced, adj., wrinkled.

   grabat, n., a gridiron. grip, n., a vulture. guerished, (Fr. guérir),
   healed.

   impetred, v. tr., besought. indigne (Fr.), unworthy.

   japing, prep., mocking.

   louing, prep., praising.

   mat, adj., exhausted. meiny, n., retinue. meschant (Fr.), wicked.
   mesel, n., a leper. moyenant (Fr.), by means of. mowe, v., to be able.
   mystery, Fr. metierr, work or business.

   notorily, adv., openly.

   paddocks, n., toads. parement, n., garment. piscine, n., a pool. plein
   (Fr.), full.

   rassassied, ppl, (Fr. rassassier), satisfied. releved, v. tr., built or
   set up. renomee, renown.

   sacred, v. tr., consecrated. Salue or salut, n. (Fr.), health or
   prosperity. sautes, n., assaults. scorpions, n., whips with iron.
   slimed, pp., pricked. slops, n., loose breeches. sudary, n., a
   winding-sheet.

   tache (Fr.), a stain.

   unnethe, adv., scarcely.

   whelk, n., a pimple. wood, adj., mad.
     __________________________________________________________________

  INDEX OF SAINTS, PATRIARCHS, FESTIVALS OF THE CHURCH AND SOME OTHER MATTERS

   Be it noted that the * placed against a name indicates that it is not
   found in the French Legend which served as the basis of Caxton's work,
   but was added by him from the Legends, in Latin and in English, which
   he mentions in his preface, but which have not been so far identified.

   Abdon. July 30, iv. 141.

   Abraham, Patriarch, i. 187

   Achilleus. May 12, iii. l79

   Adam. i. 169.

   Adrian, September 8, v. 112.

   Advent, i. 1.

   Agatha. February 5, iii. 32.

   Agathon. December 7, vii. 82.

   Agnes. January 21, ii. 245.

   *Alban. June 22, iii. 236.

   Albine. March 1, vii. 222.

   Aldegonde. January 30, vii. 218.

   *Aldhelm. May 25, iii. I92.

   Alexis, July 17, vi. 205.

   All Hallows. November l, vi. 94.

   All Souls. November 2, vi. 109.

   *Alphage. April 19, iii. 121.

   Amande. February 6, iii. 40.

   Ambrose. April 4, iii. 110.

   *Amphiabel. June 22, iii. 236.

   Anastasia. December 25, ii. 149.

   Andrew. November 30, ii. 94.

   Anthony. January 17, ii. 224.

   Annunciation of our Lady. March 25, iii. 97.

   Appollinaris. July 23, iv. 89.

   Arnold = Arnulph. August 15, vii, 164.

   Arsenius, July 19, vii. 78.

   Articles of the Faith, vii. 262.

   Ascension of our Lord, i. 108.

   Assumption of our Lady. Aug. 15, iv. 234.

   Austin of Hippo. August 28, v. 44.

   *Austin, Apostle of England, May 26, iii. 194.

   Barbara. December 4, vi 198.

   Balaam and, Josaphat. November 19, vii. 84.

   Barnabas. June 11, iii. 214.

   Bartholomew. August 24, v. 31.

   Basil. June 14, ii. 258.

   Beatrice. July 29, iv. 133.

   *Bede. May 26 or 27, vii. 39.

   Benet = Benedict. March 21, iii. 80.

   Bernard, August 20, v. 12.

   Blase. February 3, iii. 27.

   *Brandon. May 16, vii. 48.

   Brice. November 13, vi. 158.

   Calixtus. October 14, v. 255.

   Cecilia. November 22, vi. 247.

   Celsus. July 28, iv. 127.

   Christine. July 24, iv. 93.

   Christopher. July 25, iv. 111.

   Circumcision. January 1, i. 28.

   Ciriacus. August 8, iv. 205.

   Clare. August 12, vi. 161.

   Clement. November 23, vi. 253.

   Commandments, i. 281.

   Concepton of our Lady. ii. 122..

   Cornelius. September 14, v. 142.

   Corpus Christi. i. 141.

   Cosmo. September 27, v. 172.

   Crisaunt = Crescentius. October 25, vi. 59.

   *Crispin. October 25, vi. 69.

   *Crispinian. October 25, vi. 69.

   Crowned Martyrs. November 8, vi. 139.

   *Cuthbert. March 20, iii. 94.

   Cyprian. September l6, v. 142.

   Dantian. September 27, v. 172.

   Daria. October 25, vi. 59.

   David. ii. 26.

   Dedication of a Church. i. 149.

   Demetrien. October 8, vii. 182.

   Denis. October 9, v. 244.

   Dominic. August 5, iv. 172.

   Donatus. August 7, iv. 202.

   *Dorothy. February 6, vii. 42.

   *Dunstan, May 19, iii. 188.

   *Edmund, King and Martyr. November 20, vi. 243.

   *Edmund, Bishop. November 16, vi. 230.

   *Edward, King and Martyr. Trans. June 20, iii. 233.

   * Edward, King and Confessor, October 13, vi. 1.

   Elizabeth. November 19, vi. 213.

   Ember Days, i. 63.

   Epiphany. January 6, i. 41.

   *Erasmus. June 2, vii. 267.

   *Erkenwolde. April 30, vii. 67.

   Eufemia. September 16, v. 143.

   Eugenia. December 25, ii. 151 and v. 120.

   Eusebius. August 1, iv. 149.

   Eustace. November 2, vi. 83.

   Eutrope of Xaintes. April 30, iii. 269.

   *Exaltation of the Cross. September 14, v. 125.

   Fabian, January 20, ii. 231.

   Faustin. July 29, iv. 133.

   Felician. June 9. iii. 212.

   Felix, Pope. July 29, iii. 132.

   Felix, said Inpicis. January 14, ii. 221.

   Felix, Priest. August 30, v. 78.

   Fiacre. August 30, vii. 173.

   Firmin, Invention of. January 14. ii. 216.

   Forsey, January 16, v. 177.

   Francis, October 4, v. 2l4.

   Fulcian. December 11, ii. 129.

   Gatus. April 22, vii. 161.

   Geneviève. January 3, iii. 284.

   Gentian. December 11, ii, 129.

   George. April 23, iii. 125.

   Germain of Auxerre. July 31, iii. 203.

   Gervase. June 19, iii. 228.

   Gests of the Lombards, vii. 106.

   Giles. September 1, v. 91.

   *Gordian. May 10, iii. 178.

   Gorgone. September 9, v. 119.

   Gregory. March 12, iii. 60.

   Grysogone. November 24, vi, 270.

   Hilary. January 13, ii 213. Hippolitus. August 13, iv. 228.

   *Hugh. November 17, vi. 241.

   Ignatius. February 1, iii. 16.

   Innocents. December 28, ii. 176.

   Invention of the Cross. May 3, iii. 169.

   Isaac, i. 207.

   Ives of Brittany. May 19, vii. 191.

   Jacinctus. September I l, v. I20.

   Jacob, i. 207.

   James the More. July 25, iv. 97.

   James the Less. May 1, iii. 158.

   James the Martyr. November 27, vii. 34.

   Jerome. September 30, v. 199.

   Job, ii. 52.

   John the Baptist. June 24, iii. 253.

   John the Baptist, Decollation of. August 29, v. 67.

   John the Evangelist. December 27, ii. 161.

   John Port Latin. May 6, iii. 176.

   John Chrysostom. January 27 (transl of September 18), v. 136.

   John the Almoner. January 23, ii. 268.

   John the Abbot. February 28, vii. 75.

   John and Paul. June 26, iv. 6.

   Josaphat. November 19, vii. 84.

   Joseph, i. 228.

   Joshua, ii. 1.

   Jude. October 28, vi. 72.

   Judith, ii. 77.

   Julian the Bishop. January 27, iii. 8.

   Juliana the Virgin. February 16, iii. 45.

   *Juliet, or Julitte. June 16, iii. 225.

   Justin. April 13, vii. 181.

   Justina, September, 26, v. 165.

   Katherine. November 25, vii. 1.

   *Kenelm. July 17, iv. 60.

   Lambert. September 17, v. 147.

   Landry. June 10, vii. 187.

   Lawrence. August 10, iv. 208.

   Leo. June 28, iv. 10.

   Leonard. November 6, vi. 132.

   Litanies, i. 101.

   Logier = Leodegarius. October 2, v. 211.

   Longinus. March 15, iii. 70.

   Louis, Bishop. August 19, vii. 215.

   Louis, King of France. August 25, vii. 204.

   Lowe or Lupe. September 1, v. 85.

   Loye of Noyon = Eligius. December 1, iii. 261.

   Lucy. December 13, ii. 130.

   Luke. October 18, vi. 46.

   Macarius. January 2, ii. 218.

   Maccabees. August 1, iv. 153.

   Mammertin. March 30, v. 88.

   Marcel. January 16, ii. 223.

   Marcelin, Pope. April 26, iii 143.

   Marcellinus and Peter. June 3, iii. 210.

   Marcial. June 30, iii. 275.

   *Margaret. July 20, iv. 66.

   Margaret alias, Pelagien, v. 238.

   *Marine. June 18, iii. 226.

   Mark. April 25, iii. 134.

   Martha. July 29, iv. 135.

   Martin. November 11, vi. 141.

   Mary, the Blessed Virgin. See Assumption, Conception, Nativity,
   Purification.

   Mary of Egypt. April 2, iii. 106.

   Mary Magdalen. July 22, iv. 72.

   Mass, History of the, vii. 225.

   Matthew. September 21, v. 149.

   Matthias. February 24, iii. 54.

   Maturin. November 9, iv. 1.

   Maur. January 25, iii. 73.

   Maurice. September 22, v. 158.

   Mellonin = Melanius of Rouen. October 22, vii. 189.

   Michael. September 29, v. 180.

   Modestus. June 15, iii. 221.

   Morant. May 5, vii. 201.

   Moses, i. 256.

   Moses the Abbot. February 7, vii. 76.

   Nativity of our Lady. September 8, v. 96.

   Nativity of our Lord. December 25, i. 25.

   Nazarien. July 28, iv. 127.

   Nereus. May 12, iii. 179.

   Nicasius Of Rheims. December 14, ii. 136.

   Nicholas. December 6, ii. 109.

   Noah, i. 181.

   Pancrace. May 12, iii. 182.

   Passion of our Lord, i. 66.

   Pastor, January 12, vii. 71.

   Patrick. March 17, iii. 76.

   Paul the Apostle. June 30, iv. 27.

   Paul, Conversion of. January 25, ii. 279.

   Paul the Hermit. January 10, ii. 204.

   Pauline, or Paula. January 29, iii. 1.

   Pelagien, Pope. August 27, vii. 106.

   Pelagienne. October 19, v. 234.

   Pentecost. i. 122.

   Pernelle = Petronilla. May 31, iii. 186.

   Peter the Deacon. June 2, iii. 210.

   Peter of Milan. April 29, iii. 146.

   Peter the Apostle. June 29, iv. 12.

   Peter the Apostle ad Vincula. August 1, iv. 154.

   Peter the Apostle in Cathedra. February 22, iii. 50.

   Philip the Apostle. May 1, iii, 155.

   Polycarp. January 26, vii.146.

   Praxede. July 21, iv, 72.

   Prime. June 9, iii. 212.

   Prothase. June 19, iii. 228.

   Prothurs. September 11, v. 120.

   Purification of our Lady, iii. 19.

   Quadragesima. i. 60.

   Quinquagesima, i. 58.

   Quintin. October 31, vi. 81.

   Quiriacus. May 4, vii 149.

   *Quirine. June 16, iii. 225.

   Rehoboam, ii. 51.

   Remigius. January 13, ii. 209.

   Remigius, translation of. October 1, v. 208.

   Resurrection of our Lord. March 27, i. 86.

   *Rigobert. January 8, vii.185.

   Rock. August 16. v. 1.

   Sabina. See Savine.

   Saturnine. November 29, vii. 30.

   Saul, ii. 2.

   Savien, or Savinien. August 29, v. 79.

   Savina. August 29, v. 79.

   Sebastian. January 20, ii. 232.

   Seconde. March 31, iii. 102.

   Sennen. July 30, iv 141.

   Septuagesima, i. 52.

   Seven Brethren. July 10, iv. 66.

   Seven Sleepers. July 27, iv. 120.

   Sexagesima. i. 56.

   Silvester. December 31, ii. 197.

   Simeon. February 4, vii. 139.

   Simon the Apostle. October 28, vi. 72.

   Simphorien. August 22, v. 30.

   Simplicien. July 29, iv. 133.

   Sixtus the Pope. August 6, iv, 200.

   Solomon, ii. 40.

   Stephen, December 26, ii. 152.

   *Stephen, Invention of. August 3, iv. 165.

   *Stephen the Pope. August 2, iv. 164.

   *Swithin. July 2 (translation August 15), iv. 53.

   Thaisis. October 8, v. 240

   Theodora. July 17, iv. 48.

   *Theodore. November 9, vi. 140.

   Thomas Aquinas. March 7, vii. 154.

   Thomas of Canterbury. December 29, ii. 182.

   *Thomas, Translation of. July 7, iv. 56.

   Thomas the Apostle. December 21, ii. 138.

   Timothy and Appolinaris. August 23, v. 29.

   Tobit, ii. 57.

   Turian. July 13, vii. 171.

   Urban. May 25, iii. 184.

   Ursula. October 21, vi. 62.

   Valentine. February 14, iii. 43.

   Vedaste. February 6, iii. 42.

   Victor and Corona. May 14, iv. 3.

   Victorice. December 11, ii. 129.

   Vitus. June 15, iii. 221.

   Whitsuntide. See Pentecost.

   William of Paris and Bourges. January 10, iii. 266.

   *Winifred. November 3, vi. 127
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 GENERAL INDEX

   Abgarus, letter to our Lord, vi. 73.

   Abingdon, S. Edmund born at, vi. 230.

   Adalaoth, king of the Lombards, vii. 111.

   Agatha (S.), cured Euthicia of a bloody flux, ii. 131.

   Agilmud, king of the Lombards, vii. 107.

   Agisulphe, king of the Lombards, vii, 111.

   Agnes, Thecla and Mary visit S. Martin, vi. 149.

   Air, S. Mary of Egypt suspended in, iii. 106.

   Albigenses, iv. 175.

   Alboin, story of, vii. 108.

   Alcuin's letter to Charlemagne, vii. 124.

   Alexander the Pope, and the feast of S. Peter's chains, iv. I59.

   Alexandrine of Perugia, vi. 190.

   Alms-deeds of S. Gregory, iii. 61.

   Ambrose, S., his vision of S. Martin's death, vi. 156.

   Amis and Amelion, vii. 122.

   Andrea of Ferrara, miracle of, vi. 196.

   Angel entertained by S. Gregory, iii. 66.

   --instructs S. Ambrose, iii. 114.

   Angels appears to S. Vitus, iii. 222.

   Angels sing at the death of S Martin, vi. 155.

   Antichrist, signs of, i. 16.

   Antwerp, painting at, of S. Austin and the child, v. 66.

   Apollo, destruction of his temple resented by the devil, iii. 86.

   Apostles miraculously brought together in a cloud, iv. 236, 257.

   Apulia, famine in, iii. 141.

   Aquapendens, town of, v. 3.

   Ara coeli, church of, i. 27.

   Arcadius, Emperor, vi. 205.

   Archemius' daughter healed, iii. 211.

   Arians at Milan, iii. 113.

   --confounded by a miracle of S. Basil, ii. 260.

   --confounded by S. Peter Martyr, iii. 148.

   --the doings of, ii. 230.

   Arius and his sect, iv. 150.

   Ark, building of the, i. 182.

   Arphaxat, magician, iii. 271.

   Arrows hang in the air, v. 81.

   Arundel, Earl of, Caxton'e patron, i. 3.

   Askepodot, persecutes S. Alban, iii. 243.

   Ass restored to life by S. Germain, iii. 209.

   Assisi, Saracens at, vi. 167-8.

   Attila and S. Leo, iv. 11.

   --and S. Lupus, iii. 206.

   --at Paris, iii. 289.

   Attila tries to deceive S. Benet, iii. 87.

   Austin, S., attests the miracles done by the body of S. Stephen, ii.
   158.

   Austridinian, restored to life, iii. 277.

   Avarice rebuked by S. Ambrose, iii. 117.

   Ave Maria, miracle of, iii. 101.

   Avenir, a king in India, vii. 85.

   Barking monastery, vii. 68.

   Bathing never practiced by S. James, iii. 159.

   Beams lengthened miraculously, iv. 217, vii. 199.

   Beard and hair grown after death, iii. 266.

   Bede, Venerable, story of, vii. 120.

   Bells of Sens refuse to ring, v. 87.

   -- ring spontaneously, iii. 224.

   --why rung for thunder and tempests, i. 105.

   Berengarius, heresy of, vii. 133.

   Bernard saw not the Lake of Lausanne, v. 21.

   Bird calls on S. Thomas of Canterbury, iv. 59.

   -- sings to S. Elizabeth, vi. 226.

   Birds and S. Francis, v. 227.

   --feed S. Blase, iii. 27.

   --that were angels, vii. 52.

   Birinus, vision of, vii. 48.

   Blind man cured by S. Clare, vi. 191.

   --healed by S. Amande, iii. 41.

   -- healed by S. Edward, vi. 22.

   Blind men cured at the tomb of S. Edward, vi. 34.

   Blind restored to sight, ii. 96.

   Blindness cured by miracle, iii. 136.

   Blood of Christ, five times shed, i. 34.

   Blowing on idols breaks them, v. 78.

   Body of man composed of four elements, i. 61.

   Bone fires on S. John Baptist's day, v. 71.

   Bones of SS. Peter and Paul, how discriminated, iv. 25.

   Books of S. Dominic miraculously recovered, iv. 181.

   Breeches for Adam and Eve, i. 174.

   Brescia, it rains blood at, vii. 123.

   Bruill abbey, vii. 201.

   Bulgaria converted, vii 128.

   Cadygam, wife of Mahomet, vii 113.

   Calf restored to life after it had been eaten, iii. 207.

   Calne, vi. 237.

   Candle, miracle of a, iii. 25.

   Candlemas, iii. 23.

   Candles, miraculous, iii, 153, iv. 195, vii. 221.

   Canute in England, vi. 4.

   Capon seven years old, v. 229.

   Capons' (Sir John) story of David's penance, ii. 33.

   Carnifrut, the cross of, vii. 173.

   Carpo, the vision of, i. 90.

   Castle Angelo, why so called, iii. 65.

   Cat, apparition of a, iv. 188.

   Catania, city of, saved by S. Agatha. iii. 39.

   Catesby, Northamptonahire, vi. 230.

   Caxton declares himself translator of the life of S. Rock, v. 12.

   Caxton's originals for his compilation, i. 1.

   Cerne abbey, miracle of, iii. 202.

   Chalgrove, Oxfordshire, vi. 234.

   Chalice of crystal broken and made whole, iv. 218.

   Charlemagne, his personal appearance, vii. 125.

   --would not marry his daughters, vii. 124.

   Chartres saved by the coat of our Lady, iv. 242.

   Chastity of S. Edward, vi. 10.

   Chertsey, abbot of, vii. 67.

   Child on whom our Lord laid his hand, iii. 283.

   --restored to his father over sea, ii. 121.

   Christ descends from a crucifix, vii. 173.

   --the names of, i. 31.

   Christ's seamless coat, marvellous effect of, i. 84.

   Circumcision, why on the eighth day, i. 36.

   Clent, miracle of S. Kenelm at, iv. 64.

   Clerk dies through disobedience to S. Benet, iii. 87.

   --forbidden to wed by our Lady, v. 108.

   Clotilde, Queen of France, v. 208.

   Clovis, King of France, v. 209.

   Coat of our Lady, iv. 242.

   Cologne, bodies of the Magi preserved there, i. 52.

   Colomba, S., threatened by S Loye, iii. 265.

   Compton squire, refuses tithes, iii. 199.

   Conrad, confessor to S. Elizabeth, vi. 217.

   Consecration of churches, origin of, i. 152.

   Constantine's conversion, iii. 171.

   Constantine's daughter cured of leprosy by S. Agnes, ii. 251.

   Constantine forbids the bath of infant's blood, ii. 201.

   Constantine's vision of Saint Nicholas, ii. 115.

   Convent discipline, iii. 3.

   Cooks, prince of the, i. 164.

   Cope of S. Martin borne as a banner, vi. 156.

   --of S. Peter Martyr, miracle of the, iii. 149.

   --of sophistry, vi. 114.

   Corone martyred by two trees, iv. 5.

   Corpse of S. Arnold sustained in the air, vii. 169.

   Cosdroe, King of Persia, and the Cross, v. 126.

   Cow brings forth a lamb, iii. 162.

   --though mad, obeys S. Martin, vi. 152.

   Crato and the precious stones, ii. 165.

   Cripple cured by S. Peter, iv. 26.

   Crusade preached, vi. 235

   Culex and elephant, vi. 256.

   Cups of silver offered to S. Nicholas, ii. 120.

   Curse removed by S. Stephen, ii. 159.

   Cyprian the enchanter, v. 166.

   Cyprian's conversion, v. 171.

   Dagobert reproved by S. Amand, iii. 40.

   Damascus the place of man's creation, i. 170.

   Damsel palsied for desecration of S. Edward's day, vi. 41.

   Danegeld, vi. 8.

   Danes in England, vi. 2-3, 244.

   Daughter denies her father, iv. 95.

   David's penance as related by Sir J. Capons, ii. 33.

   Dead bodies defend their orator, v. 117.

   --man refuses to return to life, iii. 207.

   Deaf and dumb man cured, vii. 146.

   Deerhurst, S, Alphage at, iii. 121.

   Delphic Oracle prophesied Christ's coming, i. 26.

   Denis the Areopagite, his books, vii. 126.

   Devil appeare to S. Dominic, iv. 191.

   --appears to S Juliana, iii. 46.

   --as a herald, ii. 219.

   --cast out by S. Appollinaris, iv. 91.

   --cast out by S. Maturin, iv. 2.

   --in a woman's belly, vi. 228.

   --in female form confounded by S. Bartholomew and by S. Andrew, v. 40.

   --on the lettuce, v. 135.

   --tempts a bishop in the form of a fair woman, ii. 105.

   Devil's compact with a servant, ii. 261.

   Devil's compact with a knignt, iv. 248.

   Devils cast out by S. Bernard, v. 24-5.

   --appear in form of the old Gods, vi. 153.

   --in the likeness of dogs, ii. 99.

   --appear to S. Theodora, iv. 50.

   --cast out by S. Clare, vi. 190.

   --cast out by S. Genevieve, iii. 295, 301.

   --cast out by S. Marcial, iii. 277, 281.

   --dispersed by S Francis, v. 222.

   --inhabit pagan idols, iii. 71.

   --invoked by a gambler, iii. 153.

   --supper, iii. 205.

   Diana in form of the devil baffled by S.Nicholas, ii. 113.

   --statue of, speaks, ii. 96.

   Diana's temple destroyed by the prayer of S. John, ii. 169.

   Dicer, the, and S.Bernard, v. 22.

   Dioscurus' daughter Barbara, vi. 198.

   Disembowelling, iii. 251.

   Donatus, S. Jerome's master, v. 200.

   Dove crowns S. Margaret, iv. 71.

   Dragon at Arles, iv. 136.

   --at Epirus, iv. 161.

   --subdued by S. Silvester, ii. 204.

   --threatens an erring monk, iii. 91.

   --why borne in procession, i. 105-6.

   Dromedaries used by the Wise Men, i. 45.

   Dunstan, S., vision of, vi. 31.

   --vision of S. Peter, vi 3.

   Ebroinus, the persecutor, v. 212.

   Ebronien, the apostate, iv. 253.

   Edgar, king, iii. 190.

   Edward the Confessor's ring and the pilgrims, ii. 175.

   Eggs broken and made whole again, iv. 54.

   Emorissa, who touched our Lord, iv. 137.

   Enchanters and dragons, v. 151.

   England, heretics in, iii. 286.

   English children and S. Gregory, iii. 62.

   --children at Rome, iii. 194.

   --conquered by the Normans for their sins, ii. 126.

   Ephesus and the seven sleepers, iv. 121.

   Epileptic cured by S. Clare, vi. 189.

   Ethelred, iii. 233.

   Euphemius, father of S. Alexis, vi. 205.

   Eustace, S., story of under name of Alexis, vi. 205.

   Evangelist's symbols explained, vi. 47.

   Famine in Jerusalem, iii. 167.

   Fasting, reasons for, i. 62-5.

   Finger of S John Baptist, v.66.

   Fire obeys S. Martin, vi. 147.

   Fisherman of Westminster, vi. 16.

   Flowers from the altar of S. Stephen cure sickness and blindness, ii.
   158.

   Fowl made fish miraculously, ii. 191.

   Frederick the emperor, v. 39.

   Frederic who mocked S. Elizabeth, vi. 229.

   Frenchmen preached to by S. Philip, iii. 157.

   Friars forbidden to visit nunneries, vi. 178.

   Gaimas the Arian, v. 138.

   Gallas rebuked by S. Benet, iii. 89.

   Gargan, Mount, v. 181.

   Genebald's sons named Thief and Foxwhelp, ii. 212.

   Germain consecrates S. Genevieve, iii. 286.

   Geronce, mother of S. Genevieve, iii. 287.

   --blinded and restored, iii. 288.

   Giles Michell the cripple, vi. 15.

   Glanders cured by S. Clare, vi. 195.

   Godwin, Earl, death of, vi. 25.

   Goldsmithery of S. Loye, iii. 262.

   Good John of Perugia, vi. 193.

   Gotard, friend of S. Rocke, v. 7.

   Gratian buys the Papacy, vii. 133.

   Gregory, S., his additions to the service of the mass, vii. 124.

   Gundoferus, king of India, his palace, ii. 141.

   Hades, Christ's descent into, i. 90.

   Hair shirts worn by S. Thomas of Canterbury, ii. 184-196.

   Head of S. Nicasius speaks after it was smitten off, ii. 137.

   Heat, miracle of, iii. 243.

   Heaven, distance of, from earth. i. 112.

   Hebrew maiden and S. Thomas, ii. 139.

   Henry and Cunegonde, virgins, vii. 130.

   --at Toulouse, iv. 174.

   Herman delivered by S. Elizabeth, vi. 229.

   Hermits visit S. Anthony, ii. 228.

   Hermogenes the Enchanter, iv, 99.

   Herod's malady a vengeance of God, ii. 181.

   Hingvar the Dane, vi. 243.

   Holy Land, English pilgrims in, vi. 27.

   Honeysuckles, iii. 259.

   Honorius, emperor, vi. 205.

   Hound obeys S. Martin, vi. 148.

   Hours of prayer, wherefore instituted, i. 155.

   Hubba the Dane, vi. 243.

   Humility a safeguard againat the devil, ii. 218.

   Ice in harvest time, vi. 113.

   Idols destroyed by S. Longinus, iii. 71.

   Image of Christ speaks to S. Francis, v. 216.

   Incense, why offered at the Nativity, i. 51.

   Incestuous mother confounded by S. Andrew, ii. 98.

   India, works of S. Thomas in, ii. 144.

   Inquisition searches out heretics, iii. 150.

   Iron made to swim, iii. 84.

   Island of sheep, vii. 51.

   Jangling of monks, iv. 253.

   Jasconye, a great fish, vii. 52.

   Jehosaphat, last judgment to in the valley of, i. 18.

   Jerusalem, its destruction prophesied by Ananias, iii. 162.

   --token of its destruction, iii. 161.

   Jesus, concerning the name of, i. 33.

   Jew beats the image of S Nicholas, ii. 119.

   --that smote the crucifix, v.130.

   Jewels restored at Paris, iii. 265.

   Jewish usurer justified by S. Nicholas, ii. 1l7.

   Jews pierce a crucifix, v. 131.

   Jonathas the thief and S. Simon, vii. 144.

   Joseph, a Jew, converted by S. Basil, ii. 267.

   --of Arimathea, miracle of, i. 96.

   --discovered by Titus, iii. 168.

   Josephus at the siege of Jerusalem, iii. 165.

   Jubal's pillars, i. 179.

   Judas Iscariot, the birth and parentage of, iii. 35.

   --punishment of, vii. 61.

   Julian the Apostate, iii. 13, iv. 7-8.

   --the harbourer, iii. 13.

   --who slew his parents through ignorance. iii. 11.

   Knight, the, who sold his wife to the devil, iv. 249.

   -- who had the devil for chamberlain, iii. 101.

   Kyrkil the Danish leader, iii. 122.

   Latin understood by s. clark though unlettered, vi. 178.

   Lechery in marriage punished, iii. 283.

   Leg miraculously restored, iv. 233.

   Leofric, Earl, vision of, vi. 19.

   Leper and S. Martin, vi. 148.

   --tended by S. Louis, vii. 209.

   Leprosy cured by the sudary of S. Landry, vii. 188.

   Lexington, Stephen, vi. 237.

   Light given by miracle, iii. 293.

   Lime for building miraculously discovered, iii. 291.

   Lion of S. Jerome, v. 203.

   Loaves multiplied by S. Clare, vi. 164.

   Loaves, three suffice S. Mary seventeen years, iii. 108.

   Locusts, roots so called, iii. 259.

   Lombards, origin of their name; vii. 109.

   Londoners claim the body of S Erkenwold, vii. 70.

   Lorraine pilgrims, iv. 104.

   Lupa, Queen of Spain, iv. 102.

   Lying punished with death, iii. 11.

   Mabel, mother of s. edmund, vi. 233.

   Macidiana, mother of S. Clement, vi. 255.

   Maggot becomes a precious stone. vii. 142.

   Mahomet, the history of, vii. 112.

   Malchus of Ephesus, iv. 122.

   Malmesbury Abbey, iii. 194.

   Man born to be king, germ of W. Morris' story of the, vii. 134.

   Manuscripts, cargo of, iii. 193.

   Mariners, superstition of, iv. 79.

   Marriage scorned by S. Agnes, ii. 246.

   --spiritual, of a priest with S. Agnes, ii. 251.

   Mary, the blessed Virgin, types and symbols of, ii. 124.

   --sinless from the womb, ii. 125.

   --how she forbade a clerk to marry, ii. 128.

   --abbot of Rome saved from shipwreck on condition that he hallowed the
   Conception of our Lady, ii. 127.

   Mass of S. Gregory, miracle of the, iii. 69.

   Mass, why sung in three languages, i. 150.

   Meal miraculously provided, iii. 90.

   Melancia and Eugenia, tale of, v. 122.

   Mellitus, bishop of London, vi. 17.

   Mice and serpents, a parable, vii. 93.

   Milk flows in place of blood, iv. 5, 97.

   Miller, the, and S. Remigius, v. 209.

   Monk of evil life devoted to our Lady, iv. 248.

   Monstrous births, vii. 135.

   Mortuary beast, vi. 238.

   Moses, apocryphal history of, i. 258.

   Mother denied by her son, vii. 72. Mother of God, statute of S. Leo,
   iv. 10.

   Music, invention of, i. 179.

   Nachor, the magician, vii. 99.

   Narses, history of, vii. 109.

   Natalie, wife of S. Adrian, v. 115.

   Nebuzar-adan, prince of the Cooks, i. 164.

   Nero, the story of, iv. 24.

   Nicholas recovered from lechery, by prayer of S. Andrew, ii. 97.

   Nightingale and archer, story of the, vii. 92.

   Nobleman's daughters rescued by S. Nicholas, ii. 110.

   Noddo, fearful end of, vii. 167.

   Octaves, meaning and use of, i. 29.

   Oil of Mercy, i. 180.

   Oil given in answer to prayer, iii. 92.

   Omer, S., vii. 202,

   Otto, the emperors of that name, vii. 128-9.

   Oxen of no avail against the strength of S. Lucv. ii. 135.

   Pafuntius, abbot, and S. Thais, v. 243.

   Pantheon at Rome, vi. 94.

   Paris, victualled by S. Genevieve, iii. 298.

   Paul the deacon's history of the Lombards, vii. 106.

   Pepin, king of France, vii. 119.

   Peter converts S. Marcial, iii. 275.

   --of less avail than S. Pancrace, iii. 184.

   Peter the toller, history of ii. 269.

   Petrius of Byconne, vi. 193.

   Pharon of Meaux, vii. 174.

   Philip the emperor denied communion by S. Fabian, ii. 231

   Pine tree of Auxerre, iii. 204.

   Placida gives a silver dish to S. Germain, iii. 209.

   Plautilla lends S. Paul her keverchief, iv. 33.

   Poisoned bread known by raven, iii. 85.

   Pontius Pilate, his parentage and history, i. 80.

   --wedded his own mother, iii. 57.

   Poverty, beloved of S. Francis, v. 219.

   Precious stone falls from heaven, v. 87.

   Precious stones, miracle of, ii. 166.

   Prelates, condemnation of negligent, i. 157.

   Prepuce of our Lord at Antwerp and Rome, i. 40.

   --miracles performed by it, i. 40.

   Priests more worthy than kings, vi. 149.

   Prisoners released by prayers of S. Eutrope, iii. 274.

   Provost, the, who embraced black pots and pans, ii. 149.

   Purgatory of S. Patrick, iii. 79.

   --seen by S. Forsey, v. 178.

   Ralph the cripple cured, vi. 34.

   Raven guards the body of S. Vincent, ii. 251.

   Reeds in the desert removed by the Devil, ii. 220.

   Response Et cum spiritu tuo,' how instituted, iii. 67.

   Reynold, friar, vision of, iv. 184.

   River dried up miraculously, iii. 246.

   Robatyoa, miraculous fount of, vi. 200.

   Romain the monk feeds S. Benet, iii. 81.

   Rosamond, story of, vii. 108.

   Roses in the tombs of saints, iv. 167.

   Sacrament of the altar sent from heaven, iii. 104.

   Sacraros or Goat-man, ii. 206.

   Saracens at Assisi, vi 167.

   --quelled by S Clare, vi. 167.

   Satan and his emissaries, v. 133

   Scholastica, S., and S. Benet; iii. 92.

   Scrofula cured by S. Clare, vi. 195.

   Sea-sickness averted by S. Erasmus, vii. 267.

   Second advent of Christ, signs of, i. 12.

   Sens, the bells of, refuse to ring, v. 87.

   Sergius the monk, vii. 114.

   Serpent exorcised by S. Leonard, vi. 139.

   --in a stolen flagon of wine iii. 88.

   --three cubits long swallowed by a woman, vii. 143.

   Serpents expelled from Ireland by S. Patrick, iii. 80.

   Seth brought the oil of mercy from paradise, i. 180.

   Seven sleepers, vision of the, vi. 25.

   Shaftesbury, S. Edward at, iii. 235.

   Sheep stolen by a man bleated in his belly, by command of S. Patrick,
   iii. 78.

   Shepherds turn bread into flesh, vii. 239.

   Shrift, too frequent, v. 218.

   Silence commended among hermits, ii. 228.

   Silver platter laid in the desert by the Devil, ii. 226.

   Simon Magus, vi. 261.

   --his strife with S Peter, iv. 15.

   Sinai, hermits of, vii. 25.

   Sneezing plague, the origin of God save you,' i. 102.

   Spinning on a feast day, iv. 197.

   Star of the Epiphany, i. 48.

   Stigand, archbishop, Simony of, vi. 30.

   Stigmata of S. Francis, v. 223.

   Stratford le Bow, vii. 70.

   Strood, no tailed children at, iii. 201.

   Sunbeam, miracle of the, iii. 192; vii. 202.

   Sunday, desecration of, condemned, i. 284.

   --desecration of, punished, iii. 10.

   Sweet savour of S. Firmin's body, ii. 217.

   Swine recovered by S. Blase, iii. 28.

   Sybil prophesied of Christ, i. 27.

   Tailed children in Dorsetshire, iii. 201.

   Talkative nuns, miracle of, iii. 90.

   Theodebert's gift to S. Maur iii. 75.

   Theodolina, queen of the Lombards, vii. 111.

   Theodosius, the emperor, v. 141.

   Thief miraculously detected, iv. 59.

   --and S. Edward the Confessor, iv. 9.

   Thomas doubts the Assumption, iv. 241.

   Thought reading by S. Benet, iii. 88.

   Tithes, result of refusing, iii. 199.

   Tomb of S. Andrew, miracle of manna, ii. 105.

   --of S. Nicholas, a fountain of oil, ii. 117.

   Tonsure instituted by S. Peter, iii. 52.

   Toulouse, heresy at, iv. 174.

   Trajan spared eternal punishment, iii. 68.

   --punishment of S. Gregory therefor, iii. 68.

   Trance of S. Clare, vi. 175.

   Trinity betokened by three windows, vi. 201.

   --illustrated by three drops of water, vii. 107.

   --S. Austin's parable of the, v. 66.

   Trodden fields fruitful, iii. 196.

   Trygvier, vii. 193.

   Tuesday sacred to S. Thomas of Canterbury, iv. 56.

   Valentine despole, vi. 191.

   Valentinian rebuked by S. Ambrose, iii. 119.

   Veltis the fiend, iv, 69.

   Vengeance on sinners, instances of. The Provost and S. Andrew, ii. 109.

   Veronica, story of, i. 83.

   Versailles, miracle of tapers at, iii. 210.

   Vespasian's belief rewarded. iii. 163.

   Vienna earthquakes, origin of the lesser litany, i. 103.

   Viguy, J.de, translator of the Goden Legend, iv. 199.

   Vine cuttings form S. Clare's bed, vi. 165.

   Vines first planted, i. 186.

   Virginity preserved in wedlock, vi. 206.

   Virago, woman so called, i. 172.

   Vision of our Lady, iii. 2.

   Vital the monk and S. John the Almoner, ii. 272.

   Walking on water, iii. 85.

   Wall pierced by a ray of the sun, ii. 216.

   Wareham, Dorset, iii. 234.

   Water found by a miracle, iii. 84, 292.

   --walked on by S. Gavien, v. 83.

   Water-hanging, town of, v. 3.

   Westminster Abbey consecrated by S. Peter, vi. 16.

   --repaired, vi. 14, 18.

   Wheat inexhaustible by prayers of S. Nicholas, ii. 113.

   Wild bulls tamed, iv. 103.

   Winchcomb, S. Kenelm's burying at, iv. 66.

   Winchester, miracle of S. Austin, iii. 202.

   Windows, three, betoken the Trinity, vi. 201.

   Wolf obedient to S. Vedaste, iii. 43.

   Woman disguised as a monk, iii. 226.

   --in a monk's habit falsely accused of lechery, ii. 152.

   --falsely accused as a monk, v. 240.

   Woman's clothing given to S. Jerome, v. 2O1.

   Women avoided by S. Arsenius, vii. 80-1.

   Wulstan's disposition and restoration, vi. 36.

   Xaintes, martydom of Eutropius at, iii. 274.

   Zaroen, magician, iii. 271.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                      NOTE

   The pictorial frontispieces, and the thorncrown border in which they
   are set, are from drawings by Emily S. Ford.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                   CORRECTION

   I am anxious to correct an error which occurs on p. viii. of the
   Introduction' to this book. I should have said that whatever
   discoveries have been made as to the printer of the Legende dorée are
   due to the researches of Mons. A. Claudin, the historian of early
   printing in France. But I am now informed that his later investigations
   have caused him to mistrust his earlier conclusions, and that up to the
   present time both the typographer of the book and the place of printing
   remain undetermined.

   The Editor
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
