     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Golden Legend, vol. 1
      Creator(s): Voragine, Jacobus de (1230-1298)
     Print Basis: T. & A. Constable, Ltd. 1900
          Rights: Copyright claimed by Paul Halsall, Sept. 2000; commercial use
                  prohibited
   CCEL Subjects: All;
      LC Call no: BX4654.J334 V.1
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Roman Catholic Church

                  Biography and portraits

                  Collective

                  Saints and martyrs
     __________________________________________________________________

The GOLDEN LEGEND or LIVES of the SAINTS

Compiled by Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, 1275

First Edition Published 1470

ENGLISHED by WILLIAM CAXTON, First Edition 1483

VOLUME ONE

From the Temple Classics Edited by F.S. ELLIS

First issue of this Edition, 1900

Reprinted 1922, 1931
     __________________________________________________________________

PROLOGUE

   Among the books which afford us an insight into he popular religious
   thought of the middle ages, none holds a more important place than the
   Legenda Aurea or Golden Legend. The book was compiled and put into form
   about the year 1275 by Jacobus de Voragine, Archbishop of Genoa, who
   laid under contribution for his purpose the Lives of the Fathers by S.
   Jerome, the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, and other books of a
   like kind; while for the lives of the saints more nearly approaching
   his own age he appears to have industriously collected such legends as
   he could meet with, whether in manuscript or handed down by oral
   tradition. All persons living in later times have been deeply indebted
   to the man who thus embodied for their benefit and instruction a
   picture of the mental attitude of the age in which he lived. If the
   study of it be not absolutely essential, it may safely be averred that
   it will be most helpful and profitable, to all those who care to
   realise to themselves the faith of their forefathers, and in no small
   degree will it enable them more fully to understand the inspiration of
   the men whose faith found its expression in the glories and mysteries
   of Gothic ecclesiastical architecture. To those who can pace the aisles
   of a great cathedral or priory or abbey church, or even tread the
   humbler stones of an ancient parish church, without being touched with
   a sense of reverent wonder, the pages of The Golden Legend will appeal
   in vain. Its perusal will strike no responsive chord in their hearts.
   But to those who, whatever may be their creed, never set foot in those
   stone-written records of the past without a feeling of awe and
   veneration, mingled with an earnest longing to understand something of
   the spirit which breathes forth from them, and a desire to know what it
   was that so wrought in the minds of their makers as to produce the
   Music Gallery at Exeter, the South Porch at Lincoln, the Galilee at
   Durham, the stained glass at York, the East Window at Wells, and a
   thousand other marvels, to say nothing of the greater glories that
   await us in the magnificent churches of France, which even after
   centuries of destruction, neglect, and ill-usage still impress us with
   wonder and admiration,--the histories of The Golden Legend will be a
   new revelation of inestimable value. The corbels of roof and cloister
   vaulting which look down on us with quaint and tender beauty, and the
   strange and sometimes monstrous or demoniacal gargoyles of the
   exteriors, will have a newer and fuller meaning if we allow ourselves
   thoroughly to enter into the spirit of the book before us.

   We shall seem to hear the majestic roll of the solemn chants of Advent
   and the rejoicings of Christmas, the penitential pleadings of the
   Lenten season and the triumphal songs of Easter, as we read the
   eloquent passages devoted to those sacred seasons, even though the
   style be such as modern ears are little accustomed to, and therefore
   may sometimes appear, especially on a first reading, as more or less
   rugged and obscure.

   Lovers of the picturesque can scarcely fail to be charmed with such
   wonderful tales as those of the childhood of Moses and the history of
   Pontius Pilate, which the author frankly sets down as apocriphum';
   while the folk-lorist will find a rich field to interest him in a
   territory hitherto but little explored.

   In such histories as that of S. Brandon we dwell for a while in a
   veritable wonderland. The lives of S. Jerome, S. Macarius, S. Anthony,
   and S. Mary of Egypt, and other saints of the desert, read like the
   echoes of another world, so far removed are they from modern habits of
   thought, faith, and practice; while those of S. Francis, S. Dominic,
   and S. Thomas of Canterbury bring before our eyes the life of the
   middle ages hardly less vividly than the tales of the Gesta Romanorum
   or the everliving creations of Geoffrey Chaucer. Verily there is a
   plentiful harvest for those who care to reap. Having read every page
   very carefully six times, with unabated interest, in the course of
   editing two editions, I can testify to the attraction the book has for
   one who loves the wondrous records of old days.

   Though it does not appear to have been among the earliest of printed
   books, the Legenda Aturea was no sooner in type than edition after
   edition appeared with surprising rapidity. Probably no other book was
   more frequently reprinted between the years 1470 and 1530 than the
   compilation of Jacobus de Voragine. And while almost innumerable
   editions appeared in Latin, it was also translated into the vulgar
   tongue of most of the nations of Europe, usually with alterations and
   additions in accordance with the hagiological preferences of the
   different nationalities. It is with an early French translation that we
   are chiefly concerned, of which Caxton's version is a close rendering.
   The French book in question is a large folio volume of four hundred and
   forty-three leaves, printed in double columns, with forty-four lines to
   the page. Two copies of it only are known in this country, one in the
   British Museum, and the other in Cambridge University Library. There
   may of course be copies lurking in foreign libraries, but I have not
   been able to hear of any. It is without any indication of place of
   printing, date, or printer, and until quite lately these particulars
   had baffled the researches and conjectures of bibliographers; but
   latterly Mr. R. Proctor of the British Museum has succeeded in
   identifying the type as proceeding from the press of Peter Keyser, a
   rival of Anthony Vernard at Paris. It contains the lives of many French
   saints who are not included in the work of Voragine, notably those of
   S. Genevieve and S. Louis.

   Convincing proof that this is the book referred to by Caxton in his
   preface as a legende in frensshe,' is afforded by the fact that where
   the printer has left gross misprints uncorrected in his text, the
   translator has blindly followed him without any attempt to make sense
   of them. The most curious instance of this occurs in the explanation of
   the supposed etymology of the name of S. Stephen. The French printer
   has turned the Old French which should have read fames venues,' (femmes
   veuves) into seine venues,' which Caxton attempts to translate by hole
   comen' (whole come), regardless of the fact that it has no meaning
   whatever. It has rarely been attempted to clear the present text of
   obscurities by any alteration, on principle; but in this instance, for
   the meaningless words hole comen,' those of widow women' have been
   substituted in accordance with the Latin, which Caxton seems never to
   have troubled himself to refer to. Again, in the life of S. Genevieve
   the French version has the typographical error of a name' for a
   navire,' which the translator simply renders at name,' and this in
   later editions becomes at none' without making any better sense. This
   has been altered to by ship' as being the obvious meaning. The text has
   been amended in one or two other instances where a slight alteration
   made a passage intelligible; but, as I have said, there has been no
   attempt to clear obscurities generally or to interfere with the
   translator's language.

   The observant reader can scarcely fail to note the difference between
   the style of the Bible histories, which I take it come from the Legend
   in English,' which Caxton mentions in his preface, and that of the
   translator's work, greatly to the advantage of the former. The summary
   is in truth done with a master's hand. The life of S. Thomas of
   Canterbury is again a specimen of vigorous English clearly written, and
   is probably also taken from the Legend in English.'

   Though Caxton speaks of himself as the translator, and we have personal
   glimpses of him in the anecdotes he relates in The Circumcision of our
   Lord,' The History of David,' and The Life of S. Austin,' it is hardly
   to be supposed that he could have been at the labour of translating the
   whole book. He appears indeed to have employed some one whose knowledge
   of French must have been considerably less than that we are willing to
   credit him with, considering his long residence in French Flanders.
   Colour is also given to the suggestion that he availed himself of
   extraneous help in the work of translation by his special assertion at
   the end of the life of S. Roch: which lyfe is trans-lated oute of latyn
   into Englysshe by me, William Caxton.'

   It may be remarked as a curious bibliographical and historical
   coincidence, that while Wynken de Worde was engaged in printing the
   last of the Old English editions of The Golden Legend in London,
   William Tyndale was busily occupied at Cologne trying to get into type
   the first of the unnumbered editions of the English New Testament. The
   old order giveth place to the new.
     __________________________________________________________________

                               THE GOLDEN LEGEND

   The holy and blessed Doctor S. Jerome saith this authority: Do alway
   some good work, to the end that the devil find thee not idle. And the
   holy Doctor S. Austin saith in the book of the labour of monks that, no
   man strong or mighty to labour ought to be idle. For which cause, when
   I had performed and accomplished divers works and histories translated
   out of French into English at the request of certain lords, ladies, and
   gentlemen, as the story of the Recuyel of Troy, the Book of the Chess,
   the History of Jason, the History of the Mirror of the World, the
   fifteen books of the Metamorphoses, in which be contained the Fables of
   Ovid, and the History of Godfrey of Boulogne in the Conquest of
   Jerusalem, with other divers works and books, I ne nyste what work to
   begin and put forth after the said works tofore made; and forasmuch as
   idleness is so much blamed, as saith S. Bernard the mellifluous Doctor,
   that, she is mother of lies and stepdame of virtues, and that it is she
   that overthroweth strong men into sin, quencheth virtue, nourisheth
   pride, and maketh the way ready to go to hell. And John Cassiodorus
   saith that the thought of him that is idle, thinketh on none other
   thing but on lickerous meats and viands for his belly. And the holy S.
   Bernard, aforesaid, saith in an epistle: When the time shall come that
   it shall behove us to render and give account of our idle time, what
   reason may we render, or what answer shall we give when in idlenesse is
   none excuse? And Prosper saith that, whosoever liveth in idleness,
   liveth in manner of a dumb beast. And because I have seen the
   authorities that blame and despise so much idleness, and also know well
   that it is one of the capital and deadly sins, much hateful unto God,
   therefore I have concluded and firmly purposed in myself no more to be
   idle, but will apply myself to labour and such occupation as I have
   been accustomed to do. And forasmuch as S. Austin, aforesaid, saith
   upon a psalm that, good work ought not to be done for fear of pain, but
   for the love of righteousness, and that it be of very and sovereign
   franchise, and because me seemeth to be a sovereign weal to incite and
   exhort men and women to keep them from sloth and idleness, and to let
   to be understood to such people as be not lettered, the nativities, the
   lives, the passions, the miracles, and the death of the holy saints,
   and also some other notory deeds and acts of times past, I have
   submised myself to translate into English the legend of saints which is
   called Legenda Aurea in Latin, that is to say the Golden Legend. For in
   like wise as gold is most noble above all other metals, in like wise is
   this Legend holden most noble above all other works. Against me, here
   might some persons say that, this legend hath been translated tofore,
   and truth it is. But forasmuch as I had by me a legend in French,
   another in Latin, and the third in English, which varied in many and
   divers places, and also many histories were comprised in the other two
   books which were not in the English hook, and therefore I have written
   one out of the said three books, which I have ordered otherwise than
   the said English Iegend is, which was before made, beseeching all them
   that shall see or hear it read, to pardon me where I have erred or made
   fault, which, if any be, is of ignorance and against my will, and
   submit it wholly of such as can and may, to correct it, humbly
   beseeching them so to do, and in so doing they shall deserve a singular
   laud and merit, and I shall pray for them unto Almighty God, that he of
   his benign grace reward them, etc., and that it profit to all them that
   shall read or hear it read, and may increase in them virtue, and expel
   vice and sin, that by the example of the holy saints they amend their
   living here in this short life, that by their merits they and I may
   come to everlasting life and bliss in heaven. Amen.

   And forasmuch as this said work was great and over chargeable to me to
   accomplish, I feared me in the beginning of the translation to have
   continued it because of the long time of the translation, and also in
   the imprinting of the same, and in manner half desperate to have
   accomplished it, was in purpose to have left it after that I had begun
   to translate it, and to have laid it apart, ne had it been at the
   instance and request of the puissant, noble, and virtuous Earl, my lord
   William, Earl of Arundel, which desired me to proceed and continue the
   said work, and promised me to take a reasonable quantity of them when
   they were achieved and accomplished, and sent to me a worshipful
   gentleman, a servant of his, named John Stanney which solicited me, in
   my lord's name, that I should in no wise leave it, but accomplish it,
   promising that my said lord should during my life give and grant to me
   a yearly fee, that is to wit, a buck in summer and a doe in winter,
   with which fee I hold me well content. Then at contemplation and
   reverence of my said lord I have endeavoured me to make an end and
   finish this said translation, and also have imprinted it in the most
   best wise that I could or might, and present this said book to his good
   and noble lordship, as chief causer of the achieving of it, praying him
   to take it in gree of me William Caxton, his poor servant, and that it
   like him to remember my fee. And I shall pray unto Almighty God for his
   long life and welfare, and after this short and transitory life to come
   into everlasting joy in heaven; the which he send to him and me and
   unto all them that shall read and hear this said book, that for the
   love and faith of whom all these holy saints have suffered death and
   passion. Amen.

   And to the end each history, life and passion may be shortly found, I
   have ordered this table following, where and in what leaf he shall find
   such as shall be desired, and have set the number of every leaf in the
   margin:
     __________________________________________________________________

OF THE ADVENT OF OUR LORD

   The time of the Advent or coming of our Lord into this world is
   hallowed in Holy Church the time of four weeks, in betokening of four
   divers comings. The first was when he came and appeared in human nature
   and flesh. The second is in the heart and conscience. The third is at
   death. The fourth is at the Last Judgment. The last week may unnethe be
   accomplished: for the glory of the saints which shall be given at the
   last coming shall never end nor finish. And to this signifiance the
   first response of the first week of Advent hath four verses to reckon.
   Gloria patri et filio, for one, to the report of the four weeks, and
   how it be that there be four comings of our Lord, yet the Church maketh
   mention in especial but of twain, that is to wit, of that he came in
   human nature to the world, and of that he cometh to the Judgment and
   Doom, as it appeareth in the office of the Church of this time. And
   therefore the fastings that be in this time, be of gladness and of joy
   in one part, and that other part is in bitterness of heart. Because of
   the coming of our Lord in our nature human, they be of joy and
   gladness. And because of the coming at the Day of Judgment, they be of
   bitterness and heaviness.

   As touching the coming of our Lord in our bodily flesh, we may consider
   three things of this coming, that is to wit, the opportunity, the
   necessity and the utility. The opportunity of coming is taken by the
   reason of the man that first was vanquished in the law of nature of the
   default of the knowledge of God, by which he fell into evil errors, and
   therefore he was constrained to cry to God: Illumina oculos meos, that
   is to say, Lord, give light to mine eyes. After, came the law of God,
   which hath given commandment in which he hath been overcome of
   impuissance, as first he hath cried: There is none that fulfilleth but
   that commandeth. For there he is only taught, but not delivered from
   sin, ne holpen by grace, and therefore he was constrained to cry: There
   lacketh none to command, but there is none that accomplished the
   commandment. Then came the Son of God in time when man was vanquished
   of ignorance and impuissance. To that if he had so come tofore,
   peradventure man might say that by his own merits he might have been
   saved, and thus he had not been bound to yield thanks to God. The
   second thing that is shown us of this coming is the necessity by reason
   of the time, of which the apostle Paul speaketh, ad Galatas the fourth
   chapter: At ubi venit plenitudo temporis, when the plentitude or full
   time of the grace of God was ordained, then he sent his Son that was
   God and Son of the virgin and wife which was made subject to the law.
   To that, that they be subject to the law he bought them again, and were
   received sons of God by grace of adoption. Now saith S. Austin that
   many demand why he came not rather. He answered that it was because
   that the plentitude of time was not come, which should come by him,
   that all things were ordained and made, and after when this plentitude
   of time came, he came that of time past hath delivered us, to that we
   shall bedelivered of time, we shall come to him whereas no time
   passeth, but is perpetuity. The third thing that is showed to us of
   this coming is the utility and profit that cometh for the cause of the
   hurt and sickness general. For sith the malady was general, the
   medicine must be general, whereof saith S. Austin that: Then came the
   great medicine, when the great malady was through all the world.
   Whereof the holy Church remembereth in the seven anthems that be sung
   before the nativity of our Lord, where the malady is showed in divers
   manners, and for each demandeth remedy of his malady of prisoner out of
   the prison that sitteth in darkness and shadow of death. For they that
   have been long in prison and dark places may not see clearly, but have
   their eyes dim. Therefore, after we be delivered from prison, it
   behoveth that our eyes be made clear and our sight illumined for to see
   whither we should go, and therefore we cry in the fifth anthem: O
   Oriens splendor lucis eterne, veni et illumina sedentes in tenebris et
   umbra mortis, O Orient that art the resplendour of the eternal light,
   come and illumine them that sit in darkness and shadow of death, and if
   we were taught, lighted, unbound, and bought, what should it avail to
   us but if we should be saved? And, therefore, we require to be saved,
   and therefore we say in the two last anthems, the sixth and the
   seventh; when we cry: O Rex gentium, veni et salva hominem quem de limo
   formasti, O thou King of peoples come and save the man that thou hast
   formed of the slime of the earth; and in the seventh: O Emmanuel rex et
   legifer noster veni ad saluandum nos, domine deus noster, O Emmanuel
   that art our King, and bearer of our law, our Lord, our God, come and
   save us. The profit of his coming is assigned of many saints in many
   manners, for Luke saith in the fourth chapter that our Lord was sent
   and came to us for seven profits, where he saith: The Spirit of our
   Lord is on me, which he rehearseth by order; he was sent for the
   comfort of the poor, to heal them that were sick in sin, to deliver
   them that were in prison, to teach them that were uncunning. To forgive
   sins, to buy again all mankind. And for to give reward to them that
   deserve it. And S. Austin putteth here three profits of his coming and
   saith: In this wretched world what aboundeth but to be born to labour
   and to die. These be the merchandise of our region, and to these
   merchandises the noble merchant Jesus descended. And because all
   merchants give and take, they give that they have and take that they
   have not; Jesu Christ in this merchandise gave and took, he took that
   which in this world aboundeth, that is to wit, to be born to labour and
   to die, he gave again to us to be born spiritually, to rise and reign
   perdurably. And he himself came to us to take villanies and to give to
   us honour, to suffer death and to give us life, to take poverty and to
   give us glory. S. Gregory putteth four causes of the profit of his
   coming: Studebant omnes superbi de eadem stirpe progeniti, prospera
   vitæ præsentis appetere, adversa devitare, opprobria fugere, gloriam
   sequi: They of the world, in their pride descended of the same lineage,
   studied to desire the prosperity of this present life, to eschew the
   adversities, to flee the reproofs and shames and to ensue the glory of
   the world. And our Lord came incarnate among them, asking and seeking
   the adversities, despiting the prosperities, embracing villanies,
   fleeing all vain glory. And he himself which descended from glory,
   came, and he being come, taught new things, and in showing marvels
   suffered many evils. S. Bernard putteth other causes, and saith that,
   we travail in this world for three manner of maladies or sickness, for
   we be lightly deceived, feeble to do well, and frail to resist against
   evil. If we entend to do well we fail, it we do pain to resist the
   evil, we be surmounted and overcome; and for this the coming of Jesu
   Christ was to us necessary. To that he inhabiteth in us, by faith he
   illumineth our eyes of the heart, and in abiding with us he helpeth us
   in our malady, and in being with us he defendeth our frailty against
   our enemies.

   Of the second coming which shall be at the last Judgment two things be
   to be seen, that is to wit, that which cometh before the Judgment, and
   that which shall be at the Judgment. As for the first, three things
   shall be tofore the Judgment. First, the terrible confusion of signs
   and tokens. Secondly, the malice and deceit of Antichrist, and the
   third, of vehement and marvellous operation of the fire. As touching
   the signs, S. Luke saith in the twenty-fifth chapter: Erunt signa in
   sole, luna et stellis, etc. There shall be great signs in the sun, in
   the moon, and in the stars, and in the earth oppression of people
   anguishous for the confusion of the sound of the sea and of the waves.
   The three first signs be determined in the Book of the Apocalypse in
   the sixth chapter. Sol factus est niger tanquam saccus cilicinus: et
   luna facta est sicut sanguis, et stellæ ceciderunt super terraim. Then
   shall be the time that the sun shall be black as a sack, gross and
   rude, and the moon shall be as blood, and the stars shall fall on the
   earth. The sun is said dark, forasmuch as he is deprived of his light,
   as though he wept for the dying of men. For S. Austin saith that, the
   vengeance of God shall be so cruel at the day of doom, that the sun
   shall not dare behold it. Or as for to speak of the proper
   signification spiritually to be understood, is that, the Son of
   Justice, Jesu Christ, shall be then so dark that no man shall dare know
   him. The heaven is here taken for the air, and the star judge in great
   fear. The sixth sign, the edifices and buildings shall fall down: and
   in this sixth day thunders and tempests full of fire shall grow in the
   west, where the sun goeth down against the firmament, in running to the
   east. The seventh sign, the stones shall smite and hurtle together and
   shall cleave in four parts, and each part shall smite other, ne none.
   The eighth sign shall be the moving and general trembling of the earth,
   which shall be so. The ninth sign, all the earth shall be even and
   plain, and all the mountains and valleys shall be brought into powder
   and be all like. The tenth day, the men shall issue out of the caves
   and shall go by the ways and fields as men aliened and out of their
   wit, and shall not con speak one to another. The eleventh day the bones
   of dead men shall issue out of their burials and places and shall hold
   them upon their sepulchres, and from the sun rising unto it go down,
   the sepulchres shall be open, to the end that the dead bodies may all
   issue. The twelfth sign all the stars shall fall from the heaven and
   shall spread out rays of fire, and then great quantity shall grow. In
   this twelfth day it is said that all the beasts shall come to the field
   howling, and shall not eat ne drink. The thirteenth sign, all living
   shall die, to the end that they should arise with the dead bodies. The
   fourteenth day the heaven and the earth shall burn. The fifteenth day
   shall be a new heaven and a new earth, and all things and all dead men
   shall arise.

   The second thing that shall be afore judgment, shall be the folly and
   malice of Antichrist; he shall pain him to deceive all men by four
   manners. The first manner shall be by suasion and false exposition of
   Scripture. Forasmuch as he may, he shall give them to understand
   Christ, and he shall destroy the law of Jesu Christ, and shall ordain
   his law in alleging David the Prophet that saith: Constitue domine
   legislatorem super eos. Thus shall he say, that it was said for him as
   he that was ordained of God for to set law upon his place, after this
   that is said in the scripture of Daniel, Daniel xi.: Dabunt
   abominationem et desolationem templi, etc. Antichrist and his complices
   shall give abomination and desolation to the temple of God in this
   time, as saith the gloss: Antichrist shall be in the temple of God, as
   God, for that he shall destroy the law of God. The second manner shall
   be by marvellous operation of miracles, whereof saith the apostle S.
   Paul in his second Epistle ad Thessalonicenses in the second chapter,
   where he saith: Cujus adventus erit secundum operationem Sathanae in
   omnibus verbis et prodigiis mendacibus. Of Antichrist it is said that,
   the coming shall be after the operation of Satan in all his signs, in
   all his marvels, and false Iying deeds, whereof S. John maketh mention
   in the Apocalypse, the thirteenth chapter: Fecit signa ut etiam ignem
   facerit de celo in terram descendere. Antichrist shall make such signs,
   that is to say, he shall make such tokens that he shall make the fire
   descend from heaven. The gloss saith that, like as the Holy Ghost
   descended in likeness of fire, in likewise shall Antichrist give the
   evil spirit in likeness of fire. The third manner that he shall do for
   to deceive, shall be in giving of gifts, of which is written in the
   book of Daniel the Prophet in his eleventh chapter: Dabit eis
   potestatem in multis et terram divides gratuito: Antichrist shall give
   puissance to his servants in many things, and shall depart the earth to
   them after his will. The gloss saith that, Antichrist shall give many
   gifts to them that he shall deceive. And to his disciples he shall
   divide the earth, and them that and make them thereby to obey him. The
   fourth manner for to deceive them shall be by torments that he shall
   give to them, whereof Daniel saith in his eighth chapter: Supra quod
   credi potest universe vastabit; no man shall believe how he shall
   destroy and torment them that will not believe in him, for to draw them
   to him by force. And S. Gregory saith of him: Robustos quippe
   interficiet, et cetera; he shall slay the great and strong men; when he
   may not win nor overcome them by heart ne will, he shall overcome them
   by torment. The third thing that shall go before the judgment shall be
   the right vehement fire, the which shall go tofore the face of the
   judge. And God shall send this fire for four causes. First for the
   renewing of the world, for he shall purge and renew the elements. And,
   like to the form of the deluge it shall be forty cubits higher than all
   the mountains, like as it is written in the history scholastic; for the
   works of the people may mount so high. Secondly for the purgation of
   the people; for then that fire shall be instead of the fire of
   purgatory to them that then shall be on live. Thirdly for to give more
   greater torment to them that be damned. Fourthly for to give more
   clearness and light unto the saints. For after the saying of S. Basil:
   Our Lord God when shall make the purgation of the w others should see
   them. And it ought not to be believed that within that little valley
   all might be enclosed, after that which S. Jerome saith, but many shall
   be there, and the others there about. Nevertheless, in a little space
   of land may be men without number by divine puissance and ordinance,
   and, if it be of necessity, the chosen people shall be in the air for
   the agility and lightness of their bodies, and also in soul. And then
   the judge shall dispute and reprove the wicked men of the works of
   mercy which he ordained to us. And they shall not mow reply, but shall
   then weep upon themselves and upon their deeds; like as S. John
   Chrysostom saith upon the gospel of S. Matthew, in saying that, the
   Jews shall weep their life when they shall see their judge and him that
   giveth life to all men, whom they esteemed and trowed a dead man, and
   shall blame themselves for his body hurt and wounded by them. And they
   may not deny their cruelty but shall weep in great distress. The
   paynims, which by the vain disputations of the philosophers were
   deceived and supposed it to have been folly to worship God crucified.
   The Christian men, sinners, shall weep that have more loved the world
   than God. The heretics shall weep because they holden false opinions
   against the Faith of Jesu Christ whom then they shall see the sovereign
   judge, whom the Jews crucified. And so shall all the lineages of the
   world weep, for they shall have no force ne power ne strength against
   him, nor they may not flee before his face, nor they shall have no time
   of space to do penance for their sins nor to make satisfaction of the
   great anguish that they shall have of all things: there shall nothing
   abide to them but weeping. The second thing that shall follow at the
   judgment is the difference of the orders. For thus, as S. Gregory
   saith: at the day of judgment shall be four things, two on the party
   reproved, and two on the party chosen. The first shall be damned and
   perished, to whom he shall say, Esurivi et non dedistis mihi manducare;
   I had hunger and ye have given to me no meat. The other shall not be
   judged and perish, of whom it is written, Qui non credit jam judicatus
   est; he that believeth not is now judged. For they shall not perceive
   the words of the judge, which would not keep the words of God. The
   other of the party of the good shall be judged and shall reign, as they
   to whom shall be said: I have had hunger and ye have given me meat. The
   other shall not be judged and yet shall reign. That is to wit, the
   perfect men that shall judge others; not that they shall give the
   sentence of the judgment; for the sovereign judge shall only give the
   sentence, but they be said judges, because they be present approving
   the judgment. And this assistance shall be first to the honour of
   saints. For it shall be great honour to them to have their seats and
   sit with the judge, like as Jesu Christ promised to them, that they
   should be sitting upon twelve seats judging the twelve lineages of
   Israel. Secondly, to the confirmation of the sentence; for they shall
   approve the sentence given of the judge, as do the assistants in
   judgment which approve the sentence of the judge that is good and just.
   And with their hands they set-to their names in witness; like as David
   saith: Ut faciant in eis judicium conscriptum, etc. To the end that
   they make upon the damned, judgment written with the judge. Thirdly,
   that shall be to condemnation of the evil people whom they shall
   condemn by the works of their good life.

   The third thing that followeth the Judgment, that shall be the signs
   and tokens of the passion of Jesu Christ. That is to wit, the cross,
   the nails and the wounds. The which signs shall be first for to shew
   his glorious victory. And by that they shall appear in the excellence
   of his glory, whereof saith S. John Chrysostom that, the cross and the
   wounds shall be more shining than any rays of the sun; now then, saith
   he, consider ye what the virtue is of the cross The sun then shall be
   dark and the moon shall give no light, hereby then may ye understand
   how much the cross is more shining than the moon and more clear than
   the sun. Secondly, for to shew his mercy, by which he shall save the
   good. Thirdly, for to shew his justice, how justly he hath damned them
   that be evil, because they have despised so noble price as his blood,
   and set not thereby. And therefore as saith S. John Chrysostom: he
   shall say to them hard words by manner of reproof: For your sake I made
   myself a man, f what good then we should have done. And he shall say to
   the judge: Right true judge deme and judge this sinner to be mine for
   his trespass, which would be shine by grace. He is thine by nature, he
   is mine by his misery, he is thine by the passion, he is mine by
   monition. To thee he hath been inobedient, to me he hath been obedient.
   He hath received of thee the vesture of immortality; of me he hath
   taken this penible coat with which he is clad. He hath left thy vesture
   and is come to mine. Right just deemer, judge him to be mine for to be
   damned with me. to God, but from God may no man appeal, for he hath
   none above him. Secondly, for the crime. For all trespass and sins
   shall be there openly showed, whereof saith S. Jerome that: In this day
   all our deeds shall be showed, like as they were written in a table and
   noted. Thirdly, for the thing which may not suffer dilation. For all
   things that shall be done at the judgment shall be done in the
   twinkling of an eye. Then let us pray that we may in this holy time so
   receive him, that at the day of judgment we may be received into his
   everlasting bliss. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ.

   When the world had endured five thousand and nine hundred years, after
   Eusebius the holy saint, Octavian the Emperor commanded that all the
   world should be described, so that he might know how many cities, how
   many towns, and how many persons he had in all the universal world.
   Then was so great peace in the earth that all the world was obedient to
   him. And therefore our Lord would be born in that time, that it should
   be known that he brought peace from heaven. And this Emperor commanded
   that every man should go into the towns, cities or villages from whence
   they were of, and should bring with him a penny in acknowledgment that
   he was subject to the Empire of Rome. And by so many pence as should be
   found received, should be known the number of the persons. Joseph which
   then was of the lineage of David, and dwelled in Nazareth, went into
   the city of Bethlehem, and led with him the Virgin Mary his wife. And
   when they were come thither, because the hostelries were all taken up,
   they were constrained to be without in a common place where all people
   went. And there was a stable for an ass that he brought with him, and
   for an ox. In that night our Blessed Lady and Mother of God was
   delivered of our Blessed Saviour upon the hay that lay in the rack. At
   which nativity our Lord shewed many marvels. For because that the world
   was in so great peace, the Romans had done made a temple which was
   named the Temple of Peace, in which they counselled with Apollo to know
   how long it should stand and endure. Apollo answered to them that, it
   should stand as long till a maid had brought forth and borne a child.
   And therefore they did do write on the portal of the Temple: Lo! this
   is the temple of peace that ever shall endure. For they supposed well
   that a maid might never bear nor bring forth a child. This temple that
   same time that our Lady was delivered and our Lord born, overthrew and
   fell all down. Of which christian men afterward made in the same place
   a church of our Lady which is called Sancta Maria Rotunda, that is to
   say, the Church of Saint Mary the Round. Also the same night, as
   recordeth Innocent the third, which was Pope, there sprang and sourded
   in Rome a well or a fountain, and ran largely all that night and all
   that day unto the river of Rome called Tiber. Also after that,
   recordeth S. John Chrysostom, the three kings were in this night in
   their orisons and prayers upon a mountain, when a star appeared by them
   which had the form of a right fair child, which had a cross in his
   forehead, which said to these three kings that they should go to
   Jerusalem, and there they should find the son of the Virgin, God and
   Man, which then was born. Also there appeared in the orient three suns,
   which little and little assembled together, and were all on one. As it
   is signified to us that these three things are the Godhead, the soul,
   and the body, which been in three. natures assembled in one person.
   Also Octavlan the Emperor, like as Innocent recordeth, that he was much
   desired of his council and of his people, that he should do men worship
   him as God. For never had there been before him so great a master and
   lord of the world as he was. Then the Emperor sent for a prophetess
   named Sibyl, for to demand of her if there were any so great and like
   him in the earth, or if any should come after him. Thus at the hour of
   mid-day she beheld the heaven, and saw a circle of gold about the sun,
   and in the middle of the circle a maid holding a child in her arms.
   Then she called the Emperor and shewed it him. When Octavian saw that
   he marvelled over much, whereof Sibyl said to him: Hic puer major te
   est, ipsum adora. This child is greater lord than thou art, worship
   him. Then when the Emperor understood that this child was greater lord
   than he was, he would not be worshipped as God, but worshipped this
   child that should be born. Wherefore the christian men made a church of
   the same chamber of the Emperor, and named it Ara coeli. After this it
   happed on a night as a great master which is of great authority in
   Scripture, which is named Bartholemew, recordeth that the Rod of Engadi
   which is by Jerusalem, which beareth balm, flowered this night and bare
   fruit, and gave liquor of balm. After this came the angel and appeared
   to the shepherds that kept their sheep, and said to them: I announce
   and show to you a great joy, for the Saviour of the world is in this
   night born, in the city of Bethlehem, there may ye find him wrapt in
   clouts. And anon, as the angel had said this, a areas multitude of
   angels appeared with him, and began to sing. Honour, glory and health
   be to God on high, and in the earth peace to men of goodwill. Then said
   the shepherds, let us go to Bethlehem and see this thing. And when they
   came they found like as the angel had said. And it happed this night
   that all the sodomites that did sin against nature were dead and
   extinct; for God hated so much this sin, that he might not suffer that
   nature human, which he had taken, were delivered to so great shame.
   Whereof S. Austin saith that, it lacked but little that God would not
   become man for that sin. In this time Octavian made to cut and enlarge
   the ways and quitted the Romans of all the debts that they owed to him.
   This feast of Nativity of our Lord is one of the greatest feasts of all
   the year, and for to tell all the miracles that our Lord hath showed,
   it should contain a whole book; but at this time I shall leave and pass
   over save one thing that I have heard once preached of a worshipful
   doctor, that what person being in clean life desire on this day a boon
   of God, as far as it is rightful and good for him, our Lord at the
   reverence of this blessed high feast of his Nativity will grant it to
   him. Then let us always make us in clean life at this feast that we may
   so please him, that after this short life we may come unto his bliss.
   Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

And here followeth His Circumcision.

   The day of the circumcision of our Lord there be four things that make
   and show it to be holy and solemn. The first is the utas of the
   Nativity. The second the imposition of a new name bearing health. The
   third the effusion of his precious blood. The fourth the signs of the
   circumcision. As for the first it appeareth, for the utas of saints be
   solemn, by much more reason ought it to be of him that is the saint of
   all saints. Now it seemeth that the Nativity of our Lord ought not to
   have none utas. For the nativity tendeth to the death. And the decease
   of saints have their utas because they be born of the nativity that
   stretcheth to life perdurable, for to be after glorified in body. And
   by the same way it seemeth that the nativity of the glorious Virgin
   Mary and of S. John Baptist, and of the Resurrection of our Lord ought
   not to have utas, for the resurrection was then done. Hereto we ought
   to consider, like as saith a doctor, that, in this we should fulfil
   such things as we accomplished not in the principal day that our Lord
   was born in. Of which of ancient time men were wont to sing at the
   Mass: Vultum tuum domine, etc. to the honour of our Lady S. Mary. The
   other octaves or utases as of Paske, Whitsuntide, the nativity of our
   Lady and S. John Baptist be of devotion, as of other saints that men
   will honour for singular cause or affection. And they may be said the
   octaves of figuration, for they signify and figure the octave of the
   last resurrection perpetual, which is the eighth age. And as to the
   second, this day was his name imposed to him, and was named with the
   new name that the mouth of God named. This is the name of which there
   is none other under heaven by which we may be saved, that is Jesus.
   After S. Bernard: This is the name which in the mouth is honey, in the
   ear melody, and in the heart joy; this is the name after that he saith,
   it lighteth and shineth like oil. When it is preached it feedeth the
   soul, when it is in the mind of the heart it is sweet, and it anointeth
   when it is called. And as the evangelist saith, he had three names,
   that is to wit the Son of God, Jesus, and Christus. He is called the
   Son of God insomuch as he is God of God the Father; Christ insomuch as
   he is a man taken of a person divine and nature human, and Jesus
   inasmuch as he is God united to our humanity. And of this three manner
   of names, saith S. Bernard: Ye that lie in dust and powder arise out of
   your sleep and awake ye and give praising to God. Lo here that our Lord
   shall come unto your health, he cometh with unction, he cometh with
   glory. Jesus cometh not without health, nor Christ cometh not without
   unction, nor the Son of God without glory. For he is our health, our
   unction and our joy. And as touching this treble name; before his
   passion, he was not perfectly known. As touching the first he was
   somewhat known by conjecting, as of his enemies, which said Jesu Christ
   to be the Son of God. And as to the second, of less or fewer he was
   known for Jesu Christ. And as to the third, vocally, for as much as by
   the voice he was called Jesus. But as to the reason of the name, he was
   not known. For Jesus is as much to say as Saviour, and this understood
   not they. After the resurrection, this treble was clarified and
   declared. The first to the certainty, the second to the publication,
   the third to the reason of the name. The first name is Son of God. And
   that these names be appropriate to him, Saint Hilary in his book that
   he made of the Trinity saith thus: Vere filium Dei unigenitum. In
   divers manners this name, Son of God, is known, as it is witnessed of
   God. God the Father witnesseth it that he is his son. Apostles preach
   it, the religious believe it, the fiends our enemies confess it. And
   therefore we know our Lord Jesu Christ in his manners, by name, by
   nature, by nativity, by puissance, and by his passion. The second name
   is Christus, which is interpreted unction. For he was anointed with the
   oil of gladness before all them that to him were party. And by that he
   is said anointed, it is showed that he was a prophet, a champion, a
   priest and a king. These four persons sometime were wont to be
   anointed. Jesu Christ was a prophet teaching the doctrine divine, a
   champion in the battle against the devil whom he overcame, a priest in
   reconciling the human lineage to God the Father, and a king in
   distributing and rewarding every man. Of this second name we be all
   named, for of this name Christ we be called christian men. Of which
   name S. Austin saith thus: Every christian man ought to be c puissance
   or might is to him perdurable, the second, of might of habitation, is
   to him sith the beginning of his conception, like as the angel showed,
   and after that he hath puissance of deed and work. was imposed to him
   of Joseph, because of his passion that was to against original sin, the
   devil weened that he that received it were a sinner, and had need of
   the remedy of circumcision. And for this cause Jesu Christ would that
   his mother being alway a virgin should be married, because that by the
   sacrament of matrimony his Incarnati purpose is for to leave sin and
   take the good, the which is showed us by the son that dispended his
   good follily, and when he had perceived that he had done evil and
   foolishly, he advertised himself and said: I shall depart and return to
   my father, and shall pray that I may serve him, and that he may receive
   me to mercy, and make me as one of his servants. The third is shame of
   sin, whereof saith S. Paul to them that for their sins be in pain and
   in torment: What fruit have ye founder in those sins in your life of
   which now ye be ashamed? The fourth is dread of the coming judgment and
   doom, whereof Job saith: I have feared and doubted God as men dread the
   waves of the sea in their great rage and tempest. And S. Jerome saith
   thus: Sive comedam sive bibam, etc. As oft as I eat or drink or that I
   do any other thing, alway me seemeth that I hear the sound and the
   voice crying: Arise, ye dead men, and come to the doom and the
   judgment. The fifth is contrition, whereof S. Jerome saith: Give thy
   weeping and bitterness of that which thou hast angered thy God by thy
   sin. The sixth is confession, whereof David saith: Dixi confitebor,
   etc.: I have said and purposed in my heart that I shall confess me to
   God and make knowledge of my sin. The seventh is hope of pardon, for if
   Judas had had very repentance and hope, and had confessed his sin, he
   had had forgiveness and pardon. The eighth is satisfaction and
   sacrifice, and then is the man verily circumcised, not only from the
   sin, but also from pain. Where the two first days be for the sorrow of
   sin that hath been done and the will for to amend it, the third day we
   should confess the evil that we have done and the good deeds that we
   have left. The other four days be orison, effusion of tears, affliction
   of body, and alms given. Or otherwise by these eight days may be
   understood eight things, of which the considerati the nativity of Jesu
   Christ that is called the day of circumcision, we find that Jesu Christ
   said by the mouth of his saints: Non veni legem solvere sed adimplere;
   I came not, said Jesu Christ, to break the law, but to fulfil it. And
   he was that day circumcised and named Jesus, which is as much to say as
   Saviour. And at the circumcision must he cut a little of the skin at
   the end of the member or yard, and that is signified and shewed that we
   ought to be circumcised, and cut and taken away from us the sins and
   evil vices, that is to wit pride, wrath, envy, covetousness, sloth,
   gluttony, and lechery, and all sins, and purge us by confession, by
   contrition, by satisfaction, by almsdeeds, and by prayers, and to give
   for God's sake of the goods that he hath lent us. For we have nothing
   proper, but Jesu Christ hath lent to us all that we have. Then it is
   well reason that we do give for him to the poor of such goods as be
   his, for we be but servants, and we ought to give to the hungry meat,
   to the thirsty drink, to the naked clothing, visit the sick, and tofore
   all things to love God, and after, our neighbour as ourself; and
   despoil ourself from sin, and clothe us with good works and virtues,
   and follow the commandment of Jesu Christ. And in this manner we shall
   fulfil the will of our father Jesu Christ, if we been so purged and
   thus circumcised. Then let us pray unto the Lord of heaven that saith
   that he came not to break the law but to fulfil it, that he give us
   grace in such manner to fulfil the law and his will in this world, that
   we may come into his holy bliss in heaven. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Feast of the Epiphany of our Lord and of the three kings.

   The Feast of the Epiphany of our Lord is adorned of four miracles, and
   after them it hath four names. On this day the kings worshipped Jesu
   Christ, and S. John Baptist baptized him. And Jesu Christ changed this
   day water into wine, and he fed five thousand men with five loaves of
   bread. When Jesu Christ was in the age of thirteen days the three kings
   came to him the way like as the star led them, and therefore this day
   is called Epiphany, or the thiephanye in common language. And is said
   of this term epi, which is as much as to say as above, and of this term
   phanes which is as much to say as apparition. For then the star
   appeared above them in the air, where the same Jesus by the star that
   was seen above them showed him to the kings. And that day twenty-nine
   years passed, that was at the entry of thirty years, for he had
   twenty-nine years and thirteen days, and began the thirtieth year as
   saith S. Luke. Or after this that Bede saith, he had thirty years
   complete, as the Church of Rome holdeth. And then he was baptized in
   the flood or river of Jordan, and therefore it is called the thiephanie
   said of Theos, which is as much to say as God, and phanes apparition.
   For then God, that is the Trinity, appeared, God the Father in voice,
   God the Son in flesh human, God the Holy Ghost in likeness of a dove.
   After this, that same day a year, when he was thirty-one year old and
   thirteen days, he turned water into wine, and therefore it is called
   Bethania, said of beth, that is to say an house, and phanes, that is
   apparition. And this miracle was done of the wine in an house by which
   he showed him very God. And this same day a year after that was
   thirty-two years, he fed five thousand men with five loaves, like as
   Bede saith. And is also sung in an hymn which beginneth: Illuminans
   altissimus. And therefore it is called phagiphania, of phage, that is
   to say meat. And of this fourth miracle some doubt if it were done on
   this day, for it is not written of Bede expressly, and because that in
   the gospel of S. John is read that it was done nigh unto Pasque.
   Therefore the four apparitions were set on this day. The first by the
   star unto the crib or racke; the second by the voice of the Father on
   flom Jordan; the third of the water into wine at the house of
   Archedeclyn; the fourth by the multiplication of five loaves in desert.
   Of the first apparition we make solemnity on this day principally, and
   therefore pursue we the history such as it is.

   When our Lord was born, the three kings came into Jerusalem, of whom
   the names be written in Hebrew, that is to wit Galgalath, Magalath, and
   Tharath. And in Greek Appelius, Amerius, and Damascus. And in Latin
   Jaspar, Melchior, and Balthasar. And it is to wit that this name Magus
   hath three significations. It is said illuser or deceiver, enchanter,
   and wise. They been illusers or deceivers because they deceived Herod.
   For they returned not by him when they departed from the place where
   they had honoured and offered to Jesus, but returned by another way
   into their country. Magus also is said enchanter. And hereof be said
   the enchanters of Pharaoh, Magi, which by their malefice made their
   marvels by the enchanting of the craft of the devil. And S. John
   Chrysostom calleth these kings Magos, as wicked and evil-doers. For
   first they were full of malefices, but after they were converted. To
   whom God would show his Nativity, and bring them to him to the end that
   to sinners he would do pardon. Item, Magus in same wise. For Magus in
   Hebrew is said doctor, in Greek, philosopher, and in Latin, wise,
   whereof they be said Magi, that is to say great in wisdom. And these
   three came into Jerusalem with a great company and great estate. But
   wherefore came they to Jerusalem when the child was not born there? S.
   Remigius assigneth four reasons. The first reason is that, the kings
   had knowledge of the nativity of the Child that was born of the Virgin
   Mary, but not of the place. And because that Jerusalem was the most
   city royal and there was the see of the sovereign priest, they thought
   that so noble a child, so nobly showed ought to be born in the most
   noble city that was royal. The second cause was, for in Jerusalem were
   the doctors and the wise men by whom they might know where the said
   child was born. The third cause was to the end that the Jews should
   have none excusation. For they might have said that they had knowledge
   of the place where he should be born, but the time knew they not, and
   therefore they might say, we believe it not. And the kings showed to
   them the time, and the Jews showed the place. The fourth to the doubt
   of the Jews and their curiosity, for these kings believed one only
   prophet, and the Jews believed not many. They sought a strange king,
   and the Jews sought not their own king. These kings came from far
   countries, and the Jews were neighbours fast by. These kings were
   successors of Balaam, and came at the vision and sight of the star, by
   the prophecy of their father, which said that a star shall be born or
   spring out of Jacob, and a man shall arise of the lineage of Israel.
   That other cause that moveth them to come to Jerusalem putteth S. John
   Chrysostom, which saith that there were some that affirmed for truth
   that, there were great clerks that curiously studied to know the
   secrets of heaven; and after, they chose twelve of them to take heed.
   And if any of them died, his son or next kinsman shall be set in his
   place. And these twelve every year ascended upon a mountain which was
   called Victorial, and three days they abode there, and washed them
   clean, and prayed our Lord that he would show to them the star that
   Balaam had said and prophesied before.

   Now it happened on a time that they were there the day of the Nativity
   of Jesu Christ, and a star came over them upon this mountain which had
   the form of a right fair child, and under his head was a shining cross,
   which spake to these three kings saying: Go ye hastily into the land of
   Judea, and there ye shall find the king that ye seek, which is born of
   a virgin. Another cause putteth S. Austin; for it might well be that
   the angel of heaven appeared to them which said: the star that ye see
   is Jesu Christ, go ye anon and worship him. Another cause putteth S.
   Leo, that by the star which appeared to them, which was more
   resplendent and shining than the other, that it showed the sovereign
   king to be born on the earth. Then anon departed they for to come to
   that place. Now may it be demanded how, in so little space of thirteen
   days they might come from so far as from the East unto Jerusalem, which
   is in the middle of the world, which is a great space and a long way.
   Thereto answereth S. Remigius the doctor, and saith that, the child to
   whom they went, might well make them to go so much way in that while.
   Or after this that S. Jerome saith, that they came upon dromedaries,
   which be beasts that may go as much in one day as an horse in three
   days. And when they came into Jerusalem, they demanded in what place
   the King of Jews was born. And they demanded not if he was born, for
   they believed it firmly that he was born. And if any had demanded of
   them: Whereby know ye that he is born? They would have answered: We
   have seen his star in the Orient, and therefore we come to worship him.
   This is to understand, we being in the Orient saw his star that showed
   that he was born in Judea, and we be come to worship him. And therefore
   saith this doctor Remigius, that they confessed this child very man,
   very King, and very God. Very man when they said where is he that is
   born? very King when they said King of Jews; very God when they said we
   be come to worship him. For there was a commandment that none should be
   worshipped but God. And thus as saith S. John Chrysostom: They
   confessed the child very God by word, by deed, and by gifts of their
   treasures that they offered to him. And when Herod had heard this he
   was much troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Herod was troubled for
   three causes, first, because he dreaded that the Jews would receive the
   child born for their King, and refuse he would worship also him, and
   thought that he would go slay him. And it is to wit that as soon as
   they were entered into Jerusalem, the sight of the star was taken from
   them and for three causes: First, that they should be constrained to
   seek that place of his nativity like as they were certified by the
   appearing of the star and by the prophecy of the place of his birth,
   and so it was done. Secondly, that they that sought the help and the
   world, had deserved to lose the aid divine. The third because that the
   signs be given to miscreants, and prophecies to them that believe well
   like, as the apostle saith. And therefore the sign which was given to
   the three kings, which yet were paynims ought not to appear to them as
   long as they were with the Jews. And when they were issued of
   Jerusalem, the star appeared to them, which went before them, and
   brought them till it came above the place where the Child was. And ye
   ought to know that there be three opinions of this star, which Remigius
   the doctor putteth, saying that: Some say that it was the Holy Ghost
   which appeared to the three kings in the form of a star, which after
   appeared upon the head of Jesu Christ in the likeness of a dove. Others
   say, like to S. John Chrysostom, that it was an angel that appeared to
   the shepherds, and after appeared to the kings, but to the shepherds,
   Jews, as to them that use reason in form of a reasonable creature, and
   to the paynims as unreasonable, that is to say of a star. Others say
   more reasonably and more veritably that it was a star new created, and
   made of God, the which when he had done his office was brought again
   into the matter whereof it was first formed. And this star was this
   that Fulgentius saith: It differenced from the other stars in three
   things. First, in situation, for it was not fixed in the firmament, but
   it hung in the air nigh to the earth. Secondly, in clearness, for it
   was shining more than the others. It appeared so that the clearness of
   the sun might not hurt nor appale her light, but at plain mid-day it
   had right great light and clearness. Thirdly, in moving, for it went
   alway before the kings in manner of one going in the way, ne it had
   none turning as a circle turneth, but in such manner as a person goeth
   in the way. And when the kings were issued out of Jerusalem, and set in
   their way, they saw the star whereof they had lost the sight, and were
   greatly enjoyed.

   And we ought to note that there be five manners of stars that these
   kings saw. The first is material, the second spiritual, the third
   intellectual, the fourth reasonable, the fifth substantial. The first,
   that is material, they saw in the East; the second, that is spiritual,
   they saw in heart, and that is in the faith. For if this faith had not
   been in their hearts that had lighted them, they had never seen the
   star material. They had faith of the humanity when they said: Where is
   he that is born? and of his royal dignity when they called him King of
   Jews, and of his deity when they said they went to worship him. The
   third intellectual, which is, that the angel that they saw in vision,
   when it was by the angel showed to them that they should not return by
   Herod, how be it that after one gloss it was our Lord that warned them.
   The fourth, that was reasonable, that was the Virgin Mary whom they saw
   in the stable holding her child. The fifth, that is substantial, that
   is to say that he had substance above all other singular. And that was
   Jesu Christ whom they saw in the crib. And hereof is it said in the
   gospel that they entered into the house and found the child with Mary
   his mother, and then they worshipped him. And when they were entered
   into the house secretly and had found the child, they kneeled and
   offered to him these three gifts, that is to wit gold, incense, and
   myrrh. And this saith S. Austin: O infantia, cui astra subduntur, etc.
   O infancy or childhood, to whom the stars be subject, to whose clothes
   angels bow, the stars give virtue, the kings joy, and the followers of
   wisdom bow their knees. O blessed tigury or little house, O holy seat
   of God. And S. Jerome saith: This is an heaven where is no light but
   the star. O palace celestial in which thou dwellest, not as King
   adorned with precious stones, but incorporate. To whom, for a soft bed
   was duresse and hard crib, for curtains of gold and silk, the fume and
   stench of dung, but the star of heaven was clearly embellished. I am
   abashed when I behold these clothes and see the heaven. The heart
   burneth me for hete when I see him in the crib, a poor mendicant, and
   over him the stars. I see him right clear, right noble, and right rich.
   O ye kings, what do ye? Ye worship the child in a little foul house
   wrapped in foul clouts. Is he then not God? Ye offer to him gold, and
   whereof is he King, and where is his royal hall? Where is his throne?
   Where is his court royal, frequented and used with nobles? The stable
   is that not his hall? And his throne the rack or crib? They that
   frequent this court, is it not Joseph and Mary? they be as unwitting,
   to the end that they become wise. Of whom saith Hilary in his second
   book that he made of the Trinity: The Virgin hath borne a child, but
   this that she hath childed is of God; the child is Iying in the rack,
   and the angels be heard singing and praising him, the clothes be foul,
   and God is worshipped. The dignity of his puissance is not taken away
   though the humility of his flesh is declared. Lo, how in this child
   Jesus were not only the humble and small things, but also the rich, and
   the noble, and the high things. And hereof saith S. Jerome upon the
   Epistle ad Hebreos: Thou beholdest the rack of Jesu Christ; see also
   the heaven. Thou seest also the child Iying in the crib, but take heed
   also how the angels sing and praise God. Herod is persecuted and the
   kings worship the child. The pharisees knew him not, but the star
   showed him. He is baptized of his servant, but the voice of the Father
   is heard above thundering. He is plunged in the water, but the Holy
   Ghost The descended upon him in likeness of a dove.

   And of the cause wherefore these kings offered these gifts, many
   reasons be assigned. One of the causes is, as saith Remigius the
   doctor, that the ancient ordinance was that no man should come to God
   ne to the king with a void hand, but that he brought him some gift. And
   they of Chaldea were accustomed to offer such gifts. They, as
   Scholastica Historia saith, came from the end of Persia, from the
   Chaldeans whereas is the flood of Saba, of which flood the region of
   Saba is named. The second reason is of S. Bernard: For they offered to
   Mary, the mother of the child, gold for to relieve her poverty, incense
   against the stench of the stable and evil air, myrrh for to comfort the
   tender members of the child and to put away vermin. The third reason
   was that they offered gold for to pay the tribute, the incense for to
   make sacrifice, the myrrh for the sepulture of dead men. The fourth for
   the gold signifieth dilection or love; the incense, orison or prayer;
   the myrrh, of the flesh mortification. And these three things ought we
   offer to God. The fifth because by these three be signified three
   things that be in Jesu Christ: The precious deity, the soul full of
   holiness, and the entire flesh all pure and without corruption. And
   these three things be signified that were in the ark of Moses. The rod
   which flourished, that was the flesh of Jesu Christ that rose from
   death to life; the tables wherein the commandments were written, that
   is the soul, wherein be all the treasures of sapience and science of
   godhead. The manna signifieth the godhead, which hath all sweetness of
   suavity. By the gold which is most precious of all metals is understood
   the Deity; by the incense the soul right devout, for the incense
   signifieth devotion and orison; by the myrrh which preserveth from
   corruption, is understood the flesh which was without corruption. And
   the kings when they were admonished and warned by revelation in their
   sleep that they should not return by Herod, and by another way they
   should return into their country, lo hear then how they came and went
   in their journey. For they came to adore and worship the King of kings
   in their proper persons, by the star that led them, and by the prophet
   that enseigned and taught them. And by the warning of the angel
   returned and rested at their death in Jesu Christ. Of whom the bodies
   were brought to Milan, where as now is the convent of the friars
   preachers, and now be at Cologne in S. Peter's Church, which is the
   Cathedral and See of the Archbishop. Then let us pray unto Almighty God
   that this day showed him to these kings and at his baptism, where the
   voice of the Father was heard and the Holy Ghost seen, and at the feast
   turned water into wine, and fed five thousand men, besides women and
   children, with five loaves and two fishes, that at the reverence of
   this high and great feast he forgive us our trespasses and sins, and
   after this short life we may come to his everlasting bliss in heaven.
   Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth Septuagesima.

   At Septuagesima beginneth the time of deviation or going out of the
   way, of the whole world, which began at Adam and dured unto Moses. And
   in this time is read the Book of Genesis. The time of Septuagesima
   representeth the time of deviation, that is of transgression. The
   Sexagesima signifieth the time of revocation. The Quinquagesima
   signifieth the time of remission. The Quadragesima signifieth of
   penance and satisfaction. The Septuagesima beginneth when the Church
   singeth in the office of the mass: Circumdederunt me, and endureth unto
   the Saturday after Easter-day. The Septuagesima was instituted for
   three reasons; like as Master John Beleth putteth in the office of the
   Church. The first reason was for the redemption. For the holy fathers
   some time ordained that for the honour of the Ascension of Jesu Christ,
   in the which our nature ascended into heaven and was above the angels,
   that this day should be hallowed solemnly, and should be kept from
   fasting, and at the beginning of the Church also solemnly, as the
   Sunday. And procession was made in representing the procession of the
   apostles, which they made on that day, or of the angels that came to
   meet him and therefore commonly the proverb was that, the Thursday and
   the Sunday were cousins, for then that one was as solemn as that other.
   But because that the feasts of saints came, and be multiplied, which
   were grievous to hallow so many feasts, therefore the feast of the
   Thursday ceased. And for to recompense that, there is a week of
   abstinence ordained like to Lent and is called Septuagesima. That other
   reason is for the signification of the time, for by this time is
   signified to us the time of deviation, of going out of the way of
   exile, and of tribulation of the human lineage, from sith Adam unto the
   end of the world. Which exile is hallowed upon the revolution of seven
   days and of seven thousand years, understood by seventy days or by
   seventy hundred years. For from the beginning of the world unto the
   ascension we account six hundred years, and of the rest, that we reckon
   it for the seventh thousand, of which God knoweth only the term. Now it
   is so that Jesu Christ brought us out of this exile in the sixth age,
   in hope of perpetual life of all them that be revested with the vesture
   of innocence. By baptism we be regenerate, and when we shall have
   passed the time of this exile, he shall clothe us of double vesture,
   that is to wit of body and soul in glory.

   And in the time of deviation and of exile we leave the song of
   gladness, that is alleluia, but the Saturday of Easter we sing one
   alleluia, in enjoying us and thanking God of the vesture perpetual
   which by hope we abide for to recover in the sixth age. And in the mass
   we set a tract, in figuring the labour that yet we ought to do, and in
   fulfilling the commandments of God. And the double alleluia that we
   sing after Easter, signifieth the double vesture that we shall have in
   body and in soul. The third reason is for representation. For the
   Septuagesima representeth seventy years in which the children of Israel
   were in Babylon in servitude. And in such manner that they cast away
   and left their usage of song of gladness, saying: Quomodo cantabimus
   canticum domini, etc. Thus leave we the song of praising and of
   gladness. After, licence was given to them to return in the time of
   Sexagesima, and they began them to joy, and so we do the Saturday of
   Easter. As in the year of Sexagesima we sing alleluia in representing
   their joy and gladness, how well in the returning they had pain and
   sorrow to take their things and bear with them, therefore we sing anon
   after the tract which followeth the alleluia. And in the Saturday after
   Easter in which Septuagesima is complete, we sing double alleluia, in
   figuring the plain gladness that they had when they were returned into
   their country. And this time thus of the servitude of the children of
   Israel representeth the time of our pilgrimage of the life of this
   world. For thus as they were delivered in the sixtieth year, so were we
   in the sixth age. And as they had pain gathering and assembling their
   things for to bear with them, so have we in fulfilling the commandments
   of God. And like as they were in rest when they came into their
   country, and in gladness and in joy, in like wise we sing double
   alleluia, that betokeneth double joy that we shall have as well in body
   as in soul. In this time then of exile of the Church, full of many
   tribulations, and as thrown out into the deepness of desperation almost
   and despair, she sigheth for sorrow in saying the office of the mass:
   Circumdederunt me gemitus mortis, etc., and showeth many demonstrations
   that she suffereth, as well as for the misery that she had deserved by
   sin, as for the double pain that she is run in, and as for the trespass
   to her neighbour. But alway, for as much as she fall not in despair, is
   purposed to her in the Gospel and Epistle three manner of remedies. The
   first is that if she will issue of these tribulations, that she labour
   in the vineyard of her soul in cutting and pulling out the vices and
   the sins, and after in a way of this present life, she seek the works
   of penance. And after that in doing spiritual battle, she defend her
   strongly against the temptations of the enemy. And if she do these
   three things she shall have threefold reward. For in labouring God
   shall give her the penny, and in well running the prize, and in well
   fighting the crown. And because that Septuagesima signifieth the time
   of our captivity, the remedy is proposed to us by which we may be,
   delivered, in flying the misery by running, by victory in fighting, and
   by the penny in us ayenbyeng.
     __________________________________________________________________

Of Sexagesima.

   The Sexagesima beginneth when is sung in the Church, at office of the
   mass: Exsurge domine, and this endeth the Wednesday after Easter day;
   and was instituted for redemption, for signification, and for
   representation. For redemption it was instituted. For Melchiades the
   Pope and Silvester instituted that men should eat twice on the
   Saturday, to the end that they that had fasted the Friday, which should
   always be fasted, were not grieved. And in rechaet then of the
   Saturdays of this time, they adjousted and joined a week of the Lent
   thereto, and called it Sexagesima. That other reason is for
   signification; for that time signifieth the time of widowhood of the
   Church, and the wailing of the same for the absence of her spouse which
   was vanished into heaven. There be two wings given to the Church. The
   first is the exercitation of six works of mercy, and the fulfilment of
   the ten commandments of the law, for sixty make six sithes ten. And by
   six be understood the six works of mercy, and by ten the ten
   commandments of the law. The third reason is for representation. For
   the Sexagesima representeth also the mystery of redemption. For by ten
   is understood the man, which is the tenth penny which is made and
   formed to that he be the reparation of nine orders of angels, or for
   that he is formed of four qualities to the body. And to the soul he
   hath three powers, that is to wit memory, understanding, and will,
   which be made that he serve the Blessed Trinity, to the end that we
   believe firmly in him and love him ardently, and diligently we have and
   hold him in our mind. By six be understood six mysteries, by the which
   the man is redeemed by Jesu Christ, the which be the Incarnation, the
   Nativity, the Passion, his descension into hell, his resurrection, and
   his ascension into heaven. And because that the Sexagesima stretcheth
   unto the Wednesday after Easter, that day is sung: Venite benedicti,
   etc. For they that fulfil the works of mercy shall hear in the end:
   Venite, as Jesu Christ witnesseth. And then shall the door be opened to
   the spouse, and embrace God her spouse. And it is warned in an epistle,
   that she should bear patiently tribulation, as S. Paul did, in the
   absence of her spouse. And in the gospel that she be always ententive
   to sow good works, and that she that had sung as despaired:
   Circumdederunt me gemitus mortis, now return for to demand that she be
   holpen in her tribulations, and require to be delivered in saying
   Exsurge domine adjuva, etc., which is the beginning of the office of
   the mass.

   And this doth holy Church in three manners. For some be in holy Church
   that be oppressed of adversity, but they be not cast out. And some that
   be not oppressed ne cast out. And some that be oppressed and cast out.
   And because that they may not bear adversities, it is to dread and
   great peril lest the prosperities all to-break them. Wherefore holy
   Church crieth that he arise as to the first in comforting them, for it
   seemeth that he sleepeth when he delivereth them not. She crieth also
   as to the second, that he arise in converting them from whom it seemeth
   that he turneth his face from them in putting them from him. She crieth
   also as to the third, that he arise in helping them in prosperity, and
   in delivering them.
     __________________________________________________________________

Of Quinquagesima.

   The Quinquagesima dureth from the Sunday in which is sung in the Church
   in the office of the mass, Esto mihi, etc. And that endeth on Easter
   day, and is instituted for supplication and fulfilling, for
   signification, and for representation. For fulfilling and accomplishing
   because that we should fast forty days after the form of Jesu Christ.
   And there be but thirty-six days to fast, but men fast not the Sundays,
   for the gladness and the reverence of the resurrection, and also for
   the ensample of Jesu Christ, which ate two times with his disciples on
   the day of his resurrection, when he entered in where his disciples
   were, and the doors or gates shut, and they brought him part of a
   roasted fish and of a honey-comb. And after that, with his two
   disciples which went to Emmaus, he ate also, as some say. And therefore
   be four days put to, for accomplishing of the Sundays which be not
   fasted. And after because the clergy go before the common people, so
   should they go in devotion and holiness, therefore they begin to fast
   two days before, and abstain them from eating flesh. And thus is one
   week put, which is called the Quinquagesima, after this that S. Ambrose
   saith. That other reason is for the signification, for the
   Quinquagesima signifieth the time of remission and of penance, in which
   the sins be pardoned and forgiven. The fiftieth year was the year of
   remission, for then the debts were quitted, and the bondmen were
   franchised and let go free, and every one came again to his heritage.
   By which is understood that by penance our sins be forgiven, and from
   the servitude and bondage of our enemy we be delivered, and so we be
   returned to the mansion of our heritage of heaven. The third reason is
   for representation. For the Quinquagesima representeth not to us only
   the time of remission, but also the state of the beatitude of heaven
   which is to us represented. For in the fiftieth year servants were made
   free, and in the fiftieth day that the lamb was sacrificed the law of
   Moses was given. And the fiftieth day after Paske the Holy Ghost was
   given. And therefore this name fifty, representeth the beatitude of
   heaven, whereas was taken the possession of liberty, the knowledge of
   verity, and perfection of charity. Now it is to wit that three things
   be necessary which be contained and set in the Epistle and in the
   Gospel, that is that penance, that is to say the works of penance be
   perfect. That is to wit charity, which is purposed in the Epistle; and
   the memory of the passion of Jesu Christ; and faith which is understood
   by the sight given to the blind man which be contained in the gospel.
   For faith maketh the works acceptable to God. For without faith no man
   may please God, and the mind of the passion of God maketh the works
   light. Whereof saith S. Gregory: If the passion of Jesu Christ be well
   had in mind, there is nothing but it may be borne and suffered easily,
   for the love of God may not be idle. This saith S. Gregory: If it work,
   it is great, and if it refuse, it is no love. And thus as the Church at
   the beginning, as despaired, had cried: Circumderunt me gemitus mortis,
   and after returning to him demanded to be holpen, thus now when she
   hath taken affiance and hope of pardon, for hope of penance she prayeth
   and saith: Esto mihi in Deum protectorem. Or she demandeth four things,
   that it is to wit protection, confirmation, refuge and conduct. All the
   children of the Church or they be in grace or they be in sin, or in
   adversity, or in prosperity. They that be in grace demand for to be
   confirmed, they that be in sin demand refuge, they in adversity demand
   protection, that they from their tribulations may be defended, and they
   in prosperity demand conduct that they may be of God led and conducted.
   And thus as it is said Quinquagesima termineth and endeth at Easter,
   because that penance maketh them to rise to new life. And in
   signification hereof the psalm of Miserere mei Deus, which is the
   fiftieth psalm and the psalm of penance, is in the time of Lent oft
   used and said.
     __________________________________________________________________

Of Quadragesima.

   The Quadragesima, which we call now in English Lent, beginneth the
   Sunday in which is sung in the office of the mass: Invocavit me, etc.
   And the Church which was much troubled tofore by so many tribulations
   and had cried: Circumdederunt me, and after, in respiring and sighing
   had asked help in saying: Exsurge domini, now she showeth that she is
   heard, when she saith: He hath called me and I have heard. Now it is to
   understand that the Quadragesima containeth forty-two days for to
   account the Sundays. And if they be not reckoned there be but
   thirty-six days for to fast, which be the tenth part of the days of the
   year. But the four days tofore be put to, because the number sacred by
   the Quadragesima be accomplished, the which our saviour Jesu Christ
   hallowed by his holy fasting. And because we fast in this number of
   forty, there may be assigned three reasons. The first reason putteth S.
   Austin, which saith that S. Matthew setteth forty generations to the
   end, then, that our Lord by his holy Quadragesima descended to us, we
   should ascend to him by our Quadragesima. That other assigneth the
   same, saying, to that we may have the Quinquagesima we must put to
   forty ten; for unto that, that we may come to the blessed glory and
   rest in heaven, it behoveth us to labour all the time of this present
   life. And therefore our Lord abode forty days with his disciples after
   his resurrection, and after the tenth day, he sent to them the Holy
   Ghost. The third reason assigneth Master Prepositivus in the sum of the
   office of the Church, which saith: The world is divided into four
   parts, and the year into four times, and the man of four elements and
   four complexions is composed. And we have the new law which is ordained
   of four evangelists, and the ten commandments that we have broken. It
   behoveth then that the number of ten by the number of four be
   multiplied, that thus we make the Quadragesima, that we fulfil the
   commandments of the old law and new. Our body, as said is, is composed
   of four elements, like as they had four seats in our body. That is to
   wit, the fire which is in the eyes, the air in the tongue and ears, the
   water in the natural members named genitals, and the earth hath
   domination in the hands and other members. Then in the eyes is
   curiosity, in the tongue and ears is scurrility, in the natural
   members, that is to say genitals, voluptuousness, and in the hands and
   other members cruelty. And these four things confessed the publican
   when he prayed God. He held him afar in confessing his luxury which is
   stinking, like thus as he said: Sire, I dare not approach to thee, for
   I might stink in thy nose. And because he durst not lift up his eyes he
   confessed curiosity. And in that he smote himself on the breast he
   confessed cruelty. And when he said: Deus propitius esto mihi
   peccatori, he confessed the crime and gluttony which he ought to
   repress. S. Gregory in his homilies putteth also three reasons
   wherefore in abstinence is holden the number of forty. For the virtue
   of the ten commandments in the law, and for the accomplishing of the
   four books of the evangelists. And also in this world we that be in
   mortal body be composed of the four elements, and by the will of the
   mortal body we gainsay the commandments of God. Therefore then, we that
   have disobeyed the commandments of God by the desire of the flesh, it
   is according that the same flesh by four times ten we put to penance
   and affliction from this present day unto Easter six weeks coming, that
   be forty-two days. If the Sundays be taken away, there abide in the
   abstinence but thirty-six days. And the year is demened by three
   hundred sixty and five days, we give the tithe of them to God when we
   fast. And this saith S. Gregory: Wherefore keep we not this fasting in
   the time that Jesu Christ fasted, which was anon after his baptism, but
   we begin so that we continue until Easter. Hereof be assigned four
   reasons in the sum of the office of Master John Beleth in the office of
   the Church. The first is that we will arise with Jesu Christ, for he
   suffered for us, and we ought to suffer for him. The second is to that
   we should follow the children of Israel which first issued out of
   Egypt, and in this time issued also out Babylon, the which thing
   appeareth, for as well that one as that other, anon as they were
   returned hallowed the solemnity of Easter. And thus we for to ensue
   them in this time, we fast to the end that, from Egypt and from
   Babylon, that is to understand from this mortal world into the country
   of our heritage of heaven, we may enter. The third reason is because
   that in the printemps the heat of the flesh moveth and boileth, to the
   end that we may refrain us therein, this time we fast. The fourth is
   forasmuch as anon after our fasting we ought to receive the Body of
   Jesu Christ, for in likewise as the children of Israel, tofore they had
   eaten the lamb, they put them in affliction by penance in eating wild
   lettuce and bitter, right so we ought to withdraw and put us in
   affliction by penance, to the end that the more worthily we may take
   and receive the Lamb of life. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Ember Days.

   The fasting of the Quatretemps, called in English Ember days, the Pope
   Calixtus ordained them. And this fast is kept four times in the year,
   and for divers reasons. For the first time, which is in March, is hot
   and moist. The second, in summer, is hot and dry. The third, in
   harvest, is cold and dry. The fourth in winter is cold and moist. Then
   let us fast in March which is printemps for to repress the heat of the
   flesh boiling, and to quench luxury or to temper it. In summer we ought
   to fast to the end that we chastise the burning and ardour of avarice.
   In harvest for to repress the drought of pride, and in winter for to
   chastise the coldness of untruth and of malice. The second reason why
   we fast four times; for these fastings here begin in March in the first
   week of the Lent, to the end that vices wax dry in us, for they may not
   all be quenched; or because that we cast them away, and the boughs and
   herbs of virtues may grow in us. And in summer also, in the Whitsun
   week, for then cometh the Holy Ghost, and therefore we ought to be
   fervent and esprised in the love of the Holy Ghost. They be fasted also
   in September tofore Michaelmas, and these be the third fastings,
   because that in this time the fruits be gathered and we should render
   to God the fruits of good works. In December they be also, and they be
   the fourth fastings, and in this time the herbs die, and we ought to be
   mortified to the world. The third reason is for to ensue the Jews. For
   the Jews fasted four times in the year, that is to wit, tofore Easter,
   tofore Whitsunside, tofore the setting of the tabernacle in the temple
   in September, and tofore the dedication of the temple in December. The
   fourth reason is because the man is composed of four elements touching
   the body, and of three virtues or powers in his soul: that is to wit,
   the understanding, the will, and the mind. To this then that this
   fasting may attemper in us four times in the year, at each time we fast
   three days, to the end that the number of four may be reported to the
   body, and the number of three to the soul. These be the reasons of
   Master Beleth. The fifth reason, as saith John Damascenus: in March and
   in printemps the blood groweth and augmenteth, and in summer coler, in
   September melancholy, and in winter phlegm. Then we fast in March for
   to attemper and depress the blood of concupiscence disordinate, for
   sanguine of his nature is full of fleshly concupiscence. In summer we
   fast because that coler should be lessened and refrained, of which
   cometh wrath. And then is he full naturally of ire. In harvest we fast
   for to refrain melancholy. The melancholious man naturally is cold,
   covetous and heavy. In winter we fast for to daunt and to make feeble
   the phlegm of lightness and forgetting, for such is he that is
   phlegmatic. The sixth reason is for the printemps is likened to the
   air, the summer to fire, harvest to the earth, and the winter to water.
   Then we fast in March to the end that the air of pride be attempered to
   us. In summer the fire of concupiscence and of avarice. In September
   the earth of coldness and of the darkness of ignorance. In winter the
   water of lightness and inconstancy. The seventh reason is because that
   March is reported to infancy, summer to youth, September to steadfast
   age and virtuous, and winter to ancienty or old age. We fast then in
   March that we may be in the infancy of innocency. In summer for to be
   young by virtue and constancy. In harvest that we may be ripe by
   attemperance. In winter that we may be ancient and old by prudence and
   honest life, or at least that we may be satisfied to God of that which
   in these four seasons we have offended him. The eighth reason is of
   Master William of Auxerre. We fast, saith he, in these four times of
   the year to the end that we make amends for all that we have failed in
   all these four times, and they be done in three days each time, to the
   end that we satisfy in one day that which we have failed in a month;
   and that which is the fourth day, that is Wednesday, is the day in
   which our Lord was betrayed of Judas; and the Friday because our Lord
   was crucified; and the Saturday because he lay in the sepulchre, and
   the apostles were sore of heart and in great sorrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Passion of our Lord.

   The passion of our Lord was bitter for the sorrow that he suffered in
   derisions despitous and of many filths fructuous. The sorrow was cause
   of five things. The first, because it was shameful, for the place of
   the Mount of Calvary, whereas malefactors and criminal persons were put
   to execution, and he was there put to death right foul. The cross was
   the torment of thieves, and if the cross was then of shame and of
   villainy, she is now of glory and of honour. Wherefore saith S. Austin:
   Crux latronum qui erat supplicium, etc. The cross which was the justice
   of thieves is now become the sign of glory in the foreheads or fronts
   of emperors. And if he had such honour at his torment, what did he to
   his servant for the shameful fellowships that he did to him? For he was
   set with malefactors, but the one of them was converted, which was
   called Dismas, like as it said in the gospel of Nicodemus. And he was
   on the right side of our Lord, and that other on the left side was
   damned, which was called Gesmas. So that one then he gave the realm of
   heaven, and to that other hell. Whereof saith S. Ambrose: Auctor
   pietatis in cruce, etc. He saith the author of pity hanging on the
   cross divided offices of pity in secular errands; that is to say, the
   persecution to the apostles, peace to his disciples, his body to the
   Jews, his spirit to the Father, to the Virgin the messages of the
   wedding of the sovereign spouse, to the thief paradise, to sinners
   hell, and to christian penitent he commanded the cross. Lo! this is the
   testament that Jesu Christ made hanging on the cross. Secondly, the
   sorrow was caused unjustly, for none iniquity was found in him. And
   principally, unjustly they accused him of three things. The first was
   they said that he defended to pay the trewage; and for he said that he
   was a king; and he said him to be the Son of God. And against these
   three accusations we say on the Good Friday three excusations in the
   person of Jesu Christ when we sing: Popule meus, where Jesu Christ
   reproved them of three benefits that he did and gave to them, that is
   to wit the deliverance of them from Egypt, the sustentation and
   governance in the desert, and the plantation of the vine in a land
   propice. Like as Jesu Christ would say: Thou I accuses me because that
   I defend to pay thy trewage, and thou oughtest more to thank me of that
   I have delivered thee from the trewage and from the servitude of
   Pharaoh and of Egypt; thou accusest me that I call myself King, and
   thou oughtest better to yield me thankings of that which I governed
   thee in the desert with meat royal; thou accusest me of this that I say
   me to be the Son of God, and thou oughtest more to thank me that I have
   chosen thee to be in my vineyard, and in a right good place I have
   planted thee. The third cause is because he was despised and forsaken
   of his friends, which seemed a thing more tolerable to be suffered of
   his enemies than of them whom he held to be his friends. And alway he
   suffered death for his friends and neighbours, that is of them of whose
   lineage he was born. This said he by the mouth of David: Amici mei et
   proximi, etc.: My friends and my neighbours have approached against me
   and so have continued. Whereof said Job, capitulo xix.; Noti mei quasi
   alieni recesserunt a me: My neighbours that knew me, as strangers have
   left me. Item, he suffered of them to whom he had done much good. Like
   as S. John recordeth, Johannis viii.: I have wrought many good things
   to you. And hereto saith S. Bernard: O good Jesus, how sweetly hast
   thou conversed with men, and how great things in the most abundant wise
   hast thou granted to them. How hard and sharp things hast thou suffered
   for them, hard words, harder strokes and beatings, and most hard
   torments of the cross, nevertheless they render and yield to thee
   contrary. The fourth cause is for the tenderness of his body. Whereof
   David saith in figure of him in the second book of Kings: He is like as
   that most tender worm of the wood. Whereof saith S. Bernard: O ye Jews,
   ye be stones, but ye smite a better stone, whereof resoundeth the sound
   of pity and boileth the oil of charity. And S. Jerome saith: He is
   delivered to knights for to be beaten, and their beatings have cruelly
   wounded and torn the most precious body, in whose breast the Godhead
   was hid. The fifth cause was because it was general, for it was over
   all, that is to say over all his body, and in all the natural wits of
   his body. And first the sorrow was in his eyes, for he wept tenderly as
   S. Paul saith in his Epistle ad Hebreos. Twice he ascended on high that
   he might be far heard. He cried strongly because none should be
   excused. He added thereto weeping that we should have compassion, and
   to tender our hearts, and he had wept tofore two times also. One time
   when he raised Lazarus, and that other time when he approached
   Jerusalem he wept. The first tears were of love, whereof is said in the
   Gospel: Behold how he loved him! The second were of compassion upon
   Jerusalem. But in this third weeping the tears were of sorrow.
   Secondly, the sorrow was in hearing with his ears the reproofs and
   villanies that was said to him and blasphemed. Jesu Christ in especial
   had four things in which he heard blasphemy and reproofs, for he had
   right excellent noblesse. As to the nature divine, he was son of the
   King, perpetual sovereign, and as to the nature human he was born of
   the lineage royal. And as to this he was also King of Kings and Lord of
   Lords. He was also sovereign truth. For he is the way, the life, and
   the truth. Whereof he said himself: Thy word is truth. The Son of God,
   that is the word of God the Father, he hath also sovereign power above
   all other. For none may surmount him, for all things been made by him
   and nought is made without him. He hath also singular bounty, for there
   is none good of himself but God only. And in these four things here,
   Jesu Christ had opprobriums and blasphemies. First as to his noblesse,
   whereof is sa persevered not; for he made his question saying: What is
   truth? But he abode not the solution, nor he was not worthy to hear it.
   S. Austin saith that he abode not the solution, because that so soon as
   he had made the question it came in his thought that the custom was of
   the Jews that one should be delivered to them at Paske. And there fore
   he went out anon and abode not the solution. The third cause is after
   S. John Chrysostom: For the question was so great, difficulty, that he
   had need of long time to advise and to discuss it. And he laboured for
   the deliverance of Jesu Christ, and therefore he issued out anon.
   Nevertheless it is read in the gospel of Nicodemus that Jesu Christ
   answered: Veritas de celo est. And Pilate said: In earth is no truth.
   And Jesus said to him: How may be truth in earth which in earth is
   judged of them that have power in earth? Fourthly, he suffered
   blasphemy as to his bounty and goodness. For they said that he was a
   man sinner and deceiver in his words, Luke xxiii.: He hath moved the
   common people with his doctrine, in beginning from Galilee, hither, and
   hath broken the commandments of the law, for he keepeth not the Sabbath
   day, Johannis nono. Thirdly, the sorrow was in smelling of ordure and
   filth. For he might smell great stench on the mount of Calvary whereas
   were the bodies of dead men stinking, whereof is said in Scholastica
   Historia that Calvary is the bone of the head all bare. And because
   that many were there beheaded, and many skulls of heads were there
   sparteled all openly, they said that it was the place of Calvary.
   Fourthly the sorrow in tasting, whereof he cried: Sitio! I am athirst!
   There was given to him vinegar meddled with myrrh and gall, to the end
   that he should the sooner die, and the keepers might the sooner depart
   and go thence. For it is said by vinegar men die much soone. And with
   this also they gave to him myrrh for to have the more pain, for the
   bitterness of the myrrh and of the gall. Whereof saith S. Austin: His
   purity was fulfilled with vinegar instead of wine, his sweetness with
   gall; the innocent is set for guilty, and the life dieth for death.
   Fifthly, the sorrow was in touching, for in all the parts of his body
   he was touched and wounded, from the plant of his foot unto the top of
   his head was none whole place. And how he suffered sorrow in all his
   natural wits S. Bernard telleth, that saith: The head that made angels
   to tremble is pierced and pricked with the quality of sharp thorns. The
   visage which was most fair of all other members is fouled by spit, and
   hurt with the thorns of the Jews. The eyes more shining than the sun be
   extinct in the death. The ears hear not the song of the angels but the
   assaults of the sinners. The mouth that teacheth and enseigneth the
   angels, is made drink vinegar and gall. The feet, of whom the steps be
   worshipped, be attached with nails to the cross. The hands that formed
   the heavens be stretched on the cross, and nailed with nails. The body
   is beaten, the side is pierced with a spear, and what more may be said?
   There abode nothing save the tongue for to pray for the sinners, and
   for to recommend his mother to his disciple. Secondly, his passion was
   despised of mockeries and derisions of the Jews. For four times he was
   mocked. First, at the house of Ananias where he received spittings,
   buffets and blindfolding, of the Jews. Whereof S. Bernard saith: Right
   sweet and good Jesus thy desirous visage which angels desire to see,
   the Jews with their spittings have defiled, with their hands have
   smitten, with a veil fortorn they have covered, nor they have not
   spared to hurt it with bitter wounds. Secondly, he was mocked in the
   house of Herod, which reputed him for a fool, and aliened from his wit,
   because he might have of him none answer. And by derision he was clad
   with a white vesture, whereof saith S. Bernard: Tu es homo, etc.--He
   saith thus: Thou art a man and hast a chaplet of flowers, and I am God
   and have a chaplet of thorns. Thou hast gloves on thine hands, and I
   have the nails fixed in my hands. Thou dancest in white vestures, and I
   God am mocked and vilipended, and in the house of Herod had received a
   white vesture. Thou dancest and playest with thy feet, and I with my
   feet have laboured in great pain. Thou liftest up thine arms in joy,
   and I have stretched them in great reproof. Thou stretchest out thine
   arms across in caroling and gladness, and I stretch mine in the cross
   in great opprobrium and villainy. Thou hast thy side and thy breast
   open in sign of vain glory, and I have mine opened with a spear.
   Nevertheless return to me and I shall receive thee.

   But why and wherefore Jesus in the time of his passion before Herod
   Pilate and the Jews was thus still and spake not, there be three
   reasons and causes. The first was because they were not worthy to hear
   his answer. The second was because Eve sinned by speaking, and Jesus
   would make satisfaction by being still and not speaking. The third is
   because that all that ever he answered, they perverted it. Thirdly,
   Jesus was mocked in the house of Pilate. For they clad him with a red
   mantle, and in his hand they took him a reed, and set upon his head a
   crown of thorns, and kneeled on their knees before him saying: Hail,
   King of the Jews. This crown was of jonkes of the sea. And we hold and
   say that the blood sprang out of his head. Whereof saith S. Bernard:
   Caput illud divinum, etc. The head precious and divine was pierced with
   thorns unto the brain of the soul. There be three opinions in what
   place principally the soul hath her place; or in the heart, for the
   scripture saith, out of the heart come the evil thoughts; or in the
   blood, because the scripture saith, the soul of every one is in the
   blood; or in the head, because the Evangelist saith: When he inclineth
   his head he rendered his spirit. And this treble opinion it seemeth
   that the Jews had known, for when they would make the soul issue out of
   the body, they sought it in the head, when they thrust the thorns to
   the brain. They sought it in the blood when they opened his veins in
   the feet and hands. And they sought it in the heart when they pierced
   his side. Against these three illusions, on Good Friday, before the
   cross is showed, we make three adorations in saying: Agios, O Theos,
   Yskyros, etc., in honouring him three times, like as he was for us
   mocked and scorned on the cross. Fourthly, he was scorned on the cross.
   The princes of the priests with the old men and masters of the law,
   clerks and doctors, said to him: If he be King of Israel, let him
   descend from the cross now to the end that we believe in him. Whereof
   saith S. Bernard: In that Jesus showed the more great virtue of
   patience, he commanded humility, he accomplished obedience, he
   performed charity. And in sign of these four virtues the four corners
   of the cross be adorned with precious gems and stones. And in the most
   apparent place is charity, and on the right side is obedience, and on
   the left side is patience, and beneath is humility, the root of all
   virtues. And all these things that Jesu Christ suffered, S. Bernard
   gathereth together saying: I shall, said he, as long as I shall live
   remember the labours that he had in preaching, of the travails that he
   had in going from one place to another by land, and from city to city,
   of his wakings in praying, of his temptations in fasting, of his
   weepings and tears in having compassion, of the awaitings on him in
   speaking, in assaying him and tempting. And at last of the villanies of
   the spittings, of the mockeries, of the opprobriums and of the nails.
   Thirdly, his passion was profitable and fructuous: the which may be
   profitable in three manners. That is to wit in remission of sin, in
   gifts of grace, and in demonstration of glory. And these three things
   be showed in the title of the cross. The first is Jesus, the second
   Nazarenus, and the third Rex Judeorum, for there shall we all be kings.
   Of the profit speaketh S. Austin, saying: Our Lord Jesu Christ hath put
   away the sins past, present, and to come. The sins past in pardoning
   them; the present in withdrawing men from them; them to come in giving
   grace to eschew the sins. Yet the same doctor saith thus: We ought to
   praise and to thank, to love and to honour him; for by the death of our
   Saviour and Redeemer we be brought to life, from corruption to
   incorruption, from exile unto our country, from weeping to joy we be
   called again. And how well the manner of our redemption was profitable
   it appeareth by five reasons. That is to wit, because it was right
   acceptable to appease God, right helping to save us, right effectual to
   draw to him the human lineage, right wise to fight against the enemy of
   human lineage, and to reconcile us to God. For after this that S.
   Anselm saith: There is nothing more sharp ne more strong that a man may
   suffer by his proper will, without it be of God, than to suffer death
   with his own proper will for the honour of God. Ne no man may better
   give to God to his honour than give himself to death for him. And this
   is that the apostle saith ad Ephesios v. Our Lord hath given himself in
   to oblation and sacrifice for us in to the odour of sweetness to God
   the Father. And how he was sacrificed that was in us appeasing God, S.
   Austin in the book of the Trinity saith thus: What thing may be more
   graciously and pleasantly received than the flesh of our sacrifice,
   which was made the precious body of our priest. Therefore four things
   ought to be considered in all sacrifice: First, him to whom it is
   offered, that which is offered, him that offereth, and him for who the
   offering is offered. He himself is the moyen of both two; or that is to
   say God and man, he was himself that did offer, and he was himself that
   was offered. And the same doctor saith yet of this sacrifice, how we be
   to God reconciled: Jesu Christ is the priest and the sacrifice, he is
   God and also he is the temple, he is the priest by whom we be
   reconciled, God, to whom we be reconciled, and the temple in whom we be
   reconciled, the sacrifice of whom we be reconciled. And S. Austin
   saith, considering them that despise this reconciliation, and set
   nought thereby, he saith in the person of Jesu Christ in reproving
   them: When thou wert enemy to my Father I have reconciled thee; when
   thou wert far I bought thee again; when thou wert taken I came for to
   redeem thee; when among the mountains and the forests thou wert out of
   the way, I sought thee, to the end that of the wolves nor of the evil
   beasts thou wert not eaten nor all to-torn; I gathered thee and bare
   thee in mine arms and delivered thee to my Father. I laboured, I sweat,
   I put mine head against the thorns, stretched mine hands unto the
   nails, opened my side to the spear, have shed my blood, and have given
   over my soul and life for to join thee to me, and thou hast departed
   thyself from me. Secondly, Jesu Christ was right convenable and
   necessary for to save us, and to heal and cure us of our malady and
   sickness, for because of the time and of the place and of the manner of
   the time, as it appeareth. For Adam was made and sinned in the month of
   March, and on the Friday, which is the sixth day of the week, and
   therefore God in the month of March, and on the Friday would suffer
   death, and at midday which is the sixth hour. Secondly, for the place
   of his passion, the which might be considered in three manners. For one
   place either it is common or especial or singular. The place common
   where he suffered was the land of promise. The place especial the mount
   of Calvary. The place singular the cross. In the was in a field about
   or nigh Damascus. Where it is said, in a place special, he was there
   buried. For right in the place where Jesu Christ suffered death, it is
   said that Adam was buried. How well that this is not authentic, for S.
   Jerome saith that Adam was buried in Hebron. And also in the book of
   Josuah is written the xiv. chapter: In a place singular he was
   deceived, that is to wit in the tree, not in this on which Jesus
   suffered death, but in another tree. Thirdly, he was right convenable
   because of the curing, the which by manner was semblable to the
   prevarication by like and contrary. For thus as saith S. Austin in the
   book, De doctrina christiana: By a woman he was deceived, and by a
   woman he was born a man, and the man delivered the men. One mortal
   delivered the mortal, and the death by his death. And S. Ambrose saith:
   Adam was of the earth a virgin; Jesu Christ was born of the virgin;
   Adam was made to the image of God; Jesus was the image of God; by a
   woman folly was showed; by a woman wisdom was born. Adam was naked;
   Jesu Christ naked. The death came by the tree, the life by the cross.
   Adam in desert, and Jesus in desert, but by the contrary. For after S.
   Gregory: Adam sinned by pride, by disobedience and by gluttony, for he
   coveted the highness of God. For the serpent said to them, ye shall be
   semblable to God, he brake the covenant of God, and desired and coveted
   the sweetness of the fruit by gluttony. And because the manner of the
   Saviour ought to be by the contrary, therefore this manner was right
   convenable by the humiliation, by the fulfilling and affliction, or of
   the divine volenty. And hereof saith the apostle ad Philippenses;
   Humiliavit se ipsum. Thirdly, Jesus was right profitable to draw to him
   the human lineage. For one of the world, his free will saved, might
   never have drawn mankind to his love. And how he draweth us to his love
   S. Bernard saith: Above all things O good Jesu give me grace to love
   thee. And by this thing he drew us most to his love. That is the
   chalice good Lord that thou hast drunken, which was the work our of
   redemption. This chalice is thy passion, which lightly may appropre our
   love to thee. This is that draweth most pleasantly our devotion, and
   justly raiseth it, and soonest straineth and most vehemently taketh our
   affection. And where thou lamentest, and thereas thou despoilest thee
   of thy rays natural, there shineth most thy pity; there is most clear
   thy charity, and there aboundeth most thy grace. And how also we ought
   to return to the affiance of him S. Paul saith, ad Romanos viii.: He
   spared not his own Son, but for us all he delivered him. Therefore S.
   Bernard saith: Who is he that is not ravished to hope of affiance which
   taketh none heed to the disposition of his body? He hath his head
   inclined to be kissed, the arms stretched to embrace us, his hands
   pierced to give to us, the side open to love us, the feet fixed with
   nails for to abide with us, and the body stretched all for to give to
   us. Fourthly, he was right wise and well advised for to fight against
   the enemy of the human lineage. Job xxvi.: His wisdom hath smitten the
   proud man, and after, may ye not take the fiend with an hook? Jesu
   Christ hath hid the hook of his divinity under the meat of our
   humanity, and the fiend would take the meat of the flesh, and was taken
   with the hook of the Godhead. Of this wise taking, saith S. Austin, our
   Redemption is come and the deceiver is vanquished. And what did our
   Redemptor? He laid out his bait to our deceiver and adversary; he hath
   set forth his cross; and within he hath set his meat, that is his
   blood. For he would shed his blood not as a debtor, and therefore, he
   departed from the debtors. And this debt here the apostle calleth
   chirographe or obligation, the which Jesu Christ bare and attached it
   to the Cross. Of which Saint Austin saith: Eve took of the fiend sin by
   borrowing by usury, and wrote an obligation. She laid it for pledge,
   and the usury is augmented, and grew unto all the remnant of the
   lineage. Then took Eve of the fiend sin, when against the commandment
   she consented to him. She wrote the obligation when she put her hand to
   the tree against the defence of God. She delivered pledge when she made
   Adam to consent to the sin, and thus the usury grew and augmented unto
   the remainder of all the lineage. Against them that reck nothing of
   this redemption Saint Bernard saith in the person of Jesu Christ: My
   people, saith Jesu, what might I have done for thee that I have not
   done to thee? What cause is there that ye serve sooner the devil, our
   adversary, than me? For he hath not created ne hath nourished you. But
   this seemeth a little thing to them that be full of ingratitude. I have
   redeemed you and not he, and for what price? Not with gold ne silver,
   ne of the sun, ne of the moon, ne with any of the angels, but with my
   proper blood. And after consider, if of right for so many benefits ye
   ought to choose to have my company. And if ye will all leave me, at the
   least come with me for to win a penny a day. And because they delivered
   Jesu Christ to death, that is to wit Judas for avarice, the Jews for
   envy, and Pilate for dread. And therefore it is to see what pain was
   delivered to them of God for this sin. But of the pain and of the birth
   of Judas thou shalt find in the legend of S. Matthew, of the pain and
   ruin of the Jews, in the legend of S. James the Less, and of the pain
   of Pilate and his birth thou shalt find in one apocryphum whereas it is
   said in this manner.

   There was a king called Tyrus which knew carnally a maid called Pilam,
   which was daughter of a miller named Atus. And of this daughter he
   engendered a son. She took her name and the name of her father, which
   was called Atus, and composed thus of their names one name to her son,
   and named him Pilatus. And when he was three years old she sent him to
   the king. And the king had a son of the queen, which seemed to be of
   the age of Pilate. And these two sons when they were of age of
   discretion, oft they fought together, and with the sling they played
   oft. And the king's son also, which was legitimate, was more noble, and
   in all feats he knew more, and more was set by because of his birth.
   And Pilate seeing this was moved of envy and wrath and privily slew his
   brother. The which thing the king heard say, and was much angry, and
   demanded of his council what he might do and make of this trespass and
   homicide. The which all with one voice said that he was worthy to
   suffer death. And the king would not double the pain and punition, but
   because he owed to the Romans yearly a tribute, he sent him in hostage
   to the Romans, as well for to be quit of the death of his son, and that
   he should not be constrained to put him to death, as well as for to be
   quit of the tribute that he owed to Rome. And this time was at Rome one
   of the sons of the king of France, which was also sent for trewage. And
   when Pilate saw him, he anon accompanied with him, and saw that he was
   praised before him for the wit and for the manners that were in him.
   Pilate slew him also. And when the Romans demanded what should be done
   in this matter, they answered that he which had slain his brother and
   estranged him that was in hostage, if he might live should be yet much
   profitable to the common weal, and should daunt the necks of them that
   were cruel and wood. And then said the Romans, that sith he was worthy
   to die he should be sent into an isle of the sea named Ponthus, to them
   that will suffer no judge over them, to the end that his wickedness may
   overcome and judge them or else that he suffer of them like as he hath
   deserved. Then was Pilate sent to this cruel people and wild, which
   before had slain their judge. And it was told to him to what people he
   was sent, and that he should consider how his life was hanging, and in
   great jeopardy. He went considering his life and thought to keep it,
   and did so much that by menaces and promises to torment as by gifts,
   that he subdued them all and put them in subjection. And because he had
   victory of this cruel people, he was named of this Isle of Pontus,
   Pontius Pilate. And when Herod heard his iniquities and his frauds he
   had great joy thereof. And because he was wicked himself, he would have
   wicked with him, and sent for him by messengers and by promise of gifts
   that he came to him, and gave him the power upon the realm of Judæa and
   Jerusalem. And when he had assembled and gathered together much money,
   he went to Rome without knowing of Herod, and offered right great sums
   of money to the Emperor for to get to himself that which Herod so held.
   And so he got it. And for this cause Herod and Pilate were enemies unto
   the time of the passion of Jesu Christ, whom Pilate sent to Herod.
   Another cause of enmity is assigned in Scholastica Historia: There was
   one that said himself to be God, and had deceived many of Galilee, and
   brought the people into Garizim where he said that he would go up to
   heaven. And Pilate came upon them, and when he had knowledge of the
   deed he slew him and all his people, because he doubted that he would
   have deceived them of Judæa. And therefore were they enemies together,
   for Herod reigned in Galilee.

   And when Pilate had delivered Jesu Christ to the Jews for to be
   crucified he doubted the Emperor that he should be reproved of that
   which he had judged an innocent, and sent a friend of his for to excuse
   him. And in this while Tiberius the Emperor fell into a grievous
   malady. And it was told to him that there was one in Jerusalem that
   cured all manner maladies. And he knew not that Pilate and the Jews had
   slain him. He said to Volusian, which was secret with him: Go into the
   parts over sea, and say to Pilate that he send to me the leech or
   master in medicine for to heal me of my malady. And when he was come to
   Pilate and had said his message, Pilate was much abashed, and demanded
   fourteen days of dilation, in which time Volusian found an old woman
   named Veronica which had been familiar and devout with Jesu Christ. He
   demanded of her where he might find him that he sought. She then
   escried and said: alas! Lord God, my Lord, my God was he that ye ask
   for, whom Pilate damned to death, and whom the Jews delivered to Pilate
   for envy, and commanded that he should be crucified. Then he complained
   him sorrowfully, and said: I am sorry because he may not accomplish
   that which my lord the Emperor hath charged me. To whom Veronica said:
   My lord and my master when he went preaching, I absented me oft from
   him, I did do paint his image, for to have alway with me his presence,
   because that the figure of his image should give me some solace. And
   thus as I bare a linen kerchief in my bosom, our Lord met me, and
   demanded whither I went, and when I told him whither I went and the
   cause, he demanded my kerchief, and anon he emprinted his face and
   figured it therein. And if my lord had beholden the figure of Jesu
   Christ devoutly he should be anon guerished and healed. And Volusian
   asked: Is there neither gold ne silver that this figure may be bought
   with? She answered: Nay, but strong of courage, devout and of great
   affection, I shall go with thee and shall bear it to the Emperor for to
   see it, and after I shall return hither again. Then went Volusian with
   Veronica to Rome and said to the Emperor: Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou
   hast long desired, Pilate and the Jews by envy and with wrong, have put
   to death, and have hanged him on the cross. And a matron, a widow, is
   come with me which bringeth the image of Jesus, the which if thou with
   good heart and devoutly wilt behold, and have therein contemplation,
   thou shalt anon be whole. And when the Emperor had heard this, he did
   anon make ready the way with cloths of silk, and made the image of
   Jesus to be brought before him. And anon as he had seen it and
   worshipped it he was all guerished and whole. Then he commanded that
   Pilate should be taken and brought to Rome. And when the Emperor heard
   that Pilate was come to Rome, he was much wroth, and inflamed against
   him, and bade that he should be brought tofore him. Pilate ware always
   the garment of our Lord which was without seam, wherewith he was clad
   when he came before the Emperor. And as soon as the Emperor saw him all
   his wrath was gone, and the ire out of his heart; he could not say an
   evil word to him. And in his absence he was sore cruel towards him, and
   in his presence he was always sweet, and debonair to him, and gave him
   licence and departed. And anon as he was departed he was as angry and
   as sore moved as he was before, and more because he had not showed to
   him his fury. Then he made him to be called again, and sware he should
   be dead. And anon as he saw him his cruelty was all gone, whereof was
   great marvel. Now was there one by the inspiration of God, or at the
   persuasion of some Christian man, caused the Emperor to despoil him of
   that coat. And anon as he had put it off, the Emperor had in his heart
   as great ire and fury as he had before, wherefore the Emperor marvelled
   of this coat, and it was told to him that it was the coat of Jesus.
   Then the Emperor made Pilate to be set in prison till he had counselled
   what he should do with him. And sentence was given that he should die a
   villain's death. And when Pilate heard the sentence, he took a knife
   and slew himself. And when the Emperor heard how he was dead, he said:
   Certainly he is dead of a right villainous death and foul, for his own
   proper hand hath not spared him. Then his body was taken and bounden to
   a millstone and cast in the river of Tiber for to be sunken in to the
   bottom. And the ill spirits in the air began to move great tempests and
   marvellous waves in the water, and horrible thunder and lightning
   whereof the people was sore afraid and in great doubt. And therefore
   the Romans drew out the body and in derision sent it to Vienne and cast
   it in to the river named Rhone. Vienne is as much to say as hell, which
   is said Gehenna, for then it was a cursed place, and so there is his
   body in the place of malediction. And the evil spirits be as well there
   as in other places, and made such tempests as they did before, insomuch
   that they of that place might not suffer it. And therefore they took
   the vessel wherein the body was, and sent it for to bury it in the
   territory of the city of Lausanne. The which also was tempested as the
   other. And it was taken thence and thrown into a deep pit all environed
   with mountains. In which place, after the relation of some, be seen
   illusions, and machinations of fiends be seen grow and boil. And
   hitherto is this story called apocryphum read. They that have read
   this, let them say and believe as it shall please them.

   Nevertheless in Scholastica Historia is read that Pilate was accused
   before the Emperor Tiberius because he did put to death by violence
   them that were innocent, by his might; and that maugre the Jews he did
   images of paynims in the Temple, and that the money put in corbanam he
   took, and did withal his profit, and was proved in his visage that he
   made in his house alleys and conduits for water to run in. And for
   these things he was sent to Lyons in exile for to die among the people
   of whom he was born. And this may be well supposed that this history be
   true. For tofore was the edict given that he should be put in exile to
   Lyons, and that he was exiled ere Volusian returned to the Emperor. But
   when the Emperor heard how he had made our Lord Jesu to die he made him
   from his exile to come to Rome. Eusebius and Bede in their chronicles
   say not that he was imprisoned and put in exile, but because that he
   fell in many miseries by despair he slew himself with his own hand.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth the Resurrection.

   Heretofore we have made mention of deviation of the human lineage,
   which dureth from Septuagesima unto Easter. Hereafter we shall make
   mention of the time of reconciliation.

   The resurrection of our Lord Jesu Christ was the third day after his
   death. And of this blessed resurrection seven things be to be
   considered. First, of the time that he was in the sepulchre, that be
   three days and three nights he was in the sepulchre, and the third day
   he arose. Secondly, wherefore he arose not anon when he was dead, but
   abode unto the third day. Thirdly, how he arose. Fourthly, wherefore
   his resurrection tarried not until the general resurrection. Fifthly,
   wherefore he arose. Sixthly, how ofttimes he appeared in his
   resurrection. And the seventh, how the holy fathers which were enclosed
   in a part of hell he delivered, and what he did, etc. As to the first
   point, it ought to be known that Jesus was in the sepulchre three days
   and three nights. But, after S. Austin, the first day is taken by
   synechdoche, that is that the last part of the day is taken which
   dureth from Easter unto the utas of Whitsuntide, like as holy Church
   hath ordained. The second day is taken all whole. The third is taken
   after the first part of the day. Thus there be three days, and every
   day hath his night going before. And after Bede the order of the day
   was changed, and the course ordained, for before, the days went before
   and the nights followed, after the time of the passion that order was
   changed, for the nights go before, and this is by mystery. For man
   first overthrew in the day and fell into the night of sin. And by the
   passion and resurrection of Jesu Christ he came again from the night of
   sin unto the day of grace. As touching the second consideration, it
   ought to be known that it is according to reason that anon after his
   death he ought not to arise, but ought to abide unto the third day, and
   for five reasons. The first for the signification to that that the
   light of his death should cure our double death, and therefore one day
   whole and two nights, he lay in the sepulchre, that by the day we
   understand the light of his death, and by the two nights our double
   death. And this reason assigneth the gloss upon S. Luke, Luce vicesimo
   upon this text. Oportebat Christum pati, etc. The second for certain
   probation. For right so as in the mouth of twain or of three is the
   witness established, right so in three days is proved all deed and fait
   veritable. And to the end to prove that his death was veritable, he
   would lie therein three days. The third for to show his puissance; for
   if he had arisen anon, it should seem that he had not such might for to
   give him life as he had to raise him. And this reason toucheth the
   Apostle ad Corinthios xv. Therefore is there first made mention of his
   death. Like as his death was verily showed so his very resurrection is
   showed and declared. Fourthly, for to figure the restoration. And this
   reason assigneth Petrus Ravenensis: Jesu Christ would be three days in
   his sepulchre in figure, in benefit doing. That is to wit, to restore
   them that be fallen, to repair them that be in the earth, and to redeem
   them that were in hell. The fifth, for the representing of treble
   estate of rightful men. And this reason assigneth S. Gregory upon
   Ezechiel saying: The sixth day of the week Jesus suffered death, the
   Saturday he lay in the sepulchre, the Sunday he arose. The present life
   is yet to us the sixth day, for in anguishes and sorrows we be
   tormented. The Saturday also is that we rest us in our sepulchre, for
   after the death we shall find the rest for our souls. The Sunday is the
   eighth day. That day we shall be free of the death and of all sorrow in
   body and in soul in glory. Then the sixth day is to us sorrow, the
   seventh rest, and the eighth glory.

   As to the third consideration, how he arose, it appeareth verily that
   he arose mightily. For by his proper might he arose, Johannis nono:
   Potestatem habeo, etc. I have said I have power to deliver my soul and
   I have power to resume it again. That is to say to die when I will.
   Secondly, he arose joyously, for he took away all misery, all
   infirmity, and all servitude. Whereof he saith the gospel of John,
   Johannis xxvi., he said: When I shall arise again I shall advance me
   and go tofore you into Galilee, where ye shall see me free and
   delivered. Galilee is as much to say as transmigration, that is to say
   dying. Jesu Christ then, when he arose, went before us, for he went
   from misery to glory, and from corruption to incorruption. Whereof S.
   Leo the Pope saith: After the passion of Jesu Christ, the bonds of
   death broken, he was transported from infirmity to virtue, from
   mortality to perpetuity, and from villainy to glory. Thirdly, he rose
   profitably, for he carried with him his prey. Whereof saith Jeremy the
   fourth chapter, Ascendit leo de cubili, etc. The lion is risen out of
   his bed. Jesus ascended on high upon the cross, and the robber of the
   people enhanced himself. Jesu Christ robbed hell, wherein was the human
   lineage. As he had said: Cum exaltatus fuero, etc. When I shall ascend
   on high I shall draw to me all mine of whom hell hath holden and kept
   the souls, which were enclosed in darkness and the bodies in sepulture.
   Fourthly, he arose marvellously. For he arose without opening of the
   sepulchre which abode fast closed. For like as he issued out of his
   mother's belly, and to his disciples, the doors closed and shut, so he
   issued out of his sepulchre. Whereof is read in Scholastica Historia,
   of a monk of S. Laurence without the walls, in the year of the
   Incarnation of our Lord one thousand one hundred and eleven, which
   marvelled of a girdle with which he was girt, that without undoing or
   opening it was cast tofore him. Whereof when he saw it he marvelled,
   and he heard a voice in the air saying: Thus may Jesu Christ issue out
   of his sepulchre, and the sepulchre all closed. Fifthly, he arose
   truly, for he arose in his proper body, and by six manners he showed
   that he was verily risen. First, by the angel which lied not. Secondly,
   by many and ofttimes appearing. Thirdly, by eating openly and by no art
   fantastic. Fourthly, by palpation of his very body. Fifthly, by
   ostention of his wounds, by which he showed that it was the proper body
   in which he had verily suffered death. Sixthly, by his presence in
   coming into the house, the gates shut, when he entered suddenly and
   invisibly, by which he showed that his body was glorified. Seventhly,
   he arose immortally, for he shall never die, Johannis vi.: Christus
   resurgens, etc.

   And S. Denis in an epistle that he made to Demophilus saith that Jesu
   Christ after his ascension said to an holy man named Carpo, I am all
   ready yet to suffer for to save man; by which it seemeth that if it
   were need, that yet he were ready to suffer death as it is contained in
   the same epistle. This holy man, Carpo, told to S. Denis that a paynim
   perverted a Christian man and brought him out of the faith. And this
   Carpo took such anger therefore in his heart that he was sick. And this
   Carpo was of so great holiness that as oft as he sang mass an heavenly
   vision appeared to him. But when he should pray for the conversion of
   them both daily, he prayed God that both twain might be burnt in a
   fire. And on a time about midnight he made this prayer unto God, and
   suddenly the house in which he was in, was divided in two parts, and a
   right great furnace appeared there. And he looked up and beheld the
   heaven, and saw it open, and Jesu Christ which was environed with a
   great multitude of angels, and beside the furnace these two men were
   trembling for great dread that they had; the which men were bitten of
   serpents that issued out of the furnace, which drew them by force into
   the furnace; and also of other men they were reproved and villained.
   And this holy man Carpo in beholding them had great delight, and took
   pleasaunce in their punition; in such wise that he left the vision of
   heaven and set not thereby, but was angry that they fell not suddenly
   into the furnace. And then as he looked up into heaven, he saw the
   vision that he had before seen. And Jesu Christ which had pity of these
   two men arose up out of his throne, and came unto them with a great
   multitude of angels, and put forth his hand and delivered them. And
   Jesus said to Carpo: Smite me, from henceforth I am ready to suffer for
   to save man. This ensample reciteth S. Denis. As to the fourth article,
   wherefore he abode not until the general resurrection, three reasons be
   assigned. The first for the dignity of his body, for he was deified and
   came from the Deity, and therefore it was no reason that his body
   should so long lie in the earth. Whereof David saith, Non dabis sanctum
   tuum videre corruptionem: Thou shalt not suffer thine holy body to see
   corruption. The second reason is for the steadfastness of the faith.
   For if he had not then arisen, the faith had perished, men would not
   have believed that he had been very God. And that appeareth well, for
   in his passion, save our Lady, all lost faith. But when they had
   knowledge of his resurrection they recovered it again, as saith S.
   Paul, Si Christus non surrexerit vane est fides nostra: If Jesu Christ
   had not risen our faith had been vain or none. The third cause for the
   exemplar of our resurrection: there should be but few that should
   believe the resurrection to come if Jesu Christ had not risen. And this
   is our example and our hope. And therefore say the apostles, Jesu
   Christ is arisen and we shall arise, for his resurrection is cause of
   ours. Whereof saith S. Gregory: Our Lord by example hath showed that he
   promised in reward, as that we should know him to have risen. Thus in
   ourself we should have hope of the reward of his resurrection, and we
   ought to know that Jesu Christ would not prolong his resurrection above
   three days, to the end that desperation should not be in the world. As
   to the fifth article, it is wherefore he arose. He arose for four
   things much profitable to us; for his resurrection made the
   justification of our sins. She enseigneth new life of manners, she
   engendereth the hope of reward, and ordaineth the resurrection of all.
   Of the first saith S. Paul ad Romanos: Jesu Christ died for our sins
   and arose for to justify us. Of the second: Like as Jesu Christ arose
   by the glory of the Father, which is a new glorious life, so ought we
   in spiritual life to take new manners. Of the third: By his great mercy
   God hath raised us in hope of life by the resurrection of Jesu Christ.
   Of the fourth it is said to us in Scripture: Jesu Christ arose from
   death, for by man is death come to men, and by man, that is Jesu
   Christ, the life is come to men. Thus be they the first of dead men.
   Adam of them that died, and Jesu Christ of them that be alive by his
   resurrection. And thus it appeareth that Jesu Christ had four
   properties in his resurrection. The first is, that our resurrection is
   deferred unto the last resurrection, and Jesu Christ arose the third
   day. As saith the gloss upon this psalm: Ad vesperum demorabitur
   fletus, etc.: At evensong time shall be weeping, and on the morn
   gladness and joy. The gloss saith that the resurrection of Jesu Christ
   is cause sufficient of the resurrection of souls in this present time,
   and of the bodies in time to come. The second property is, that we rise
   by him, and he arose by himself. Whereof saith S. Ambrose: How might he
   seek help to raise his body, which raised other? The third property is,
   that we become dust or ashes, and his body might not be turned into
   ashes. The fourth property is, that his resurrection is cause
   sacramental of our resurrection. As touching the sixth article, how oft
   he appeared the day of his resurrection. He appeared five times. First
   to Mary Magdalene, Marci ultimo. After his resurrection he appeared
   first to Mary Magdalene, which is figure of penitents. And for five
   reasons he appeared to her. First, for she loved him most ardently.
   Because she loved so much, God forgave and pardoned her many sins.
   Secondly, for to show that he died for sinners, Matthew ix.: Non vend
   vocare, etc.: I came not for to call rightful men but sinners to
   penance. Thirdly, for to verify his word, Matthew xxi.: Amen dico quia
   meretrices, etc.: To the hypocrites and pharisees he saith that common
   women and the publicans should go before them to the kingdom of heaven.
   Fourthly, for because that like as a woman was messenger of death, so a
   woman should be messenger of life, after the gloss. Fifthly, like as
   sin abounded, so should grace more abound, like as the apostle saith ad
   Romanos v. The second time he appeared to the three Maries which
   returned from the monument, when he said to them: Avete, God greet you;
   and then then approached him and held his feet. And that is the figure
   of humble prayers. To whom our Lord appeared, as well for the reason of
   the nature as for the reason of the affection. For they held his feet,
   which signifieth the affection of the heart. Thirdly he appeared to S.
   Peter, but when or in what place it is not known, but if it were by
   adventure when he returned from the monument with S. John. For it might
   well be that S. Peter in some place turned from S. John, where God
   appeared to him, or by adventure when he was alone in the monument.
   Like as it is said in Scholastica Historia, or peradventure in a cave
   or a fosse. For it is read in the histories, when he renied and forsook
   our Lord, that he fled into a cave where as the mountain is which is
   called the mountain of the cock; or else after that it is said that he
   wept three days continually after that he had renied God, and there
   Jesus appeared to him and comforted him, saying: Peter bear the virtue
   of obedience, to whom our Lord showeth him. Fourthly he appeared to his
   disciples which went to Emaus, which is as much as to say as desire of
   counsel, and signifieth to visit the poor members of Jesu Christ and to
   help them. As it is said in the gospel: Go and sell all that thou hast,
   and give it to poor people. Fifthly he appeared to his disciples which
   were together in a place closed. And this signifieth religious men that
   be in the world with the gates of their five wits closed. These five
   apparitions were the day of his resurrection.

   And these five representeth the priest in his mass when he turneth him
   five times to the people. But the third turning is in silence, which
   signifieth the apparition made to S. Peter, which is not known when it
   was made ne in what place. Sixthly he appeared the eighth day to his
   disciples when S. Thomas was there, which had said that he would not
   believe it till he had seen the wounds, the nails, and that he had put
   his hands in his side. The seventh time he appeared fishing, Johannis
   ultimo, and that signifieth preachers which be fishers of men. The
   eighth time he appeared to his disciples in the Mount Tabor, Matthew
   ultimo, and that signifieth them that been contemplative, for in the
   said hill was our Lord transfigured. The ninth time he appeared to
   eleven disciples where they sat at table, whereat he reproved their
   incredulity and hardness of heart; by which we understand the sinners
   in the eleven number of transgression set, whom our Lord by his mercy
   sometime visiteth. The tenth time he appeared to his disciples in the
   Mount of Olives by which is signified them that be full of mercy and
   that love compassion, to whom our Lord appeareth, which is Father of
   mercy and of pity. From this place he ascended up into heaven. There be
   three other manner of apparitions of which is made mention, which were
   made the day of the resurrection, but they be not had in the text of
   the gospel. The first was that he appeared to S. James the Less, which
   is named James Alphei, of which thou shalt find in his legend.

   The second that he appeared was to Joseph, as it is read in the gospel
   of Nicodemus. For when the Jews had heard that Joseph had demanded the
   body of Jesus of Pilate, and that he had put it in his monument, they
   were angry and had indignation on him, and took him and put him in a
   secret place, where diligently they closed him and kept him, and would
   have slain him after their sabbath day. And Jesus the night of his
   resurrection entered into the house where he was in, and overlift up
   the four corners of the house, and wiped and cleansed his visage and
   kissed him. And without breaking of any lock or seal he brought him
   into his house in Arimathea. The third is after that it is believed he
   appeared unto his mother Mary, the glorious Virgin, and how be it that
   the holy Evangelists speak nothing thereof, the Church of Rome
   approveth it. For the same day is made station at our Lady the major.
   And if we should not believe because the Evangelists make no mention
   thereof, it should follow that after his resurrection he appeared not
   to her; but that ought not to be believed that such a son should not
   leave his mother without visiting, and do to her so little honour. And
   peradventure the Evangelists speak no word of her because it appeareth
   not to them but to set witness of the resurrection. And the Virgin Mary
   ought not to be set in for no witness. For if the words of strange
   women were reputed for leasings, much more should the mother be because
   of the love that she had to him that was her son. And though the
   Evangelists have not written it, yet they knew well for certain that it
   is right that first he should enhance and comfort her that had most
   pain and sorrow for his death. And that witnesseth S. Ambrose in the
   third book of Virgins: Vidit Maria, etc.: Mary saw the resurrection and
   she believed it perfectly. Mary Magdalene saw it and yet she doubted
   it. Of the seventh, how Jesu Christ drew the holy fathers out of hell,
   and what he made there, the Evangelist telleth not clearly.
   Nevertheless Saint Austin in a sermon, and Nicodemus in his gospels,
   show it somewhat. And Saint Austin saith: Anon as Jesu Christ had
   rendered the spirit, the soul that was united to his Godhead was quick
   and living in the deepness of hell descended. And when he was at
   deepest of the darkness, like as a robber shining and terrible to the
   tyrants of hell, they beheld him and began to demand and enquire: Who
   is he that is so strong, so terrible, so clear and so shining ? The
   world, which is to us subject, sent to us never such one dead, ne he
   sent to us never such gifts into hell. Who is he then that is so
   constant that is entered into the furthest end of our parts, and he
   doubteth not only of our torments, but yet he hath unbound them of
   their bonds whom we held and kept? And they that were wont to wail and
   weep under our torments, assail us now by their health. And now not
   only they fear us, but now threaten and menace us. And they said to
   their prince: What prince art thou? All thy gladness is perished and
   all thy joys be converted into weepings. When thou hangedst him in the
   cross thou knewest not what damage thou shouldst suffer in hell. After
   these cruel words of them of hell, at the commandment of our Lord all
   the locks, all the bars and shuttings been broken, and to-frushed. And
   lo! the people of saints that come kneeling tofore him in crying with
   piteous voice, saying: Our Redeemer! Thou art come for to redeem the
   world, we have abided thee every day; thou art descended into hell for
   us, and leave us not, but that we be with thee when thou shalt return
   to thy brethren. Lord sweet God, show that thou hast despoiled hell,
   and bind the author of death with his bonds, render to the world now
   gladness, and quench the pains; and for thy pity unbind the caitiffs
   from servitude whiles thou art here, and assoil the sinners when thou
   descendest into hell, them of thy party. This said Saint Austin.

   And it is read in the gospel of Nicodemus that Carinus and Leucius,
   sons of old Simeon, arose with Jesu Christ. And they were adjured and
   sworn of Ananias, of Caiaphas, of Nicodemus, of Joseph, and of
   Gamaliel, that they should tell and say what Jesus did in hell. And
   they rehearsed and said: When we were with our fathers in the place of
   obscurity and darkness, suddenly it was all so light and clear as the
   colour of the sun, like purple, gold, and light royal, which illumined
   all the habitation upon us. And anon Adam the father of the human
   lineage began to enjoy, saying: This light is the light of the creator
   of the light sempiternal, which promised to send to us his light
   perpetual. And Isaiah cried: This is the light of God the Father, like
   as I said living in the earth: The people that were in darkness saw a
   great light. Then came our Father Simeon, and in joying said: Glorify
   ye our Lord, for I received Christ, a child born in the world, in to
   mine hands in the Temple, and I was constrained by the Holy Ghost to
   say, Nunc viderunt oculi mei salutare tuum: I have now seen with mine
   eyen thine health which bringeth and hath made it ready before the face
   of all thy people. After, came one which seemed to be an hermit, and
   when we demanded him what he was, he answered that he was John that
   baptized Christ, and he that am gone before him for to make ready his
   way, and showed him with my finger when I said: Ecce agnus Dei, and am
   descended for to show to you that he cometh soon to visit you. Then
   said Seth: When I came to the gate of Paradise for to pray our Lord to
   send me his angel, and that he would give to me of the oil of mercy for
   to anoint the body of Adam my father, which was sick, the angel Michael
   appeared to me and said: Labour not in praying by weeping for t things
   here, anon they were transfigured and were no more seen. And hereof
   speaketh Gregory Nyssen and S. Austin, like as is found in some books.

   Anon as Jesu Christ descended into hell, the night began to wax clear.
   And anon the porter black and horrible among them in silence began to
   murmur, saying: Who is he that is so terrible and of clearness so
   shining? Our master received never none such into hell, ne the world
   cast never none such into our cavern. This is an assailer, and not
   debtor, a breaker and destroyer, and no sinner but a despoiler, we see
   him a judge but no beseecher, he comes for to fight and not to be
   overcome, a caster out and not here a dweller.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth the Litanies, the More and the Less

   The Litanies be done twice in the year. The first be done on Saint
   Mark's day, and that is called the more Litany. And the second be done
   on the three days before the Ascension Day, and is called the lesser
   Litany. And Litany is as much to say supplication or prayer. The first
   Litany is named in three manners. First, it is called the more Litany.
   secondly, the procession of seven orders. Thirdly, the black cross.
   Then this Litany is said the more, for three reasons. The first is for
   him that instituted it, that was Saint Gregory the Pope, and that was
   at Rome, which is lady and head of the world, because that the body of
   the prince of the apostles is there, and the Holy See. And also for the
   reason of the cause wherefore it was instituted, and that was for a
   right great and grievous malady. For as the Romans had in the Lent
   lived soberly and in continence, and after at Easter had received their
   Saviour. After, they disordered them in eating, in drinking, in plays
   and in lechery. And therefore our Lord was moved against them, and sent
   to them a great pestilence, which was called the botche of impedimy.
   And that was cruel and sudden, and caused people to die in going by the
   way, in playing, in being at table, and in speaking one with another
   suddenly they died. In this manner sometime sneezing they died, so that
   when any person was heard sneezing anon they that were by said to him:
   God help you, or Christ help: and yet endureth the custom. And also
   when he sneezeth or gapeth, he maketh tofore his face the sign of the
   cross, and blesseth him; and yet endureth this custom. And how that
   pestilence began, it is found in the life of S. Gregory. Secondly, this
   Litany is said procession of seven orders, because that when they were
   made, S. Gregory ordained them by seven ordinances. For in the first
   order was all the clergy, in the second were the monks and religious
   men, in the third were all the nuns, in the fourth all the children, in
   the fifth all the lay people, in the sixth all the women, and in the
   seventh all they that were married. But because that now we may not
   fulfil in number of persons, we ought to fulfil it in number of
   Litanies. For it with black clothes. And peradventure for that same
   cause they covered the cross and the altars with blessed hairs, and
   thus we should take on us clothing of penance.

   There is another Litany, which is called the lesser Litany, the which
   is made the three days tofore the Ascension. And this instituted S.
   Mamertin, Bishop of Vienne in the time of the Emperor Leo, which
   reigned the year of our Lord three hundred and fifty-eight tofore the
   institution of the first. And is said the Litany the less, the
   rogations and processions. For it is the lesser Litany to the
   difference of the first, because that this lesser Litany was instituted
   of a lesser, which was a simple Bishop, in a lesser place, and for
   lesser malady. And the cause of the institution was this. For then, at
   Vienne, were great earthquakes of which fell down many churches and
   many houses, and there was heard great sounds and great clamours by
   night. And then happed a terrible thing on Easter-day, for fire
   descended from heaven that burnt the king's palace. Yet happed more
   marvellous thing; for like as the fiends had entered into the hogs,
   right so by the sufferance of God for the sins of the people, the
   fiends entered into wolves and other wild beasts, which every one
   doubted, and they went not only by the ways ne by the fields, but also
   by the cities ran openly, and devoured the children and old men and
   women. And when the Bishop saw that every day happed such sorrowful
   adventures, he commanded and ordained that the people should fast three
   days; and he instituted the Litanies, and then the tribulation ceased.
   And from then, forth on, the Church hath ordained and confirmed that
   this Litany should be kept and observed over all. It is said also
   Rogations, for then we pray and demand the suffrages of all the saints,
   and we thus have good cause for to keep this ordinance and fast in
   these days. And for many reasons it is instituted. First, because it
   appeaseth the battles, that commonly begin in primetime. Secondly,
   because that the fruits which be then tender, that God will multiply.
   Thirdly, because that every man should mortify in himself the movings
   of his flesh, which in that time boil. Fourthly, because that every one
   dispose himself to receive the Holy Ghost; for by fastings, by orisons,
   and by devotion is one more able and more worthy. But, two other
   reasons assigneth Master William of Auxerre, because then, when Jesu
   Christ would ascend into heaven he said: Ask ye duly and ye shall have.
   And we may the more faithfully demand when we have the promise of God.
   Secondly, because that holy Church fasteth and prayeth that she have
   but little flesh, that is to make the body lean by abstinence, and to
   get wings by prayer.

   For prayer is the wing of the soul by which she fleeth to heaven, to
   the end that she may follow Jesu Christ ascending up before us to show
   us the way. And know ye that the soul that aboundeth in plenty of
   flesh, and hath but few pens and feathers, he may not well fly. Thus
   this Litany is called procession, for then the Church maketh general
   procession. And in this procession the cross is borne, the clocks and
   the bells be sounded and rung, the banners be borne, and in some
   churches a dragon with a great tail is borne. And aid and help is
   demanded of all saints. And the cause why the cross is borne and the
   bells rung is for to make the evil spirits afraid and to flee; for like
   as the kings have in battles tokens and signs-royal, as their trumpets
   and banners, right so the king of heaven perdurable hath his signs
   militant in the Church. He hath bells for business and for trumps, he
   hath the cross for banners. And like as a tyrant and a malefactor
   should much doubt when he shall hear the business and trumps of a
   mighty king in his land, and shall see his banners, in like wise the
   enemies, the evil spirits that be in the region of the air, doubt much
   when they hear the trumpets of God which be the bells rung, and when
   they see the banners borne on high. And this is the cause why the bells
   be rung when it thundereth, and when great tempests and outrages of
   weather happen, to the end that the fiends and the evil spirits should
   be abashed and flee, and cease of the moving of tempests. Howbeit also
   that there is another cause therewith; that is for to warn the
   Christian people, that they put them in devotion and in prayer, for to
   pray God that the tempest may cease. There is also the banner of the
   King, that is the cross, which the enemies dread much and doubt. For
   they dread the staff with which they have been hurt. And this is the
   reason wherefore in some churches in the time of tempest and of
   thunder, they set out the cross against the tempest to the end that the
   wicked spirits see the banner of the sovereign king, and for dread
   thereof they flee. And therefore in procession the cross is borne, and
   the bells rung for to chase and hunt away the fiends being in the air,
   and to the end that they leave to tempest us. The cross is borne for to
   represent the victory of the resurrection, and of the ascension of Jesu
   Christ. For he ascended into Heaven with all a great prey. And thus
   this banner that flyeth in the air signifieth Jesu Christ ascending
   into heaven. And as the people follow the cross, the banners, and the
   procession, right so when Jesu Christ styed up into heaven a great
   multitude of saints followed him. And the song that is sung in the
   procession signifieth the song of angels and the praisings that came
   against Jesu Christ and conducted and conveyed him to heaven where is
   great joy and melody. In some churches, and in especial in them of
   France, is accustomed to bear a dragon with a long tail filled full of
   chaff or other thing. The two first days it is borne before the cross,
   and on the third day they bear it after the cross, with the tail all
   void, by which is understood that the first day tofore the law, or the
   second under the law, the devil reigned in the world, and on the third
   day, of grace, by the passion of Jesu Christ, he was put out of his
   realm.

   After in this procession singularly we call the suffrages of all the
   saints. And why we call to the saints divers reasons be assigned
   heretofore, but yet there be of the general, wherefore we pray the
   saints. First for our poverty and for the glory of saints, and for the
   reverence of God. For the saints may well know the vows and the prayers
   of the suppliants. For in the mirror perpetual, that is Jesu Christ,
   they understand how much it appertaineth to their joy and to our
   profit. Then the first reason is for our poverty, and for our misery,
   or for our default we have some merit, to the end that where our merits
   be not sufficient the suffrages of saints may avail us, or for default
   that we have in contemplation of God, and that we may see perfectly the
   light sovereign that we see and behold in his saints, or for the
   default that we have in loving God, for we see that some show more
   greater affection to a saint than they do to God, and such people be
   imperfect. The second reason is for the glory of saints. For God will
   that we call the saints, because that by their suffrages that we
   require, we glorify them, and the more greatly we praise them. The
   third reason is for the reverence of God, to the end that the sinners
   that have offended God, the which dare not approach to God in their
   persons, they approach him by the friends of God in demanding their
   suffrages. And in these Litanies we ought to repeat this song of
   angels: Sancte Deus, sancte fortis, sancte et immortalis miserere
   nobis. Item, John Damascene recordeth in his fourth book that, in
   Constantinople, for a tribulation that happed there, there were
   litanies made. It happed that a child amid the people was ravished to
   heaven and this canticle he learned there; and after then he returned
   to the people, and in the midst of the people he sang it, and anon that
   tribulation ceased. And after at the Council of Chalcedon this canticle
   was approved and the cause concluded. We know that it is so that the
   fiends be put out by this canticle: Sancte Deus. Of this canticle and
   praising the authority is approved by four reasons. First, because that
   an angel taught it first. Secondly, because at the prolation and
   repetition of this canticle, that tribulation ceased. Thirdly, because
   that the Council of Chalcedon approved it. And fourthly, because that
   the fiends and enemies so much dread and doubt it.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth next the Ascension of our Lord.

   The Ascension of our Lord Jesu Christ was the fortieth day after his
   resurrection; for which to declare, seven things be to be considered.
   First then, he ascended. Secondly, why he ascended not anon after his
   resurrection. Thirdly, how he ascended. Fourthly, what company ascended
   with him. Fifthly, by what merit he ascended. Sixthly, where he
   ascended, and seventhly, wherefore he ascended. As to the first he
   ascended from the mount of Olives by Bethany; the which mountain, by
   another relation, is said the mountain of three lights. For by night on
   the side of the west it is lighted of the fire that burneth in the
   Temple, which never is put out ne quenched. On the morning it is light
   of the orient, for she hath first the rays of the sun before it shineth
   in the city, and also it hath great abundance of oil that nourisheth
   the light, and therefore it is said the hill of three lights. Unto this
   hill Jesu Christ commanded his disciples that they should go. For on
   the day of his Ascension he appeared two times, one time to eleven
   disciples that ate in the hall where they had supped with him. All the
   apostles and the disciples and also the women, abode in that part of
   Jerusalem which is called Mello, in the mountain of Sion, where David
   had made his palace. And there was the great hall arrayed and ordained
   for to sup, whereas Jesu Christ commanded that they should make ready
   for to eat the Paschal Lamb, and in this place the eleven apostles
   abode, and the other disciples, and the women abode in divers mansions
   there about. And when they had eaten in this hall, our Lord appeared to
   them and reproved them of their incredulity. And when he had eaten with
   them, and had commanded them that they should go to the Mount of Olivet
   on the side by Bethany, he appeared again to them, and answered to them
   of the demands that they made to him indiscreetly, and with his hands
   lifted he blessed them; and anon before them he ascended unto heaven.
   Of the place of this ascension saith Sulpicius, Bishop of Jerusalem,
   and it is in the gloss. For there was edified a church in the place
   where were made the signs of his ascension. Never sith might be set
   there any pavement, it could not be laid ne set but anon it issued out,
   and the stones of the marble sprang into the visages of them that set
   it. And that is a sign that they be stones on which Christ passed upon,
   which lie in the powder and dust, and abide for a token and sign
   certain. As to the second point, wherefore he ascended not anon after
   his resurrection, but abode forty days, that was for three reasons.

   First, for the certification of his resurrection. And more strong it
   was to prove his resurrection than his passion, for from the first unto
   the third the passion might be well proved, but to prove the very
   resurrection it required more days, and therefore a greater time was
   required between the resurrection and the ascension than between the
   passion and resurrection. And hereof saith Leo the Pope, in a sermon of
   the ascension: This day the number of forty days is complete and
   dispensed by right holy ordinance and to the profit of our enseignment
   and teaching, to the end that in the space of his presence corporal the
   faith of teaching was necessary. And we ought to give thankings to the
   divine dispensation for the tardy creance of holy fathers to us
   necessary; for they doubted of that which we doubt not. Secondly, he
   abode for the consolation of the apostles. For the consolations divine
   surmount the tribulations temporal. And the time of the passion was the
   time of tribulation to the apostles, and therefore there ought to be
   more days unto the ascension than for the resurrection. Thirdly, for
   the mystery of the comparation, for to give to understand that the
   consolations divine be compared to tribulations as the day unto an
   hour, and the year unto a day. And that this be true it appeareth by
   the writing of the prophet Isaiah: I shall preach a year pleasant to
   our Lord, and a day of vengeance to God. Lo! for one day of
   tribulation, he rendereth a year of consolation. And that is by
   comparison as the day to an hour. It appeareth by that, that our Lord
   was dead and lay in the sepulchre forty hours, which was the time of
   tribulation. And by forty days after his resurrection he appeared to
   his disciples, which was the time of consolation. And this saith the
   gloss: Because that he was forty hours dead, after, he was forty days
   living ere he ascended in to heaven. As to the third point, how he
   ascended, it appeareth how that he ascended mightily. For by his
   puissance and virtue saith Isaiah, he ascended into heaven, Isaiah
   xliii. And also S. John saith: No man ascendeth into heaven by his own
   puissance and might, but the Son of Man that is in heaven. And how be
   it that he ascended in a cloud, he had none need, but because that he
   would show that every creature is ready to serve his creator, he
   ascended in his proper virtue. And in this is the difference, after
   that Scholastica Historia saith, of Jesu Christ, of Enoch and Elijah.
   For Enoch was translated, Elijah was borne, but Jesu Christ by his own
   might is ascended into heaven. After S. Gregory, the first, that is to
   wit Enoch, was engendered of a man, and he was engendering. The second,
   that is to say Elijah, was engendered and not engendering. The third,
   that is to wit Jesu Christ, he was born, not engendered of a man ne
   engendering. Secondly, he ascended openly, for seeing his disciples he
   ascended: whereof it is said Johannis xvi., Vado ad eum qui me misit,
   etc.: I go to my father, and none of you demandeth whither goest thou?
   the gloss saith: I go so openly that no man demanded of that they saw
   at the eye. And therefore he would ascend in their presence, because
   they might bear witness, and that they should enjoy of that they saw
   nature human ascend to heaven, and that they should desire to follow
   him. Thirdly, he ascended joyously, for the angels singing and
   enjoying, he ascended into heaven in gladness. Whereof saith S. Austin:
   Adscendente Christo paves, etc.: Jesu Christ ascending, the heaven
   abashed, the stars marvelled, the company of heaven enjoyed, the trump
   sounded, and all the sieges of the pleasant place made melody.
   Fourthly, he ascended lightly. Whereof David saith: He styed up as a
   giant with a great pace: and much hastily and lightly he ascended when
   he passed so great a space in a moment. Rabbi Moses, which was a great
   philosopher, rehearseth that every circle, or every heaven of each
   planet, hath the thickness and the way of five hundred years. That is
   to say as one may go in a plain way in five hundred years. And that is
   the distance between heaven and heaven, and between circle and circle,
   after that which is said so great. And as there be seven heavens, after
   his saying, from the centre of the earth unto the concavity of the
   heaven of Saturn, which is the seventh way of seven thousand years; and
   unto the concavity of the eighth heaven seven thousand and seven
   hundred years, that is as much space as one could go in plain way in
   seven thousand and seven hundred years if a man might live so long, and
   that every year be of three hundred and sixtyfive days, and the way of
   every day be of forty miles, and every mile be of two thousand paces or
   cubits, and this said Rabbi Moses, which was a great philosopher; if it
   be truth or no God knoweth, for he that all hath made and created in
   certain number, in certain poise and weight, and in certain measure, he
   knoweth all.

   Then this leap or springing was great that Jesu Christ made from the
   earth to heaven. Of this leap, and divers others leaps of Jesu Christ,
   S. Ambrose saith: Jesu Christ came into this world to make a leap; he
   was with God the Father, he came into the Virgin Mary, and from the
   Virgin Mary into the crib or rack. He descended into flom Jordan, he
   ascended upon the cross, he descended into his tomb. From the tomb he
   arose, and after ascended up into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand
   of the Father. As to the fourth point, it is with whom he ascended. He
   ascended with a great prey of men and great multitude of angels. And
   that he ascended up with the prey of men, it appeareth by this that
   David saith: Ascendisti in altum, cepisti captivitatem, etc.: Lord,
   thou hast ascended on high and hast taken them that were captives
   emprisoned, and the servitude thou hast affranchised. And also that he
   ascended with a great multitude of angels, it appeareth by the
   interrogations that the angels made Lord of the deputations to them
   beneath. When Jesu Christ ascended into heaven as Isaiah recordeth,
   Isaiah Ixiii.: Quis est iste qui venit de Edom, etc.: Who is he that
   cometh from Edom with his clothes dyed, whereas saith the gloss that
   some of the angels that knew not plainly the mystery of the
   incarnation, of his passion and of his resurrection, that saw our Lord
   ascend with all a great multitude of angels and of saints by his own
   virtue, marvelled, and said to the angels that accompanied him: Who is
   this that cometh from Edom? And yet they said: Who is this king of
   glory, etc. S. Denis in the book of the The Hierarchy of holy angels in
   the seventh chapter saith: Thus seemeth it that he said that three
   questions were made to the angels when that Jesus ascended. The first
   were the first to themselves, the second were the principals to Jesu
   Christ that ascended, the third were the less to the greatest. Of which
   they demanded among them: who is this that cometh from Edom, his
   clothes dyed of Bosra? This word Edom is as much to say as full of
   blood, and this word Bosra is to say anguish and tribulation. Thus as
   they would have said: Who is this that cometh from the world full of
   blood by the sin of the world and of malice against God? And our Lord
   answered: I am He that speaketh in justice. And S. Denis saith thus,
   that he said: I am he that disputeth justice and righteousness of
   health in the redemption of human lineage. He was justice, inasmuch as
   he that was creator brought again his creatures from the strange
   jurisdiction, and he was righteousness, inasmuch as the enemy which had
   assailed us he put and cast out of the domination that he had in the
   human lineage. And after this maketh S. Denis a question: Sith the
   principal angels be nigh to God and be without moyen illumined of God,
   wherefore, demanded they one of the other like as that they would have
   learned each of other? But he saith, that giveth this solution, that in
   that they demand each of other, as it showeth that they desire to know,
   and in that first among them they had collation, it showed that they
   durst not advance them tofore the divine progression. And for this
   first, they ought to ask each one other, because that peradventure
   their interrogation were not over hasty upon the illumination that they
   had received of God without moyen. The second question is that which
   the first and sovereign angel made to Jesu Christ saying: Why is thy
   clothing red, and thy vestments as trodden or fulled in a press? Our
   Lord hath his clothing and his body red, all covered with blood,
   because that yet when he ascended he had his wounds in his body, after
   this that Bede saith: He must keep his wounds in his body for five
   reasons, and he said, thus our Lord keepeth his wounds. And to the day
   of judgment he shall keep them, to the end that it confirm his
   resurrection. And for to pray the Father for us, he presenteth them, to
   the end that the good see the great mercy by which he hath redeemed
   them, and that the wicked people may know that righteously they be
   damned, and that eternally he bears with him the signs of his glorious
   victory perpetual. And to this question answered our Lord: Torcular
   calcavi, etc. The press I have turned and fouled all alone, and of all
   men. there was not one that would help me. The press is the cross, in
   the which he was pressed in such wise that the blood sprang out. Thus
   Jesu Christ called the enemy the presser, which that thus had wrapped
   the human lineage with cords of sin, and quenched him so clean that he
   had nothing spiritual, but that it was without expressed, and only he
   showed it in the Virgin Mary. But our champion fought so strongly, and
   defouled the presser so foul, that he brake the bonds of sin and
   ascended into heaven. And after this he opened the tavern of heaven and
   poured out the wine of the Holy Ghost. The third question is that which
   the lesser angels made to the greater and more, in saying: Who is this
   king of glory? They answered and said: The lord of virtues, he is the
   king of glory. And of this question of the angels, and of the answer of
   the other saith S. Austin: All the air is hallowed in the company
   divine, and all the tourbe of devils flying in the air fled backward
   when Jesu Christ ascended, to whom the angels that were in the company
   of God ran and demanded: Who is this king of glory? And they answered
   this is he that was white and coloured as a rose, the which was seen
   without colour and without beauty; sick in the tree, strong in his
   despoil; foul reputed in his body, well-armed in the battle; stinging
   in his death, fair in his resurrection; white, born of the Virgin, red
   in the cross; pale in reproof and clear in heaven. As to the fifth, it
   is for what merit he ascended; and we ought to understand that he
   ascended in treble merit. Whereof saith S. Jerome: Jesu Christ ascended
   in merit of truth, for that which had he promised by prophets, he
   fulfilled in merit of humility and debonairly. For like as he was
   sacrificed like a lamb for the life of the people in merit of justice.
   But by justice and not only by puissance, but by justice and by right
   thou hast delivered man, and I have withholden of thy puissance, and
   thy virtue shall bring thee to heaven. This said God the Father to the
   Son. As to the sixth, that is whither he ascended, it ought to be known
   that he ascended above all the heavens, as the apostle saith ad
   Ephesios quarto: He that descended from heaven, that is he that
   ascended above all the heavens because he fulfilled all things. He said
   above all the heavens because there be many heavens above which he
   ascended. There is a heaven material, a heaven rational, a heaven
   intellectual and a heaven substantial. There be many heavens material.
   The heaven of the air, which is called æreum; one other called
   ethereum; another olimpium; another igneum; another siderum; another
   crystallinum; and another empyreum; the heaven reasonable is the man
   just, which is said just because of the divine habitation. For like as
   heaven is the seat of God as the prophet Isaiah saith: Coelum mihi
   sedes est. Our Lord saith that the heaven is his seat, right so is the
   soul of a righteous man. Like as Solomon saith: The soul of a righteous
   man is the seat of sapience, by reason of the holy conversation. For
   the saints by holy conversation and desire dwell in heaven. As saith S.
   Paul: Our conversation is in heaven because of continual operation in
   virtue. For like as the heavens move continually without resting, in
   such manner the saints move always by good works. The heaven
   intellectual be the angels, and the angels be called heaven by reason
   of dignity and of their understanding. Whereof saith S. Denis in the
   book of divine names, in the fourth chapter. The divine spirits and the
   angels be above the creatures which be, and live above all things that
   live and understand, and know above all other wits and reasons, and
   more than all other things that be in being, they desire well and good
   of which they been participant, that is God. Secondly, they be right
   fair because of their nature and of their glory. Of which beauty saith
   S. Denis in the book before alleged: The angel is the manifestation of
   deeds and will of God by whom they be showed, and he is the clearness
   of dark light, he is a mirror pure and right clear without receiving of
   any filth or spot in him, if it be lawful to say, he is the beauty and
   the conformity of the bounty of God. Thirdly, they be right strong
   because of their virtue and might, of which strength saith John
   Damascene in his second book, the eighth chapter, where he saith:
   Fortes sunt et parati, etc. The angels of God be strong and always
   ready to fulfil the will of God, and they be found alway anon where God
   will have them. The heaven hath three conditions. It is right high,
   right fair, and right strong. Of the two first saith Solomon,
   Ecclesiastici xliii.: The firmament is the beauty of the height, and
   the beauty of heaven is in the sight of glory. The heaven is
   substantial, that is the quality of the divine excellence of which Jesu
   Christ came, and after this he ascended. Whereof David saith: A summo
   coelo egressio ejus, etc. From the high and sovereign heaven the Son of
   God descended and ascended again unto the sovereign height, the quality
   of the divine excellence. And that he ascended above all the heavens
   material David said it clearly which said, Elevata est magnificentia
   tua super coelos, Lord God thy magnificence is lift up and elevate
   above all the heavens material. He ascended unto the heaven where God
   the Father sitteth, not like unto Elijah which ascended in a chariot of
   fire unto a high region, from whence he was translated into a paradise
   terrestrial. He went no further, but Jesu Christ ascended in the
   highest heaven that is called coelum empyreum, which is the proper
   habitation of God, of the angels, and of the saints. And this
   habitation properly appertaineth to dwellers, for this heaven, above
   all other heavens, hath excellence in divinity, in priority, in
   situation and circumference. And therefore it is convenient of Jesu
   Christ, which all the heavens of intelligence and reason surmounteth in
   divinity, in eternity, in situation of immobility, and in circumference
   of puissance. Semblably it is the habitation of saints of good
   congruity. For that heaven is without deformity, unmeasurable, of
   perfect light, and of capacity without measure; and rightfully it
   appertaineth unto angels and unto saints, which were all one in
   operation, immovable in dilection, shining in the faith and in
   knowledge, of great capacity in receiving the Holy Ghost, it appeareth
   by this Scripture that saith in the Canticles: Lo! this is he that
   cometh leaping in the mountains and overpassing the hills. And who that
   ascended above all the heavens of intelligence, that is to say above
   the angels, appeareth by David, that saith: He ascended above the
   cherubin, which is as much as to say as the plenitude of science, and
   flew upon the pens of the wind. And who ascended above unto the heaven
   substantial, that is, to the equality of God the Father, it appeareth
   by the gospel of Mark, Marci ultimo: Et Dominus quidem, Jesus, etc.
   Sith that our Lord had spoken to his disciples, he was set in heaven on
   the right side of God. Whereof saith S. Bernard: To my Lord Jesus
   Christ it is said singularly, and given of my Lord God the Father, that
   he sit on the right side of his glory in glory, in essence
   consubstantial by generation, semblable of majesty and nothing-unlike,
   and of eternity semblable.

   Now may we say that Jesus in his ascension was right high of four
   manners of height, that is to wit of place, of remuneration, of reward,
   of knowledge, and of virtuality or strength. Of the first said the
   apostle ad Ephesios: He that descended hither down, that is he that
   ascended above all the heavens. Of the second, ad Ephesios secundo: He
   was made obedient unto death. When S. Austin saith: The humility of
   clearness is the merit, and the clearness of meekness is the meed or
   reward. Meekness is the merit of clearness, and clearness is the reward
   of meekness. Of the third saith David: Adscendit super cherubim, He
   ascended above cherubim, that is above the plenitude of science and of
   knowledge. Of the fourth it appeareth, for as it is written: He
   ascended above Seraphim, which is interpreted the strength of God. And
   we ought to know that of his ascension we have nine fruits profitable.
   The first is the habitation of the love of God, whereof is said in the
   gospel, Johannis xvi.: Nisi enim abiero, etc. But if I shall go the
   Holy Ghost shall not come to you; where saith S. Austin: If ye seek me
   by fleshly love ye may not comprehend the Holy Ghost which is spiritual
   love. The second is the more greater knowledge of God, whereof saith S.
   John in the gospel: If ye love me well ye shall have great joy, for I
   go to my Father, for he is greater than I am. Where saith S. Austin: I
   shall withdraw this form of humanity in which my Father is more greater
   than I, as to that ye may see God. The third point is the merit of the
   faith, of whom saith S. Leo the Pope in a sermon of the Ascension: Then
   began the faith more certain to approach, which teacheth us the Son to
   be equal to the Father and semblable, and as to the body substantial of
   Jesu Christ, of which he is less than the Father, and whereof he had no
   need. And this vigour is of great courage, and firm without doubt, for
   to believe that which is not seen at eye, and to affix the desires that
   may not be beholden. And S. Austin saith: He ascended as a giant to run
   in his way, and tarried not, but he ran crying by voice, by words, by
   deeds, by death, by life, by descending and by ascending; in crying
   that we should return to him by good heart that we may find him. The
   fourth is our surety, therefor ascended Jesu Christ into heaven for to
   be our advocate to God the Father. And we ought to hold us well assured
   when we have such advocate to God the Father, and this witnesseth us S.
   John, that saith in his canon: We have advocate to the Father, Jesus
   Christ which is merciful to us for our sins. And of this surety saith
   S. Bernard: O man, saith he, we have a sure going or a coming to God
   the Father, where the Mother is before the Son, to whom she showeth her
   breast and her paps, and the Son showeth to the Father his side and his
   wounds. Then we may not be put away where we have so many signs of love
   and of charity. The fifth is our dignity. A great dignity have we
   gotten when our nature is lift up unto the right side of the Father,
   whereof the angels of heaven, considering that, defended for to be
   worshipped of man, Apocalypsis xix. S. John would have worshipped the
   angel that spake to him, and the angel defended him in saying: Beware
   thee that thou do not so, for I am thy brother and thy servant. Whereas
   the gloss saith, that in the old law he defended not to be worshipped
   of man, but after the Ascension, when he saw man lift up above him. And
   of this S. Leo saith in a sermon of the Ascension: This day the nature
   of our humanity hath been borne above the height of all puissances unto
   where as God the Father sitteth, as that it should seem more marvellous
   when it is seen that it is much far from men, so much more show they
   the reverence and the honour that they have. And hereof the faith
   mistrusteth not, ne hope slacketh not, ne charity aminisheth not. The
   sixth is the stedfastness and firmness of our faith, whereof saith S.
   Paul ad Hebræos sexto: To Jesu Christ we run for refuge, for to keep
   the hope that hath been delivered to us as an anchor which is firm to
   the soul and sure, which leadeth to within heaven, where Jesu Christ
   before us entered. And S. Leo saith thus: The ascension of Jesu Christ
   is our mounting and lifting up, and where the joy of our head is, there
   abideth the hope of our body. The seventh is the showing of the way of
   heaven, whereof saith Micah the prophet: He ascended to show us the
   way. And S. Austin saith: Thy Saviour hath made the way to thee, arise
   thou and go thither, for thou hast that thou intendest, be not now
   slothful. The eighth is the opening of the gate of heaven; for like as
   Adam opened the gate of hell, in likewise Jesu Christ opened the gate
   of heaven, as the Church singeth; Lord God Jesu Christ, thou art he
   that hast overcome the prick of death, that is the devil, and hast
   opened the realm of heaven to them that believe in thee. The ninth is
   the preparation of the new place. Whereof Jesus saith in the Gospel of
   John: I go for to make ready your place in heaven. And S.Austin saith:
   Lord, array that thou hast made ready. Thou arrayest us Lord to thee,
   and thou arrayest thee to us, when thou makest ready the place, to the
   end that to thee in us, and in thee to us, may be the preparation of
   the place and the mansion of the everlasting health. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth of the Blessed Holy Feast of Pentecost or of the Holy Ghost.

   The Holy Ghost, as witnesseth S. Luke in the story of the Acts of the
   Apostles, on this day was sent to the apostles in the form and likeness
   of tongues of fire. And of this sending and coming eight things be to
   be considered. First, from whom he was sent. Secondly, in how many
   manners he was sent. Thirdly, in what time he was sent. Fourthly, how
   oft he was sent to the apostles. Fifthly, in what wise he was sent.
   Sixthly, into whom he was sent. Seventhly, wherefore he was sent. As to
   the first, it is to weet that he was sent from the Father, and from the
   Son he was sent, and he also himself, the Holy Ghost, gave and sent
   himself. Of the first saith S. John, Johannis xiv.: The Holy Ghost
   which is said paraclitus, whom God the Father shall send in my name,
   this is he that shall teach us all. Of the second saith S. John: If I
   go, saith Jesus, I shall send him to you. Now it is to wit that the
   sending is compared in three manners to the sender. First, as he that
   giveth being in his substance, and in this manner the sun giveth his
   rays or beams. Secondly, as in giving virtue or strength, and so is the
   dart given by the virtue and strength of him that casteth it. Thirdly,
   to him that giveth his jurisdiction to another, and thus the messenger
   is sent from him of whom he hath the commandment. And after these three
   manners the Holy Ghost may be said to be sent, for it is said: sent of
   the Father and of the Son as having virtue and authority in his
   operation, notwithstanding himself giveth and sendeth him. The which
   thing seemed to be veritable after this that the gospel of John saith,
   Johannis decimo sexto, Cum autem venerit ille Spiritus veritatis, etc.:
   When the spirit of truth shall come, which proceedeth from the Father,
   he shall bear witness of me that he cometh from me. Now saith S. Leo in
   a sermon of the Pentecost: The incommutable deity of the Blessed
   Trinity is without any changing, one in substance, not divided in
   operation, all one in will, like in omnipotence, equal in glory, and in
   his mercy. He hath taken to himself the work of our redemption, that
   the Father be to us merciful, the Son to us profitable, and God the
   Holy Ghost inflame us. And because that the Holy Ghost is God,
   therefore he giveth himself. And that this is true, S. Ambrose in the
   book of the Holy Ghost sayeth thus: The glory of the Divinity is
   approved by four reasons, or for that he is without sin, or for that he
   leaveth the sins, or for that he is creator and not creature, or for
   that he worshipped none but he is worshipped. And in that is showed to
   us that the Blessed Trinity was all given to us, for the Father hath
   offered all that he had. As saith S. Austin: He hath sent to us his Son
   in price of our redemption, and the Holy Ghost in sign of our adoption.
   Semblably the Son of God hath given himself unto us. For thus saith S.
   Bernard: He is our pastor, he is our pasture, and he is our redemption,
   for he gave his soul in price of our redemption, his blood in to drink,
   his flesh in to meat, and his divinity in to final reward. Semblably
   the Holy Ghost gave himself all to us; like as the apostle saith: By
   the Holy Ghost is given the word of sapience to one, to another of
   science; and thus of all graces particular is given by the same Holy
   Ghost. And hereof saith S. Leo the Pope: The Holy Ghost is the inspirer
   of the faith, giver of Science, teacher of chastity, and cause of all
   health. As to the second, he is sent in four manners, that is to wit,
   that the Holy Ghost is sent in two manners, visibly and invisibly. As
   touching into the hearts pure and chaste he descended visibly, when by
   some sign visible he is showed. Of the sending invisible saith S. John,
   Johannis iii.: Spiritus ubi vult spirat. The Holy Ghost where he will
   he inspireth the hearts, but thou knowest not whence he cometh nor
   whither he will go. And it is no marvel, for as S. Bernard saith of
   this word invisible: He is not entered by the eyes, for he is not
   coloured, ne by the ears, for he soundeth not, ne by the nostrils, for
   he is not meddled with the air, ne he entereth not by the conduit of
   the mouth, for he may not be swallowed, ne by the feeling or
   attouching, for he is not maniable, ne may not be handled. Thou
   demandest then if he hath sought any place natural or human by which
   thou mightest know that he be come into thee. Know thou, saith S.
   Bernard, that of the moving of the heart I have understood by his
   presence; and by the fleeing of vices I have felt the virtue of his
   puissance; and by the discussion and reproving of my sins hidden, I am
   amarvelled of the deepness of sapience and of the amendment of my
   manners how little and small that they be. I have experience of the
   bounty of his mansuetude and of the reformation and renovation of the
   spirit of my heart. I have pierced the thickness and the nobleness of
   his beauty, and of the regard and consideration of all these things, I
   am abashed of the multitude of his greatness. The sending visible, when
   it is in any sign visible, it showeth. And it is to wit that in five
   signs visible the Holy Ghost is sent and showed. First, in sign of a
   dove upon Jesu Christ when he was baptized, Luke iii.: The Holy Ghost
   descended in bodily likeness of a dove upon him. Secondly, in likeness
   of a fair cloud and clear upon Jesu Christ at his transfiguration,
   Matthew xvii.: Lo! he yet speaking a bright cloud shadowed them. This
   was upon the Mount Tabor where Jesu Christ spake with S. Peter, James,
   and John. And thus as he spake there descended a clear cloud that
   covered them all, whereas the gloss saith thus: When Jesu Christ was
   baptized, and also when he was clarified, the mystery of the Trinity
   was showed. The Holy Ghost was showed at the baptism in likeness of a
   dove, and in the hill in the likeness of a clear mountain and cloud.
   Thirdly, he was showed in likeness of a blowing or a blast, as saith S.
   John, Johannis vicesimo: He breathed and blew on them and said: Take ye
   the Holy Ghost in you; of whom ye forgive the sins, they shall be
   forgiven, and of whom ye retain the sins, they shall be retained.
   Fourthly, in likeness of fire. Fifthly, in likeness of tongues. And in
   these two manners he appeared to us to give us to understand that the
   properties of the tongue and of fire he putteth in the hearts when he
   descendeth. The dove hath wailing for her song, she hath no gall, she
   maketh her house in an hole, or in a wall of stone. And thus the Holy
   Ghost, them that he replenisheth, he maketh them to wail for their
   sins. Whereof saith Isaiah the prophet, Isaiah Iix.: We all shall roar
   like bears, and wail like doves, in thinking humbly and bitterly how we
   have erred against the Scripture.

   And this comforteth us the apostle S. Paul, ad Romanos viii.: The Holy
   Ghost ceaseth not to pray for us in moving us to wailings without
   number, for our sins which be without number. Secondly, the doves be
   without gall, and the Holy Ghost maketh them such where he descendeth,
   for that is his nature. Whereof saith the wise man, Sapientiæ xii.: O
   quam bonus et suavis, etc.: O Lord God, how much good and sweet is this
   spirit in us. Item, in the same place he is called sweet, benign, and
   human, of that he maketh us benign and human, that is to wit, sweet in
   word, benign in heart, and human in work. Thirdly, the doves dwell
   within the holes of walls of stone, that is to say, in the wounds of
   Jesu Christ he maketh them dwell. That he fulfilleth whereof it is said
   in the Cantica Canticorum ii.: Arise thou my spouse, my love and my
   dove, my spouse and love, that is a devout soul, and come my dove for
   to nourish small pigeons in the holes of the wall, that is in the
   wounds of our Lord. Whereof S. Jerome saith: Spiritus oris nostri,
   etc.--thus as he would say, the Spirit that is of our mouth, that is
   Jesu Christ, for he is our mouth. And our flesh maketh us say to
   Christ, In thine umber, that is, in thy passion, in which Jesu Christ
   was obscure, dark and despised, we shall live by continual memory.
   Secondly, he was showed in likeness of a cloud. The cloud is lift up
   from the earth by virtue of the sun, and nourisheth and engendereth
   rain, and refresheth and cooleth the air and the earth. Thus the Holy
   Ghost, them that he replenisheth he lifteth from the earth for to
   despise the earthly things, as saith the prophet Ezechiel: The Holy
   Ghost hath lift me into the air between heaven and earth, and hath
   brought me into Jerusalem, in the vision of God. Secondly, he
   refresheth the earth, that is the hearts, against the dryness of
   burning of vices. And of this was said to the Virgin Mary Spiritus
   sanctus superveniet in te, etc.: The Holy Ghost shall come in thee, and
   the virtue of him that is highest shall shadow thee, and from all
   ardour of vices shall cool thee. And the Holy Ghost is called water
   because that water hath the virtue and nature to refresh and cool.
   Whereof saith S. John the Evangelist: From the Holy Ghost the floods of
   living water shall run. And that same saith he of the Holy Ghost, which
   the apostles received, and of them that received him, for the rivers
   ran through all the world upon them that believed in God. Thirdly, he
   engendereth rain, the which descendeth by drops. And this is that David
   saith: The Holy Ghost shall blow and make waters to flow, that is to
   say by the tears coming from the heart dropping from the eyes.
   Fourthly, he is showed in likeness of breath, which is a spirit of the
   heart which is cast out by the mouth, which is light, hot, sweet, and
   necessary to breathe with. Thus the Holy Ghost is light to be shed into
   a man, he is most swift of anything that is movable, as the gloss saith
   upon this word: Factus est repente de coelo sonus, etc. At the coming
   of the Holy Ghost he made moving as of thunder, and of wind, vehement
   and sudden, and fulfilled all the house where the apostles sat, which
   abode him in great devotion. For the grace of the Holy Ghost wrought
   not in his operation of space, ne of time, but he had sudden motion.
   Secondly, he is hot for to enflame the hearts. Whereof Jesu Christ
   saith: I am come to cast fire in the earth, but this is that burneth
   and inflameth the hearts. And is compared to wind which is hot, whereof
   is said in the Canticles: Veni auster et perfla hortum meum. Come wind
   of the south, and blow in my garden, that is my soul. Thirdly, he is
   sweet for to make sweet the hearts, and therefore he is named by the
   name of unction; the sweet unction of him teacheth us which
   appertaineth to our health. And it is named by name of dew whereof
   singeth holy Church: Et sui roris aspersione fecundet, where she
   prayeth that the aspersion and springing of the dew make our hearts to
   grow in virtue, and also by space of time still and calm. After the
   stroke of the fire, descended a sweet sound of air soft and small, and
   there was our Lord. Fourthly, it is necessary to breathe in such manner
   that if it might not issue out of the mouth that he might not breathe,
   anon the man should die. And thus should we understand of the Holy
   Ghost, after this that David saith: Auferes spiritum eorum et deficient
   et in pulverem, etc. Lord God as soon as thou shalt take away their
   spirit they shall fail. And therefore saith he: Emitte spiritum tuum,
   etc. Lord God send thy spirit into them and they shall be created by
   spiritual life and be renewed, for the Holy Ghost is he that giveth
   life. Fourthly, he was showed in the likeness of fire. Fifthly, in
   likeness of tongues. And the cause for which he appeared in these two
   manners I shall hereafter say. As to the third principal, in which time
   he was sent, he was on the fiftieth day sent, after Easter, for to give
   to us knowledge that the Holy Ghost came, and it is the perfection of
   the law, the remuneration perdurable, and the remission of sins. It
   appeareth of the perfection of the law, for from the day that the Lamb
   was sacrificed in that old law, the law was delivered the fiftieth day
   after that, as the Church saith, in fire. And also in the New
   Testament, fifty days after Easter, descended the Holy Ghost on the
   mount of Sion in likeness of fire. Like as the law was given in the
   highest of the mount of Sinai, so the Holy Ghost in the solier where
   the supper of Jesu Christ and of his apostles was made. In this
   appeareth that the Holy Ghost is the perfection of all the law, for in
   that is the plenitude of dilection. Secondly, the perdurable
   remuneration is in the Holy Ghost, whereof the gloss saith thus, that
   the fourty days in which our Lord conversed with his disciples signify
   the holy church, also the fiftieth day on which the Holy Ghost was
   given, expresseth the penny of the last retribution and reward
   perdurable. Thirdly, of the Holy Ghost is the remission of sins, as
   saith the gloss. Therefore it was given in the fiftieth day, because in
   the fiftieth year was the Jubilee, and all things pardoned, and by the
   Holy Ghost the sins be pardoned. And it followeth in the gloss: In the
   jubilee spiritual the prisoners be delivered, the debts be quitted, the
   exiled be repealed and called home, the heritages be rendered, and the
   bond men be rendered from their servitude and made free. and the guilty
   of death be made quit and delivered. Whereof saith S. Paul: The law of
   the spirit of life in Jesu Christ hath delivered me from the law of sin
   and of death. After, the debts of sin be left, for charity covereth and
   quencheth great multitude of sins. The exiled men be called home, and
   the prophet saith: Spiritus tuus bonus, etc. Lord thy good spirit hath
   brought me into the right land of my country, that is, into heaven. The
   heritage lost is rendered, whereof saith S. Paul: The Holy Ghost hath
   given witness to our Spirit that we be the sons of God. And if we be
   sons we be heirs, which were servants to sin, we be made free to God,
   for where the Holy Ghost is, there is franchise and liberty. As
   touching the fourth, how oft he was sent to the apostles, after that
   the gloss saith: He was given to them by three times, that is to wit
   before the passion of Jesu Christ, after the resurrection, and after
   the Ascension. First to do miracles. Secondly to release the sins, and
   thirdly to confirm the hearts. First, when he sent them to preach, and
   to cast fiends out of bodies, and to heal the sick malades, he gave to
   them the puissance. And these marvels did they by the Holy Ghost,
   nevertheless it is not consequent that whosoever have the Holy Ghost do
   miracles. For S. Gregory saith: The miracles maketh not a man holy, but
   show him holy, nor also every man that doth miracles hath not the Holy
   Ghost. For evil people avaunt them to have done miracles, saying: Lord,
   Lord, say they, have not we well prophesied in thy name? Thou hast
   given to us the spirit of prophecy.

   God doth miracles by his angels, by matter amiable that they have, and
   the fiends by virtues natural, which be in things created naturally,
   and the enchanter, by help of fiends. The good christian man by justice
   public, the evil christian man by signs of justice. Secondly, they had
   the Holy Ghost when he breathed on them saying: Take ye the Holy Ghost
   in to you, to whom ye loose their sins they shall be loosed, and of
   whom ye retain, they shall be retained. Nevertheless none save God may
   forgive sins as to the sin that is in the soul, and which is the
   obligation to pain perdurable, or as to the offence of God, the which
   is only forgiven by the infusion of the grace of God, and by the force
   and virtue of contrition. Nevertheless we say that the priest
   assoilleth of sins, as for that he is insinued, or showeth that the
   sinner is assoilled of God. As to that, that the pain that should be
   perpetual, he changeth into temporal of purgatory, and also for that
   the pain temporal is due, he releaseth part. Thirdly, the Holy Ghost
   was given to them on this day, when he confirmed so their hearts that
   they dreaded no torment by the virtue of the Holy Ghost, which all
   overcometh. Whereof saith S. Austin: Such is the grace of the Holy
   Ghost that if he find heaviness in the heart he breaketh it; if he find
   desire of evil, he destroyeth it; if he find vain dread, he casteth it
   out. And S. Leo the Pope saith: The Holy Ghost was hoped of the
   apostles, not for then first he had inhabited in them, but because that
   the hearts to him sacred and dedicated, he more should visit them, and
   more abundantly by grace should abide in increasing his gifts not then
   begun, of which he was not newly showing his operation, for his largess
   passeth all abundance. As to the fifth, that is to wit, how he was
   sent. It is to be known that he was sent with great sound in tongues of
   fire, the which tongues appeared sitting. And the sound was sudden from
   heaven, vehement and shining. It was sudden for he had no need of space
   temporal. It was from heaven, for he made them celestial that he
   replenished. Vehement for he gave dread of love, or for that he took
   away the sorrow perdurable, which is malediction; or for that that he
   bare the heart out of carnal love. Also he was replenishing, for he
   fulfilled all the apostles. As saith S. Luke: Repleti sunt omnes
   Spiritu Sancto. And it is to weet that there be three signs of
   replenishing that were in the apostles. The first is that the place
   where he is giveth no sound, like a tun of wine that is full. To this
   purpose speaketh Job: Shall the ox cry and roar when the racke is full?
   The ox shall not low nor cry when the crib shall be full, like as he
   would say when the heart is full of grace, him ought not grudge by
   impatience. This sign had the apostles, for in the tribulation that
   they had, they resounded not, ne grudged by impatience, but joyously
   went to the presence of the tyrants, to prison, and to torments. The
   second sign is that he may receive no more, else he were not full. In
   this manner he that is all filled demandeth no more. In like wise the
   saints that have plenitude of grace, may receive none other liquor of
   earthly delectation; and because they have tasted the sweetness of
   heaven, they have none appetite to the earthly delectations. Whereof
   saith S. Austin: Whoso drinketh one drop of delights of paradise, the
   which one drop is greater than all the sea ocean. Which ought to be
   understood that all the thirst of this world is in him extinct. And
   this sign had the apostles which would have none of the goods of this
   world in proper, but put it all in common. The third sign is for to run
   over out, as it appeareth by a river which ariseth and runneth over his
   banks. As Solomon saith: Which filleth as Phison wisdom. This flood, or
   river Phison, of his nature ariseth and springeth over, and watereth
   and arroseth the land about him. In like wise the apostles began to
   spread abroad. For after they had received the Holy Ghost they began to
   speak divers languages, where the gloss saith, that that was the sign
   of plenitude, for the vessel full sheddeth over, as it appeareth of S.
   Peter, for anon as he began to preach he converted three thousand.
   Secondly, he was sent in tongues of fire. And here be three things to
   be considered. First, for whom he was sent conjointly in the tongues of
   fire. Secondly, wherefore he was sent in tongues of fire more than in
   another element. Thirdly, wherefore he was sent in tongues more than in
   another member. As to the first, for three reasons he was sent and
   appeared in tongues of fire, to the end that their words should inflame
   the hearts. Secondly, that they should preach the fiery law of God.
   Thirdly, that they should know that the Holy Ghost, which is fire,
   spake in them, and t by his incomprehensibility. For the third, he is
   said Holy Ghost having all virtue, for he is invincible, for he hath
   all strength, seeing all things from far. The third reason is taken as
   to his manifold effect. And this reason assigneth Rabanus, saying that
   the fire hath four virtues or natures. It burneth, it purgeth, It
   chauffeth, it lighteth. In likewise the Holy Ghost burneth the sins, he
   purgeth the hearts, he casteth away all coldness and dread of the
   hearts, and he illumineth them that be ignorant. Of the first saith
   Zachary the prophet: He broileth and burneth the hearts as the fire
   burneth the silver. Also David saith: Lord I pray thee, burn my reins
   and my heart, and dry them from all sin. He purgeth also the hearts
   after that, as saith Isaiah: When our Lord hath washed away the filthes
   of the daughters of Sion, and hath purged the blood of Jerusalem from
   the middle of him in the spirit of judgment and in the spirit of
   burning, then shall they be in safety and surety, and kept against all
   tempest. And the prophet speaketh of the purgation that shall be made
   at the last, when all shall be purged pure and clean that shall go in
   to heaven. He casteth out also all coldness and pusillanimity of the
   hearts, whereof the apostle saith: Be ye fervent in spirit, that is of
   heart, the which thing the Holy Ghost maketh when He espriseth him of
   his love. And hereof saith S. Gregory: The Holy Ghost appeared in fire
   for all the hearts which He replenished, and voided the coldness of
   fire, and inflamed them with desire of the glory perdurable. He
   illumined also the ignorant, whereof saith the wise man; Lord God who
   shall know thy science, if thou give not thy sapience and send to us
   thine Holy Spirit from above, that is he that all enseigneth and
   teacheth? The fourth reason is taken after the nature of his love. Love
   is signified by the fire for three causes. The first cause is for the
   fire is always moving, so is it of the Holy Ghost; for them that he
   replenisheth he maketh them to be in continual moving of good
   operation. Whereof saith S. Gregory: The love of God is never idle, as
   long as it is in the heart of a devout person it fructifieth. And it
   fructifieth not, it is a sign that it is not there. The second is, for
   the fire among all the other elements hath but little matter, but
   strong virtue in operation it hath in his quality. Thus the Holy Ghost,
   whom he replenisheth, maketh them to have but little love to earthly
   things, and great to spiritual things, in so much they love not worldly
   things more worldlily, but spiritually. S. Bernard putteth four manners
   of love; that is to wit, to love the world fleshly, the spirit fleshly,
   the flesh spiritually, and the spirit spiritually. The third cause is,
   for that the fire abasheth and meeketh the things high. He hath tended
   on high things despercled, to unite them, and them despercled to bring
   together. And by these three things be understood three virtues of
   love. For as saith S. Denis in the book of the names divine: The fire
   hath three virtues, for he inclineth the high things down, he lifteth
   the things low in height, he ordaineth the things equal to their
   ordinance. And these three things maketh the Holy Ghost in them that he
   replenisheth. For he inclineth them by humility, he lifteth them up by
   desire of high things, and ordaineth them together by unity of manners.
   Thirdly, he appeared in likeness of a tongue more than in another
   member, and for three reasons. The tongue is the member that is
   inflamed of the fire of hell, and is of great difficulty to govern, and
   profitable when it is well governed. And because that the tongue was
   inflamed of the fire of hell, she had need that the Holy Ghost should
   come to inflame it. As saith S. James: It is the fire of the Holy
   Ghost, and because it is evil and lightly governed, she hath the more
   need. For after that that saith S. James in his chronicle: All nature
   of beasts, of birds, and of serpents be mastered and ruled by man, but
   the tongue may not be mastered. And because it is a member profitable
   when it is well governed, therefore he had need of the Holy Ghost that
   should govern it. He appeared also in a tongue, which is much
   necessary. To preachers he is necessary, for he maketh them to speak
   fervently without dread, and therefore he was in that likeness. As
   saith S. Bernard: The Holy Ghost descended upon the disciples in
   tongues of fire to the end that they should preach and speak the law of
   the tongues of fire. The Holy Ghost also maketh them to speak and
   preach hardily and constantly, as S. Luke saith in the Acts of the
   Apostles: They were all replenished with the Holy Ghost and began to
   speak with hardiness the word of God. He maketh them also to speak in
   many manners for the great and diverse multitude of hearers, and
   therefore it is said they began to speak with divers tongues in such
   wise as the Holy Ghost administered to them. He made them also to
   preach profitably to the edification of the people, whereof saith
   Isaiah: The Holy Ghost is descended upon me, and hath anointed me with
   his grace, whereof he hath made my words pleasant and profitable to the
   health of creatures. Thirdly, the tongues appeared sitting, in
   signifying that he was necessary to presidents and judges, for he
   giveth authority for to pardon and to forgive sins, as saith S. John:
   Take ye the Holy Ghost, by whom ye shall take away the sins of
   them-that will repent them. He giveth also wisdom for to deem and
   judge, whereof saith Isaiah: shall put, saith God, my spirit upon them
   that shall judge and deem truly. He giveth also debonairty and
   sweetness for to support and mollify the judgment, as it is said,
   Numeri xi.: I shall give to my people of my spirit that is in thee, for
   to support the burden of my people. The spirit of Moses was the spirit
   of benignity and of sweetness that was in him for to judge the people.
   Moses was most meek and most debonair, and therefore God delivered to
   him his people for to govern.

   The Holy Ghost giveth also adornment of holiness for to inform, as
   saith the Scripture: The Holy Ghost hath adorned the heavens, that be
   the hearts wherein he descendeth. And as to the sixth, into whom he was
   sent, into the apostles that were vessels clean and pure, and disposed
   to receive the Holy Ghost, And that for seven causes that were in them.
   First, they were quiet and peaceable in heart, and this signifieth that
   is sung: Dum complerentur dies pentecostes, etc. The day of the
   pentecost they were all together in one place still assembled. The day
   of the pentecost is the day of rest, after that Isaiah saith: Upon whom
   shall my spirit descend, but upon an humble heart and being still.
   Secondly, he was heard by dilection. And this is that the Scripture
   saith: Erant omnes pariter, they were all together, for they were all
   of one heart and of one will. And thus the spirit of man giveth not
   life to the members but that they be together; in likewise the Holy
   Ghost giveth not spiritual life but to the members united spiritually.
   And as the fire quencheth and goeth out when the brands be taken away,
   so the Holy Ghost goeth away when the members by discord be divided.
   And therefore it is sung of the apostles that the Holy Ghost found them
   all of one accord by love and by charity, and illumined them with
   clearness shining in them of the divine Deity. Thirdly, they were in a
   secret place; for they were in the place where Jesu Christ made with
   them his maundy or supper, whereof is said, Hosea ii.: I shall lead
   man's soul into a solitary place and shall speak to it in secret.
   Fourthly, they were in orison and prayer continual, whereof is sung:
   Orantibus apostolis deum venisse, etc, when they were in prayer then
   came the Holy Ghost upon them; which prayer is necessary to receive the
   Holy Ghost. Like as the wise man saith: I have prayed God and the Holy
   Ghost is come in me. Whereof saith Jesu Christ, John xiv.: I shall pray
   God my Father, and I shall send to you in my stead the Holy Ghost that
   shall comfort you. Fifthly, they were garnished with humility and
   meekness, and that is, that they were sitting when the Holy Ghost came.
   And hereof saith David: Lord God, thou art he that sendest the
   fountains into the valleys, that is the Holy Ghost which is the
   fountain of grace, which he sendeth into the humble hearts. Sixthly,
   they were in peace together. In that is to be understood that they were
   in Jerusalem, which is as much to say as the vision of peace. And that
   peace is necessary to receive the Holy Ghost, our Lord showed when he
   came to them after his resurrection saying: Pax vobis, Peace be with
   you, and after said: Take ye the Holy Ghost. Seventhly, they were lift
   up in contemplation. And this is to understand that they received the
   Holy Ghost in an high place, wherof saith the gloss: Who that now
   desireth the Holy Ghost in his heart, let him put the house of his
   flesh under his feet by lifting up his heart by contemplation. And as
   to the seventh, wherefore he was sent; it is to be noted, for seven
   causes he was sent, that be understood in this authority: Paracletus
   autem spiritus sanctus: quem mittet pater in nomine meo ille vos
   docebit omnia. The first cause is for to comfort the sorrowful when is
   said, Paracletus, which is as much as to say as comforter, as God saith
   by Isaiah: The spirit of God upon me, and it followeth to the end that
   I should comfort the weepers of Sion, that be the daughters that saw
   God. Whereof saith S. Gregory: The Holy Ghost is said comforter to them
   that he findeth wailing for their sins that they have committed, he
   maketh ready hope of pardon in lifting their hearts from affliction of
   sorrow. The second is for to quicken the dead when he saith Spiritus,
   for the Spirit is he that quickeneth as it is said in Ezechiel: Ye
   bones that be dry and without life, I shall send in you my Spirit and
   ye shall live. The third cause is for to sanctify and make clean the
   sinners in this that he said: Sanctus, as it is said, Spirit because he
   giveth life. Also he saith Holy, because he sanctifieth and maketh
   clean, and it is said pure and clean. Therefore saith David: The grace
   of the Holy Ghost which is a flood pure and cleansing, he gladdeth the
   city of God, that is holy church, and by this flood our Lord hath
   sanctified his tabernacle. The fourth cause is, he is sent for to
   confirm love among them that be in discord and hate, which is noted in
   this word Pater. He is said Father, because that naturally he loveth
   us, as saith S. John in the gospel, Johannis xiii.: Jesu Christ saith:
   My Father loveth you as his sons, and if ye be his sons, then be ye
   brethren each to other, and between brethren always ought to persevere
   love and friendship. The fifth cause is for to save the just and true
   men. In this that he saith: In nomine meo, that is Jesus, that is to
   say, Saviour, in whose name the Father sent the Holy Ghost to show that
   he came to save the people. The sixth cause is for to inform the
   ignorant in this that he saith: Ille vos docebit omnia. The Holy Ghost,
   when he shall come, he shall teach you all things. As to the seventh,
   that he is given or sent first in the beginning of the church by
   prayer, as thus when he came the apostles prayed God and were in
   prayer, whereof is sung: Orantibus apostolis Deum venisse, the apostles
   praying, the Holy Ghost came. And Luke iii., Jesu praying the Holy
   Ghost descended. Secondly, he came by hearing attentively and devoutly
   the word of God. Acts x.: As S. Peter was preaching, the Holy Ghost
   descended upon them. Thirdly, he came by holy and busy operation, that
   is by this that is said: Imponebant manus super eos et accipiebant
   spiritum sanctum. The apostles put their hands on them that believed
   and anon they received the Holy Ghost. And this imposition of the hands
   signifieth the absolution of the priest; which absolution give us the
   Holy Ghost. Amen
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Feast of the Holy Sacrament.

   The great largesse and benefits that God hath distributed to Christian
   people, give to the said people great dignity, for there is no people,
   ne never was so great a nation that their gods had approached so nigh
   them as our Lord God is unto us. The blessed Son of God would make us
   partners unto his divinity and godhead, and therefore took our nature
   to the end that making himself man, he would make men as gods. And all
   that he took of us, he gave all again to us for our salvation. He gave
   his proper body an offering unto God the Father on the altar of the
   cross, for our reconciliation, and shed his blood in price and washing
   our sins, to the end that we might be redeemed from the miserable
   servitude wherein we were, and that we should be also clean and
   cleansed of our sins. And also to the end that this excellent benefice
   abide to us in perpetual memory, he hath unto devout hearts and
   faithful given his own body in meat, and his precious blood in drink,
   in likeness of bread and wine. O precious feast and convive and verily
   full of great wonder, the feast healthful and replenished of all
   sweetness. What thing may be more precious than the noble convive or
   feast in which not only the flesh of calves ne of oxen like as was
   given in the old law for to taste, but the proper body of Jesu which is
   very God, is presented for to receive and assavour devoutly. What thing
   might be more full of great admiration than is this Holy Sacrament in
   which the bread and wine be commixed substantially into the proper body
   of Jesu. And therefore Jesu Christ there is contained under the species
   and likeness of bread and wine. He is eaten and received of the good
   and true christian men but for that he is not departed in pieces ne
   asundered in his members, but abideth all whole and entire in every
   each of his parts. For if this holy sacrament were divided or departed
   in a thousand parts, in every part should remain the proper body of our
   Lord whole and entire. None other sacrament is not of so much merit,
   nor so full of health as this sacrament is. For by this be purged the
   sins, the virtues be increased, and the thoughts be engrassed and
   fulfilled with the abundance of all good virtues. He is in holy church
   offered for the living and them that be dead, to the end that he may
   profit to all that which is for their salvation, of all them that be
   ordained and instituted to consecrate it. The sweetness of this holy
   sacrament may none express. By the which sweetness is spiritually
   tasted and remembered the excellent charity that God showed in his
   glorious passion, and to the end that it might be the more fervently
   impressed in the hearts of devout and faithful people, of the great
   largesse of his charity when he should depart out of this world and go
   to God his Father and would eat his paschal lamb with his disciples,
   then he instituted this holy sacrament like a memory perdurable of his
   passion, as the accomplishment of ancient figures, and of the miracles
   that were done by him, and also to the end that they that were
   sorrowful and heavy for his absence, should thereby have some solace
   singular. This is a thing then right convenient and convenable unto the
   devotion of devout hearts; to remember solemnly the institution of so
   healthful and marvellous a sacrament, to the end that the ineffable
   manner of the ordinance and thought divine visibly be honoured and
   worshipped; and that the might and puissance of God be loved and
   thanked, which in this sacrament worketh so marvellously; and also, of
   so healthful and of so sweet and gracious benefice be given and
   rendered to God due thankings and graces. And how well that on the day
   of the cene or supper in which this noble sacrament was instituted is
   special memory made of this sacrament, how be it the surplus of the
   service of the same day appertaineth to the passion of our Lord, in the
   which passion our mother, holy church, is occupied all that day
   devoutly. And because this institution of so noble sacrament may be
   hallowed more solemnly, the Pope Urban iv., by great affection that he
   had to this holy sacrament, moved of great devotion, he ordained the
   feast and remembrance of this holy sacrament the first Thursday after
   the octaves of Pentecost, for to be hallowed of all good christian
   people, to the end that we who use throughout all the year this holy
   sacrament to our salvation, may do our devoir to this holy institution
   specially in the time when the Holy Ghost enseigned and teached the
   hearts of the disciples to know the mystery of this holy sacrament. For
   in that time then, the true faithful disciples began to frequent it, it
   is read in the Acts of the Apostles that they were perseverant in the
   doctrine of the apostles and in communication of the breaking of the
   bread in devout orisons after the sending of the Holy Ghost. And to the
   end that the holy institution of this amorous sacrament should be the
   more honorably hallowed on the said day, and by the utas or octaves
   following, in stead of distribution material, that been distributed in
   cathedral churches, the foresaid Pope Urban hath given of his power and
   largess apostolic, wages spiritual and pardons special unto all them
   that shall be personally in clean life at the hours diurnal and
   nocturnal of this holy solemnity, to the end that every good catholic
   person should have the more desire to come to one so great a solemnity
   overall where it shall be hallowed. That is to wit at matins, an
   hundred days of pardon, at the mass as much, at the first evensong as
   much, and at the second evensong on the day also an hundred days; at
   the hours of prime, of tierce, of sixt, of none, and of compline, at
   every each of these hours forty days. On the other days during the
   octaves for every day to them that shall be at matins and at mass, at
   tierce, at sixt, none, evensong and compline, an hundred days of
   pardon. And all these pardons of the treasure of the church by the
   misericord divine, he hath given them and instituted to endure
   perpetually. This sacrament figured our Lord when he sent manna from
   heaven unto the old fathers in desert, where they were fed with meat
   celestial, and it is said that the men had eaten bread of angels, but
   alway, all they that had eaten thereof, they died in desert, but this
   meat that ye now receive is the living bread which descended from
   heaven; that administered the substance of the life eternal; and
   therefore whosoever receive this bread here, worthily he shall never
   die eternally, for this is the proper body of Jesu Christ.

   Now consider here then which is most excellent and most profitable, the
   bread of the angels or the proper body of Jesu Christ, which is life
   perdurable. The manna aforesaid came from heaven, this precious flesh
   is above the heaven; this manna is celestial; this flesh here is God
   the creator of heavens. The manna was kept unto the morn and was
   corrupt; this bread may feel no corruption. To them in desert,
   abovesaid, sprang water out of a stone, to us is sprung the blood of
   the amorous Jesu Christ. The water refresheth them for an hour, but the
   precious blood of Jesu Christ washeth us perpetually. The Jews drank
   and alway were athirst, but thou christian man, when thou hast drunk of
   this beverage here, thou mayst never after have thirst. That other was
   given to them in a shadow and umber but this was given in truth. Now ye
   shall understand this that was in the shadow, they drank of the water
   that issued out of the stone, this stone was Jesu Christ and yet they
   pleased not alway in their works to God, and therefore died they in
   desert. All those things there were done in figure, for to give
   knowledge of things more great and more notable. It is much greater
   thing of the light than of the shadow; semblably of verity than it is
   of figure; and also much greater of the body of our creator and maker,
   than it is of the manna that came from heaven. Thou shalt demand
   peradventure: how thou affirmest and assurest me that I receive the
   body of Jesu Christ when I see another thing. We have many examples by
   the which we may well prove that it which thou receivest is not that
   thing that nature hath formed, but it is well that that the benediction
   hath consecrated. The benediction hath greater might than nature, for
   by benediction ofttimes nature hath been changed. Moses that held a rod
   in his hand, when he cast it to the earth it became a serpent; anon he
   took it up and it turned into the nature of a rod. Thou seest then how
   by the grace of the prophet the nature hath been changed twice, of the
   serpent and of the rod. The rivers of Egypt ran some time their course
   natural, but suddenly by the veins of the fountains blood began to
   issue, and ran so long that the people wist not for to drink. After, at
   the prayer of the prophet the river of blood ceased, and came again to
   his nature of water as it was before. The people of the Hebrews was on
   a time all environed and enclosed of the Egyptians, between the sea and
   them Moses lift up his rod, and then the water departed, and assembled
   unto the likeness of a wall, and there appeared to them a way for to go
   on foot, and the flood of Jordan, in his proper place, against his
   nature returned against the hill. The old fathers that were in desert,
   also on a time had great thirst; Moses took his rod and smote a stone,
   out of the which issued a great abundance of water. Is not the grace of
   benediction great which hath wrought above nature, when the stone
   giveth water which he may not by nature? Marah, which was a river right
   bitter, in such wise that the people that had great thirst might not
   drink it; Moses put a staff in the water, and suddenly by the grace of
   benediction which there wrought, it lost his bitterness and became
   sweet. Semblably in the time of Elisha the prophet, one of the sons of
   the prophets let fall the iron of his axe in the water, the which iron,
   after his nature, sank down to the bottom of the water. Then he came to
   Elisha praying him for his axe. Elisha put his bourdon in the water,
   and anon the iron began to swim about the water, which is a thing above
   nature, for the weight of the iron is heavier than the liquor of the
   water. By all these things, and by the blessing of prophets, we see
   clearly how grace or benediction hath thus wrought above nature, and
   then, sith that benediction human, diverse times hath thus converted
   things against nature, what shall we say of the consecration divine
   where the words of God work? For this holy sacrament here that thou
   receivest is consecrate of the words of Jesu Christ. Then if the word
   of Elijah was of so great effect that it made fire to descend from
   heaven, of much more value and effect is the word of Jesu Christ for to
   turn the likeness of elements. Ye have read of the work of the world;
   as God said and commanded so was it made; he commanded and it was made.
   And the word that made all things of nought, may not the same change
   the things that have been made into other species and likeness? It is
   not less to him to create things than to change things. We show also
   the mystery of the incarnation of our maker Jesu Christ. Was not that
   above nature that Jesu Christ was born of the Virgin Mary? If thou
   demand of the ordinance of nature, thou knowest that the woman hath a
   custom to conceive by the seed of man; but the Virgin Mary engendered
   and conceived above the ordinance of nature, and alway remained a
   virgin. And this holy sacrament that we now consecrate, is the proper
   body of Jesu Christ that was born of the Virgin. Wherefore then seekest
   thou of the ordinance of the precious nature of Jesu Christ, when he is
   above all nature? He that was born of the Virgin is the proper flesh of
   Jesu Christ, the which was crucified and buried. And verily this proper
   flesh is in this sacrament. Our Saviour Jesu Christ saith: Lo! this is
   my proper body. Before the benediction of the celestial words it is
   another species, but after the consecration it is the proper body of
   our Lord. For as soon as the consecration is preferred and said, the
   substance of the bread is converted into the blessed body of Jesu
   Christ, and in like wise of the wine and water in the chalice; after
   the words of consecration said, is the very body of our Lord also whole
   in flesh and blood. All the remnant that is said in the mass be
   praisings and laudings to our Lord, and also prayers for the church,
   for the kings, and for the people. But when this holy sacrament is
   consecrate the priest useth not his own words, but he speaketh the
   proper words of Jesu Christ and so consecrateth the sacrament. The
   which word of Jesu Christ is it by which all thing was made, the
   heaven, the earth, and the sea; then mayst thou see what a worker is
   the word of Jesu Christ.

   And sith that so much might and power is in the word of Jesu Christ,
   that it which never had been began to be, then by much more reason may
   he make that that is, to be converted into other substance. And thus
   that which was bread before the consecration, is the proper body of
   Jesu Christ after the consecration. And thus hath our blessed Lord left
   to us his blessed body for to be honoured and worshipped here in earth.
   And by reason, methinketh, he might do no less, considering our
   unstableness, and how prone the people have been to worship false gods
   and idols; and how oft his own chosen people the Jews departed from his
   laws and took to them false gods, notwithstanding the great miracles
   and marvellous that he did and showed for them, than to leave his own
   proper body here among us daily, to be remembered in eschewing of all
   idolatry for the salvation of our souls, whom we beseech that we may
   receive unto our perpetual salvation. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Dedication of the Temple of the Church.

   The dedication of the church is solemnly hallowed among the other
   feasts of the church, and because that it is double church or temple,
   that is to wit, material and spiritual. And therefore it is to be seen
   shortly of the dedication of this double temple. As to the dedication
   of the temple material. three things be to be considered. First,
   wherefore it is hallowed or dedicate. Secondly, how it is hallowed.
   Thirdly, by whom it is hallowed. And because that two things be in the
   church that be hallowed, that is the altar and the temple, therefore it
   is first to be seen how the altar is hallowed. The altar is first
   hallowed for three things. First, to make sacrifice to God, as it is
   said, Genesis viii.: Noah edified first an altar to our Lord, and took
   of all the birds and of all the beasts of the the thought, and the song
   of the voice to the preaching of the word of God: but in this, what
   profiteth the sweetness of the voice without the sweetness of the
   heart? She breaketh the voice, but the will keepeth the concordance of
   the voice, and of good manners, so that by ensample he accord him to
   his neighbour, and by his good will he accord him to God, and by
   obedience to his master; and this is the treble manner of music, which
   is reported to the treble difference of the office of the church. For
   the office of the church is made in psalms, in lessons, and in song.
   The first manner of music is made by touching of fingers, as in the
   psaltery and semblable instruments: the second is the song as of the
   voice; and that appertaineth to the lessons. And thereof saith the
   Psalmist Sing ye to him in deporting your voice. The third, that is by
   blowing, appertaineth to the song of a trumpet and hereof saith David:
   Praise ye him in the sound of the trumpet.

   The temple or the church is hallowed for five reasons. The first is,
   because that the devil and all his power be put out, whereof S. Gregory
   recounteth in his dialogue, that as a church of the heretic Arians was
   yielded to good christian men, and they hallowed it, and had brought in
   relics of SS. Fabian and Sebastian, and of S. Agatha, all the people
   were there assembled, and they heard suddenly a hog cry, and run hither
   and thither among their feet, seeking the doors of the church, and he
   might not be seen of no man, whereof the people had great marvel. But
   our Lord showed to them that it was the foul spirit that dwelled tofore
   in that place: and that night was a great noise upon the covering of
   the church, like as they had run upon it, and the second night yet a
   greater noise, and the third night was so fearful and so horrible a
   great noise, as that the church should have been thrown down unto the
   foundament, and then the wicked spirits departed and came no more
   there. The hideous sound signified that for certain the fiend issued by
   constraint the which he had long holden. Secondly, it is hallowed
   because that they that flee to the church should be safe; whereof some
   churches, after the dedication, be privileged of princes, that they
   that be culpable and flee to the church that they may be safe. Whereof
   the canon saith: The church defendeth the culpables from blood that
   they ne loose life ne member. And therefore Joab fled to the tabernacle
   and took the altar. Thirdly, it is hallowed because that the orisons be
   enhanced there. And it is signified in the book of Kings, the viii.
   chapter, when the temple was dedicated, Solomon said: Whosoever shall
   pray in this place thou shalt hear him, Lord in heaven, and when thou
   hast heard him thou shalt be to him debonair. And we worship God in the
   churches towards the east for three reasons, after that Damascene saith
   in the fourth book, the fifth chapter. First, because that we show that
   we require our peace. Secondly, that we behold Jesu Christ crucified.
   Thirdly, that we show that we abide him a judge to come. And also he
   saith: God planted paradise in the house of the east from the which he
   exiled man because he brake his commandments; and made him to dwell
   tofore paradise toward the occident, ere he went any other part, and
   therefore we look now in the church toward the orient. And our Lord
   crucified beheld toward the occident, and thus look we worshipping him
   toward the orient. He was borne on high, and so worship him the
   apostles, and so shall he come as they saw him going to heaven. And so
   worship we him towards the orient, in abiding till he come. Fourthly,
   the church is hallowed because that there louings and prayings be given
   to God, and this is done at the seven times or hours canonical at
   matins, at prime, at tierce, and so at the others. And howbeit that God
   is to be praised in all the hours of the day, but because our infirmity
   sufficeth not thereto, it is ordained that at these hours we praise God
   specially, because that these hours in some things be more privileged
   than the others; for at midnight when matins be sung Jesu Christ was
   born, and also was taken and despised of the Jews; and at the same hour
   he depoiled hell. Taking midnight largely, that is to say afore day, he
   arose from death to life, and he appeared at the hour of prime, and it
   is said that he shall come into the doom at midnight. Whereof S. Jerome
   saith: I ween that those things that the apostles have said shall be
   before day. For the day of the vigil of Easter, before midnight it
   behoveth not to leave matins, for the people abide the coming of Jesu
   Christ. And when this time shall come, men ought to have surety that
   all men make feast that day. And we sing at that hour praisings because
   that we give him thankings for his nativity, for his taking, and of the
   deliverance of the holy apostles, so that we may busily abide his
   coming. And the lauds be adjousted to the matins because that the
   morrowtide he drowned the Egyptians in the sea, and created the world
   and arose. And at this hour let us give thankings to God that we be not
   drowned in the sea of this world with the Egyptians, and that we render
   louings to God for our creation and for his resurrection. At the hour
   of prime Jesu Christ came into the temple and the people assembled
   there to him, as Luke saith, the xxi. chapter. He was at that hour
   presented to Pilate, and at this hour, after he was risen, he appeared
   first to the women. And this is the first hour of the day, and
   therefore let us render our thankings to God and praising, because that
   we may follow Jesu Christ, that we may yield to him the first fruit of
   all our works. At the hour of tierce Jesu Christ was crucified in the
   tongues of the Jews, and was bound to a stake and beaten tofore Pilate.
   And as it is said, the stake or pillar that he was bound to, showeth
   yet his blood. And this same hour was the Holy Ghost sent to the
   apostles. In the sixth hour he was nailed to the cross, and darknesses
   were throughout all the world, so that the sun bewept the death of his
   Lord, and covered him with black in such wise that he gave no light to
   them that crucified his Lord. And at this hour was he at dinner the day
   of his Ascension with his disciples. At the hour of nones Jesu Christ
   gave up his spirit, and the knight pierced his side, and the company of
   the apostles had a custom for to assemble then for to pray, and Jesu
   Christ ascended that hour into heaven. And for these honours praise we
   our Lord at all hours. At evensong time Jesu Christ made the sacrament
   of his body and of his blood together; he washed the feet of his
   apostles and disciples; he was taken down off the cross and borne to
   the sepulchre; he manifested and showed himself unto his disciples in
   habit of a pilgrim, and for these things the church giveth thanks to
   God at this hour. At compline Jesu Christ sweat water and blood, his
   monument was delivered to be kept and there he rested. And when he was
   risen, he showed himself and declared peace to his apostles. And of
   these things give we louings and thanks to God. And hereof saith S.
   Bernard how we ought to render and give thankings to God: My brethren,
   saith he, when ye sacrifice to God with praisings and thankings, join
   your mind to your words, and thy talent to thy wit, and gladness to thy
   talent, and demurety to thy gladness, and humility to thy demurety, and
   to humility free will.

   Fifthly, the church is hallowed for to administer there the sacraments
   of the church. Like as on the table of God, in which the sacraments be
   communicated and administered; and some sacraments be administered and
   given to them that enter, as baptism, and some be given to them that
   issue out as is the last unction or annealing. And some be given to the
   abiders and dwellers as is order. And some fight and fall, to them is
   given penance. Some other contrarien, and to them is given hardiness of
   courage for to enforce them, and that is by confirmation. And to other
   is given meat for to sustain them, and this is for to receive the
   sacred body of Jesu Christ. And sometime is taken away the letting,
   that they fall not into sin, and that is by conjunction of marriage.
   Secondly, it is to wit how she is hallowed. And it ought first to be
   known of the altar, and after of the church. And many things appertain
   to the hallowing of the altar. And first be made on the four corners of
   the altar four crosses of holy water, and environed about seven times,
   and seven times arrosed and besprent with the holy water stick or
   sprinkler. After, the incense is burnt on the altar, and after, it is
   anointed with chrism and then it is covered with black cloth, and this
   representeth them that go to the altar. For they ought first to have
   charity in four manners, that is, they love God, and themselves, their
   friends and their enemies. And this signifieth the four crosses on the
   four corners of the altar. And of these four corners is said in Genesis
   the xxviii. chapter: Thou shalt stretch to the orient, to the occident,
   to the north and to the south. Or by the four crosses that be made in
   the four corners be signified that Jesu Christ saved by the cross the
   four parts of the world, or for this, that they signify that we ought
   to bear the cross of Jesu Christ in four manners, that is, in the heart
   by thought; in the mouth by confession; in the body by mortification;
   and in the visage by continual impression. Secondly, to have care and
   owe to watch: and this signifieth the environing or going about the
   altar. For they sing then: The waits of the city have found me. For
   they ought have cure and watch upon them that be to them committed. And
   for this cause putteth Gilbert the negligence of prelates among the
   things disordinate. These be foul things and much perilous, that is to
   wit, a blind archer, a halting messenger, a prelate negligent, a doctor
   not conning, and a dumb crier, this be a perilous fellowship.

   Or by the seven goings about of the altar be signified seven
   considerations that we ought to have unto the seven virtues of the
   humility of Jesu Christ, and to go oft about them. The first virtue is
   that he that was rich be made poor. The second, that he was put in the
   rack or in the crib. The third, that he was subject to his parents. The
   fourth, that he inclined his head under the power of his servant. The
   fifth, that he sustained the disciple, thief and traitor. The sixth,
   that before a felonous judge he held his peace and spake not. The
   seventh, that he prayed piteously for them that crucified him.

   Thirdly, they ought to have mind of the passion of Jesu Christ, and
   that is signified by the sprinkling and casting of the water, which
   signified seven effusions of the blood of Jesu Christ. The first, was
   in the circumcision. The second, was in the orison. The third, when he
   was beaten at the pillar. The fourth, when he was crowned with thorns.
   The fifth, in piercing his hands. The sixth, in nailing his feet, and
   the seventh, in opening of his side. And these arrosements or
   sprinkling of blood were made with the sprinkle of humility, and of
   charity without estimation. And the altar is environed seven times for
   to signify that the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost be given in the
   baptism; or by the seven goings about be signified the seven comings of
   Jesu Christ. The first, was from heaven into the belly of his mother.
   The second, from the belly into the crib. The third, from the crib into
   the world. The fourth, from the world unto the gallows of the cross.
   The fifth, from the cross unto the sepulchre. The sixth, from the
   sepulchre to hell. The seventh, from hell when he arose and ascended
   unto heaven.

   Fourthly, they should have ardent prayer, amorous and devout, and this
   is signified by the incense which is burnt upon the altar, and then it
   hath virtue to ascend by the lightness of the fume, and to comfort by
   his quality, and to conjoin by the gum, and to confirm by that it is
   aromatous or well smelling. And all in like wise is the orison or
   prayer which ascendeth to the mind of God; it comforteth the soul as to
   the sin past in asking medicine; it estraineth as to that which is to
   come for to beware thereof; it confirmeth as to that is present in
   getting defence and keeping. Or it may be said that devout orison is
   signified by the incense, that it appertaineth that it ascend to God.
   And hereof saith Ecclesiasticus: Orison of humility giveth to God sweet
   savour when it issueth out of a heart inflamed. And the apostle saith
   much incense is given to him.

   Fifthly, they ought to have resplendor or brightness of conscience and
   the odour of good renown. And this is signified by the chrism or cream;
   they ought to have a pure conscience so that they might say with the
   apostle: Our glory is the witness of our conscience and also is good
   renown. Whereof the apostle to Timothy: It behoveth that he have good
   witness of them that be without; and Chrysostom saith that the clerks
   ought not to have no filth, ne in word, ne in deed, ne in thought, ne
   in opinion, for they be the virtue and beauty of the church, and if
   they be evil they make foul all the church.

   Sixthly, they ought to have cleanness of good work; which is signified
   by the white clothes and clean of which the altar is covered. The usage
   of coverture and of vestments were found for to cover, for to chauffe,
   and keep warm, and for to array ordinately. And the good works cover
   the nakedness of the soul, whereof the apostle saith: Clothe thee with
   white vesture that the confusion of thy nakedness appear not. They
   array the soul with honesty, whereof the apostle saith to the Romans:
   Clothe you with vestments of light, they enchauffe and inflame us in
   charity. Where of it is said: Be not thy vestments hot, for it availeth
   little to him that goeth to the altar if he have sovereign dignity and
   a life defamed. It should be an horrible thing to see him in a high
   seat and a low life; sovereign degree and low estate; a sad visage and
   light in works; full of words and nothing of deed; noble of authority
   and fleeing courage.

   Secondly, it ought to be seen how the church is sacred and hallowed.
   And to that appertain many things, for the bishop goeth all about three
   times, and at every time that he cometh to the gate or door he knocketh
   with his cross, saying: Princes open your gates. And the church is
   washed within and without with holy water, and a cross of ashes is made
   on the pavement, and of sand a travers, the angle from the orient unto
   that which is against the occident. And the A B C is written within of
   letters of Greek and of Latin. Crosses be made on the walls of the
   church, and they be anointed with cream. And it is to wit that the
   three first goings about signify three goings about that Jesu Christ
   made for the hallowing of his church. The first was when he came from
   heaven into the world. The second was when he descended from the world
   into hell. The third was when he came again from hell and ascended into
   heaven. Or the three goings about show that the church is hallowed in
   the honour of the Trinity, or for to signify the three estates of them
   that be to be saved of the church, that be virgins, continent, and
   married folk; which be signified in the disposition of the church
   material. Like as Hugo de Sancto Victore showeth, for he saith: That
   the sanctuary signifieth the order of virgins, the choir or quire
   signifieth the continent, and the body signifieth the order of them
   that be married. For the sanctuary is straiter than the choir or quire,
   and the quire straiter than the body, for the order of virgins is more
   worthy than the continents, and the order of the continents is more
   worthy than they that be married. The second knocking at the door
   signifieth the treble right that Jesu Christ hath in the church,
   wherefore it ought to be opened to him. For it is his by creation, and
   sweet by redemption and by promise of glorifying. And of this threefold
   right saith Anselm: Certainly, Lord, for so much as thou hast made me,
   I owe myself all to thee; because thou redeemest me, I owe myself all
   to thee; because thou hast promised to me so great things, I owe myself
   unto thy love; and because thou art greater than I, for whom thou
   gavest thyself, and to whom thou promiseth thyself, I owe to thee more
   than myself. And this that the bishop crieth thrice: Open your gates,
   etc., signifieth the treble power that he hash, in heaven. in the
   world, and in hell. And this that the church is thrice washed within
   and without signifieth three causes. The first is for to put out the
   devil, and therefore is said in the blessing of the water, that it be
   blessed to chase away all the power of the enemy, the fiend with his
   angels cursed and shrewd. And thou oughtest to know that this holy
   water is made of four things, that is, of water, of salt, of wine, and
   of ashes, which things put out the devil and chaseth him away. By the
   water is signified the effusion of tears; by the wine is signified
   spiritual gladness; and by the salt is showed mure discretion, and by
   the ashes is profound humility. Secondly, it is dedicate for to make
   herself clean from all earthly things which were corrupt by sin, and
   therefore because it should be clean from all ordure it is washed with
   holy water, so that it be clean and pure. And this was signified in the
   old law, that all should be cleansed by water. Thirdly, it is hallowed
   for to take away all malediction, for the earth at the beginning was
   cursed with his fruit because man was deceived by fruit, and the water
   was not cursed. And therefore it is said that our Lord ate fish, but it
   is not found that ever he ate any flesh by name save the paschal lamb,
   and that was in ensample for to accomplish the commandment of the law.
   And because that all malediction and cursings should be taken away, is
   the church washed with holy water. Fourthly, the A B C is written in
   the pavement in Latin and in Greek, and this signifieth the communion
   of that one and of that other people. Or it signifieth that one and
   that other testament, or the articles of our faith. For the scripture
   of the letters, Greek and Latin, that were made on the table of the
   cross, representeth the assemble of the faith made by Jesu Christ on
   the cross and therefore is this cross laid and made transverse from the
   angle of the orient unto the angle of the occident, for to signify that
   it that was first on the right side was made the left side, and that
   which was at the head was made at the end, and thus to the contrary.
   And it representeth the scripture of that one and that other testament
   which was accomplished by Jesu Christ on the cross, for he said when he
   died: All is accomplished. And the cross is made transverse because
   that the one was changed into that other, for all the law is in a roll.
   Thirdly, the crosses be painted in the church, and that is for three
   causes. The first is to fear the devils, for when they see the sign of
   the cross there, by which they have been put out, they be afeard and
   dare not enter, for they doubt and dread much the sign of the cross.
   And hereof saith Chrysostom: In what place they see the sign of the
   cross they shall flee, for they dread the staff of which they have been
   hurt. Thirdly, it representeth the articles of the faith. For the
   pavement of the church is the foundament of our faith, the letters that
   be within written be articles of our faith, by the which the rude
   people and new be introduced, and they of the one and other people
   which ought repute them for ashes and for powder, after this that
   Abraham saith in Genesis: I shall speake to my Lord as I were ashes and
   powder. Secondly, for to show the sign of the victory of Jesu Christ,
   for these crosses be signs and banners of Jesu Christ and of his
   victory, and therefore be there painted the crosses for to show that
   the place is divine, subject to God. And also it is of custom to
   emperors and to other princes, that when a town or city is taken or
   yielded, for to set up within the banners and the ensigns of the lords,
   to signify that it is subject to them. Thirdly, for to represent the
   apostles it is used for to set up twelve lights before the cross, for
   to represent the twelve apostles, which by the faith of God crucified
   they illumined all the world, and anointed with cream in baptism, for
   oil signifieth cleanness of conscience, and balm signifieth the odour
   of good life. And it is to know that the church or the temple was, as
   it is said, assailed by three persons, by Jeroboam, by Nebuchadnezzar,
   and by Antiochus. For as it is read in the book of Kings: Jeroboam did
   do make two calves gilt and did do set that one in Judæa, and that
   other in Bethel, which is said the house of God. And thus did he by
   covetousness, and therefore it is signified that the covetousness of
   clerks maketh much foul the house of God, the which avarice reigneth
   much in them, whereof S. Jerome saith, that from the least unto the
   greatest they follow all avarice. And S. Bernard saith the same: Who
   wilt thou give me of these provosts that entend not more to empty the
   purse of his subjects than to take away from them their sins? The
   calves be their nephews and their sons, which they set in Bethel, the
   house of God. And the church is assailed by Jeroboam after this that it
   is said: The Church is assailed when it is edified and builded of the
   avarice of the usurers and thieves.

   Whereof is read that an usurer had founded a church, and then he prayed
   the bishop for to dedicate and hallow it. And as the bishop and his
   clerks made the office of the dedication he saw the devil which was in
   a chair by the altar in the habit of a bishop, and he said to the
   bishop, Why hallowest thou my church? Cease ye, for the right thereof
   appertaineth to me, because it is made of usury and of ravin. And then
   the bishop and his clerks were sore afraid and fled, and anon the devil
   destroyed the church with great storm and great noise. Nebuzar-adan as
   is read in the xxv. chapter of the book of Kings that he burnt the
   house of God for he was prince of the cooks, and signifieth them that
   serve to gluttony and to luxury, and make of their belly their god. And
   after this that the apostle saith, that their belly is their god. And
   Hugh of S. Victore showeth how their belly is their god, and saith: Men
   were wont to make temples to the gods, and dress altars, ordain
   ministers for to serve them, to sacrifice beasts and to burn incense.
   But now the belly and the kitchen is the temple, the table is the
   altar, the cooks be ministers, the beasts sacrificed be the flesh
   sodden and roasted, the incense is the odour of the savour. The king
   Antiochus was the most proud man and the most covetous, and assailed
   the church of God, as it is read in the Maccabees. And by him be
   signified pride and covetise, which covet not to profit but to serve
   themselves, and they defoul much the church of God. Of which
   covetousness and pride S. Bernard saith: They go worshipfully of the
   goods of our Lord, and yet they give him no worship, they go every day
   as goliards in habit shining, and royal apparel, they bear gold on
   their bridles, on their saddles and on their spurs; their harness
   shines more than the altars. And thus as the house of God was
   dishonoured by these three, right so was it dedicated by other three.
   And Moses made the first dedication, and Solomon the second, and the
   third Judas Maccabeus. By the which is signified that we ought to have
   in the dedication of the church the humility that was in Moses, the
   wisdom and discretion that was in Solomon, and the very confession of
   faith that was in Judas Maccabeus. And after it appertaineth to see of
   the dedication of the temple spiritual, which temple we be, that is to
   wit, the assembly of good christian men.

   And this temple is made of living stones, as S. Peter saith: Let us
   edify whilst the stones be quick, it is said of stones polished;
   whereof is sung: the jointures been made of polished stones; it is made
   of square stones four cornered, that is to say of spiritual stones that
   have four squares, that is to wit, faith, hope, charity and good works,
   which be all equal as S. Gregory saith: As long as thou believest thou
   hast hope, and lovest as much as thou believest, and hopest and lovest
   to work in them.

   In this temple the altar is the heart, and upon this altar three things
   ought to be offered to God. The first thing is the fire of love
   perdurable, like as the apostle saith, the fire of dilection shall be
   perdurable and shall never fail at the altar of the heart. The second
   thing is the incense of orison and prayer well smelling, as it is said
   in Paralipomenon, Aaron and Phineas, burnt incense upon the altar of
   sacrifices, that is to say where were burnt the things precious and
   well smelling. The third thing is sacrifice of righteousness, and this
   is the offering of penance in sacrifice of perfect love, and in calves
   of mortifying of the flesh, and hereof saith David: Thou shalt accept
   the sacrifice of righteousness, the oblations and holocausts. This
   temple spiritual that we be, is of God in the manner as the temple
   material. For first the sovereign bishop when he findeth the door of
   the heart shut, he goeth about three times, when he bringeth to our
   mind the sin of the mouth, of the heart. and of the work. And of this
   treble going about saith he, as to the first I have gone about the
   city, that is to wit of the heart. And the second saith Isaiah: Take
   thy harp, and as to the third: The common woman is forgotten. Secondly,
   he smiteth three times the door of the heart, which is closed, to the
   end that it should be opened to him. And he smiteth by the stroke of
   benefice, of counsel and of playing. Of this treble stroke it is said
   in the Proverbs: I have stretched out my hand, etc. As to the evil and
   as to the benefits given he saith: Thou despisest all my counsel, and
   as to counsel inspired, thou despisest my counsellors, and to the
   blaming, that is for the plaies to thee given. Or this treble going
   about is done when he moveth us to reasonable knowledge of sins, and to
   sorrow for them, to avenge and blame ourselves for sin. Thirdly, he
   arroseth or watereth the temple spiritual three times with water, and
   so oft it ought to be watered or besprinkled. And this watering
   signifieth three manners of shedding of tears. For as S. Gregory saith:
   The thought of an holy man should be confused in sorrow, in considering
   where he was, where he shall be, and where he is. Or he was said in
   sin; or he shall be in judgment; or he is in maleurte; and there is
   where is no joy. When he sheddeth then his tears of the heart,
   considering that he was in sin, and shall be in judgment for to give a
   reckoning for sin, then is this temple watered once of water; and when
   he is contrite to weep for his unhappiness and maleurte where he is,
   the temple is watered the second time. And when he weepeth for the joy
   where he is not, he arroseth or watereth the temple the third time. And
   thou oughtest to know that wine, salt, and ashes be meddled with this
   water. For with the other sacraments we ought to have wine of spiritual
   gladness, salt of ripe wisdom, and ashes of deep humility. Or by wine
   with water is understood the humility of Jesu Christ, that he had in
   taking flesh human. The wine with water is the word human; and by the
   salt is understood the holiness of his life which is savour to all of
   his religion. By the ashes is understood his passion. And of these
   three things we ought to water our heart, the which be, the blessing of
   his incarnation by which we be called to humility, the ensample of his
   conversation by the which we be conformed to holiness, and the mystery
   of his passion by the which we be moved to charity. Fourthly, in this
   temple of the heart spiritual is written the A B C, or the scripture
   spiritual. And this scripture is treble, that is to wit the evils of
   things, the witnesses of divine benefits, and the accusation of his
   proper trespasses. And of these three things saith the apostle to the
   Romans: The people that have law do naturally the things that be of the
   law. They that have no law make law to themselves. They that show the
   work of the law written in their heart, that is the first, the witness
   of their conscience is the second, and he that thinketh to accuse
   himself is the third. Fifthly, the cross ought to be painted in this
   church, that is to understand that it ought to have the sharpnesses of
   penance. And these sharpnesses ought to be anointed and have light of
   the fire, for they be not only to be suffered in patience, but with
   good will and by charity. And hereof saith S. Bernard: He that is
   threatened and menaced with the dread of Jesu Christ he beareth the
   cross in patience; he that profiteth in hope beareth it gladly and with
   good will, but he that is perfect in charity embraceth it ardently, and
   much people see our crosses that see not our anointings. And he that
   shall have all these things in him shall be the temple of God to his
   honour, and shall be plainly worthy that God inhabit and dwell in him
   by grace, so that he may dwell in God by glory, the which he give us
   that liveth and reigneth God in heaven, world without end. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here follow the stories of the Bible.

The Life of Adam

   The Sunday of Septuagesima beginneth the story of the Bible, in which
   is read the legend and story of Adam which followeth.

   In the beginning God made and created heaven and earth. The earth was
   idle and void and covered with darkness. And the spirit of God was
   borne on the waters, and God said: Be made light, and anon light was
   made. And God saw that light was good, and divided the light from
   darkness, and called the light day and darkness night.

   And thus was made light with heaven and earth first, and even and
   morning was made one day. The second day he made the firmament, and
   divided the waters that were under the firmament from them that were
   above, and called the firmament heaven. The third day were made on the
   earth herbs and fruits in their kind. The fourth day God made the sun
   and moon and stars, etc. The fifth day he made the fishes in the water
   and birds in the air. The sixth day God made the beasts on the earth,
   every one in his kind and gender. And God saw that all these works were
   good and said: Faciamus hominem, etc. Make we man unto our similitude
   and image. Here spake the Father to the Son and Holy Ghost, or else as
   it were the common voice of three persons, when it was said make we,
   and to our, in plural number. Man was made to the image of God in his
   soul. Here it is to be noted that he made not only the soul with the
   body, but he made both body and soul. As to the body he made male and
   female. God gave to man the lordship and power upon living beasts. When
   God had made man it is not written: Et vidit quod esset bonum, quia in
   proximo sciebat eum lapsurum. For yet he was not perfect till the woman
   was made, and therefore it is read: It is not good the man to be alone.
   Thus in six days was heaven and earth made and all the ornation of
   them. And then he made the seventh day on which he rested, not for that
   he was weary, but ceased his operation, and showed the seventh day
   which he blessed. Thus be shortly showed the generations of heaven and
   earth, for here be determined the works of the six days and the seventh
   day he sanctified and made holy. God had planted in the beginning
   Paradise a place of desire and delices. And man was made in the field
   of Damascus; he was made of the slime of the earth. Paradise was made
   the third day of creation, and was beset with herbs, plants and trees,
   and is a place of most mirth and joy. In the midst whereof be set two
   trees, that is the tree of life, and that other the tree of knowing
   good and evil. And there is a well, which casteth out water for to
   water the trees and herbs of Paradise. This well is the mother of all
   waters, which well is divided into four parts. One part is called
   Phison. This goeth about Inde. The second is called Gijon, otherwise
   Nilus, and that runneth about Ethiopia, the other two be called Tigris
   and Euphrates. Tigris runneth towards Assyria, and Euphrates is called
   fruitful, which runneth in Chaldea. These four floods come and spring
   out of the same well, and depart, and yet in some place some of them
   meet again.

   Then God took man from the place of his creation and brought him into
   Paradise, for to work there, not to labour needily, but in delighting
   and recreating him, and that he should keep Paradise. For like as
   Paradise should refresh him, so should he labour to serve God, and
   there God gave him a commandment. Every commandment standeth in two
   things, in doing or forbidding. In doing he commanded him to eat of all
   the trees of Paradise, in forbidding he commanded that he should not
   eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. This commandment was
   given to the man, and by the man it went to the woman. For when the
   woman was made it was commanded to them both, and hereto he set a pain,
   saying: Whatsoever day thou eatest thereof thou shalt die by death.

   God said: It is not good a man to be alone, make we to him an helper
   like to himself for to bring forth children. Adam supposed that some
   helper to him had been among the beasts which had been like to him.
   Therefore God brought to Adam all living beasts of the earth and air,
   in which be understood them of the water also, which with one
   commandment all came tofore him. They were brought for two causes, one
   was because man should give to each of them a name, by which they
   should know that he should dominate over them, and the second cause was
   because Adam should know that there was none of them like to him. And
   he named them in the Hebrew tongue, which was only the language and
   none other at the beginning. And so none being found like unto him, God
   sent in Adam a lust to sleep, which was no dream, but as is supposed in
   an extasy or in a trance; in which was showed to him the celestial
   court. Wherefore when he awoke he prophesied of the conjunction of
   Christ to his church, and of the flood that was to come, and of the
   doom and destruction of the world by fire he knew, which afterward he
   told to his children.

   Whiles that Adam slept, God took one of his ribs, both flesh and bone,
   and made that a woman, and set her tofore Adam. Which then said: This
   is now a bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; and Adam gave her a
   name like as her lord, and said she should be called virago, which is
   as much as to say as made of a man, and is a name taken of a man. And
   anon, the name giving, he prophesied, saying: Because she is taken of
   the side of a man, therefore a man shall forsake and leave father and
   mother and abide and be adherent unto his wife, and they shall be two
   in one flesh; and though they be two persons, yet in matrimony and
   wedlock they be but one flesh, and in other things twain. For why,
   neither of them had power of his own flesh. They were both naked and
   were not ashamed, they felt nothing of the moving of their flesh, ne to
   refrain them as we now do, for they stood both in the state of
   innocence. Then the serpent which was hotter than any beast of the
   earth and naturally deceivable, for he was full of the devil Lucifer,
   which was deject and cast out of heaven, had great envy to man that was
   bodily in Paradise, and knew well, if he might make him to trespass and
   break God's commandments, that he should be cast out also. Yet he was
   afeard to be taken or espied of the man, he went to the woman, not so
   prudent and more prone to slide and bow. And in the form of the
   serpent, for then the serpent was erect as a man. Bede saith that he
   chose a serpent having a maiden's cheer, for like oft apply to like,
   and spake by the tongue of the serpent to Eve, and said: Why commanded
   you God that ye should not eat of all the trees of Paradise? This he
   said to find occasion to say that he was come for. Then the woman
   answered and said: Ne forte moriamur, lest haply we die, which she said
   doubting, for lightly she was flexible to every part. Whereunto anon he
   answered: Nay in no wise ye shall die, but God would not that ye should
   be like him in science, and knowing that when ye eat of this tree ye
   shall be as gods knowing good and evil, he as envious forbade you. And
   anon the woman, elate in pride and willing to be like to God, accorded
   thereto and believed him. The woman saw that the tree was fair to look
   on, and clean and sweet of savour, took and ate thereof, and gave unto
   Adam of the same; happily desiring him by fair words. But Adam anon
   agreed, for when he saw the woman not dead he supposed that God had
   said that they should die to fear them with, and then ate of the fruit
   forbidden. And anon their sight was opened that they saw their
   nakedness, and then anon they understood that they had trespassed, for
   anon their flesh began to move and stir to concupiscence. For before
   that they had eaten of the forbidden fruit, the movings were repressed
   and closed as in young children. And then, after they had sinned, they
   were opened like springs of water and began to move, and then they were
   expert and knew them. And like as they were inobedient to their
   superior, right so their members began to move against their superior,
   which is reason, and they felt their first moving in their privy
   members, and thereof they were ashamed. And thus they knew that they
   were naked, and they took fig leaves and sewed them together for to
   cover their members in manner of breeches. And anon after, they heard
   the voice of our Lord God walking, and anon they hied them. Our Lord
   called the man and said: Adam, where art thou? Calling him in blaming
   him and not as knowing where he was, but as who said: Adam, see in what
   misery thou art. Which answered: I have hid me, Lord, for I am naked.
   Our Lord said: Who told thee that thou wert naked, but that thou hast
   eaten of the tree for bidden? He then not meekly confessing his
   trespass, but laid the fault on his wife, and on him as giver of the
   woman to him, and said: The woman that thou gavest to me as a fellow,
   gave to me of the tree, and I ate thereof. And then our Lord said to
   the woman: Why didst thou so? Neither she accused herself, but laid the
   sin on the serpent, and privily she laid the fault on the maker of him.
   The serpent was not demanded, for he did it not of himself, but the
   devil by him. And our Lord, cursing them, began at the serpent, keeping
   an order and congruous number of curses. The serpent was the first and
   sinned most, for he sinned in three things. The woman next and sinned
   lese than he, but more than the man, for she sinned in two things. The
   man sinned last and least, for he sinned but in one. The serpent had
   envy, he lied, and deceived, for these three he had three curses.
   Because he had envy at the excellence of man, it was said to him: Thou
   shalt go and creep on thy breast; because he lied he is punished in his
   mouth, when it was said: Thou shalt eat earth all the days of thy life.
   Also he took away his voice and put venom in his mouth. And because he
   deceived, it was said: I shall put enmity between thee and woman, and
   thy seed and her seed. She shall break thy head, etc. In two things the
   woman sinned, in pride and eating the fruit. Because she sinned in
   pride, he meeked her, saying: Thou shalt be under the power of man, and
   he shall have lordship over thee, and he shall put thee to affliction.
   Now is she subject to a man by condition and dread, which before was
   but subject by love; and because she sinned in the fruit, she is
   punished in her fruit, when it was said to her: Thou shalt bring forth
   children in sorrow; in the pain of sorrow standeth the curse, but in
   bringing forth of children is a blessing. And so, in punishing, God
   forgat not to have mercy, which is to be noted, etc. And because Adam
   sinned but only in eating of the fruit, therefore he was punished in
   seeking his meat, as it is said to him: Accursed be the earth in thy
   work, that is to say for thy work of thy sin, for which is made that
   the earth that brought forth good and wholesome fruits plenteously,
   from henceforth shall bring forth but seldom, and also none without
   man's labour, and also sometime weeds, briars, and thorns shall grow.
   And he added: Thereto shalt thou eat herbs of the earth, as who saith
   thou shalt be like a beast or jument. He cursed the earth because the
   trespass was of the fruit of the earth and not of the water. He added
   thereto to him of labour: In the sweat of thy cheer thou shalt eat thy
   bread unto the time thou return again into the earth; that is to say
   till thou die, for thou art earth, and into earth thou shalt go again.

   Then Adam, wailing and sorrowing the misery that was to come of his
   posterity, named his wife Eve, which is to say, mother of all living
   folk. Then God made to Adam and Eve two leathern coats of the skins of
   dead beasts, to the end that they bare with them the sign of mortality,
   and said: Lo, Adam is made as one of us, knowing good and evil, now
   lest he put his hand and take of the tree of life and live ever, as who
   saith: beware and cast him out, lest he take and eat of the tree of
   life. And so he was cast out of Paradise, and set in the field of
   Damascus where as he was made and taken from, for to work and labour
   there. And our Lord set Cherubim to keep Paradise of delight with a
   burning sword and pliant, to the end that none should enter there ne
   come to the tree of life.

   After then that Adam was cast out of Paradise and set in the world, he
   knew his wife and engendered Cain, the fifteenth year after he was
   made, and his sister Calmana. They came out of Paradise virgins, as
   Methodius saith, and when Adam was made, he was made a perfect man as a
   man of thirty years of age when he was but one day old, and he might
   well have gotten many children tofore Cain, but after another fifteen
   years was Abel born, and his sister Delbora.

   When Adam was an hundred and thirty years of age, Cain slew Abel his
   brother. Truth it is, after many days Cain and Abel offered sacrifice
   and gifts unto God. It is to be believed that Adam taught his sons to
   offer to God their tithes and first fruits. Cain offered fruits, for he
   was a ploughman and tiller of earth, and Abel offered milk and the
   first of the lambs, Moses saith, of the fattest of the flock. And God
   beheld the gifts of Abel, for he and his sacrifices were acceptable to
   our Lord; and as to Cain his sacrifices, God beheld them not, for they
   were not to him acceptable, he offered withies and thorns. And as some
   doctors say, fire came from heaven and lighted the sacrifice of Abel,
   and the gifts of Cain pleased not our Lord, for the sacrifice would not
   belight nor burn clear in the light of God. Whereof Cain had great envy
   unto his brother Abel, which arose against him and slew him. And our
   Lord said to him: Where is Abel thy brother? He answered and said: I
   wot never, am I keeper of my brother? Then our Lord said: What hast
   thou done? The voice of the blood of thy brother crieth to thee from
   the earth, wherefore thou art cursed, and accursed be the earth that
   received the blood of thy brother by his mouth of thy hands. When thou
   shalt work and labour the earth it shall bring forth no fruit, but thou
   shalt be fugitive, vagabond, and void on the earth. This Cain deserved
   well to be cursed, knowing the pain of the first trespass of Adam, yet
   he added thereto murder and slaughter of his brother. Then Cain,
   dreading that beasts should devour him, or if he went forth he should
   be slain of the men, or if he dwelt with them, they would slay him for
   his sin, damned himself, and in despair said: My wickedness is more
   than I can deserve to have forgiveness, whoso find me shall slay me.
   This he said of dread, or else wishing, as who said, would God he would
   slay me. Then our Lord said: Nay not so, thou shalt die, but not soon,
   for whosoever slayeth Cain shall be punished seven sithes more, for he
   should deliver him from dread, from labour and misery, and added that
   he should be punished personally sevenfold more. This punition shall
   endure to him in pain unto the seventh, Lameth, whosomever shall slay
   seventh Cain shall loose seven vengeances. Some hold that his pain
   endured unto the seventh generation, for he committed seven sins. He
   departed not truly, he had envy to his brother, he wrought guilefully,
   he slew his brother falsely, he denied it, he despaired and damned, he
   did no penance. And after he went into the east, fugitive and vagabond.
   Cain knew his wife which bare Enoch, and he made a city and named it
   Enoch after the name of his son Enoch. Here it showeth well that this
   time were many men, though their generation be not said, whom Cain
   called to his city, by whose help he made it, whom he induced to theft
   and robbery.

   He was the first that walled or made cities; dreading them that he
   hurted, for surety he brought his people into the towns. Then Enoch gat
   Irad, and Irad Mehujael, and he gat Methusael, and he gat Lameth, which
   was the seventh from Adam and worst, for he brought in first bigamy,
   and by him was committed first adultery, against the law of God and of
   nature, and against the decree of God. This Lameth took two wives, Adah
   and Zilla; of Adah he gat Jabal which found first the craft to make
   folds for shepherds and to change their pasture, and ordained flocks of
   sheep, and departed the sheep from the goats after the quality, the
   lambs by themselves, and the older by themselves, and understood the
   feeding of them after the season of the year. The name of his brother
   was Jubal, father of singers in the harp and organs, not of the
   instruments, for they were found long after, but he was the finder of
   music, that is to say of consonants of accord, such as shepherds use in
   their delights and sports. And forasmuch as he heard Adam prophesy of
   two judgments by the fire and water, that all things should be
   destroyed thereby, and that his craft new found should not perish, he
   did do write it in two pillars or columns, one of marble, another of
   clay of the earth, to the end that one should endure against the water,
   and that other against the fire. Josephus saith that the pillar of
   marble is yet in the land of Syria. Of Zilla he begat Tubal-cain, which
   found first the craft of smithery and working of iron, and made things
   for war, and sculptures and gravings in metal to the pleasure of the
   eyes, which he so working, Tubal, tofore said, had delight in the sound
   of his hammers, of which he made the consonants and tunes of accord in
   his song. Noema, sister of Tubal-cain, found first the craft of diverse
   texture.

   Lameth was a shooter, and used to shoot at wild beasts, for none use of
   the meat of them, but only for to have the skins for their clothing,
   and lived so long that he was blind and had a child to lead him. And on
   a time by adventure he slew Cain. For Cain was alway afeard and hid him
   among bushes and briars, and the child that led Lameth had supposed it
   had been some wild beast and directed Lameth to shoot thereat, and so,
   weening to shoot at a beast, slew Cain. And when he knew that he had
   slain Cain, he with his bow slew the child, and thus he slew them both
   to his damnation; therefore as the sin of Cain was punished seven
   sithes, so was the sin of Lameth seventy sithes and seven. That is to
   say seventyseven souls that came of Lameth were perished in the deluge
   and Noah's flood; also his wife did him much sorrow, and evil-entreated
   him. And he being wroth said that he suffered that for his double
   homicide and manslaughter, yet nevertheless he feared him by pain,
   saying: Why will ye slay of me? he shall be more and sorer punished
   that slayeth me, than he that slew Cain.

   After that Abel was slain, Strabus saith that Adam avowed no more to
   have to do with his wife, but by an angel he brake the vow, because a
   son should be born to God. Yet nevertheless Josephus said that when
   Abel was slain and Cain fled away, Adam thought of procreation of
   children, and so when he was one hundred and thirty years old he
   engendered Seth like to his similitude, and he to the image of God.
   This Seth was a good man, and he gat Enos, and Enos Cainan, and Cainan
   begot Malaleel, and Malaleel Jared, and Jared Enoch, and Enoch
   Methuselah, and Methuselah Lamech, and Lamech Noah. And like as in the
   generation of Cain the seventh was the worst, so in the generation of
   Seth the seventh was the best, that was Enoch whom God took and brought
   him into Paradise, unto the time that he shall come with Elias for to
   convert the hearts of the fathers into the sons. And Adam lived after
   he had begotten Seth eight hundred years, and engendered sons and
   daughters. Some hold opinion thirty sons and thirty daughters, and some
   fifty of that one and fifty of that other. We find no certainty of them
   in the Bible. But all the days of Adam living here in earth amount to
   the sum of nine hundred and thirty years. And in the end of his life
   when he should die, it is said, but of none authority, that he sent
   Seth his son into Paradise for to fetch the oil of mercy, where he
   received certain grains of the fruit of the tree of mercy by an angel.
   And when he came again he found his father Adam yet alive and told him
   what he had done. And then Adam laughed first and then died. And then
   he laid the grains or kernels under his father's tongue and buried him
   in the vale of Hebron; and out of his mouth grew three trees of the
   three grains, of which trees the cross that our Lord suffered his
   passion on was made, by virtue of which he gat very mercy, and was
   brought out of darkness into very light of heaven. To the which he
   bring us that liveth and reigneth God, world without end.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth the History of Noah.

   The first Sunday in Sexagesima.

   After that Adam was dead, died Eve and was buried by him. At the
   beginning, in the first age, the people lived long. Adam lived nine
   hundred and thirty years, and Methuselah lived nine hundred and
   sixty-nine years. S. Jerome saith that he died the same year that the
   flood was. Then Noah was the tenth from Adam in the generation of Seth,
   in whom the first age was ended. The seventy interpreters say that this
   first age dured two thousand two hundred and forty-four years. S.
   Jerome saith not fully two thousand, and Methodius full two thousand,
   etc.

   Noah then was a man perfect and righteous and kept God's commandment.
   And when he was five hundred years old, he gat Shem, Ham, and Japhet.
   This time men began to multiply on the earth, and the children of God,
   that is to say of Seth, as religious, saw the daughters of men, that is
   to say of Cain, and were overcome by concupiscence and took them to
   their wives. This time was so much sin on the earth in the sin of
   lechery, which was misused against nature, wherefore God was displeased
   and determined in his prescience to destroy man that he had made, and
   said: I shall put man away that I have made, and my spirit shall not
   abide in man for ever, for he is flesh. As who said, I shall not punish
   man perpetually as I do the devil, for man is frail, and yet ere I
   shall destroy him I shall give him space and time of repentance and to
   amend him, if he wild. The time of repentance shall be one hundred and
   twenty years. Then Noah, righteous and perfect, walked with God, that
   is in his laws, and the earth was corrupt by sin and filled.

   When God saw the earth to be corrupt, and that every man was corrupt by
   sin upon the earth, he said to Noah: The end of all people is come
   tofore me except them that shall be saved, and the earth is replenished
   with their wickedness. I shall destroy them with the earth, id est,
   with the fertility of the earth. Make to thee an ark of tree, hewn,
   polished, and squared. And make there divers places, and lime it with
   clay and pitch within and without, that is to wit with glue which is so
   fervent, that the timber may not be loosed. And thou shalt make it
   three hundred cubits of length, fifty in breadth, and thirty of height.
   And make therein divers distinctions of places and chambers and of
   wardrobes. And the ark had a door for to enter in and come out, and a
   window was made thereon which that the Hebrews say was of crystal. This
   ark was on making, from the beginning that God commanded first to make
   it, one hundred and twenty years. In which time Noah oft desired the
   people to leave their sin, and how he had spoken with God, and that he
   was commanded to make the ship, for God should destroy them for their
   sin, but if they left it. And they mocked him and said that he raved
   and was a fool, and gave no faith to his saying and continued in their
   sin and wickedness. Then, when the ark was perfectly made, God bade him
   to take into it of all the beasts of the earth, and also of the fowls
   of the air, of each two, male and female, that they may live. And also
   of all the meats of the earth that be comestible, that they may serve
   and feed thee and them. And Noah did all that our Lord commanded him.
   Then said our Lord to Noah: Enter thou and all thy household into the
   ark, that is to say thou and thy wife and thy three sons and their
   three wives. I have seen that thou art rightful in this generation. Of
   all beasts that be clean thou shalt take seven, and of unclean beasts
   but only two. And of the birds seven and seven, male and female, that
   they may be saved on the face of the earth. Yet after seven days I
   shall rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights, and shall
   destroy all the substance that I made on the earth. And Noah did all
   things that our Lord commanded him. He was six hundred years old when
   the flood began on the earth. And then Noah entered in and his sons,
   his wife, and the wives of his sons, all into the ark to eschew the
   waters of the flood. Of all the beasts and the fowls, and of all that
   moved and had life on earth, male and female, Noah took in to him as
   our Lord had bidden. And seven days after they were entered, the water
   began to increase. The wells of the abysms were broken, and the
   cataracts of heaven were opened, that is to say the clouds, and it
   rained on the earth forty days and forty nights. And the ark was
   elevate and borne upon the waters on

   height above the mountains and hills, for the water was grown higher
   fifteen cubits above all the mountains, that it should purge and wash
   the filth of the air. Then was consumed all that was on the earth
   living, man, woman, and beast and birds. And all that ever bare life,
   so that nothing abode upon the earth, for the water was fifteen cubits
   above the highest mountain of the earth. And when Noah was entered he
   shut the door fast without forth, and limed it with glue. And so the
   waters abode elevate in height an hundred and fifty days from the day
   that Noah entered in. And our Lord then remembered Noah and all them
   that were in the ark with him, and also on the beasts and fowls, and
   ceased the waters. And the wells and cataracts were closed, and the
   rains were prohibited, and forbidden to rain no more. The seventh
   month, the twenty-seventh day of the month, the ark rested on the hills
   of Armenia. The tenth month, of the first day of the month, the tops of
   the hills appeared first. After these forty days after the lessing of
   the waters, Noah opened the window and desired sore to have tidings of
   ceasing of the flood. And sent out a raven for to have tidings, and
   when he was gone he returned no more again, for peradventure she found
   some dead carrion of a beast swimming on the water, and lighted thereon
   to feed her and was left there. After this he sent out a dove which
   flew out, and when she could find no place to rest ne set her foot on,
   she returned unto Noah and he took her in. Yet then were not the tops
   of the hills bare. And seven days after he sent her out again, which at
   even returned, bearing a branch of an olive tree, burgeoning, in her
   mouth. And after other seven days he sent her again, which came no more
   again. Then in the year of Noah six hundred and one, the first day of
   the month, Noah opened the covering of the ark and saw that the earth
   was dry, but he durst not go out, but abode the commandment of our
   Lord. The second month, the twenty-seventh day of the month, our Lord
   said to Noah: Go out of the ark, thou and thy wife, thy sons and the
   wives of thy sons. He commanded them to go conjointly out which
   disjointly entered, and let go out with them all the beasts and fowls
   living, and all the reptiles, every each after his kind and gender, to
   whom our Lord said: Grow ye and multiply upon the earth. Then Noah
   issued out and his wife, and his sons with their wives, and all the
   beasts, the same day a year after they entered in, every one after his
   gender. Noah then edified an altar to our Lord and took of all the
   beasts that were clean and offered sacrifice unto our Lord; and our
   Lord smelled the sweetness of the sacrifice and said to Noah: From
   henceforth I shall not curse the earth for man, for he is prone and
   ready to fall from the beginning of his youth. I shall no more destroy
   man by such vengeance. And then our Lord blessed them and said: Grow ye
   and multiply the earth and be ye lords of all the beasts of the earth,
   of the fowls of the air, and of the fishes. I have given all things to
   you, but eat no flesh with the blood. I command you to slay no man, nor
   to shed no man's blood. I have made man after mine image. Whosomever
   sheddeth his brother's blood, his blood shall be shed. Go ye forth and
   grow and multiply and fill the earth. This said our Lord to Noah and
   his sons: Lo! I have made a covenant with you and with them that shall
   come after you, that I shall no more bring such a flood to slay all
   people, and in token thereof I have set my rainbow in the clouds of
   heaven: for who that trespasseth I shall do justice otherwise on him.
   Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years. From the time
   of Adam until after Noah's flood, the time and season was alway green
   and tempered; and all that time men ate no flesh, for the herbs and
   fruits were then of great strength and effect, they were pure and
   nourishing. But after the flood the earth was weaker and brought not
   forth so good fruit, wherefore flesh was ordained to be eaten. And then
   Noah began to labour for his livelihood with his sons, and began to
   till the earth, to destroy briars and thorns and to plant vines. And so
   on a time Noah had drunk so much of the wine that he was drunk, and lay
   and slept, and his privy member lay bare and open. Ham, his middlest
   son espied it, and laughed and scorned his father, and called his
   brethren to see, which came backward for to cover their father, and
   would not look on it, and rebuked Ham of his folly and sin. And when
   Noah was covered with the mantle, anon he awoke, and when he understood
   how Ham his son had scorned him, he cursed him and also his son Canaan,
   and blessed Shem and Japhet because they covered him.

   All the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years and then he
   died. And after his death his sons dealed all the world between them,
   Shem had all Asia, Ham Africa, and Japhet all Europe. Thus was it
   departed. Asia is the best part and is as much as the other two, and
   that is in the east. Africa is the south part, and therein is Carthage
   and many rich countries, therein be blue and black men. Ham had that to
   his part of Africa. The third part is Europe which is in the north and
   west, therein is Greece, Rome and Germany. In Europe reigneth now most
   the christian law and faith, wherein is many a rich realm. And so was
   the world departed to the three sons of Noah.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here followeth the Life of Abraham.

   The Sunday called Quinquagesima is read in the church the history of
   the holy patriarch Abraham which was the son of Terah. This Terah was
   the tenth from Noah in the generation of Shem. Japhet had seven sons
   and Ham four sons. Out of the generation of Ham Nimrod came, which was
   a wicked man and cursed in his works, and began to make the tower of
   Babel which was great and high. And at the making of this tower, God
   changed the languages, in such wise that no man understood other. For
   tofore the building of that tower was but one manner speech in all the
   world, and there were made seventy-two speeches. The tower was great,
   it was ten miles about and five thousand and eighty-four steps of
   height. This Nimrod was the first man that found mawmetry and idolatry,
   which endured long and yet doth. Then I turn again to Terah which had
   three sons, which was Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Of Nahor came Us, Bus,
   and Batuel. Of Us came Job, of Bus came Balaam, and of Batuel Rebekah
   and Laban. Of Haran came Lot and two daughters, Melcha and Sara.

   Now I shall speak of Abram of whom our blessed lady came. He wedded
   Sara, daughter of his brother Haran. Abram was ever faithful and true,
   he was sixty-five years old when his father died, for whom he mourned
   till our Lord comforted him, which said to Abram: Abram, make thee
   ready and go out of thy land and kindred, and also from the house of
   thy father, and come into the land that I shall show to thee. I shall
   make thee grow into much people; I shall bless thee and magnify thy
   name, and thou shalt be blessed, and I shall bless them that bless
   thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall be blessed all
   the kindreds of the earth.

   Abram was seventy years old when he departed from the land of Haran,
   and he took with him Sara his wife, and Lot the son of his brother, and
   their meiny, and his cattle and his substance, and came into the land
   of Canaan, and came into the vale of Sichem, in which were ill people
   which were the people of Canaan. And our Lord said to Abram: I shall
   give to thee this land and to thine heirs. Then Abram did raise an
   altar on which he did sacrifice, and blessed and thanked our Lord.
   Abram beheld all the land toward the south, and saw the beauty thereof,
   and found it like as our Lord told him. But he had not been long in the
   land but that there fell great hunger therein, wherefore he left that
   country and went into Egypt and took with him Sara his wife. And as
   they went by the way Abram said to his wife: I fear and dread sore that
   when we come to this people, which be lawless, that they shall take
   thee for thy beauty and slay me, because they would use thee. Wherefore
   say thou art my sister, and I thy brother, and she agreed thereto. And
   when they were come in to that country the people saw that she was so
   fair, and anon they told the king, which anon commanded that she should
   be brought into his presence. And when she was come, God of his good
   grace so purveyed for her, that no man had power to use any lechery
   with her ne to do her villainy. Wherefore the king was feared that God
   would have taken vengeance on him for her, and sent for Abram and said
   to him that he should take his wife, and that he had evil done to say,
   that she was his sister, and so delivered her again, and gave him gold
   and silver, and bade that men should worship him in all his land, and
   he should freely at his pleasure depart with all his goods. Then after
   this Abram took his wife Sara and went home again, and came unto
   Bethel, and set there an altar of stone, and there he adored and
   worshipped the name of God. His store and beasts began to multiply, and
   Lot with his meiny was also there. And their beasts began so sore to
   increase and multiply, that unnethe the country might suffice to their
   pasture, in so much that rumour and grudging began to sourde and arise
   between the herdmen of Abram and the herdmen of Lot. Then Abram said to
   Lot: Lo! this country is great and wide, I pray thee to choose on which
   hand thou wilt go, and take it for thy meiny and thy beasts. And let no
   strife be between me and thee, ne between my herdmen ne thy herdmen.
   Lo! behold all the country is tofore thee, take which thou wilt; if
   thou go on the right side, I shall go on the left side, and if thou
   take the left, I will go on the right side. Then Lot beheld the country
   and saw a fair plain toward flom Jordan, which was pleasant, and the
   flood ran toward Sodom and Gomorrah, which was like a paradise, and
   took that part for him. And Abram took towards the west, which was
   beside the people of Canaan at the foot of mount Mamre. And Lot dwelled
   in Sodom. The people of Sodom were worst of all people.

   Our Lord said to Abram: Lift up thine eyes and see directly from the
   place that thou art now in, from the north to the south, and from the
   east to the west. All this land that thou seest I shall give thee, and
   to thy seed for evermore. I shall make thy seed as powder or dust of
   the earth, who that may number the dust of the earth shall number thy
   seed. Arise therefore and walk the land in length and in breadth, for I
   shall give it to thee. Abram moved then his tabernacle and dwelled in
   the valley of Mamre, which is in Hebron and set there his tabernacle.
   It happened soon after that there was a war in that land, that four
   kings warred again other five kings, which were of Sodom, Gomorrah and
   other. And the four kings overthrew the five and slew them, and spoiled
   and took all the substance of the country and took also with them Lot
   and all his goods. And a man gat away from them and came to Abram, and
   told him how that Lot was taken and led away. And then anon Abram did
   do gather his people together, the number of three hundred and
   eighteen. And followed after, and departed his people in two parties
   because they should not escape. And Abram smote in among them, and slew
   the kings, and rescued Lot and all his goods, and delivered the men of
   Sodom that were taken and the women. And they of Sodom came against
   him, and Melchisedech came and met with him, and offered to him bread
   and wine. This Melchisedech was king and priest of Jerusalem and all
   the country, and blessed Abram. And there Abram gave to him the tythes
   of all he had. And the king of Sodom would that Abram should have had
   such prey as he took, but he would not have as much as the latchet of a
   shoe, and thus gat Abram much love of all the people. After this our
   Lord appeared to Abram in a vision and said: Abram, dread thee nothing,
   I am thy protector, and thy reward and meed shall be great. Abram
   answered: Lord God, what wilt thou give me? Thou wottest well I have no
   children, and sith I have none I will well that Eleazar the son of my
   bailiff be my heir. Nay, said our Lord, he shall not be thine heir, but
   he that shall issue and come of thy seed shall be thine heir. Our Lord
   led him out and bade him behold the heaven, and number the stars if
   thou mayst, and said to him, so shall thy offspringing and seed be. And
   Abram believed it and gave faith to our Lord's words, and it was
   reputed to him to justice. And our Lord said to him, I am the Lord that
   led thee out of the land of Ur of the Chaldees for to give to thee this
   land into thy possession. And Abram said: Lord, how shall I know that I
   shall possess it? A voice said to Abram: Thy seed shall be exiled into
   Egypt by the space of four hundred years, and shall be there in
   servitude, and after, I shall bring them hither again in the fourth
   generation. Thou shalt abide here unto thy good age, and shalt be
   buried here, and go with thy fathers in peace. Sara was yet without
   child, and she had a handmaid named Hagar, an Egyptian, and she on a
   day said to Abram her husband: Thou seest I may bear no child,
   wherefore I would thou took Hagar my maid, and lie by her that thou
   might get a child which I might keep and hold for mine. And ten year
   after that Abram had dwelled in that land, he took Hagar and get her
   with child, and anon as she felt herself with child she despised her
   mistress Then Sara said to Abram: Thou dost evil. I gave thee licence
   to lie with my servant, and now sith she is conceived by thee, she hath
   me in despite, God judge this between thee and me. To whom Abram
   answered: Thine handmaid is in thine hands, chastise her as it pleaseth
   thee. After this Sara chastised Hagar and put her to so great
   affliction that she went away; and as she went an angel met with her in
   the wilderness by a well, and said: Hagar, whence comest and whither
   goest thou? She answered: I flee away from the face of my lady Sara. To
   whom the angel said, return again and submit thee by humbleness unto
   thy lady, and I shall multiply thy seed, and so much people shall come
   of it that it cannot be numbered for multitude. And he said
   furthermore: Thou hast conceived and shalt bear a child and shalt call
   him Ishmael. He shall be a fierce man, he shall be against all men, and
   all men against him. Then Hagar returned home and served her lady, and
   soon after this she was delivered of Ishmael. Abram was eighty-six
   years old when Ishmael was born.

   When Abram was ninety-nine years, our Lord appeared to him and said:
   Abram, lo! I am the Lord Almighty, walk thou before me and be perfect,
   and I shall keep covenant between me and thee and shall multiply thy
   seed greatly. And Abram fell down lowting low to the earth and thanked
   him. Then our Lord said I am, and my covenant I shall keep to thee,
   thou shalt be father of much people. Thou shalt no more be called
   Abram, but Abraham, for I have ordained thee father of much people. I
   shall make thee to increase most abundantly; kings and princes shall
   come of thee, and shall stablish my covenant between me and thee, and
   thy seed in thy generations. I shall give to thee and to thy seed after
   thee the land of thy pilgrimage, all the land of Canaan, into their
   possession and I shall be their God. Yet said God to Abraham: And thou
   shalt keep thy covenant to me, and thine heirs after thee in their
   generations, and this shall be the covenant that ye shall keep and
   thine heirs after thee. Every man-child and male shall be circumcised
   in his privy member, that it be a token between me and you. Every child
   masculine that shall be born shall be circumcised when he is eight days
   old, and I will that this sign shall be in your flesh. And see that the
   men in your generation be circumcised, begin at thyself and thy
   children. And all that dwell in thy kindred, who of you that shall not
   be circumcised in his flesh shall be cast and put out for ever from my
   people, because he obeyeth not my statute and ordinance. And thy wife
   Sara shall be called no more Sara but she shall be called Sarah, and I
   shall bless her, and shall give to thee a son of her, whom I shall
   bless also. I shall him increase into nations, and kings of peoples
   shall come of him. Abraham fell down on his face toward the earth and
   laughed in his heart, saying: May it be that a woman of ninety years
   may conceive and bear a child? I beseech thee, Lord, that Ishmael may
   live before thee. Our Lord said to Abraham, Sarah shall bring forth a
   son whom thou shalt name Isaac, and I shall keep my covenant to him for
   evermore, and to his heirs after him. And I have heard they request for
   Ishmael also. I shall bless him and increase, and shall multiply his
   seed into much people, twelve dukes shall come of him. I shall keep my
   covenant to Isaac, whom Sarah shall bring forth the next year. When
   these words were finished Abraham took Ishmael his son and all the men,
   small and great, strangers and other that were in his house, and
   circumcised them. Ishmael was thirteen years old when he was
   circumcised, and Abraham was ninety-nine years when he himself was
   circumcised. And thus that same day he and his son Ishmael and all the
   men in his house, as well as strangers, of what degree they were,
   received this new law of circumcision, whereby they were known from
   other people. After this on a time, as Abraham sat beside his house in
   the vale of Mamre in the heat of the day, and as he lift up his eyes,
   he saw three young men coming to him, and anon as he saw these three
   standing by him he ran to them and worshipped one alone; he saw three
   and worshipped but one. That betokeneth the Trinity, and prayed them to
   be harboured with him, and took water and washed their feet: and prayed
   them to tarry under the tree, and he would bring bread to them for to
   comfort them. And they bade him do as he had said, he went and bade
   Sarah to make three ashy cakes and sent his child for a tender fat
   calf, which was sodden and boiled. And he served them with butter and
   milk, and the calf, and set it tofore them. He stood by them, and when
   they had eaten they demanded him: Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said:
   Yonder in the tabernacle. And he said, I shall go and come again, and
   Sarah thy wife shall have a child. And she stood behind the door and
   heard it and laughed, and said softly to herself: How may it be that my
   lord is so old and I also that I should bear Abraham a child? She
   thought it impossible. Then said our Lord to Abraham: Why laugheth
   Sarah thy wife, saying in scorn, Shall I bear a child? but as I said to
   thee before, I shall return and come again, and she shall have a child
   in that time. And he asked Sarah why she smiled in scorn, and she said
   she smiled ne laughed not, and our Lord said, It is not so, for thou
   laughedst. When they had rested Abraham conveyed them on the way. And
   our Lord said to Abraham: I have not hid from thee what I purpose to
   do. The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is multiplied and their sin is much
   grievous. I shall descend and see if the sin be so great, the stench
   thereof cometh to heaven, I shall take vengeance and destroy them. Then
   Abraham said: I hope, Lord, thou wilt not destroy the just and
   righteous man with the wicked sinner. I beseech thee, Lord, to spare
   them. Our Lord said: If there be fifty good and righteous men among
   them, I shall spare them. And Abraham said: Good Lord, if there be
   found forty, I pray thee to spare them. Our Lord said: If there be
   forty, I shall spare them, and so from forty to thirty and from thirty
   to twenty and from twenty to ten, and our Lord said: If there be found
   ten good men among them, I shall not destroy them. And then our Lord
   went from Abraham, and he returned home again. That same eventide came
   two angels into Sodom, and Lot sat at his gate, and when he saw them he
   went and worshipped them and prayed them to come and rest in his house,
   and abide there and wash their feet. And they said: Nay, we shall abide
   here in the street, and Lot constrained them and brought them into his
   house and made a feast to them. But ere they should go to bed, the
   sinful and cursed people of the town, young and old, beset and
   environed Lot's house, and called Lot, and said: Where be the men that
   thou tookest into thy house this night? Bring them forth that we may
   know and use them. And Lot anon shut the door, and stood behind and
   said to them: O ye my brethren, I beseech you that ye will not do ne
   commit this wicked sin on them. I have two daughters, virgins, which
   yet never knew man. I shall bring them out to you, and use ye them, but
   these men I pray you to spare, they be entered under the shadow of my
   protection. They said again to him: Go forth and fetch them; thou art
   entered among us as a stranger, shalt thou rule and judge us? We shall
   put thee to more affliction than them. Lot withstood them mightily;
   they had almost broken up the doors, but the men set hand to, and did
   help Lot, and brought him in and did shut fast the door: and smote them
   that were without with blindness that they might not see, ne find the
   door. Then said the angels to Lot: If thou have here of thy kindred,
   sons or daughters, all them that long to thee, lead out of this city,
   we shall destroy this place, for the cry thereof is come to our Lord,
   which hath sent us for to destroy them. Lot went unto his kinsmen and
   said: Arise and take your children, and go out of this city, for our
   Lord shall destroy it. And they supposed that he had raved or japed.
   And as soon as it was day the angels said to Lot: Arise, and take thy
   wife and thy two daughters, and go out of this town lest ye perish with
   them. Yet he dissimuling, they took him by the hand and his wife and
   two daughters, because that God should spare them, and led them out of
   the city. And there they said to him: Save thy soul and look not behind
   thee lest thou perish also, but save thee in the mountain. Lot said to
   them: I beseech thee, my Lord, forasmuch as thy servant hath found
   grace before thee, and that thou hast showed thy mercy to me, and that
   peradventure I might take harm on the hill, that I may go into the
   little city hereby and may be saved there. He said to Lot: I have heard
   thy prayers, and for thy sake I shall not subvert this town for which
   thou hast prayed, hie thee and save thyself there, for I may do nothing
   till thou be therein. Therefore that town is called Zoar. So Lot went
   in to Zoar; and the sun arose, and our Lord rained from heaven upon
   Sodom and Gomorrah sulphur and fire, and subverted the cities and all
   the dwellers of the towns about that region, and all that was there
   growing and burgeoning. Lot's wife turned her and looked towards the
   cities, and anon she was turned into a statue or image of salt, which
   abideth so unto this day. Abraham arose in the morning early, and
   looked towards the cities, and saw the smoke ascending from the places,
   like as it had been the light of a furnace. What time our Lord
   subverted these cities he remembered Abraham, and delivered Lot from
   the vengeance of the cities in which he dwelled. Then Lot ascended from
   Zoar and dwelled in the mountain, and his two daughters with him. He
   dreaded to abide any longer in the town, but dwelled in a cave, he and
   his two daughters with him.

   Then the elder daughter said to the younger: Our father is old, and
   there is no man left on the earth living that may do have ado with us
   after the manner of the world, come and let us make him drunk and let
   us sleep with him, that we may have some seed of him. They gave their
   father wine to drink that night and made him drunk. And the elder
   daughter went to him, and conceived of him, he not knowing of it. And
   the second night in like wise conceived the younger daughter, and Lot
   was not knowing thereof. They conceived both of their father. The more
   had a son and called him Moab; he is father of the Moabites unto this
   day. The younger brought forth another son and called him Ammon; he is
   father of the Ammonites unto this day.

   Abraham departed from thence and went southward and dwelled between
   Kadesh and Shur, and went a pilgrimage to Gerar. He said that his wife
   was his sister. Abimelech the king of Gerar sent for her and took her.
   God came to Abimelech in his sleep and said: Thou shalt be dead for the
   woman that thou hast taken, she hath an husband. Abimelech touched her
   not and said: Lord, wilt thou slay a man ignorant and rightful? She
   said that she was his sister, in the simpleness of my heart and
   cleanness of my hands I did this. And God said to him: I know well that
   with a simple heart thou didst it, and therefore I have kept thee from
   having to do with her, now yield the woman to her husband, and he shall
   pray for thee, he is a prophet and thou shalt live. And if thou deliver
   her not, thou shalt die, and all they that be in thy house. Abimelech
   arose up the same night and called all his servants, and told them all
   these words. All they dreaded sore. Also Abimelech called Abraham and
   said to him: What hast thou done to us, that we have trespassed to
   thee? Thou hast caused me and my realm to sin greatly. Thou hast done
   that thou shouldst not have done. What sawest thou for to do so?
   Abraham said: I thought that the dread of God was not in this place,
   and that ye would slay me for my wife; and certainly otherwise she is
   also my sister, the daughter of my father but not of my mother, and I
   have wedded her. And after that I went from the house of my father, I
   said to her: Wheresomever we go say thou art my sister. Then Abimelech
   took sheep and oxen and servants and maidens, and gave to Abraham, and
   delivered to him Sarah his wife, and said: Lo! the land is here tofore
   thee, wheresoever thou wilt, dwell and abide. And he said to Sarah: Lo
   ! I have given to thy brother a thousand pieces of silver, this shall
   be to thee a veil of shine eyes, and wheresomever thou go, remember
   that thou wert taken. Abraham prayed for Abimelech and his meiny and
   God healed him, his wife and all his servants, and they conceived. Our
   Lord had closed the place of engendering of all the house of Abimelech
   for Sarah the wife of Abraham. Our Lord then visited Sarah, and she
   conceived and brought forth a son in her old age, than same time that
   God had promised. Abraham called his son that she had borne, Isaac, and
   when he was eight days old he circumcised him as God had commanded, and
   Abraham was then an hundred years old. Then said Sarah: Who would have
   supposed that I should give suck to my child, being so old? I laughed
   when I heard our Lord say so, and all they that shall hear of it may
   well laugh. The child grew and was weaned from the pap, and Abraham
   made a great feast at the day of his weaning. After this, on a day when
   Sarah saw the son of Hagar her handmaid play with her son Isaac, she
   said to Abraham: Cast out this handmaid with her son, the son of the
   handmaid shall not be heir with my son Isaac. Abraham took this word
   hard and grievously for his son. Then said God to him: Let it not be
   hard to thee for thy son and handmaid, whatsomever Sarah say to thee
   hear her voice, for in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Yet shall I make
   the son of the handmaid grow into great people, for he is of thy seed.
   Abraham rose early in the morning, and took bread and a bottle of
   water, and laid it on her shoulder, and gave to her the child and let
   her go, which, when she was departed, erred in the wilderness of
   Beersheba. And when the water was consumed that was in the bottle, she
   left the child under a tree that was there and went thence as far as a
   bow shot and sat her down, and said: I shall not see my son die, and
   there she wept. Our Lord heard the voice of the child, and an anger
   called Hagar saying, What doest thou, Hagar? Be not afeard, our Lord
   hath heard the voice of the child from the place which he is now in.
   Arise and take the child and hold him by the hand, for I shall make him
   to increase into much people. God opened her eyes and she saw a pit of
   water, and anon she went and filled the bottle, and gave the child to
   drink, and abode with him, which grew and dwelled in the wilderness,
   and became there a young man and an archer, and dwelled also in the
   desert of Paran. And his mother took to him a wife of the land of
   Egypt.

   That same time said Abimelech, and Phicol the prince of his host, unto
   Abraham: Our Lord is with thee in all things that thou doest. Swear
   thou by the Lord that thou grieve not me, ne them that shall come after
   me, ne my kindred, but after the mercy that I have showed to thee, so
   do to me and to my land in which thou hast dwelled as a stranger. And
   Abraham said, I shall swear. And he blamed Abimelech for the pit of
   water which his servants had taken away by strength. Abimelech
   answered: I know not who hath done this thing, and thou toldest me not
   thereof, and I never heard thereof till this day. And then after this
   they made covenant together, and promised each to other to be friends
   together.

   After all these things God tempted Abraham, and said to him: Abraham,
   Abraham. He answered and said: I am here, and he said to him: Take thou
   thine only son that thou lovest, Isaac, and go into the land of Vision
   and offer him in sacrifice to me upon one of the hills that I shall
   show to thee. Then Abraham arose in the night, and made ready his ass,
   and took with him two young men and Isaac his son. And when they had
   hewn and gathered the wood together to make sacrifice, they went to the
   place that God commanded him. The third day after, he lift up his eyes
   and saw from afar the place, and he said to his children: Abide ye here
   with the ass, I and my son shall go to yonder place, and when we have
   worshipped there we shall return to you. Then he took the wood of the
   sacrifice and laid it on his son Isaac, and he bare in his hands fire
   and the sword. And as they went both together, Isaac said to his
   father: Father mine. What wilt thou, my son? said Abraham, and he said:
   Lo! here is fire and wood, where is the sacrifice that shall be
   offered? Abraham answered: My son, God shall provide for him a
   sacrifice well enough. They went forth and came to the place that God
   had ordained, and there made an altar, and laid the wood thereon, and
   took Isaac and set him on the wood on the altar, and took his sword and
   would have offered him up to God. And lo! the angel of God cried to him
   from heaven saying: Abraham, Abraham, which answered: I am here, and he
   said to him. Extend not thy hand upon thy child, and do nothing to him,
   now I know that thou dreadest God, and hast not spared thine only son
   for me. Abraham looked behind him, and saw among the briars a ram fast
   by the horns, which he took, and offered him in sacrifice for his son.
   He called that place: The Lord seeth. The angel called Abraham the
   second time saying: I have sworn by myself, saith the Lord, because
   thou hast done this thing, and hast not spared thine only son for me, I
   shall bless thee and shall multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven,
   and like the gravel that is on the seaside, thy seed shall possess the
   gates of their enemies, and in thy seed shall be blessed all the people
   of the earth, for thou obeyedst to me. Abraham then returned to his
   servants, and went into Beersheba and dwelled there. Sarah lived an
   hundred and twenty-seven years and died in the city of Arba, which is
   Hebron in the land of Canaan; for whom Abraham made sorrow and wept,
   and bought of the children of Heth a field, and buried her worshipfully
   in a double spelunke.

   Abraham was an old man, and God blessed him in all his things. He said
   to the eldest and upperest servant in all his house: I charge and
   conjure thee by the name of God of heaven and of earth that thou suffer
   not my son Isaac to take no wife of the daughters of Canaan amongst
   whom I dwell, but go into the country where my kindred is, and take of
   them a wife to my son. And the servant answered: If no woman there will
   come with me into this country, shall I bring thy son into that country
   from whence thou camest? Abraham said: Beware that thou lead not my son
   thither. The Lord of heaven and of earth, that took me from the house
   of my father and from the place of my nativity, hath said and sworn to
   me, saying: To thy seed I shall give this land. He shall send his angel
   tofore thee, and thou shalt take there a wife for my son. If no woman
   will come with thee thou shalt not be bounden by thine oath, but in no
   wise lead my son thither. His servant then swore and promised to him
   that he would so do. He took ten camels of the flock of his lord, and
   of all his goods bare with him, and went in to Mesopotamia unto the
   town of Nahor. And he made the camels to tarry without the town by a
   pit side at such time as the women be wont to come out for to draw
   water. And there he prayed our Lord, saying: Lord God of my lord
   Abraham, I beseech thee to help me this day, and do mercy unto my lord
   Abraham. Lo! I stand here nigh by the well of water, and the daughters
   of the dwellers of this town come hither for to draw water, therefore
   the maid to whom I say: Set down thy pot that I may drink, and then she
   set down her pot and say: I will give to thee drink, and to the camels,
   that I may understand thereby that she be the maid that thou hast
   ordained to thy servant Isaac, and thou showest thy mercy to my lord
   Abraham. He had not fully finished these words with himself, but that
   Rebekah, daughter of Bethuel, son of Milcah wife of Nahor, brother of
   Abraham, came out of the town, having a pot on her shoulder, which was
   a right fair maid, and much beauteous and unknown to the man. She went
   down to the well and filled her pot with water and returned. The
   servant of Abraham ran to her and said: I pray thee to give me a little
   of the water in thy pot for to drink. Which said: Drink, my lord, and
   lightly took t that man, she said: Yea, I shall go with him. Then they
   let her go, and her nurse with her, and so she departed, and they said
   to her: Thou art our sister, we pray God that thou mayst increase into
   a thousand thousand, and that thy seed may possess the gates of their
   enemies. Then Rebekah and her maidens ascended upon the camels, and
   followed the servant of Abraham which hastily returned unto his lord.

   That same time, when they were come, Isaac walked by the way without
   forth and looked up and saw the camels coming from far. Rebekah espied
   him and demanded of the servant who that he was that came in the field
   against them. He answered and said: That is my lord Isaac, and anon she
   took her pall or mantle and covered her. The servant anon told unto his
   lord Isaac all that he had done; which received her and led her into
   the tabernacle of Sarah his mother and wedded her, and took her in to
   his wife, and so much loved her, that the love attempered the sorrow
   that he had for his mother. Abraham after this wedded another wife, by
   whom he had divers children. Abraham gave to Isaac all his possessions,
   and to his other children he gave movable goods, and departed the sons
   of his concubines from his son Isaac whilst he yet lived. And all the
   days of the life of Abraham were one hundred and seventy-five years,
   and then died in good mind and age, and Isaac and Ishmael buried him by
   his wife Sarah in a double spelunke.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth the life of Isaac, with the history of Esau and of Jacob, which
is read in the Church the Second Sunday of Lent.

   Isaac was forty years old when he wedded Rebekah and she bare him no
   children. Wherefore he besought our Lord that she might conceive and
   bring forth fruit. Our Lord heard his prayer that she conceived of him
   and had twain sons at once, which two, ere they were born, fought oft
   in their mother's belly. For which cause she prayed God to counsel her
   and to give her comfort, which appeared and said to her: Two manner
   people be in thy belly, and two manner folk shall be divided from thy
   womb, people shall overcome people, and the more shall serve the less.
   Thus said our Lord to her. After this, when time came that she should
   be delivered, there were twain to be born. The first that issued was
   rough from the head to the foot, and he was named Esau. And forthwith
   followed that other holding the plant of his brother's foot in his
   hand, and he was named Jacob. Isaac the father was sixty years old when
   these children were born. And after this, when they were grown to
   reasonable age, Esau became a ploughman, and a tiller of the earth, and
   an hunter. And Jacob was simple and dwelled at home with his mother.
   Isaac the father loved well Esau, because he ate oft of the venison
   that Esau took, and Rebekah the mother loved Jacob.

   Jacob on a time had made a good pottage, and Esau his brother had been
   an hunting all day and came home sore an hungred, and found Jacob
   having good pottage, and prayed him to give him some, for he was weary
   and much hungry. To whom Jacob said: If thou wilt sell to me thy
   patrimony and heritage I shall give thee some pottage. And Esau
   answered, Lo! I die for hunger, what shall avail me mine inheritance if
   I die, and what shall profit me my patrimony? I am content that thou
   take it for this pottage. Jacob then said: Swear that to me thou shalt
   never claim it, and that thou art content I shall enjoy it, and Esau
   sware it, and so sold away his patrimony, and took the pottage and ate
   it, and went his way, setting nothing thereby that he had sold his
   patrimony. This aforesaid is to bring in my matter of the history that
   is read, for now followeth the legend as it is read in the church.

   Isaac began to wax old and his eyes failed and dimmed that he might not
   clearly see. And on a time he called Esau his oldest son and said to
   him: Son mine, which answered: Father, I am here ready, to whom the
   father said: Behold that I wax old and know not the day that I shall
   die and depart out of this world, wherefore take shine harness, thy bow
   and quiver with tackles, and go forth an hunting, and when thou hast
   taken any venison, make to me thereof such manner meat as thou knowest
   that I am wont to eat, and bring it to me that I may eat it, and that
   my soul may bless thee ere I die. Which all these words Rebekah heard.
   And Esau went forth for to accomplish the commandment of his father,
   and she said then to Jacob: I have heard thy father say to Esau, thy
   brother: Bring to me of thy venison, and make thereof meat that I may
   eat, and that I may bless thee tofore our Lord ere I die. Now my son,
   take heed to my counsel, and go forth to the flock, and bring to me two
   the best kids that thou canst find, and I shall make of them meat such
   as thy father shall gladly eat, which when thou hast brought to him and
   hast eaten he may bless thee ere he die. To whom Jacob answered:
   knowest thou not that my brother is rough and hairy and I am smooth? If
   my father take me to him and taste me and feel, I dread me that he
   shall think that I mock him, and shall give me his curse for the
   blessing. The mother then said to him: In me, said she, be this curse,
   my son, nevertheless hear me; go to the flock and do that I have said
   to thee. He went and fetched the kids and delivered them to his mother,
   and she went and ordained them into such meat as she knew well that his
   father loved, and took the best clothes that Esau had, and did them on
   Jacob. And the skins of the kids she did about his neck and hands there
   as he was bare, and delivered to him bread and the pulment that she had
   boiled. And he went to his father and said: Father mine, and he
   answered: I am here; who art thou, my son? Jacob said: I am Esau, thy
   first begotten son, I have done as thou commandedst me, arise, sit and
   eat of the venison of my hunting that thy soul may bless me. Then said
   Isaac again to his son: How mightest thou, said he, so soon find and
   take it, my son? To whom he answered: It was the will of God that such
   thing as I desired came soon to my hand. Isaac said to him: Come hither
   to me, my son, that I may touch and handle thee, that I may prove
   whether thou be my son Esau or not. He came to his father, and when he
   had felt him, Isaac said: The voice truly is the voice of Jacob, but
   the hands be the hands of Esau. And he knew him not, for his hands
   expressed the likeness and similitude of the more brother. Therefore
   blessing him, he said to him: Thou art then my son Esau? He answered
   and said: I am he. Then said Isaac: Bring to me the meat of thine
   hunting, my son, that my soul may bless thee; which he offered and gave
   to his father, and also wine. And when he had eaten and drunken a good
   draught of the wine, he said to Jacob: Come hither to me, my son, and
   kiss me; and he went to him and kissed him. Anon as he felt the sweet
   savour and smell of his clothes, blessing him he said: Lo! the sweet
   odour of my son is as the odour of a field full of flowers, whom our
   Lord bless. God give to thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness
   of the earth, abundance of wheat, wine, and oil, and the people serve
   thee, and the tribes worship thee. Be thou lord of thy brethren, and
   the sons of thy mother shall bow down and kneel to thee. Whosomever
   curseth thee, be he accursed, and who that blesseth thee, with
   blessings be he fulfilled.

   Unnethe Isaac had fulfilled these words and Jacob gone out, when that
   Esau came with his meat that he had gotten with hunting, entered in,
   and offered to his father saying: Arise, father mine, and eat of the
   venison that thy son hath ordained for thee, that thy soul may bless
   me. Isaac said to him: Who art thou? To whom he answered, I am thy
   first begotten son Esau. Isaac then was greatly abashed and astonied,
   and marvelled more than can be thought credible. And then he was in a
   trance, as the master of histories saith, in which he had knowledge
   that God would that Jacob should have the blessing. And said to Esau:
   Who then was he that right now a little tofore thy coming brought to me
   venison? And I have eaten of all that he brought to me ere thou camest.
   I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed. When Esau heard these
   words of his father, he cried with a great cry, and was sore astonied
   and said: Father, I pray thee bless me also. To whom he said: Thy
   brother germain is come fraudulently, and hath received thy blessing.
   Then said Esau: Certainly and justly may his name be called well Jacob,
   for on another time tofore this he supplanted me of my patrimony, and
   now secondly he hath undernome from me my blessing. And yet then he
   said to his father: Hast thou not reserved to me one blessing? Isaac
   answered: I have ordained him to be thy lord, I have subdued all his
   brethren to his servitude. I have stablished him in wheat, wine and
   oil. And after this what shall I do to thee, my son? To whom Esau said:
   Hast thou not, father, yet one blessing? I beseech thee to bless me.
   Then with a great sighing and weeping Isaac moved said to him: In the
   fatness of the earth and in the dew of heaven shall be thy blessing,
   thou shalt live in thy sword, and shalt serve thy brother. Then was
   Esau woe-begone, and hated Jacob for supplanting him of his blessing
   that his father had blessed him with, and said in his heart: The days
   of sorrow shall come to my father, for I shall slay my brother Jacob.
   This was told to Rebekah, which anon sent for Jacob her son, and said
   to him: Lo! Esau thy brother threateneth to slay thee, therefore now my
   son hear my voice and do as I shall counsel. Make thee ready and go to
   my brother in Aran, and dwell there with him unto the time that his
   anger and fury be overpast, and his indignation ceased, and that he
   forget such things that thou hast done to him, and then after that I
   shall send for thee, and bring thee hither again. And Rebekah went to
   Isaac her husband and said: I am weary of my life because of the
   daughters of Heth, if Jacob take to him a wife of that kindred, I will
   no longer live. Isaac then called Jacob and blessed him and commanded
   to him saying: I charge thee in no wise to take a wife of the kindred
   of Canaan, but go and walk into Mesopotamia of Syria, unto the house of
   Bethuel, father of thy mother, and take to thee there a wife of the
   daughters of Laban thine uncle. God Almighty bless thee, and make thee
   grow and multiply, that thou mayst be increased into tourbes of people,
   and give to thee the blessings of Abraham, and to thy seed after thee,
   that thou mayst possess and own the land of thy pilgrimage which he
   granted to thy grandsire. When Isaac had thus said, and given him leave
   to go, he departed anon, and went into Mesopotamia of Syria to Laban,
   son of Bethuel, brother of Rebekah his mother. Esau seeing that his
   father had blessed Jacob and sent him into Mesopotamia of Syria to wed
   a wife there, and that after his blessing commanded to him saying: Take
   thou no wife of the daughters of Canaan; and he obeying his father went
   into Syria, proving thereby that his father saw not gladly the
   daughters of Canaan, he went to Ishmael and took him a wife beside them
   that he had taken tofore, that was Melech, daughter of Ishmael, son of
   Abraham.

   Then Jacob departed from Beersheba and went forth on his journey toward
   Aran. When he came to a certain place after going down of the sun and
   would rest there all night, he took of the stones that were there and
   laid under his head and slept in the same place. And there he saw in
   his sleep a ladder standing on the earth, and the upper end thereof
   touched heaven, and angels of God ascending and descending upon it, and
   our Lord in the midst of the ladder saying to him: I am the Lord God of
   Abraham thy father, and of Isaac; the land on which thou sleepest I
   shall give to thee and to thy seed, and thy seed shall be as dust of
   the earth; thou shalt spread abroad unto the east and unto the west,
   and north and south, and all the tribes of the earth shall be blessed
   in thee and in thy seed. And I shall be thy keeper wheresoever thou
   shalt go, and shall bring thee again into this land, and I shall not
   leave till I have accomplished all that I have said. When Jacob was
   awaked from his sleep and dreaming, he said: Verily God is in this
   place, and I wist not of it. And he said dreadingly: How terrible is
   this place, none other thing is here but the house of God and the gate
   of heaven. Then Jacob arose early and took the stone that lay under his
   head, and raised it for witness, pouring oil thereon, and called the
   name of the place Bethel which tofore was called Luza. And there he
   made a vow to our Lord, saying: If God be with me and keep me in the
   way that I walk, and give me bread to eat, and clothes to cover me, and
   I may return prosperously into the house of my father, the Lord shall
   be my God, and this stone that I have raised in witness, this shall be
   called the house of God. And the good of all things that thou givest to
   me, I shall offer to thee the tithes and tenth part. Then Jacob went
   forth into the east, and saw a pit in a field and three flocks of sheep
   Iying by it, for of that pit were the beasts watered. And the mouth
   thereof was shut and closed with a great stone, for the custom was when
   all the sheep were gathered, they rolled away the stone, and when they
   had drunken they laid the stone again at the pit mouth. And then he
   said to the shepherds: Brethren, whence are ye? Which answered: Of
   Aran. Then he asking them said: Know ye not Laban, son of Nahor? They
   said: We know him well. How fareth he, said he, is he all whole? He
   fareth well, said they; and lo! Rachel his daughter cometh there with
   her flock. Then said Jacob: It is yet far to even, it is yet time that
   the flocks be led to drink, and after be driven to pasture, which
   answered: We may not so do till all the beasts be gathered, and then we
   remove the stone from the mouth of the pit and water our beasts. And as
   they talked, Rachel came with the flock of her father, for she kept
   that time the beasts. And when Jacob saw her and knew that she was his
   eme's daughter, and that they were his eme's sheep, he removed the
   stone from the pit's mouth, and when her sheep had drunken, he kissed
   her, and weeping he told her that he was brother to her father and son
   of Rebekah. Then she hied her and told it to her father, which when he
   understood that Jacob, his sister's son was come, he ran against him
   and, embracing, kissed him, and led him into his house. And when he had
   heard the cause of his journey he said: Thou art my mouth and my flesh.

   And when he had been there the space of a month, he demanded Jacob if
   he would gladly serve him because he was his cousin, and what hire and
   reward he would have. He had two daughters, the more was named Leah,
   and the less was called Rachel, but Leah was blear-eyed, and Rachel was
   fair of visage and well-favoured, whom Jacob loved, and said: I shall
   serve thee for Rachel thy younger daughter seven years. Laban answered:
   It is better that I give her to thee than to a strange man; dwell and
   abide with me, and thou shalt have her. And so Jacob served him for
   Rachel seven years, and him thought it but a little while, because of
   the great love that he had to her. And at the end of seven years, Jacob
   said to Laban: Give to me my wife, for the time is come that I should
   have her. Then Laban called all his friends and made a feast for the
   wedding, and at night he brought in Leah, the more daughter, and
   delivered to her an handmaid named Zilpah. Then Jacob, weening that it
   had been Rachel, went to her as the manner is, and when the morning
   came and he saw that it was Leah, he said to Laban her father: What
   hast thou done? Have I not served thee for Rachel, why hast thou
   brought Leah to me? Laban answered: It is not the usage ne custom of
   our country to give the younger first to be wedded, but fulfil and make
   an end of this complement and marriage this week, and then shall I give
   to thee Rachel my daughter for other seven years that thou shalt serve
   to me. Jacob agreed gladly, and when that week was passed, he wedded
   Rachel to his wife. To whom Laban her father gave an handmaid named
   Bilhah. Nevertheless when the wedding of the younger was finished,
   because of the great love that he had to her, him thought that the
   other seven years were but short. Our Lord saw that he despised Leah.
   He let Leah conceive, and Rachel her sister abode barren, which then
   Leah bare a son and named him Reuben, saying: Our Lord God hath
   beholden mine humility and meekness, now shall mine husband love me.
   She conceived yet and bare another son, and said: Because our Lord saw
   me despised he hath given to me this son, and she called him Simeon.
   She conceived the third, and brought forth another son, and said: Now
   shall my husband be coupled to me, because I have born to him three
   sons, and she called his name Levi. She conceived the fourth son and
   was delivered of him, and said: Now I shall knowledge me to our Lord,
   and therefore she named him Judah, and then she ceased of bearing of
   children.

   Rachel, seeing herself barren, had envy to her sister and said to Jacob
   her husband: Make me with child or else I shall die. To whom Jacob was
   wroth, and answered: What! weenest thou that I were God and hath prived
   from thee the fruit of thy belly? Then she said, I have my servant
   Bilhah, go unto her, and let her conceive of thee on my knees, that I
   may have of her some sons. She gave Bilhah unto her husband to know
   her, which when Jacob had known, she conceived and bare a son. Then
   said Rachel: Our Lord hath heard my petition giving to me a son, and
   she named him Dan. After that Bilhah conceived again and bare another
   son, for whom Rachel said: Our Lord hath compared me to my sister and I
   have availed, and she named him Naphtali. Then Leah feeling that she
   conceived no more, she gave Zilpah her handmaid to her husband, which
   conceived and bare a son whom Leah named Gad. After Zilpah conceived
   and bare another son, for whom Leah said: This is for my blessedness,
   and certainly all generations shall say that I am blessed; therefore
   she called him Asher.

   It happed that Reuben went out in harvest time into the field, and took
   there a mandrake which he brought and gave to his mother. Then Rachel
   said to her sister Leah: Give me some part of the mandrake of thy son.
   Leah answered: Is it not enough to take from me my husband, but that
   also thou wilt have part of the mandrake of my son? Then said Rachel:
   He shall sleep with thee this night for the mandrake of thy son. At
   even, when Jacob came home from the field, Leah went against him and
   said to him: Thou shalt this night sleep with me, for I have bought
   thee for the meed of the mandrake of my son. He slept with her that
   night, and our Lord heard her prayers. She conceived and brought forth
   the fifth son, and she said: God hath rewarded me because I gave my
   handmaid to my husband. She called his name Issachar. Yet Leah
   conceived and bare the sixth son and said: God hath endowed me with a
   good dower, yet shall my husband abide with me because I have borne to
   him six sons, and she called his name Zebulon. After this she conceived
   and bare a daughter named Dinah. Then our Lord remembered Rachel and
   heard her and opened the place of conception, which conceived and bare
   a son, saying: The Lord hath taken away mine opprobrium and shame, and
   named his name Joseph, saying: I pray God to send me another. When
   Joseph was born, Jacob said to Laban his wives' father: Give me leave
   to depart that I may go in to my country and my land; give to me my
   wives and children for whom I have served thee that I may go hence.
   Thou knowest what service I have served thee. Laban said to him: I have
   founden grace in thy sight; I know it by experience that God hath
   blessed me for thee; I have ordained the reward that I shall give to
   thee. Then Jacob answered: Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how
   much thy possession was in my hands. Th colours. And when he said the
   contrary they brought forth all white. God hath taken the substance of
   your father and hath given it to me. And now God hath commanded me to
   depart, wherefore make you ready and let us depart hence. Then answered
   Rachel and Leah: Shall we have nothing else of our father's faculty and
   of the heritage of his house? Shall he repute us as strangers, and he
   hath eaten and sold our goods? Sith God hath taken the goods of our
   father and hath given it to us and to our children, wherefore all that
   God commanded to thee, do it. Jacob arose and set his children and his
   wives upon his camels, and went his way and took all his substance, and
   flocks, and all that he had gotten in Mesopotamia and went toward his
   father Isaac into the land of Canaan. That time was Laban gone to shear
   his sheep, and Rachel stole away the idols of her father. Jacob would
   not let Laban know of his departing, and when he was departed with all
   that longed to him of right, he came to the mount of Gilead. It was
   told to Laban, the third day after, that Jacob was fled and gone, who
   anon took his brethren and pursued him by the space of seven days and
   overtook him in the mount of Gilead. He saw our Lord in his sleep
   saying to him: Beware that thou speak not angrily ne hard words to
   Jacob. That time Jacob had set his tabernacle in the hill, and when he
   came thither with his brethren, he said to Jacob: Why hast thou done
   thus to me to take away my daughters as prisoners taken by sword? Why
   fleddest thou from me and wouldst not let me have knowledge thereof?
   Thou hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and daughters, thou hast done
   follily. Now may I do thee harm and evil, but the God of thy father
   said to me yesterday: Beware that thou speak no hard words against
   Jacob. Thou desirest to go to the house of thy father, why hast thou
   them, and returned into his country. Jacob went forth in his journey
   that he had taken. Angels of God met him, which when he saw, he said:
   These be the castles of God, and called that place Mahanaim. He sent
   messengers tofore him to Esau his brother in the land of Seir, in the
   land of Edom, and bade them say thus to Esau: This saith thy brother
   Jacob: I have dwelled with Laban unto this day, I have oxen and asses,
   servants both men and women. I send now a legation unto my lord that I
   may find grace in his sight. These messengers returned to Jacob and
   said: We came to Esau thy brother, and lo! he cometh for to meet thee
   with four hundred men. Jacob was sore afraid then, and divided his
   company into twain turmes, saying: If Esau come to that one and destroy
   that, that other shall yet be saved. Then said Jacob: O God of my
   father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, O Lord that saidst to me,
   return into thy land and place of thy nativity, and saidst I shall do
   well to thee, I am the least in all thy mercies, and in thy truth that
   thou hast granted to thy servant, with my staff I have gone this river
   of Jordan, and now I return with two turmes. I beseech the Lord keep me
   from the hands of my brother Esau, for I fear him greatly lest he come
   and smite down the mother with the sons. Thou hast said that thou
   shouldest do well to me and shouldest spread my seed like unto the
   gravel of the sea, and that it may not be numbered for multitude. Then
   when he had slept that night, he ordained gifts for to send to his
   brother, goats two hundred, kids twenty, sheep two hundred, and rams
   twenty; forty kine and twenty bulls, twenty asses and ten foals of
   them. And he sent by his servants all these beasts; and bade them say
   that Jacob his servant sent to him this present and that he followeth
   after. And Jacob thought to please him with gifts.

   The night following, him thought a man wrestled with him all that night
   till the morning, and when he saw he might not overcome him, he hurted
   the sinew of his thigh that he halted thereof, and said to him: Let me
   go and leave me, for it is in the morning. Then Jacob answered: I shall
   not leave thee but if thou bless me. He said to him: What is thy name?
   he answered: Jacob. Then he said: Nay, said he, thy name shall no more
   be called Jacob, but Israel, for if thou hast been strong against God,
   how much more shalt thou prevail against men? Then Jacob said to him:
   What is thy name? tell me. He answered, Why demandest thou my name,
   which is marvellous? And he blessed him in the same place. Jacob called
   the name of that same place Penuel, saying: I have seen our Lord face
   to face, and my soul is made safe. And anon as he was past Penuel the
   sun arose. He halted on his foot, and therefore the children of Israel
   eat no sinews because it dried in the thigh of Jacob. Then Jacob
   lifting up his eyes saw Esau coming and four hundred men with him, and
   divided the sons of Leah and of Rachel, and of both their handmaidens,
   and set each handmaid and their children tofore in the first place,
   Leah and her sons in the second, and Rachel and Joseph all behind. And
   he going tofore kneeled down to ground and, worshipping his brother,
   approached him. Esau ran for to meet with his brother, and embraced
   him, straining his neck, and weeping kissed him, and he looked forth
   and saw the women and their children, and said: What been these and to
   whom longen they? Jacob answered: They be children which God hath given
   to me thy servant and his handmaidens, and their children approached
   and kneeled down, and Leah with her children also worshipped him, and
   last of all Joseph and Rachel worshipped him. Then said Esau: Whose
   been these turmes which I have met? Jacob answered: I have sent them to
   thee, my lord, unto the end that I may stand in thy grace. Esau said: I
   have many myself, keep these and let them be thine. Nay, said Jacob, I
   pray thee to take this gift which God hath sent me that I may find
   grace in thy sight, for meseemeth I see thy visage like the visage of
   God; and therefore be thou to me merciful, and take this blessing of
   me. Unnethe by compelling he taking it, said: Let us go together, I
   shall accompany thee and be fellow of thy journey. Then said Jacob:
   Thou knowest well, my lord, that I have young children and tender, and
   sheep and oxen, which, if I overlaboured, should die all in a day,
   wherefore please it you, my lord, to go tofore, and I shall follow as I
   may with my children and beasts. Esau answered: I pray thee then let my
   fellows abide and accompany thee, whatsoever need thou have. Jacob
   said: It is no need, I need no more but one, that I may stand in thy
   favour, my lord. And Esau returned then the same way and journey that
   he came into Seir. And Jacob came to Succoth and builded there an
   house, and from thence he went in to Shalem, the town of Shechem which
   is in the land of Canaan, and bought there a part of a field, in which
   he fixed his tabernacles, of the sons of Hamor father of Shechem for an
   hundred lambs. And there he raised an altar, and worshipped upon it the
   strongest God of Israel.

   It happed that Dinah, daughter of Leah, went out for to see the women
   of that region, which when Shechem, son of Hamor, prince of that land
   saw, anon loved and ravished and slept with her, oppressing her by
   strength, and was assotted on her in such wise as he went to his father
   Hamor and said: Give me this damsel in marriage that she may be my
   wife. Which when Jacob knew, and heard how his daughter was ravished,
   his sons then being absent in occupation of feeding of their beasts in
   the field, he held it secret till they returned. Then Hamor went to
   speak of this matter to Jacob, and that time his sons came from the
   field and heard what was happened and done, and were passing wroth and
   angry because he had so defouled their sister. Then said Hamor to them:
   Shechem my son loveth your daughter, give her to him in marriage, and
   let us ally each with other, let our daughters be given to you, and
   yours to us, and dwell ye with us. All the country is in your power,
   exercise and occupy it, buy and sell and take ye it. Then said Shechem
   to his father and brethren: Whatsoever ye ordain I will do, and what ye
   demand, gifts or dower, I shall gladly give it, so I may have this
   damsel unto my wife. Then answered the sons of Jacob to Shechem and his
   father in guile, dissimuling as they had not known the ravishment of
   their sister: We may not do that ye desire, ne give our sister to a man
   uncircumcised. it is a thing unlawful and great sin to u Lord appeared
   again to Jacob after that he was returned from Mesopotamia of Syria,
   and was come into Bethel, and blessed him saying: Thou shalt no more be
   called Jacob but Israel shall be thy name, and called him Israel, and
   said to him: I am God Almighty, grow and multiply, folks and peoples of
   nations shall come of thee, kings shall come of thy loins. The land
   that I gave to Abraham and Isaac I shall give to thee and thy seed; and
   vanished from him. He then raised a stone for a remembrance in the
   place where God spake to him, and anointed it with oil, calling the
   name of the place Bethel. He went thence and came in veer time unto the
   land that goeth to Ephrath, in which place Rachel travailed and began
   for cause of childing to die. The midwife said to her, Be not afeard,
   for thou shalt have a son. And the death drawing near, she named him
   Benoni, which is as much to say as the son of my sorrow. The father
   called him Benjamin, that is to say the son of the right hand. There
   Rachel died and was buried in the way toward Ephrath, that is
   Bethlehem. Jacob raised a title upon her tomb; this is the title of the
   monument of Rachel unto this present day. Jacob went thence and came to
   Isaac his father into Mamre the city of Arbah, that is Hebron, in which
   dwelled Abraham and Isaac. And all the days of Isaac were complete,
   which were an hundred and fourscore years, and he consumed and died in
   good mind, and Esau and Jacob his sons buried him.

   Thus endeth the history of Isaac and his two sons Esau and Jacob.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here beginneth the history of and his brethren, which is read the third Sunday
in Lent.

   Joseph when he was sixteen years old began to keep and feed the flock
   with his brethren, he being yet a child, and was accompanied with the
   sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, wives of his father. Joseph complained on
   his brethren, and accused them to their father of the most evil sin.
   Israel loved Joseph above all his sons for as much as he had gotte son
   a long time. All his sons gathered them together for to comfort their
   father and assuage his sorrow, but he would take no comfort, but said:
   I shall descend to my son into hell for to bewail him there. And thus,
   he abiding in sorrow, the Midianites carried Joseph into Egypt, and
   sold him to Potiphar, eunuch of Pharaoh, master of his knights.

   Thus was Joseph led into Egypt, and Potiphar, prince of the host of
   Pharaoh, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of Ishmaelites. Our Lord
   God was always with Joseph, and he was wise, ready, and prosperous in
   all manner of things. He dwelled in his lord's house and pleased so
   well his lord, that he stood in his grace that he made him upperest and
   above all other, and betook him the rule and governance of all his
   house, which well and wisely governed the household and all that he had
   charge of. Our Lord blessed the house of Egypt for Joseph's sake, and
   multiplied as well in beasts as in fields all his substance. Joseph was
   fair of visage and well favoured.

   After many days the lady, his master's wife, beheld and cast her eyes
   on Joseph, and said to Joseph: Come and sleep with me, which anon
   refused that, and would not attend ne listen to her words, ne would not
   consent to so sinful a work, and said to her: Lo! hath not my lord
   delivered to me all that he hath in his house? and he knoweth not what
   he hath, and there is nothing therein but that it is in my power and at
   my commandment except thee, which art his wife. How may I do this evil
   and sin to my lord? Such manner, or semblable words, he said daily to
   her, and the woman was the more desirous and grievous to the young man,
   and he always forsook and refused the sin. It happed on a day that
   Joseph entered into the chamber about certain needs that he had to do,
   and she caught him by his mantle, and held it fast, and said to him:
   Come and lie with me, who anon would not agree to her, but fled forth
   out of the doors, and left his mantle behind him in her hand. And when
   the lady saw that she was refused, and his mantle in her hand, she
   cried and called the men of the house and said to them: Lo! this Hebrew
   is come to my chamber and would have enforced and have lain by me, and
   when I cried, he fled out of the chamber and left for haste his mantle
   that I held, behind him, and into witness of truth she showed to her
   husband the mantle when he came home, and said: Thy servant the Hebrew,
   whom thou hast brought into this house, is entered into my chamber for
   to have lain by me, and when I cried, he left his mantle that I held,
   and fled away. When the lord heard this, anon he gave faith and
   believed his wife, and being sore wroth, set Joseph in prison where the
   prisoners of the king were kept and he was there fast set in. Our Lord
   God was with Joseph, and had mercy on him, and made him in the favour
   and grace of the chief keeper of the prison, in so much that he
   delivered to Joseph the keeping of all the prisoners, and what he did
   was done, and the chief jailor was pleased with all. Our Lord was with
   him and directed all his works.

   After this it fell so that two officers of the king's trespassed unto
   their lord, wherefore he was wroth with them and commanded them to the
   prison whereas Joseph was. That one of them was the butler, and that
   other the baker; and the keeper betook them to Joseph to keep, and he
   served them. After a while that they had been in prison they both saw
   on one night a dream of which they were astonied and abashed, and when
   Joseph was come in to serve them, and saw them heavy, he demanded them
   why they were heavier than they were wont to be, which answered: We
   have dreamed and there is none to interpret it to us. Joseph said to
   them: Suppose ye that God may not give me grace to interpret it? Tell
   to me what ye saw in your sleep. Then the butler told first and said:
   Methought I saw a vine had three branches, and after they had flowered
   the grapes were ripe, and then I took the cup of Pharaoh in my hand,
   and took the grapes and wrang out of them wine into the cup that I
   held, and presented it to Pharaoh to drink. Joseph answered: The three
   branches be yet three days, after which Pharaoh shall remember thy
   service and shall restore thee into thy foremost office and gree, for
   to serve him as thou wert wont to do. Then I pray thee to remember me
   when thou art at thine above, and be to me so merciful to sue unto
   Pharaoh that he take me out of this prison, for I was stolen out of the
   land of Hebrews and am innocently set here in prison. Then the master
   baker saw that he had wisely interpreted the butler's dream; he said:
   Methought that I had three baskets of meat upon my head, and in that
   one basket that was highest methought I bare all the meat of the
   bakehouse and birds came and ate of it. Joseph answered: This is the
   interpretation of the dream; the three baskets be three days yet to
   come, after which Pharaoh shall smite off thy head and shall hang thee
   on the cross, and the birds shall tear thy flesh. And the third day
   after this Pharaoh made a great feast unto his children, and remembered
   him, among the meals, on the master butler and the master baker. He
   restored his butler unto his office, and to serve him of the cup, and
   that other was hanged, that the truth of the interpreter was believed
   and proved. Notwithstanding the master butler in his wealth forget
   Joseph his interpreter.

   Two years after Pharaoh saw in his sleep a dream. Him thought he stood
   upon the river, from which he saw seven oxen ascend to the land which
   were fair and right fat, and were fed in a fat pasture; he saw other
   seven come out of the river, poor and lean, and were fed in places
   plenteous and burgeoning. These devoured the other that were so fat and
   fair. Herewith he started out of his sleep, and after slept again, and
   saw another dream. He saw seven ears of corn standing on one stalk,
   full and fair of corns, and as many other ears void and smitten with
   drought, which devoured the beauty of the first seven. In the morning
   Pharaoh awoke and was greatly afeard of these dreams, and sent for all
   conjectors and diviners of Egypt, and wise men; and when they were
   gathered he told to them his dream, and there was none that could
   interpret it. Then at last the master butler, remembering Joseph, said:
   I knowledge my sin, on a time the king being wroth with his servants,
   sent me and the master of the bakers into prison, where we in one night
   dreamed both prodigies of things coming. And there was a child of the
   Hebrews, servant to the jailor, to whom we told our dreams and he
   expounded them to us and said what should happen; I am restored to mine
   office and that other is hanged on the cross.

   Anon, by the king's commandment, Joseph was taken out of prison and
   shaved, bathed, and changed his clothes, and brought tofore Pharaoh, to
   whom be said: I saw a dream which I have showed unto wise men, and
   there is none that can tell me the interpretation thereof. To whom
   Joseph answered: God shall answer by me things prosperous to Pharaoh.
   Then Pharaoh told to him his dreams, like as is tofore written, of the
   seven fat oxen and seven lean, and how the lean devoured the fat, and
   in likewise of the ears. Joseph answered: The king's dreams are one
   thing which God hath showed to Pharaoh. The seven fat oxen and the
   seven ears full, betoken seven years to come of great plenty and
   commodious, and the seven lean oxen, and the seven void ears smitten
   with drought, betoken seven years after them of great hunger and
   scarcity. Lo! there shall come first seven years of great fertility and
   plenty in all the land of Egypt, after whom shall follow other seven
   years of so great sterility, barrenness, and scarcity, that the
   abundance of the first shall be all forgotten. The great hunger of
   these latter years shall consume all the plenty of the first years. The
   latter dream pertaineth to the same, because God would that it should
   be fulfilled. Now therefore let the king provide for a man that is wise
   and witty, that may command and ordain provosts and officers in all
   places of the realm, that they gather into garners and barns the fifth
   part of all the corn and fruits that shall grow these first seven
   plenteous years that be to come, and that all this wheat may be kept in
   barns and garners in towns and villages, that it may be made ready
   against the coming of the seven scarce years that shall oppress by
   hunger all Egypt, to the end that the people be not enfamined. This
   counsel pleased much to Pharaoh and to all his ministers. Then Pharaoh
   said to his servants: Where should we find such a, man as this is,
   which is fulfilled with the spirit of God? And then he said to Joseph:
   Forasmuch as God hath showed to thee all that thou hast spoken, trowest
   thou that we might find any wiser than thou or like to thee ? Thou
   shalt be upperest of my house, and to the commandment of thy mouth all
   people shall obey. I only shall go tofore thee and sit but one seat
   above thee. Yet said Pharaoh to Joseph: Lo! I have ordained thee above
   and master upon all the land of Egypt. He took a ring from his hand and
   gave it into his hand, and clad him with a double stole furred with
   bise; and a golden collar he put about his neck, and made him to ascend
   upon his chair; the second trumpet crying that all men should kneel
   tofore him, and that they should know him upperest provost of all the
   land of Egypt. Then said the king of Egypt to Joseph: I am Pharaoh,
   without thy commandment shall no man move hand nor foot in all the land
   of Egypt. He changed his name and called him in the tongue of Egypt:
   The saviour of the world. He gave to him a wife named Asenath, daughter
   of Potiphera, priest of Eliopoleos.

   Joseph went forth then into the land of Egypt. Joseph was thirty years
   old when he stood in the favour and grace of Pharaoh. And he went round
   about all the region of Egypt. The plenteousness and fertility of the
   seven years came, and sheaves and shocks of corn were brought in to the
   barns; all the abundance of fruits was laid in every town. There was so
   great plenty of wheat that it might be compared to the gravel of the
   sea, and the plenty thereof exceedeth measure. Joseph had two sons by
   his wife ere the famine and hunger came, which Asenath the priest's
   daughter brought forth, of whom he called the name of the first
   Manasseh, saying: God hath made me to forget all my labours, and the
   house of my father hath forgotten me. He called the name of the second
   son Ephraim, saying: God hath made me to grow in the land of my
   poverty.

   Then passed the seven years of plenty and fertility that were in Egypt,
   and the seven years of scarcity and hunger began to come, which Joseph
   had spoken of tofore, and hunger began to wax and grow in the universal
   world; also in all the land of Egypt was hunger and scarcity. And when
   the people hungered they cried to Pharaoh asking meat, to whom he
   answered: Go ye to Joseph, and whatsoever he saith to you do ye. Daily
   grew and increased the hunger in all the land. Then Joseph opened the
   barns and garners, and sold corn to the Egyptians, for the hunger
   oppressed them sore. All provinces came into Egypt for to buy meat to
   them, and to eschew the hunger.

   Jacob, father unto Joseph, heard tell that corn and victuals were sold
   in Egypt, and said to his sons: Why be ye negligent? I have heard say
   that corn is sold in Egypt; go ye thither and buy for us that is
   necessary and behoveful, that we may live, and consume not for need.
   Then the ten brethren of Joseph descended into Egypt for to buy wheat,
   and Benjamin was left at home with the father, because whatsoever
   happed to the brethren in their journey. Then they entered into the
   land of Egypt with other for to buy corn. There was great famine in the
   land of Canaan, and Joseph was prince in the land of Egypt, also by his
   commandment wheat was sold unto the people. Then when his brethren were
   come and had adored and worshipped him, he anon knew them, and spake to
   them, as to strangers, hard words, demanding them saying: Whence be ye?
   bring with you your youngest brother that I may know that ye be none
   espies and that ye may receive this brother that I hold in prison, and
   then forthon what that ye will buy ye shall have licence. And this
   said, each of them poured out the wheat, and every man found his money
   bounden in the mouth of every sack. Then said Jacob their father: Ye
   have made me without children. Joseph is gone and lost, Simeon is
   bounden in prison, and Benjamin ye will take away from me, on me come
   all these evils. To Reuben answered: Slay my two sons if I bring him
   not again to thee; deliver him to me in my hand, and I shall restore
   him again to thee. The father said: My son shall not go with you, his
   brother is dead and he is left now alone, if any adversity should hap
   to him in the way that ye go into, ye shall lead my old hairs with
   sorrow to hell.

   In the meanwhile famine and hunger oppressed all the land greatly. And
   when the corn that they brought from Egypt was consumed, Jacob said to
   his sons: Return ye into Egypt and buy for us some meat, that we may
   live. Judah answered: That man said to us, under swearing of great
   oaths that: Ye shall not see my face ne come into my presence but if ye
   bring your youngest brother with you. Therefore if thou wilt send him
   with us, we shall go together and shall buy for us that shall be
   necessary, and if thou wilt not we shall not go. The man said as we oft
   have said to thee, that if we bring him not we shall not see his
   visage. Israel said to them: This have ye done into my misery, that ye
   told to him that ye had another brother. And they answered: The man
   demanded of us by order our progeny, if our father lived, if we had any
   brother. And we answered him consequently after that he demanded, we
   wist not what he would say, ne that he said bring your brother with
   you. Send the child with us that we may go forth and live, and that we
   ne our children die not for hunger. I shall receive thy son, and
   require him of my hand. If I lead him not thither and bring him again,
   I shall be guilty to thee of the sin ever after. If there had been no
   delay of this, we had been there and come again by this time. Then
   Israel their father said to them: If it be so necessary as ye say, do
   ye as ye will; take with you of the best fruits of this land in your
   vessels, and give ye and present to that man gifts, a little raisins,
   and honey, storax, stacten, terebinthe, and dates, and bear with you
   double money, and also the same money that ye found in your sacks, lest
   there be any error therefore; and take with you Benjamin, your brother.
   My God, that is almighty, make him pleasant unto you, and that ye may
   return in safety with this your brother and him also that he holdeth in
   prison; I shall be as a man barren therewhiles, without children. Then
   the brethren took the gifts and double money and Benjamin, and went
   forth into Egypt, and came and stood tofore Joseph; whom when he had
   seen, and Benjamin, he commanded to the steward of his house that he
   should do slay sheep and calves and make a feast, for these brethren
   shall dine with me this day. He did as he was commanded and brought the
   men into his lord's house. Then were they all afeard and said softly
   together: Because of the money that we had in our sacks we be brought
   in that he take us with the default, and shall by violence bring us and
   our asses into servitude. Wherefore they said to the steward of the
   house, in the gate of the house ere they entered, saying: We pray thee
   to hear us: the last time that we came to buy victual, which when we
   had bought and departed, and were on our him from themward, for he was
   moved in all his spirits and wept on his brother, and went into his
   bedchamber. After this he washed his visage and came out making good
   countenance and commanded to set bread on the board, and after that he
   set his brethren in order, each after their age, and ate together, and
   Joseph sat and ate with the Egyptians. For it was not lawful to the
   Egyptians to eat with the Hebrews. And each of them were well served,
   but Benjamin had the best part, and they ate and drank so much that
   they were drunken. Then Joseph commanded the steward of his house to
   fill their sacks with wheat as much as they might receive, and the
   money of the wheat put it in to every man's sack, and take my cup of
   silver, and the money of the youngest, and put that in his sack. And
   all this was done. And on the morn betimes they were suffered to depart
   with their asses. And when they were gone out of the town and a little
   on their way, then Joseph said to his steward: Make thee ready and ride
   after, and say to them: Why have ye done evil for good? The cup that my
   lord is accustomed to drink in, ye have stolen, ye might not do a worse
   thing. He did as Joseph had commanded and overtook them, and said to
   them all by order like as he had charge, which answered: Why saith your
   lord so, and doth to us his servants such letting? The money that we
   found in our sacks we brought again to thee from the land of Canaan,
   and how may it follow that we should steal any gold or silver from the
   house of thy lord? Look! at whom it be found of us all thy servants,
   let him die. Which said to them: Be it after your sentence, at whom
   that it ever be found he shall be my servant and the others shall go
   free and be not guilty. Then he hied and set down all their sacks,
   beginning at the oldest unto the youngest, and at last found the cup in
   the mouth of the sack of Benjamin. Then they all for sorrow cut and
   rent their clothes, and laded their asses again, and returned all into
   the town again. Then Judah entered first with his brethren unto Joseph
   and all they together fell down platte to the ground. To whom Joseph
   said: Why have ye done thus? Know not ye that there is no man like to
   me in the science of knowledge? To whom Judah answered: What shall we
   answer to thee, my lord; or what shall we speak or rightfully desire?
   God hath found and remembered the iniquity of us thy servants, for we
   be all thy servants, yea, we and he at whom the cup was found. Joseph
   answered: God forbid that I should so do, whosoever stole the cup shall
   be my servant, and go ye your way, for ye shall be free and go to your
   father. Then Judah approached near him and spake with a hardy cheer to
   him and said: I beseech thee my lord to hear me thy servant that I may
   and that thou wilt not be wroth to thy servant. Thou art next to
   Pharaoh; my lord, thou demandedst first of us thy servants: Have ye a
   father or brother? And we answered to thee, my lord: Our father is an
   old man and we have a brother a young child which was born to him in
   his old age, whose brother of the same mother is dead, and he is an
   only son whom the father loveth tenderly. Thou saidest to us thy
   servants: Bring him hither to me that I may see. We told to thee my
   lord for truth: our father may not forego the child, if he forego him
   certainly he shall die. And thou saidest to us, thy servants: But if ye
   bring him with you, ye shall no more see my visage. Then when we came
   to our father and told him all these things, and our father bade us to
   return and buy more corn. To whom we said: We may not go thither but if
   our youngest brother go with us, for if he be absent we dare not
   approach, ne come to the presence of the man; and he answered to us: Ye
   know well that my wife brought to me forth but two sons, that one went
   out, and ye said that of wild beasts had devoured him, and yet I heard
   never of him ne he appeared not. If now ye should take this my son and
   any thing happened to him in the way ye should bring my hoar bair with
   sorrow to hell. Therefore if I should come home to my father and bring
   not the child with me, sith the soul and health of my father dependeth
   of this child, and see that he is not come with us, he shall die and we
   thy servants should lead his old age with wailing and sorrow to hell. I
   myself shall be thy proper servant which have received him upon my
   faith and have promised for him, saying to my father: If I bring him
   not again I shall be guilty of the sin to my father ever after. I shall
   abide and continue thy servant for the child in the ministry and
   service of thee my lord. I may not depart, the child being absent, lest
   I be witness of the sorrow that my father shall take. Wherefore I
   beseech thee to suffer this child to go to his father and receive me
   into thy service. Thus said Judah, with much more; as Josephus,
   Antiquitatum, rehearseth more piteously, and saith moreover that the
   cause why he did do hide the cup in Benjamin's sack, was to know
   whether they loved Benjamin or hated him as they did him, what time
   they sold him to the Ishmaelites.

   Then this request made, Joseph might no longer forbear, but commanded
   them that stood by to withdraw them, and when all men were gone out
   sauf he and his brethren, he began to say to them weeping: I am Joseph
   your brother, liveth yet my father? The brethren were so afeard that
   they could not speak ne answer to him. Then he debonairly said to them;
   Come hither to me; and when they came near him he said: I am Joseph
   your brother that ye sold into Egypt; be ye not afeard nor think not
   hard unto you that ye sold me into these regions. God hath sent me
   tofore you into Egypt for your health. It is two years since the famine
   began, and yet been five years to come in which men may not ear, sow,
   ne reap. God hath sent me tofore you that ye should be reserved on the
   earth, and that ye may have meat to live by. It is not by your counsel
   that I was sent hither, but by the will of God, which hath ordained me
   father of Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and prince in all the
   land of Egypt. Hie you, and go to my father, and say ye to him: This
   word sendeth thee thy son Joseph: God hath made me lord of the
   universal land of Egypt, come to me lest thou die, and thou shalt dwell
   in the land of Goshen. Thou shalt be next me, thou and thy sons and the
   sons of thy sons, and I shall feed thy sheep, thy beasts and all that
   thou hast in possession. Yet rest five year to come of famine,
   therefore come lest thou perish, thy house, and all that thou owest.
   Lo! your eyes and the eyes of my brother Benjamin see that my mouth
   speaketh these words to you. Show ye to my father all my glory and all
   that ye have seen in Egypt. Hie ye and bring him to me. This said, he
   embraced his brother Benjamin about his neck and wept upon each of
   them. After this they durst better speak to him. Anon it was told and
   known all about in the king's hall that Joseph's brethren were come.
   And Pharaoh was joyful and glad thereof and all his household. And
   Pharaoh said to Joseph that he should say to his brethren: Lade ye your
   beasts and go into the and of Canaan, and bring from thence your father
   and kindred, and come to me, and I shall give you all the goods of
   Egypt, that ye may eat the marrow of the earth. Command ye also that
   they take carriages of this land of Egypt, for the carriage of their
   children and wives, and say to them: Take your father and come as soon
   as ye may, and leave nothing behind you, for all the best things shall
   be yours. The sons of Israel did as they were commanded. To whom Joseph
   gave carriages after the commandment of Pharaoh, and meat to eat by the
   way. He commanded to give to every each two garments. To Benjamin he
   gave three hundred pieces of silver, with five garments of the best,
   and also he sent clothing to his father, adding to them ten asses which
   were laden with all riches of Egypt, and as many asses laden and
   bearing bread and victual to spend by the way. And thus he let his
   brethren depart from him saying: Be ye not wroth in the way. Then they
   thus departing came into the land of Canaan to their father, and showed
   all this to their father, and said: Joseph thy son liveth and he
   lordeth in all the land of Egypt.

   When Jacob heard this he awoke as a man had been awaked suddenly out of
   his sleep, yet nevertheless he believed them not, and they told to him
   all the order of the matter. When he saw the carriage and all that he
   had sent, his spirit revived and said: It sufficeth to me if Joseph my
   son yet live, I shall go and see him ere I die. Then Israel went forth
   with all that he had and came to the pit where tofore he had sworn to
   God; and slew there beasts to make sacrifices to the God of Isaac his
   father. He heard God by a vision that same night saying to him: Jacob,
   Jacob, to whom he answered: I am here all ready. God said to him: I am
   strongest God of thy father Isaac, dread thee not, but descend down
   into Egypt. I shall make thee to grow there into great people. I shall
   descend with thee thither, and I shall bring thee again when thou
   returnest. Joseph soothly shall put his hands upon thine eyes. Jacob
   then arose on the morn early, and his sons took him with their children
   and wives and set them on the carriages that Pharaoh had sent to bring
   him and all that he had into the land of Canaan. And so came into Egypt
   with all his progeny, sons and children, etc.

   These be the names of the sons of Israel that entered with him into
   Egypt. The first begotten Reuben with his children four. Simeon with
   his seven sons. Levi with his three sons. Judah and his sons three.
   Issachar and his four sons. Zebulon and his sons three. These were sons
   of Leah that Jacob gat in Mesopotamia, and Dinah his daughter. All
   these sons and daughters were thirty-three. Gad also entered with his
   children seven. Asher with his children five and of his children's
   children two. These were sons of Zilpah, in number sixteen. The sons of
   Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin. Joseph had two sons in the land of
   Egypt by his wife Asenath, Manasseh and Ephraim. The sons of Benjamin
   were ten. All these children that came of Rachel were in number
   fourteen. Dan entered with one son, and Naphtali with four sons. These
   were the children of Bilhah; they were in number seven. All the souls
   that were issued of his seed that entered into Egypt with him, without
   the wives of his sons, were sixty-six. The sons of Joseph that were
   born in Egypt twain. Summa of all the souls of the house of Jacob that
   entered into Egypt were in all seventy.

   Jacob sent then tofore him Judah unto Joseph, to show to him his
   coming. And he came to Joseph in Goshen, and anon Joseph ascended his
   chariot and went for to meet his father, and when he saw him, he
   embraced him meekly and wept. And his father received him joyously and
   embraced also him. Then said the father to Joseph: Now shall I die
   joyously because I have seen thy visage. Then said Joseph to his
   brethren and to all the house of his father: I shall go and ascend to
   Pharaoh and shall say to him, that my brethren and the house of my
   father that were in the land of Canaan be come to me, and be men
   keeping sheep, and can the manner well for to keep the flocks of sheep,
   and that they have brought with them their beasts, and all that ever
   they had. When he shall call you and ask you of what occupation ye be,
   ye shall say: We be shepherds, thy servants, from our childhood unto
   now, and our fathers also. This shall ye say that ye may dwell in the
   land of Goshen, for the Egyptians have spite unto herdmen of sheep.
   Then Joseph entered tofore Pharaoh and said to him: My father, my
   brethren, their sheep and beasts be come from the land of Canaan, and
   be in the land of Goshen. And he brought five of his brethren tofore
   the king, whom he demanded of what occupation they were of. They
   answered: We be keepers of sheep, thy servants, we and our fathers, we
   be come to dwell in thy land, for there is no grass for the flocks of
   sheep of us thy servants, the famine is so great in the land of Canaan.
   We beseech thee that thou command us thy servants to dwell in the land
   of Goshen. Then said the king to Joseph: Thy father and thy brethren be
   come to thee, the land of Egypt is at thy commandment, make thou them
   to dwell in the best place, and deliver to them the land of Goshen. And
   if thou know them for conning, ordain they to be masters of my beasts.
   After this Joseph brought his father in, and made him stand tofore the
   king which blessed him, and was demanded of the king how old he was. He
   answered: The days of the pilgrimage of my life be an hundred and
   thirty years, small and evil, and yet I am not come unto the days of my
   fathers that they have lived. And he blessed the king and went out.
   Then Joseph gave to his father and brethren possession in Egypt in the
   best soil of Rameses like as Pharaoh had commanded, and there fed them,
   giving to each of them victual.

   In all the world was scarcity of bread, and hunger and famine oppressed
   specially and most, the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan. Of which
   lands Joseph gat all the money for selling of wheat, and brought it
   into the king's treasury. When all people lacked money, all Egypt came
   to Joseph saying: Give us bread, why die we to the lacking money. To
   whom he answered: Bring to me your beasts and I shall give you for them
   victuals, if ye have no money: which when they brought, he gave to them
   victuals and food for horses, sheep, oxen and asses, and sustained them
   one year for changing of their beasts. Then came they again the second
   year and said: We hide not from thee our lord that our money is failed
   and also our beasts be gone, and there is nothing left but our bodies
   and our land. Why then shall we die in thy sight? And we ourselves and
   also our land shall be thine, buy us into bondship and servitude of the
   king, and give us seed to sow lest the earth turn into wilderness. Then
   Joseph bought all the land of Egypt, every man selling his possessions
   for the vehement hunger that they had. He subdued all unto Pharaoh, and
   all his people from the last terms of Egypt unto the utterest ends of
   the same, except the land longing to the priests, which was given to
   them by the king, to whom were given victuals openly out of all the
   barns and garners, and therefore they were not compelled to sell their
   possessions. Then said Joseph to all the peoples: Lo, now ye see and
   know that Pharaoh oweth and is in possession of you and of your land.
   Take to you seed and sow ye the fields that ye may have fruit. The
   fifth part thereof ye shall give to the king and four parts I promise
   to you to sow, and for meat to your servants and to your children.
   Which answered: Our health is in thine hand, let our lord only behold
   us and we shall gladly serve the king. From that time unto this present
   day, in all the land of Egypt the fifth part is paid to the king; and
   it is holden for a law, except the land longing to the priests which is
   free from this condition.

   Then Israel dwelled in Egypt in the land of Goshen, and was in
   possession thereof. He increased and multiplied greatly, and lived
   therein seventeen years. And all the years of his life were an hundred
   and seven and forty years. When he understood that the day of his death
   approached, he called to him his son Joseph and said to him: If I may
   find so much grace in thy sight, do to me so much mercy as thou promise
   and swear that thou bury me not in Egypt, but that I may rest with my
   fathers, and take and carry me from this land, and lay me in the
   sepulchre of my forefathers. To whom Joseph answered: I shall do that
   thou hast commanded. Then said he: Swear to me, and so he swore. And
   then Israel adored and worshipped our Lord, and turned him towards his
   bed's head. Then this done, anon after it was told to Joseph that his
   father was sick and feeble; who anon took his sons Manasseh and Ephraim
   and came to his father. Anon it was told to the father: Lo thy son
   Joseph cometh to thee, which then was comforted, and sat up in his bed.
   And Joseph entered in, and Jacob said: Almighty God appeared to me in
   Luz which is in the land of Canaan, and he blessed me and said: I shall
   increase thee and multiply thee into tourbes of peoples, I shall give
   to thee this land and to thy seed after thee in sempiternal possession,
   therefore thy two sons that be born to thee in this land of Egypt
   tofore I came hither to thee, shall be my sons Ephraim and Manasseh,
   they shall be reputed to me as Simeon and Reuben. The other that thou
   shalt get after them shall be thine, and shall be called in the name of
   their brethren in their possessions. Then he, seeing Joseph's sons,
   said to him: Who be these children? Joseph answered: They be my sons
   which God hath given to me in this place. Bring them hither, said he,
   to me that I may bless them. Israel's eyes were dimmed and might not
   see clearly for great age. He took them to him and kissed them and said
   to Joseph: I am not defrauded from the sight of thee, and furthermore
   God hath showed to me thy seed. Then when Joseph took them from his
   father's lap, he worshipped him kneeling low to the earth, and set
   Ephraim on his right side, and on the left side of Israel, and Manasseh
   on the right side of his father Israel, which took his right hand and
   laid it on the head of Ephraim the younger brother, and his left hand
   on the head of Manasseh which was first born. Then Jacob blessed the
   sons of Joseph and said: God, in whose sight walked my fathers Abraham
   and Isaac, God that hath fed me from my youth unto this present day,
   the angel that hath kept me from all evil bless these children, and my
   name be called on them, and the names of my fathers Abraham and Isaac,
   and grow they into multitude upon earth. Then Joseph seeing that his
   father set his right hand upon the head of Ephraim the younger brother
   took it heavily, and took his father's hand and would have laid it on
   the head of Manasseh, and said to his father: Nay father, it is not
   convenient, that ye do, this is the first begotten son, set thy right
   hand on his head. Which renied that and would not do so, but said: I
   wot, my son, I wot what I do, and this son shall increase into peoples
   and multiply, but his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his
   seed shall grow into gentiles, and blessed them, saying that same time:
   In thee shall be blessed Israel, and shall be said: God make thee like
   to Ephraim and Manasseh. And he said to Joseph his son: Lo! now I die
   and God shall be with you, and shall reduce and bring you again into
   the land of your fathers; and I give to thee one part above thy
   brethren, which I gat and won from the hand of the Amorite with my
   sword and my bow. Then Jacob called his sons tofore him and said to
   them:

   Gather ye altogether tofore me, that I may show to you things that be
   to come, and hear your father Israel. And there he told to each of them
   his condition singularly. And when he had blessed his twelve sons he
   commanded them to bury him with his fathers in a double spelunke which
   is in the field of Ephron the Hittite against Mamre in the land of
   Canaan which Abraham bought. And this said he gathered to him his feet
   and died. Which anon as Joseph saw, he fell on his visage and kissed
   him. He commanded to his masters of physic and medicines, which were
   his servants, that they should embalm the body of his father with sweet
   spices aromatic; which was all done, and then went they sorrowing him
   forty days. The Egyptians wailed him seventy days, and when the wailing
   was past, Joseph did say to Pharaoh how he had sworn and promised to
   bury him in the land of Canaan. To whom Pharaoh said: Go and bury thy
   father like as thou hast sworn. Which then took his father's body and
   went, and with him were accompanied all the aged men of Pharaoh's
   house, and the noblest men of birth of all the land of Egypt, the house
   of Joseph with his brethren, without the young children, flocks and
   beasts, which they left in the land of Goshen. He had in his fellowship
   chariots, carts and horsemen, and was a great tourbe and company, and
   came over Jordan where as they hallowed the exequies by great wailing
   seven days long. And when they of the country saw this plaint and
   sorrowing they said: This is a great sorrow to the Egyptians. And that
   same place is named yet the bewailing of Egypt. The children of Israel
   did as they were commanded, and bare him into the land of Canaan, and
   buried him in the double spelunke which Abraham had bought. Then when
   Jacob the father was buried, Joseph with all his fellowship returned
   into Egypt. Then his brethren after the death of their father spake
   together privily, and dreading that Joseph would avenge the wrong and
   evil that they had done to him, came to him and said: Thy father
   commended us ere he died that we should say thus to thee; We pray thee
   that thou wilt forget, and not remember the sin and trespass of thy
   brethren, ne the malice that they executed in thee. We beseech thee
   that thou wilt forgive to thy father, servant of God, this wickedness.
   Which when Joseph heard he wept bitterly, and his brethren came to him
   kneeling low to the ground and worshipped him, and said, We be thy
   servants. To whom he answered: Be ye nothing afeard ne dread you not,
   ween ye that ye may resist God's will? Ye thought to have done to me
   evil, but God hath turned it into good, and hath exalted me as ye see
   and know, that he should save much people. Be ye nothing afeard, I
   shall feed you and your children. And comforted them with fair words,
   and spake friendly and joyously to them. And he abode and dwelled still
   in Egypt with all the house of his father, and lived an hundred and ten
   years, and saw the sons of Ephraim in to the third generation. After
   these things he said to his brethren: After my death, God shall visit
   you and shall do you depart from this land unto the land that he
   promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. When that time shall come, take
   my bones and lead them with you from this place, and then died. Whose
   body was embalmed with sweet spices and aromatics and laid in a chest
   in Egypt.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here next followeth the history of Moses, which is read in the Church on
Mid-lent Sunday:

   These be the names of the children of Israel that entered into Egypt
   with Jacob, and each entered with their household and meiny. Reuben,
   Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulon, Benjamin, Dan, Naphtali, Gad,
   and Asher; they were all in number that entered seventy. Joseph was
   tofore in Egypt. And when he was dead and all his brethren and kindred,
   the children of Israel grew and multiplied greatly, and filled the
   earth. Then was there a new king upon Egypt which knew nothing of
   Joseph, and said to his people: Lo! and see the people of Israel is
   great, and stronger than we be, come and let us wisely oppress them,
   lest they multiply and give us battle and fight with us and drive us
   out of our land. Then he ordained provosts and masters over them to set
   them awork and put them to affliction of burdens. They builded to
   Pharaoh two towns, Pithom and Raamses. How much more they oppressed
   them, so much the more they increased and multiplied. The Egyptians
   hated the children of Israel and put them to affliction, scorning and
   having envy at them, and oppressed bitterly their life with hard and
   sore labours of tile and clay, and grieved all them in such works. The
   king of Egypt said to the midwives of the Hebrews, of whom that one was
   called Shiphrah, and that other Puah, and commanded: When so is that
   the time of birth is, and that ye shall do your office in helping in
   the birth of children, if it be a manchild slay him, if it be a
   maid-child keep it and let it live. The midwives dreaded God, and did
   not as the king commanded them, but reserved and kept the men-children.
   For whom the king sent and said: What is the cause that ye reserved and
   kept the men-children? They answered: There be of the Hebrews women
   that can the craft of midwives as well as we, and ere we come the
   children be born. God did well therefore unto the midwives, and the
   people grew and were greatly comforted. And because the midwives
   dreaded God they edified to them houses. Then Pharaoh commanded to his
   people saying: Whatsomever is born of males cast ye into the river, and
   what of women keep ye them and let ye them live.

   After this was a man of the house of Levi went out and took a wife of
   his kindred, which conceived and brought forth a son, and he saw him
   elegant and fair, and hid him three months, and when he might no longer
   hide him, took a little crib of rushes and wickers and pitched it with
   glue and pitch, and put therein the child, and set it on the river, and
   let it drive down in the stream, and the sister of the child standing
   afar, considering what should fall thereof. And it happed that same
   time, the daughter of king Pharaoh descended down to the river for to
   wash her in the water, and her maidens went by the brink, which then,
   when she saw the little crib or fiscelle she sent one of her maidens to
   fetch and take it up, which so fetched and brought to her, and she saw
   therein Iying a fair child; and she having pity on it said: This is one
   of the children of the Hebrews. To whom anon spake the sister of the
   child: Wilt thou, said she, that I go and call thee a woman of the
   Hebrews that shall and may nourish this child? She answered: Go thy
   way. The maid went and called his mother, to whom Pharaoh's daughter
   said: Take this child and nourish him to me, and I shall give to thee
   thy meed and reward. The mother took her child and nourished it, and
   when it was weaned and could go she delivered it to the daughter of
   king Pharaoh, whom she received and adopted instead of a son and named
   him Moses, saying that I took him out of the water. And he there grew
   and waxed a pretty child. And as Josephus, Antiquitatum, saith: This
   daughter of Pharaoh, which was named Termuthe, loved well Moses and
   reputed him as her son by adoption, and on a day brought him to her
   father, who for his beauty took him in his arms and made much of him,
   and set his diadem on his head, wherein was his idol. And Moses anon
   took it, and cast it under his feet and trod on it, wherefore the king
   was wroth, and demanded of the great doctors and magicians what should
   fall of this child. And they kalked on his nativity and said: This is
   he that shall destroy thy reign and put it under foot, and shall rule
   and govern the Hebrews. Wherefore the king anon decreed that he should
   be put to death. But others said that Moses did it of childhood and
   ought not to die therefore, and counselled to make thereof a proof, and
   so they did.

   They set tofore him a platter full of coals burning, and a platter full
   of cherries, and bade him eat, and he took and put the hot coals in his
   mouth and burned his tongue, which letted his speech ever after; and
   thus he escaped the death. Josephus saith that when Pharaoh would have
   slain him, Termuthe, his daughter, plucked him away and saved him. Then
   on a time as Moses was full grown, he went to his brethren, and saw the
   affliction of them and a man of Egypt smiting one of the Hebrews, his
   brethren. And he looked hither and thither and saw no man. He smote the
   Egyptian and slew him and hid him in the sand. And another day he went
   out and found two of the Hebrews brawling and fighting together; then
   he said to him that did wrong: Why smitest thou thy neighbour? which
   answered: Who hath ordained thee prince and judge upon us? wilt thou
   slay me as thou slewest that other day an Egyptian? Moses was afeard
   and said to himself: How is this deed known and made open? Pharaoh
   heard hereof and sought Moses for to slay him, which then fled from his
   sight and dwelled in the land of Midian, and sat there by a pit side.
   The priest of Midian had seven daughters which came thither for to draw
   water, and to fill the vessels for to give drink to the flocks of the
   sheep of their father. Then came on them the herdmen and put them from
   it. Then rose Moses and defended the maidens and let them water their
   sheep, which then returned to their father Jethro. And he said to them:
   Why come ye now earlier than ye were wont to do? They said that a man
   of Egypt hath delivered us from the hand of the herdmen, and also he
   drew water for us and gave to the sheep drink. Where is he, said he,
   why left ye the man after you' go call him that he may eat some bread
   with us. Then Moses sware that he would dwell with him. And he took
   Zipporah one of his daughters and wedded her to his wife, which
   conceived and bare him a son whom he called Gershom, saying: I was a
   stranger in a strange land. She brought to him forth another son whom
   he named Eleazar, saying: The God of my father is my helper and hath
   kept me from the hand of Pharaoh.

   Long time after this died the king of Egypt, and the children of
   Israel, wailing, made great sorrow for the oppression of their labour,
   and cried unto God for help. Their cry came unto God of their works,
   and God heard their wailing, and remembered the promise he made with
   Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and our Lord beheld the children of Israel
   and knew them.

   Moses fed the sheep of Jethro his wife's father. When he had brought
   the sheep into the innermost part of the desert he came unto the mount
   of God, Oreb. Our Lord appeared to him in flame of fire in the midst of
   a bush, and he saw the fire in the bush, and the bush burned not. Then
   said Moses, I shall go and see this great vision why the bush burneth
   not. Our Lord then beholding that he went for to see it, called him,
   being in the bush, and said: Moses, Moses, which answered: I am here.
   Then said our Lord: Approach no nearer hitherward. Take off thy shoon
   from thy feet, the place that thou standest on is holy ground. And said
   also: I am God of thy fathers, God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, and
   God of Jacob. Moses then hid his face, and durst not look toward God.
   To whom God said: I have seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and
   I have heard their cry of the hardness that they suffer in their works,
   and I knowing the sorrow of them am descended to deliver them from the
   hand of the Egyptians, and shall lead them from this land into a good
   land and spacious, into a land that floweth milk and honey, unto the
   places of Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites and
   Jebusites. The cry of the children of Israel is come to me, I have seen
   their affliction, how they be oppressed of the Egyptians. But come to
   me and I shall send thee unto Pharaoh that thou shalt lead the children
   of Israel out of Egypt. Then Moses said to him: Who am I that shall go
   to Pharaoh and lead the children out of Egypt? To whom God said: I
   shall be with thee, and this shall be the sign that I send thee. When
   thou shalt have led out my people of Egypt, thou shalt offer to God
   upon this hill. Moses said unto God: Lo! if I go to the children of
   Israel and say to them: God of your fathers hath sent me to you; if
   they say What is his name? what shall I say? Our Lord said to Moses:
   Ego sum qui sum. I am that I am. He said: Thus shalt thou say to the
   children of Israel: He that is, sent me to you, and yet shalt thou say
   to them: The Lord God of your fathers, God of Abraham, God of Isaac,
   and God of Jacob, hath appeared to me saying: This is my name for
   evermore, and this is my memorial from generation to generation. Go and
   gather together the seniors and aged men of Israel, and say to them:
   The Lord God of your fathers hath appeared to me, God of Abraham, God
   of Isaac, and God of Jacob, saying: Visiting I have visited you, and
   have seen all that is fallen in Egypt, and I shall lead you out of the
   affliction of Egypt into the land of Canaan, Ethei, etc, unto the Iand
   flowing milk and honey, and they shall hear thy voice. Thou shalt go
   and take with thee the seniors of Israel to the king of Egypt, and
   shalt say to him: The Lord God of the Hebrews hath called us; we shall
   go the journey of three days in wilderness that we may offer to our
   Lord God. But I know well that the king of Egypt shall not suffer you
   to go but by strong hand. I shall stretch out my hand and shall smite
   Egypt in all my marvels that I shall do amid among them. After that he
   shall let you go. I shall then give my grace to this people tofore the
   Egyptians, and when ye shall go out ye shall not depart void, nor with
   nought, but every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her
   hostess, vessels of silver and of gold, and clothes, and them shall ye
   lay on your sons, and on your daughters, and ye shall rob Egypt. Then
   Moses answered and said: They shall not believe me ne hear my voice,
   but shall say: God hath not appeared to thee. God said then to him:
   What is that thou holdest in thine hand? He answered: A rod. Our Lord
   said: Cast it on the ground. He threw it down and it turned into a
   serpent, whereof Moses was afeard and would have fled. Our Lord said to
   him: Put forth thy hand and hold him by the tail; he stretched forth
   hie hand and held him, and it turned again into a rod. To this, that
   they believe thee, that I have appeared to thee. And yet our Lord said
   to him: Put thy hand into thy bosom, which, when he hath put in, and
   drawn out again, it was like a leper's hand. Our Lord bade him to
   withdraw it into his bosom again, and he drew it out and it was then
   like that other flesh. If they hear not thee, and believe by the first
   sign and token, they shall believe thee by the second. If they believe
   none of the two ne hear thy voice, then take water of the river and
   pour on the dry ground, and whatsoever thou takest and drawest shall
   turn into blood. Then Moses said: I pray the Lord send some other, for
   I am not eloquent, but have a letting in my speech. Our Lord said to
   him: Who made the mouth of a man, or who hath made a man dumb or deaf,
   seeing or blind, not I? Go, therefore, I shall be in thy mouth and
   shall teach thee what thou shalt say. Then said Moses: I beseech thee
   Lord, said he, send some other whom thou wilt. Our Lord was wroth on
   Moses and said: Aaron thy brother deacon, I know that he is eloquent,
   lo! he shall come and meet with thee, and seeing thee he shall be glad
   in his heart. Speak thou to him and put my words in his mouth, and I
   shall be in thy mouth and in his mouth, and I shall show to you what ye
   ought to do, and he shall speak for the people, and shall be thy mouth,
   and thou shalt be in such things as pertain to God. Take with thee this
   rod in thine hard, by which thou shalt do signs and marvels. Then Moses
   went to Jethro his wife's father, and said to him, I shall go and
   return to my brethren into Egypt, and see if they yet live. To whom
   Jethro said: Go in God's name and place. Then said our Lord to Moses:
   Go and return into Egypt, all they be now dead that sought for to slay
   thee. Then Moses took his wife and his sons and set them upon an ass
   and returned in to Egypt, bearing the rod of God in his hand. Then our
   Lord said to Aaron: Go against Moses and meet with him in desert; which
   went for to meet with him unto the mount of God, and there kissed him.

   And Moses told unto Aaron all that our Lord had said to him for which
   he sent him, and all the tokens and signs that he bade him do. They
   came both together and gathered and assembled all the seniors and aged
   men of the children of Israel. And Aaron told to them all that God had
   said to Moses, and made the signs and tokens tofore the people and the
   people believed it. They heard well that our Lord had visited the
   children of Israel, and that he had beholden the affliction of them,
   wherefore they fell down low to the ground and worshipped our Lord.

   After this Moses and Aaron went unto Pharaoh and said: This saith the
   Lord God of Israel: Suffer my people to depart that they may sacrifice
   to me in desert. Then said Pharaoh: Who is that Lord that I may hear
   his voice and leave Israel? I know not that Lord, nor I will not leave
   Israel. They said to him: God of the Hebrews hath called us that we go
   the journey of three days in the wilderness and sacrifice unto our Lord
   God, lest peradventure pestilence or war fall to us. The king of Egypt
   said to them: Why solicit ye, Moses and Aaron, the people from their
   works and labour? Go ye unto your work. Pharaoh also said: The people
   is much, see how they grow and multiply, and yet much more shall do if
   they rested from their labour. Therefore he commanded the same day to
   the prefects and masters of their works saying: In no wise give no more
   chaff to the people for to make loam and clay, but let them go and
   gather stubble, and make them to do as much labour as they did tofore,
   and lessen it nothing. They do now but cry: Let us go and make
   sacrifice to our God, let them be oppressed by labour and exercised
   that they attend not to leasings. Then the prefects and masters of
   their work said to them that Pharaoh had commanded to give them no
   chaff, but they should go and gather such as they might find, and that
   their work should not therefore be minished. Then the children were
   disperpled for to gather chaff, and their masters awaited on them and
   bade them: Make an end of your work as ye were wont to do when that
   chaff was delivered to you. And thus they were put to more affliction,
   and would make them to make as many tiles as they The did tofore. Then
   the upperest of the children of Israel came to Pharaoh and complained
   saying: Why puttest thou thy servants to such affliction? He said to
   them: Ye be so idle that ye say ye will go and sacrifice to your God;
   ye shall have no chaff given to you, yet ye shall work your customable
   work and gather your chaff also.

   Then the eldest and the upperest among the Hebrews went to Moses and
   Aaron and said: What have ye done? ye have so done that ye have made
   our odour to stink in the sight of Pharaoh, and have encouraged him to
   slay us. Then Moses counselled with our Lord how he should do, and
   said: Lord, why hast thou sent me hither? For, sith I have spoken to
   Pharaoh in thy name, he hath put thy people to more affliction than
   they tofore, and thou hast not delivered them. Our Lord said to Moses:
   Now thou shalt see what I shall do to Pharaoh. By strong hand he shall
   let you go, and in a boistous he shall cast you from his land.

   Yet said our Lord to Moses: I am the Lord God that appeared to Abraham,
   Isaac, and Jacob in my might, and my name is Adonai, I showed to them
   not that. I promised and made covenant with them that I should give to
   them the land of Canaan in which they dwelled. I now have heard the
   wailing and the tribulations that the Egyptians oppress them with, for
   which I shall deliver and bring them from the servitude of the
   Egyptians. Moses told all these things to the children of Israel, and
   they believed him not for the anguish of their spirits that they were
   in, and hard labour. Then said our Lord to Moses: Go and enter in to
   Pharaoh and bid him deliver my people of Israel out of his land. Moses
   answered: How should Pharaoh hear me when the children of Israel
   believe me not? Then our Lord said to Moses and Aaron that they both
   should go to Pharaoh and give him in commandment to let the children of
   Israel to depart. And he said to Moses: Lo! I have ordained thee to be
   God of Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet. Thou shalt
   say to him all that I say to thee, and he shall say to Pharaoh that he
   suffer the children of Israel to depart from his land. But I shall
   enhard his heart, and shall multiply my signs and tokens in the land of
   Egypt, and he shall not hear ne believe you. And I shall lead the
   children of Israel my people. And shall show mine hand, and such
   wonders on Egypt, that Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord. Moses
   and Aaron did as our Lord commanded them. Moses was eighty years old
   when he came and stood tofore Pharaoh, and Aaron eighty-three years
   when they spake to Pharaoh. Then when they were tofore Pharaoh, Aaron
   cast the rod down tofore Pharaoh, and anon the rod turned into a
   serpent. Then Pharaoh called his magicians and jugglers and bade them
   do the same. And they made their witchcraft and invocations and cast
   down their rods, which turned in likewise into serpents, but the rod of
   Aaron devoured their rods. Yet was the heart of Pharaoh hard and so
   indurate that he would not do as God bade. Then said our Lord to Moses:
   The heart of Pharaoh is grieved and will not deliver my people. Go to
   him to-morn in the morning and he shall come out, and thou halt stand
   when he cometh on the bank of the river, and take in thine hand the rod
   that was turned into the serpent, and say to him: The Lord God of the
   Hebrews sendeth me to thee saying: Deliver my people that they may
   offer and make sacrifice to me in desert, yet thou hast no will to hear
   me. Therefore our Lord said: In this shalt thou know that I am the
   Lord: Lo! I shall smite with the rod that is in my hand the water of
   the flood, and it shall turn into blood; the fishes that be in the
   water shall die, and the Egyptians shall be put to affliction drinking
   of it. Then said our Lord to Moses: Say thou to Aaron: Take this rod
   and stretch thine hand upon all the waters of Egypt, upon the floods,
   rivers, ponds, and upon all the lakes where any water is, in that they
   turn to blood, that it may be a vengeance in all the land of Egypt, as
   well in treen vessels as in vessels of earth and stone. Moses and Aaron
   did as God had commanded them, and smote the flood with the rod tofore
   Pharaoh and his servants, which turned into blood, and the fishes that
   were in the river died, and the water was corrupt. And the Egyptians
   might not drink the water, and all the water of Egypt was turned into
   blood. And in likewise did the enchanters with their witchcraft, and
   the heart of Pharaoh was so indurate that he would not let the people
   depart as our Lord had commanded, but he returned home for this time.
   The Egyptians went and dolven pits for water all about by the river,
   and they found no water to drink but all was blood. And this plague
   endured seven days, and whatsomever water the children of Israel took
   in this while was fair and good water. This was the first plague and
   vengeance. The second was that God sent frogs so many, that all the
   land was full, the rivers, the houses, chambers, beds, that they were
   woebegone, and these frogs entered into their meat. so many that they
   covered all the land of Egypt. Then Pharaoh prayed Moses and Aaron that
   God would take away these frogs, and that he would go suffer the people
   to do sacrifice; and then Moses asked when he would deliver them if the
   frogs were voided, and Pharaoh said: In the morn. And then Moses
   prayed, and they voided all. And when Pharaoh saw that he was quit of
   them, he kept not his promise and would not let them depart. The third
   vengeance that God sent to them was a great multitude of hungry
   horse-flies, as many as the dust of the earth, which were on men, and
   bit them and beasts. And then enchanters said then to Pharaoh: This is
   the finger of God. Yet would not Pharaoh let them depart. The fourth
   vengeance was that God sent all manner kind of flies and lice in such
   wise that the universal land of Egypt was full of all manner flies and
   lice, but in the land of Goshen were none. Yet was he so indurate that
   he would not let them go, but would that they should make their
   sacrifice to God in that land. But Moses would not so, but would go
   three days' journey in desert, and sacrifice to God there. Pharaoh
   said: I will that ye go into desert, but not far, and come soon again,
   and pray ye for me. And Moses prayed for him to our Lord, and the flies
   voided that there was not one left. And when they were gone Pharaoh
   would not keep his promise. Then the fifth plague was that God showed
   his hand upon the fields and upon the horses' asses, camels, sheep and
   oxen, and was a great pestilence on all the beasts. And God showed a
   wonder miracle between the possessions of the Egyptians and the
   possessions of his people of Israel, for of the beasts of the children
   of Israel there was not one that perished. Yet was Pharaoh so
   hard-hearted that he would not suffer the people to depart. The sixth
   plague was that Moses took ashes out of the chimney and cast on the
   land. And anon all the people of Egypt, as well men as beasts were full
   of botches, boils, and blains and wounds, and swellings in their
   bladders, in such wise that the enchanters could ne might not stand for
   pain tofore Pharaoh. Yet would not Pharaoh hear them, nor do as God had
   commanded. The seventh plague was a hail so great that there was never
   none like tofore, and thunder and fire that it destroyed all the grass
   and herbs of Egypt and smote down all that was in the field, men and
   beasts. But in the land of Goshen was none heard, ne harm done. Yet
   would not Pharaoh deliver them. The eighth our Lord sent to them
   locusts, which is a manner great fly, called in some place an
   adder-bolte, which bit them and ate up all the corn and herbs that was
   left, in such wise that the people came to Pharaoh and desired him to
   deliver, saying that the land perished. Then Pharaoh gave to the men
   licence to go and make their sacrifice, and leave their wives and
   children there still, till they came again, but Moses and Aaron said
   they must go all, wherefore he would not let them depart. The ninth
   plague and vengeance was that God sent so great darkness upon all the
   land of Egypt that the darkness was so great and horrible that they
   were palpable, and it endured three days and three nights. Wheresoever
   the children of Israel went it was light.

   Then Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron and said to them: Go ye and make
   your sacrifice unto your Lord God, and let your sheep and beasts only
   abide. To whom Moses said: We shall take with us such hosties and
   sacrifices as we shall offer to our Lord God. All our flocks and beasts
   shall go with us, there shall not remain as much as a nail that shall
   be necessary in the honour of our Lord God, for we know not what we
   shall offer till we come to the place. Pharaoh was so indurate and
   hard-hearted that he would not let them go, and bade Moses that he
   should no more come in his sight. For when thou comest thou shalt die.
   Moses answered: Be it as thou hast said: I shall no more come to thy
   presence. And then our Lord said to Moses: There resteth now but one
   plague and vengeance, and after that he shall let you go. But first say
   to all the people that every man borrow of his friend, and woman of her
   neighbour, vessels of gold and silver, and clothes; our Lord shall give
   to his people grace and favour to borrow of the Egyptians; and then
   gave to them a commandment how they should depart. And our Lord said to
   Moses: At midnight I shall enter into Egypt and the first begotten
   child and heir of all Egypt shall die, from the first begotten son of
   Pharaoh that sitteth in his throne unto the first begotten son of the
   handmaid that sitteth at the mill, and all the first-begotten of the
   beasts. There shall be a great cry and clamour in all the land of Egypt
   in such wise that there was never none like, ne never shall be after,
   and among all the children there shall not an hound be hurt, ne woman,
   ne beast, whereby ye shall know by what miracle God divideth the
   Egyptian and Israel. Moses and Aaron showed all these signs and plagues
   tofore Pharaoh, and his heart was so indurate that he would not let
   them depart. Then when Moses had said to the children how they should
   do, they departed, and ate their paschal lamb, and all other ceremonies
   as be expressed in the Bible, for a law to endure ever among them,
   which the children of Israel obeyed and accomplished, it was so that at
   midnight our Lord smote and slew every first-begotten son throughout
   all the land of Egypt, beginning at the first son and heir of Pharaoh
   unto the son of the caitiff that lay in prison, and also the first
   begotten of the beasts. Pharaoh arose in the night and all his servants
   and all Egypt, and there was a great clamour and sorrowful noise and
   cry, for there was not a house in all Egypt but there lay therein one
   that was dead. Then Pharaoh did do call Moses and Aaron in the night,
   and said: Arise ye and go your way from my people, ye and the children
   of Israel, as ye say ye will, take your sheep and beasts with you like
   as ye desired, and at your departing bless ye me. The Egyptians
   constrained the children to depart and go their way hastily, saying: We
   all shall die. The children of Israel took their meal, and put it on
   their shoulders as they were commanded, and borrowed vessels of silver
   and of gold, and much clothing. Our Lord gave to them such favour
   tofore the Egyptians that the Egyptians lent to them all that they
   desired, and they spoiled and robbed Egypt.

   And so the children of Israel departed, nigh the number of six hundred
   thousand footmen, besides women and children which were innumerable,
   and an huge great multitude of beasts of divers kinds. The time that
   the children of Israel had dwelt in Egypt was four hundred years. And
   so they departed out of Egypt, and went not the right way by the
   Philistines, but our Lord led them by the way of desert which is by the
   Red Sea. And the children descended out of Egypt armed. Moses took with
   him the bones of Joseph for he charged them so to do when he died. They
   went in the extreme ends of the wilderness, and our Lord went tofore
   them by day in a column of a cloud, and by night in a column of fire
   and was their leader and duke; the pillar of the cloud failed never by
   day, nor the pillar of fire by night tofore the people. Our Lord said
   to Moses, I shall make his heart so hard that he shall follow and
   pursue you, and I shall be glorified in Pharaoh, and in all his host,
   the Egyptians shall know that I am Lord. And anon it was told to
   Pharaoh that the children of Israel fled, and anon his heart was
   changed, and also the heart of his servants, and said: What shall we
   do, shall we suffer the children to depart and no more to serve us?
   Forthwith he took his chariot and all his people with him. He took with
   him six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots and wains of
   Egypt, and the dukes of all his hosts and he pursued the children of
   Israel and followed them in great pride. And when he approached, that
   the children of Israel saw him come, they were sore afraid and cried to
   our Lord God, and said to Moses: Was there not sepulchre enough for us
   in Egypt but that we must now die in wilderness? Said we not to thee:
   Go from us and let us serve the Egyptians: It had been much better for
   us to have served the Egyptians than to die here in wilderness. And
   Moses said to the people: Be ye not afraid, stand and see ye the great
   wonders that our Lord shall do for you this day. The Egyptians that ye
   now see, ye shall never see them after this day. God shall fight for
   you, and be ye still. Our Lord said then to Moses: What criest thou to
   me? Say to the children of Israel that they go forth. Take thou and
   raise the rod, and stretch thy hand The upon the sea, and depart it
   that the children of History Israel may go dry through the middle of
   it. I of Moses shall so indurate the heart of Pharaoh that he shall
   follow you, and all the Egyptians, and I shall be glorified in Pharaoh,
   and in all his host, his carts and horsemen. And the Egyptians shall
   know that I am Lord when I shall so be glorified. The angel of God went
   tofore the castles of Israel, and another came after in the cloud which
   stood between them of Egypt and the children of Israel. And the cloud
   was dark that the host of Israel might not come to them of all the
   night. Then Moses stretched his hand upon the sea, and there came a
   wind blowing in such wise that it waxed dry, and the children of Israel
   went in through the midst of the Red Sea all dry foot; for the water
   stood up as a wall on the right side and on the left side. The
   Egyptians then pursuing them followed and entered after them, and all
   the carts, chariots and horsemen, through the middle of the sea. And
   then our Lord beheld that the children of Israel were passed over and
   were on the dry land, on that other side. Anon turned the water on
   them, and the wheels on their carts turned up so down, and drowned all
   the host of Pharaoh, and sank down into the deep of the sea. Then said
   the Egyptians: Let us flee Israel; the Lord fighteth for them against
   us. And our Lord said to Moses: Stretch out shine hand upon the sea,
   and let the water return upon the Egyptians, and upon their chariots
   and horsemen. And so Moses stretched out his hand and the sea returned
   in to his first place. And then the Egyptians would have fled, but the
   water came and overflowed them in the midst of the flood, and it
   covered the chariots and horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh, and
   there was not one of them. And the children of Israel had passed
   through the middle of the dry sea and came land.

   Thus delivered our Lord the children of Israel from the hand of the
   Egyptians, and they saw the Egyptians Iying dead upon the brinks of the
   sea. And the people then dreaded our Lord and believed in him, and to
   Moses his servant. Then Moses and the children of Israel sang this song
   to our Lord: Cantemus domino magnificatus est, Let us sing to our Lord,
   he is magnified, he hath overthrown the horsemen and carmen in the sea.
   And Miriam the sister of Aaron, a prophetess, took a timpane in her
   hand, and all the women followed her with timpanes and chords, and she
   went tofore singing Cantemus domino. Then Moses brought the children of
   Israel from the sea into the desert of Sur, and walked with them three
   days and three nights and found no water, and came into Marah, and the
   waters there were so bitter that they might not drink thereof. Then the
   people grudged against Moses, saying: What shall we drink? And he cried
   unto our Lord which showed to him a tree which he took and put into the
   waters, and anon they were turned into sweetness. There our Lord
   ordained commandments and judgments, and there he tempted him saying:
   If thou hearest the voice of thy Lord God, and that thou do is rightful
   before him, and obeyest his commandments, and keep his precepts, I
   shall not bring none of the languors ne sorrows upon thee that I did in
   Egypt. I am Lord thy saviour. Then the children of Israel came in to
   Elim, where as were twelve fountains of water, and seventy palm trees,
   and they abode by the waters. Then from thence went all the multitude
   of the children of Israel into the desert of Sin, which is between Elim
   and Sinai, and grudged against Moses and Aaron in that wilderness, and
   said: Would God we had dwelled still in Egypt, whereas we sat and had
   plenty of bread and flesh; why have ye brought us into the desert for
   to slay all this multitude by hunger? Our Lord said then to Moses: I
   shall rain read to you from heaven, let the people go out and gather
   every day that I may prove them whether they walk in my law or not; the
   sixth day let them gather double as much as they gathered in one day of
   the other. Then said Moses and Aaron to all the children of Israel: At
   even ye shall know that God hath brought you from the land of Egypt,
   and to-morn ye shall see the glory of our Lord. I have well heard your
   murmur against our Lord, what have ye mused against us? What be we? and
   yet said Moses; Our Lord shall give you at even flesh for to eat and
   to-morn bread unto your fill, for as much as ye have murmured against
   him; what be we? Your murmur is not against us but against our Lord. As
   Aaron spake to all the company of the children of Israel they beheld
   towards the wilderness, and our Lord spake to Moses in a cloud and
   said: I have heard the grudgings of the children of Israel; say to
   them: At even ye shall eat flesh and to-morn ye shall be filled with
   bread, and ye shall know that I am your Lord God. And when the even was
   come there came so many curlews that it covered all their lodgings, and
   on the morn there lay like dew all about in their circuit. Which when
   they saw and came for to gather, it was small and white like to
   coriander. And they wondered on it and said: Mahun, that is as much to
   say, what is this? To whom Moses said: This is the bread that God hath
   sent you to eat, and God commandeth that every man should gather as
   much for every head as is the measure of gomor, and let nothing be left
   till on the morn. And the sixth day gather ye double so much, that is
   two measures of gomor, and keep that one measure for the Sabbath, which
   God hath sanctified and commanded you to hallow it. Yet some of them
   brake God's commandment, and gathered more than they ate and kept it
   till on the morn, and then it began to putrify and be full of worms.
   And that they kept for the Sabbath day was good and putrified not. And
   thus our Lord fed the children of Israel forty years in the desert. And
   it was called Manna. Moses took one gomor thereof and put it in the
   tabernacle for to be kept for a perpetual memory and remembrance.

   Then went they forth all the multitude of the children of Israel, in
   the desert of Sin in their mansions and came to Rephidim, where as they
   had no water. Then all grudging they said to Moses, Give us water for
   to drink. To whom Moses answered: What grudge ye against me, why tempt
   ye our Lord? The people thirsted sore for lack and penury of water
   saying: Why hast thou brought us out of Egypt for to slay us and our
   children and beasts? Then Moses cried unto our Lord saying: What shall
   I do to this people? I trow within a while they shall stone me to
   death. Then our Lord said to Moses: Go before the people and take with
   thee the older men and seniors of Israel, and take the rod that thou
   smotest with the flood in thy hand, and I shall stand tofore upon the
   stone of Oreb, and smite thou the stone with the rod and the waters
   shall come out thereof that the people may drink. Moses did so tofore
   the seniors of Israel and called that place Temptation, because of the
   grudge of the children of Israel, and said: Is God with us or not? Then
   came Amalek and fought against the children of Israel in Rephidim.
   Moses said then to Joshua: Choose to thee men, and go out and fight
   against Amalek to-morrow. I shall stand on the top of the hill having
   the rod of God in my hand: Joshua did as Moses commanded him, and
   fought against Amalek. Moses, Aaron. and Hur, ascended into the hill,
   and when Moses held up his hands, Israel won and overcame their
   enemies, and when he laid them down then Amalek had the better. The
   hands of Moses were heavy; Aaron and Hur took then a stone and put it
   under them, and they sustained his hands on either side, and so his
   hands were not weary until the going down of the sun. And so Joshua
   made Amalek to flee, and his people, by strength of his sword. Our Lord
   said to Moses: Write this for a remembrance in a book and deliver it to
   the ears of Joshua; I shall destroy and put away the memory of Amalek
   under heaven. Moses then edified an altar unto our Lord, and called
   there on the name of our Lord, saying: The Lord is mine exaltation, for
   this is the hand only of God, and the battle and God shall be against
   Amalek from generation to generation.

   When Jethro the priest of Midian, which was cousin of Moses, heard say
   what our Lord had done to Moses and to the children of Israel his
   people, he took Zipporah the wife of Moses, and his two sons, Gershom
   and Eleazar and came with them to him into desert, whom Moses received
   with worship and kissed him. And when they were together Moses told him
   all what our Lord had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel,
   and all the labour that they endured and how our Lord had delivered
   them. Jethro was glad for all these things, that God had so saved them
   from the hands of the Egyptians, and said: Blessed be the Lord that
   hath delivered you from the hand of the Egyptians and of Pharaoh, and
   hath saved his people; now I know that he is a great Lord above all
   gods, because they did so proudly against them. And Jethro offered
   sacrifices and offerings to our Lord. Aaron and all the seniors of
   Israel came and eat with him tofore our Lord. The next day Moses sat
   and judged and deemed the people from morning unto evening, which, when
   his cousin saw, he said to him: What doest thou? Why sittest thou alone
   and all the people tarry from the morning until evening? To whom Moses
   answered: The people came to me demanding sentence and the doom of God;
   when there is any debate or difference among them they come to me to
   judge them, and to show to them the precepts and the laws of God. Then
   said Jethro: Thou dost not well nor wisely, for by folly consumest thy
   self, and the people with thee; thou thy might, thou mayst not alone
   sustain it, but hear me and do there after, and our Lord shall be with
   thee. Be thou unto the people in those things that appertain to God,
   that thou tell to them what they should do, and the ceremonies and
   rites to worship God, and the way by which they should go, and what
   work they shall do. Provide of all people wise men and dreading God, in
   whom is truth, and them that hate avarice and covetise, and ordain of
   them tribunes and centurions and deans that may in all times judge the
   people. And if there be of a great charge and weight, let it be
   referred to thee, and let them judge the small things; it shall be the
   easier to thee to bear the charge when it is so parted. If thou do so,
   thou shalt fulfil the commandment of God, and sustain his precepts, and
   the people shall go home to their places in peace. Which things when
   Moses had heard and understood, he did all that he had counselled him,
   and chose out the strongest and wisest people of all Israel and
   ordained them princes of the people, tribunes, centurions,
   quinquagenaries, and deans, which at all times should judge and deem
   the people. And all the great and weighty matters they referred to him,
   deeming and judging the small causes. And then his cousin departed and
   went into his country.

   The third month after the children of Israel departed out of Egypt,
   that same day they came into the wilderness of Sinai, and there about
   the region of the mount they fixed their tents. Moses ascended into the
   hill unto God. God called him on the hill and said: This shalt thou say
   to the house of Jacob and to the children of Israel. Ye yourselves have
   seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on the
   wings of eagles and have taken you to me. If ye therefore hear my voice
   and keep my covenant, ye shall be to me in the reign of priesthood and
   holy people. These be the words that thou shalt say to the children of
   Israel. Moses came down and gathered all the most of birth, and
   expounded in them all the words that our Lord had commanded him. All
   the people answered: All that ever our Lord hath said we shall do. When
   Moses had showed the people the words of our Lord, our Lord said to
   him: Now I shall come to thee in a cloud that the people may hear me
   speaking to thee, that they believe thee ever after. Moses went and
   told this to the people, and our Lord bade them to sanctify the people
   this day and to-morrow, and let them wash their clothes, and be ready
   the third day. The third day our Lord shall descend tofore all the
   people on the mount of Sinai. And ordain to the people the marks and
   terms in the circuit. And say to them: Beware that ye ascend not on the
   hill ne touch the ends of it. Whosoever toucheth the hill shall die by
   death, there shall no hand touch him, but with stones he shall be
   oppressed and with casting of them on him he shall be tolben; whether
   it be man or beast, he shall not live. When thou hearest the trump
   blown then ascend to the hill. Moses went down to the people and
   sanctified and hallowed them, and when they had washen their clothes he
   said to them: Be ye ready at the third day and approach not your wives.
   When the third day came, and the morning waxed clear, they heard
   thunder and lightening and saw a great cloud cover the mount, and the
   cry of the trump was so shrill that the people were sore afraid. When
   Moses had brought them forth unto the root of the hill they stood
   there. All the mount of Sinai smoked, for so much as our Lord descended
   on it in fire, and the smoke ascended from the hill as it had been from
   a furnace. The mount was terrible and dreadful, and the sound of the
   trump grew a little more and continued longer. Moses spake and our Lord
   answered him. Our Lord descended upon the top of the mount of Sinai,
   even on the top of it, and called Moses to him, which when he came said
   to him: Go down and charge the people that they come not to the terms
   of the hill for to see the Lord, for if they do, much multitude shall
   perish of them. The priests that shall come let them be sanctified lest
   they be smitten down. And thou and Aaron shall ascend the hill. All the
   people and priests let them not pass their bounds lest God smite them.
   Then Moses descended and told to the people all that our Lord hath
   said. After this our Lord called Moses and said: I am the Lord God that
   brought you out of Egypt and of thraldom. And gave him the Commandment
   first by speaking and many ceremonies as be rehearsed in the Bible,
   which is not requisite to be written here, but the ten commandments
   every man is bounden to know. And ere Moses received them written, he
   went up into the mount of Sinai, and fasted there forty days and forty
   nights ere he received them. In which time he commanded him to make
   many things, and to ordain the laws and ceremonies which now be not had
   in the new law. And also as doctors say, Moses learned that time all
   the histories to-fore written of the making of heaven and earth, of
   Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and of Joseph with his brethren. And
   at last delivered to him two tables of stone, both written with the
   hand of God which follow.
     __________________________________________________________________

Here follow the Ten Commandments of our Law.

   The first commandment that God commanded is this. Thou shalt not
   worship no strange ne diverse gods. That is to say, thou shalt worship
   no god but me, and thou shalt not retain thine hope but in me, for who
   that setteth principally his hope on any creature or faith or belief in
   any thing more than in me, sinneth deadly. And such be they that
   worship idols, and make their god of a creature; whosoever so doth,
   sinneth against this commandment. And so do they that overmuch love
   their treasures, gold or silver, or any other earthly thing that be
   passing and transitory, or set their heart or hope on any thing by
   which they forget and leave God their creator and maker which hath lent
   to them all that they live by. And therefore ought they to serve him
   with all their goods, and above all things to love him and worship him
   with all their heart, with all their soul, and with all their strength,
   like as the first commandment enseigneth and teacheth us.

   The second commandment is this, that thou shalt not take the name of
   God in vain, that is to say, thou shalt not swear by him for nothing.
   In this commandment our Lord commandeth in the gospel that thou shalt
   not swear by the heaven ne by earth ne by other creature. But for good
   cause and rightful a man may swear without sin, as in judgment or in
   requiring of truth, or without judgment in good and needful causes. And
   in none other manner without reason by the name of our Lord and for
   nought. If he swear false wittingly he is forsworn, and that is against
   the commandment and sinneth deadly, for he sweareth against his
   conscience, and that is when he sweareth by advice and by deliberation,
   but a man should swear truly and yet not for nought or for any vain or
   ill thing, ne maliciously. But to swear lightly without hurt or blame
   is venial sin, but the custom thereof is perilous and may well turn to
   deadly sin but if he take heed. But he then that sweareth horribly by
   our Lord, or by any of his members, or by his saints in despite, and
   blasphemeth in things that be not true, or otherwise, he sinneth
   deadly, he may have no reason whereby he may excuse him. And they that
   most accustom them in this sin they sin most, etc.

   The third commandment is that thou have mind and remember that thou
   hallow and keep holy thy Sabbath day or Sunday. That is to say, that
   thou shalt do no work nor operation on the Sunday or holy day, but thou
   shalt rest from all worldly labour and intend to prayer, and to serve
   God thy maker, which rested the seventh day of the works that he made
   in the six days tofore, in which he made and ordained the world. This
   commandment accomplisheth he that keepeth to his power the peace of his
   conscience for to serve God more holily. Then this day that the Jews
   called Sabbath is as much to say as rest. This commandment may no man
   keep spiritually that is encumbered in his conscience with deadly sin,
   such a conscience can not be in rest ne in peace as long as he is in
   such a state. In the stead of the Sabbath day which was straitly kept
   in the old law, holy church hath established the Sunday in the new law.
   For our Lord arose from death to life on the Sunday, and therefore we
   ought to keep it holily, and be in rest from the works of the week
   tofore, and to cease of the work of sin, and to intend to do ghostly
   works, and to follow our Lord beseeching him of mercy and to thank him
   for his benefits, for they that break the Sunday and the other solemn
   feasts that be stablished to be hallowed in holy church, they sin
   deadly, for they do directly against the commandment of God aforesaid
   and holy church, but if it be for some necessity that holy church
   admitteth and granteth. But they sin much more then, that employ the
   Sunday and the feasts in sins, in lechery, in going to taverns in the
   service time, in gluttony and drinking drunk, and in other sins,
   outrages against God. For alas for sorrow I trow there is more sin
   committed on the Sunday and holy days and feasts than in the other work
   days. For then be they drunk, fight and slay, and be not occupied
   virtuously in God's service as they ought to do. And as God commandeth
   us to remember and have in mind to keep and hallow the holy day, they
   that so do sin deadly and observe and keep not this third commandment.
   These three commandments be written in the first table and appertain
   only to God.

   The fourth commandment is that thou shalt honour and worship thy father
   and mother, for thou shalt live the longer on earth. This commandment
   admonisheth us that we be well ware to anger father and mother in any
   wise. Or who that curseth them or set hand on them in evil will,
   sinneth deadly. In this commandment is understood the honour that we
   should do to our ghostly and spiritual fathers, that is to them that
   have the cure of us, to teach and chastise us, as be the prelates of
   the Church, and they that have the charge and cure of our souls, and to
   keep our bodies. And he that will not obey to him that hath the cure
   over him when he enseigneth and teacheth him good that he is bound to
   do, he sinneth grievously and is inobedient, which is deadly sin.

   The fifth commandment is that thou shalt slay no man. This commandment
   will that no man shall slay the other for vengeance, ne for his goods,
   or for any other evil cause, it is deadly sin. But for to slay
   malefactors in executing of justice or for other good cause, if it be
   lawful it may well be done. In this commandment is defended the sin of
   wrath and hate, of rancour and of ire. For as the Scripture saith: Who
   hateth his brother is an homicide when it is by his will, and he
   sinneth deadly; and he that beareth anger in his heart long, for such
   ire long holden in the heart is rancour and hate, which is deadly sin,
   and is against this commandment. And yet sinneth he more that doth or
   purchaseth shame, villany or hurt to another wrongfully, or counselleth
   or helpeth to grieve another for to avenge him. But wrath or anger
   lightly past without will to noy or grieve any other, is not deadly
   sin.

   The sixth commandment is, thou shalt not do adultery, that is to say,
   thou shalt not have fleshly company with another man's wife. In this
   commandment it is forbidden and defended all manner sin of the flesh
   which is called generally lechery, which is a right foul sin and
   villainous. How be it that there is some branch of it that is not
   deadly sin, as oft movings of the flesh that may not be eschewed, which
   men ought to restrain and refrain as much as they may. And this cometh
   oft times by outrageous drinking and eating, or by evil thought, or
   foul touching, for in such things may be great peril. And in this
   commandment is defended all sin against nature, in what manner it be
   done in his person or other.

   The seventh commandment is that thou shalt do no theft. This
   commandment forbiddeth to take away other men's things whatsomever they
   be, without reason, against the will of them that owe or make them. In
   this commandment is defended ravin, usury, robbery and deceit, and
   beguiling other for to have their havoir or good. And he that doth
   against this commandment is bound to make restitution and yield again
   that he hath so gotten or taken, if he know to whom he ought to render
   it. And if he know not, he is bounden to give it for God's sake, or do
   by the counsel of holy church. For who retaineth wrongfully and without
   reason other men's goods against their will, sinneth deadly, if he pay
   not where as he oweth, if he know where and be in his power and hath
   whereof. And if he know not let him do by the counsel of holy church,
   and whoso doth not so, sinneth against this commandment deadly.

   The eighth commandment is that thou shalt not bear false witness
   against thy neighbour. In this commandment is forbidden that no man
   shall lie wittingly, for whoso lieth doth against this commandment. And
   also that he forswear not him in judgment, ne make no leasings to annoy
   ne grieve another, nor he ought not to missay ne speak evil of others
   in intention to impair his good name and fame, for it is deadly sin.
   Against this commandment do they that say evil of good men behind them,
   and backbite them, and do this wittingly by malice, which is called
   detraction. And also they that accuse some of their folly, or hearken
   by manner of adulation or flattering, when they that men speak of be
   not present. They that do thus and say such words do against this
   commandment, for they be all false witnesses.

   The ninth commandment is that thou shalt not desire the wife of thy
   neighbour, nor shalt not covet her in thine heart, that is to say, thou
   shalt not consent to sin with her with thy body. This commandment
   defendeth to desire to have company with all manner women out of
   marriage, and the evil signs that be without forth make men for to draw
   them to sin, as the evil words of such matter, or the foul and evil
   attouching, kissing, handling and such other. And the difference
   between this commandment and the sixth aforesaid is that, the sixth
   commandment forbiddeth the deed without forth, and this forbiddeth the
   consenting within forth; for the consenting within forth to have
   company with a woman that is not his by marriage is deadly sin, after
   the sentence of the gospel that saith: Who that seeth a woman and
   coveteth her in his heart, he hath now sinned in his heart and deadly.
   This is to understand of the consenting expressed in his thought.

   The tenth commandment is that thou shalt not covet nothing that is, or
   longeth to, thy neighbour. This commandment defendeth will to have
   things that belong to other men by evil reason or wrongfully. In this
   commandment is defended envy of other men's weal, of other men's grace
   or welfare. For such envy cometh of evil covetise to have such good or
   such grace or fortune as he seeth in other. And this covetise is when
   the consenting and thought be certainly one, then it is deadly sin. And
   if there be any evil movings without will and consenting of damage or
   hurt of other, this is not deadly sin. If he sin herein it is but
   venial sin. These be the ten commandments of our Lord, of which the
   three first belong to God, and the seven other be ordained for our
   neighbours. Every person that hath wit and understanding in himself,
   and age, is bound to know them and to obey and keep these ten
   commandments aforesaid or else he sinneth deadly.

   Thus Moses abode in the hill forty days and forty nights and received
   of Almighty God the tables with the commandments written with the hand
   of God; and also received and learned many ceremonies and statutes that
   God ordained, by which the children of Israel should be ruled and
   judged. And whiles that Moses was thus with our Lord on the mount, the
   children of Israel saw that he tarried and descended not, and some of
   them said that he was dead or gone away, and would not return again,
   and some said nay; but in conclusion they gathered them together
   against Aaron, and said to him: Make to us some gods that may go tofore
   us, we know not what is befallen to Moses. Then Aaron said: Take the
   gold that hangeth in the ears of your wives and your children, and
   bring it to me. The people did as he bade, and brought the gold to
   Aaron, which he took and molt it and made thereof a calf. Then they
   said, These be thy gods, Israel, that brought thee out of the land of
   Egypt. Then the people made an altar tofore it, and made great joy and
   mirth, and danced and played tofore the calf, and offered and made
   sacrifices thereto. Our Lord spake to Moses, saying: Go hence and
   descend down, thy people have sinned whom thou hast brought forth from
   the land of Egypt. They have soon forsaken and left the way which thou
   hast showed to them. They have made to them a calf blown, and they have
   worshipped it, and offered sacrifices thereto, saying: These be thy
   gods, Israel, that have brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Yet said
   our Lord to Moses: I see well that this people is of evil disposition,
   suffer me that I may wreak my wrath on them, and I shall destroy them.
   I shall make thee governor of great people. Moses then prayed our Lord
   God saying: Why art thou wroth, Lord, against thy people that thou hast
   brought out of the land of Egypt in a great strength and a boisterous
   hand? I beseech thee, Lord, let not the Egyptians say that their God
   hath locked them out for to slay them in the mountains. I pray thee
   Lord that thy wrath may assuage, and be thou pleased and benign upon
   the wickedness of thy people. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob thy
   servants, to whom thou promisedst and swaredst by thyself saying: I
   shall multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and the universal land
   of which I have spoken I shall give to your seed, and ye shall possess
   and have it ever. And with these words our Lord was pleased that he
   would do no harm as he had said unto his people; and Moses returned
   from the mount, bearing two tables of stone, written both with the hand
   of God. And the scripture that was in the tables were the ten
   commandments as fore be written. Joshua hearing the great noise of the
   children of Israel said to Moses: I trow they fight beneath, which
   answered and said: It is no cry of exhorting men to fight, ne noise to
   compel me to flee, but I hear the noise of singing. When he approached
   to them he saw the calf and the instruments of mirth, and he was so
   wroth that he threw down the tables and brake them at the foot of the
   hill, and ran and caught down the calf that they had made, and burnt
   and smote it all to powder, which he cast into water and gave it to
   drink to the children of Israel. Then said Moses to Aaron: What hath
   this people done to thee that thou hast made to sin grievously? To whom
   he answered: Let not my lord take none indignation at me, thou knowest
   well that this people is prone and ready to sin. They said to me: Make
   us gods that may go tofore us; we know not what is fallen to this Moses
   that led us out of Egypt. To whom I said: Who of you that hath gold
   give it me; they took and gave it to me, and I cast it into the fire,
   and thereof came out this calf. And then said Moses: All they that be
   of God's part and have not sinned in this calf let them join to me; and
   the children of Levi joined to him, and he bade each man take a sword
   on his side and take vengeance and slay every each his brother, friend,
   and his neighbour that have trespassed. And so the children of Levi
   went and slew thirty three thousand of the children of Israel. And then
   said Moses: Ye have hallowed this day your hands unto our Lord, and ye
   shall be therefore blessed. The second day Moses spake to the people
   and said: Ye have committed and done the greatest sin that may be. I
   shall ascend unto our Lord again, and shall pray him for your sin. Then
   Moses ascended again, and received afterwards two tables again, which
   our Lord bade him make. And therein our Lord wrote the commandments.
   And after, our Lord commanded him to make an ark and a tabernacle: in
   which ark was kept three things. First the rod with which he did
   marvels, a pot full of manna, and the two tables with commandments. And
   then after Moses taught them the law; how each man should behave him
   against other and what he should do, and what he should not do, and
   departed them into twelve tribes, and commanded that every man should
   bring a rod into the Tabernacle. And Moses wrote each name on the rod,
   and Moses shut fast the tabernacle. And on the morn there was found one
   of the rods that burgeoned and bare leaves and fruit, and was of an
   almond tree. That rod fell to Aaron.

   And after this, long time, the children desired to eat flesh and
   remembered of the flesh that they ate in Egypt, and grudged against
   Moses, and would have ordained to them a duke for to have returned into
   Egypt. Wherefore Moses was so woe that he desired of our Lord to
   deliver him from this life, because he saw them so unkind against God.
   Then God sent to them so great plenty of curlews that two days and one
   night they flew so thick by the ground that they took great number, for
   they flew but the height of two cubits. And they had so many that they
   dried them hanging on their tabernacles and tents. Yet were they not
   content, but ever grudging, wherefore God smote them and took vengeance
   on them by a great plague and many died and were buried there. And then
   from thence they went into Hazeroth and dwelt. After this Miriam and
   Aaron, brother and sister of Moses began to speak against Moses,
   because of his wife which was of Ethiopia, and said: God hath not
   spoken only by Moses, hath he not also spoken to us? Wherefore our Lord
   was wroth. Moses was the humblest and the meekest man that was in all
   the world. Anon then, our Lord said to him, and to Aaron and to Miriam:
   Go ye three only unto the tabernacle; and there our Lord said that
   there was none like to Moses, to whom he had spoken mouth to mouth, and
   reproved Aaron and Miriam because they spake so to Moses, and being
   wroth, departed from them, and anon, Miriam was smitten and made leper
   and white like snow. And when Aaron beheld her and saw her smitten with
   leprosy, he said to Moses: I beseech the Lord that thou set not the sin
   on us which we have committed follily, and let not this our sister be
   as a dead woman, or as born out of time and cast away from her mother,
   behold and see, half her flesh is devoured of the leprosy. Then Moses
   cried unto our Lord, saying: I beseech thee Lord that thou heal her; to
   whom our Lord said: If her father had spit in her face should she not
   be put to shame and rebuke seven days? Let her depart out of the
   castles seven days, and after she shall be called in again. So Miriam
   was shut out of the castles seven days, and the people removed not from
   the place till she was called again.

   After this our Lord commanded Moses to send men into the land of Canaan
   that he should give them charge for to see and consider the goodness
   thereof, and that of every tribe he should send some. Moses did so as
   our Lord had commanded, which went in and brought of the fruits with
   them, and they brought a branch with one cluster of grapes as much as
   two men might bear between them upon a colestaff. When they had seen
   the country and considered by the space of forty days they returned and
   told the commodities of the land, but some said that the people were
   strong, and many kings and giants, in such wise that they said it was
   impregnable and that the people were much stronger than they were.
   Wherefore the people anon were afeard, and murmured against Moses and
   would return again into Egypt. Then Joshua and Caleb, which were two of
   them that had considered the land, said to the people: Why grudge ye
   and wherefore be ye afraid? We have well seen the country, and it is
   good to win. The country floweth full of milk and honey, be not rebel
   against God, he shall give it us, be ye not afeard. Then all the people
   cried against them, and when they would have taken stones and stoned
   them, our Lord in his glory appeared in a cloud upon the covering of
   the tabernacle, and said to Moses: This people believeth not the signs
   and wonders that I have showed and done to them. I shall destroy them
   all by pestilence, and I shall make thee a prince upon people greater
   and stronger than this is. Then prayed Moses to our Lord for the
   people, that he would have pity on them and not destroy them, but to
   have mercy on them after the magnitude of his mercy. And our Lord at
   his request forgave them. Nevertheless our Lord said that all the men
   that had seen his majesty, and the signs and marvels that he did in
   Egypt, and in desert, and have tempted him ten times, and not obeyed
   unto his voice, shall not see ne come into the country and land that I
   have promised to their fathers, but Joshua and Caleb, my servants,
   shall enter into the land, and their seed shall possess it. Moses told
   all this unto the children and they wailed and sorrowed greatly
   therefore.

   After this the people removed from thence and came into the desert of
   Sin; and there Miriam, sister of Moses and Aaron, died, and was buried
   in the same place. Then the people lacked water and came and grudged
   against Moses, and yet wished they had abided in Egypt. Then Moses and
   Aaron entered into the Tabernacle and fell down to the ground low, and
   prayed unto our Lord, saying: Lord God, hear the clamour of thy people,
   and open to them thy treasure, a fountain of living water, that they
   may drink and the murmuration of them may cease. Our Lord said to him
   then: Take the rod in thy hand, and thou and Aaron thy brother,
   assemble and gather the people and speak ye to the stone, and it shall
   give out water. And when the water cometh let all the multitude drink
   and their beasts. Moses then took the rod as our Lord bade, and
   gathered all the people tofore the stone and said to them: Hear ye
   rebels and out of belief; trow ye not that we may give you water out of
   this stone? And he lift up his hand and smote between the stone, and
   water came and flowed out in the most largest wise, in such wise that
   the people and beasts drank their fill. Then said God to Moses and
   Aaron: Because ye have not believed me and sanctified my name tofore
   the children of Israel, and given to me the laud, but have done this in
   your name, ye shall not bring this people into the land that I shall
   give to them. And therefore this water was called the water of
   contradiction, where the children grudged against God.

   Anon after this, by God's commandment, Moses took Aaron upon the hill,
   and despoiled him of his vesture, and clothed therewith his son
   Eleazar, and made him upperest bishop for his father Aaron. And there
   Aaron died in the top of the hill, and Moses descended with Eleazar.
   And when all the multitude of people saw that Aaron was dead, they wept
   and wailed on him thirty days in every tribe and family.

   After this the people went about the land of Edom, and began to wax
   weary, and grudged against our Lord and Moses, and said yet: Why hast
   thou led us out of the land of Egypt for to slay us in this desert and
   wilderness? Bread faileth us, there is no water, and our souls abhor
   and loathe this light meat. For which cause God sent among them
   fiery-serpents, which bit and wounded many of them and slew also. Then
   they that were hurt came into Moses and said: We have sinned, for we
   have spoken against our Lord and thee; pray for us unto God that he
   deliver from us these serpents. Then Moses prayed our Lord for the
   people. And our Lord said to him: Make a serpent of brass and set it up
   for a sign, and whosomever be hurt, and looketh thereon and beholdeth
   it, shall live and be whole. Then Moses made a serpent of brass, and
   set it up for a sign, and when they that were hurt beheld it they were
   made whole.

   After this when Moses had showed to them all the laws of our Lord, and
   ceremonies, and had governed them forty years, and that he was an
   hundred and twenty years old, he ascended from the fields of Moab upon
   the mountain of Nebo into the top of Pisgah against Jericho, and there
   our Lord showed to him all the land of Gilead unto Dan, and the land of
   promise from that one end unto that other. And then our Lord said to
   him: This is the land that I promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
   saying: I shall give it to thy seed. Now thou hast seen it with thine
   eyes, and shalt not enter ne come therein. And there in that place died
   Moses, servant of our Lord, as God commanded, and was buried in the
   vale of the land of Moab against Beth-peor. And yet never man knew his
   sepulchre unto this day. Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when
   he died, his eyes never dimmed, ne his teeth were never moved. The
   children of Israel wept and mourned for him thirty days in the fields
   of Moab. Joshua the son of Nun was replenished with the spirit of
   wisdom; for Moses set on him his hands, and the children obeyed him as
   our Lord had commanded to Moses. And there was never after a prophet in
   Israel like unto Moses, which knew and spake to God face to face in all
   signs and tokens that God did and showed by him in the land of Egypt to
   Pharaoh and all his servants.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    GLOSSARY

   adderbolt, n., a dragon-fly, also the bolt of a crossbow. adjousted,
   pp., Fr. ajouter, to add. aliened, pp., separated. ayenbar, n.,
   redeemer.

   bourdon, n., a staff.

   can, v., to be able. cheer, n., the visage. colestaff, n., a pole for
   carrying a burden between two persons. con, v., to know. corbanam, n.,
   an offering.

   dilation, n., delay. do make, did do make = cause to be made.

   engrassed, pp., Fr. engraisser, to fatten or enrich. enseigned, v., Fr.
   enseigner, to teach. eurous, adj., Ft. heureux, happy.

   flom, n., a river. frushed, v., Fr. fruisser, to crush or bruise.

   goliards, n., jesters or buffoons. guerished, v., Fr. guerir, to heal.

   impedimy, n., disease of the groin.

   jape, n., jest or scoff. jonkes of the sea, n, juncus acutus, the great
   sea rush. jument. n.. a mare

   kalked, v., reckoned or calculated.

   leasings, n., lies. louings, n., praisings. Iowted, pp., bowed, used
   also for lurked.

   maleurte, n., Fr. malheur, unhappiness. mezny, n., company or retinue.
   more, adj., greater or elder. move, v., to be able. moyen, n., middle,
   mean.

   Nebuzar-adan, n. This name means literally in the Hebrew (2 Kings xxv.)
   chief of the slayers,' which the English translators following the
   Vulgate understand as slayers of men,' and so interpret the name as
   captain of the guard.' But in the Septuagint, Nebuzar-adan is taken to
   be chief of the slayers of beasts, hence the title of prince of the
   cooks.' The French version, from which Caxton generally translates,
   reads car il estoit prince des gueux,' but here Caxton seems to have
   turned to the original, where Voragine, strange to say, follows the
   Latin version of the Septuagint, and writes princeps cocorum.'

   palpation, n., touching. plaies, n., wounds. primetime or printemps,
   n., spring. prince of the cooks - See Nebuzar-adan. propice, adj.,
   favourable. pulment, n., pottage.

   quatretemps, n., Ember days.

   rather, adv., earlier. rechaet, n., in exchange for, in place of.
   renommee. n.. renown.

   sieges, n., seats or thrones. sithes, n., times. solder. n.. an upper
   chamber. sparteled, pp., scattered. spelunke, n., a cave or tomb.
   stacten, n., myrrh. storax, n., incense. styed, v., rose up, ascended.
   sweven, n., a dream. synechdoche, n., bringing together.

   terebinth, n., turpentine. tigurye, n., a small house. tourbe, n., a
   crowd. tree treen, n., wood. trewage, n., tribute. turmes, n., troops,
   companies.

   unnethe, adv., hardly, scarcely. utas, n., octave.

   veer, n., spring-tide.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]8

   2 Kings

   [2]25

   Job

   [3]26

   Isaiah

   [4]43

   Daniel

   [5]11

   Hosea

   [6]2

   Matthew

   [7]9   [8]17   [9]21

   Luke

   [10]3   [11]3   [12]23

   John

   [13]14

   Acts

   [14]10
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.xv-p1.1
   2. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iv-p13.1
   3. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=26&scrV=0#iii.ix-p2.1
   4. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=0#iii.xii-p2.1
   5. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=11&scrV=0#iii.i-p4.1
   6. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p4.1
   7. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.x-p4.1
   8. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p1.2
   9. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iii.x-p4.2
  10. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p1.1
  11. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p4.3
  12. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=0#iii.ix-p1.1
  13. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p4.2
  14. file:///ccel/v/voragine/goldleg1/cache/goldleg1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iii.xiii-p4.4
