     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: A Review of the Annotations of Hugo Grotius
      Creator(s): Owen, John (1616-1683)
     Print Basis: The Banner of Truth Trust, Edinburgh, 1966.
   CCEL Subjects: All; Theology; Classic; Proofed;
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   A review

   of

   the annotations of Hugo Grotius

   in reference unto the

   doctrine of the deity and satisfaction of Christ;

   with

   a defence of the charge formerly laid against them.
     __________________________________________________________________

Prefatory note.

   Henry Hammond, the chaplain of Charles I., and the sub-dean of Christ
   Church, Oxford, from which office he was expelled by the Parliamentary
   visitors in 1648, was a divine of eminent learning, and, besides other
   works, was the author of "Annotations on Scripture," which still
   deserve to be consulted, although disfigured by his habit of explaining
   much in the New Testament by reference to the Gnostic heresy. He was
   the opponent of Owen on several questions, relating to the nature of
   church-government, the authority of the Ignatian Epistles, and the
   orthodoxy of Hugo Grotius.

   In 1617 Grotius published a refutation of the errors of Faustus
   Socinus, entitled, "A Defence of the Catholic Faith concerning the
   Satisfaction of Christ." Though opposed to the Socinians, the work was
   not deemed in perfect harmony with orthodox sentiment. Ravensperger in
   consequence assailed him, in a work entitled, "Judicium de Libro
   Grotii," etc. G. J. Vossius came to his defence in the following year.
   On the part of the Socinians, Crellius replied to Grotius. A
   complimentary letter from the latter to his opponent confirmed the
   suspicions entertained of his own orthodoxy. Crellius was answered by
   Essenius, Velthuysenius, and Stillingfleet.

   Owen, in the preface to his treatise on the "Perseverance of the
   Saints," had alluded to Dr Hammond as indebted to Grotius "for more
   than one rare notion" in his expositions of Scripture. An elaborate
   reply to the whole argument of Dr Owen against the Ignatian Epistles,
   contained in the same preface, appeared in 1655 from the pen of
   Hammond, and under the title, "An Answer to the Animadversions on the
   Dissertations concerning the Epistles of Ignatius." In the course of
   it, a digression was introduced vindicating Grotius from charges which
   Owen certainly had not mooted, but in which, to a certain extent, he
   could not refrain from concurring. These charges were, that towards the
   close of his life the learned Dutchman had veered towards Socinianism,
   and had become favourable to the interests of the church of Rome. In
   regard to the charge of Socinian leanings, it was founded partly on his
   letter to Crellius, partly on certain expressions which fell from him
   on his death-bed, and partly on his Scholia on the Bible. Two volumes
   of these Scholia appeared in 1641 and 1644, before the death of
   Grotius; and two, one including the Acts and the Epistles of Paul and
   James, and the other including the six Catholic Epistles and the
   Revelation, were published posthumously in 1646 and 1650. These Scholia
   contain expositions of Scripture which differ considerably from what
   Grotius had given in his work "De Satisfactione Christi." Hammond
   argues that his letter to Crellius was but an interchange of
   civilities, in which he was not called to discuss the points of
   controversy between them; gives a different version of his death-bed
   utterances; and maintains that the posthumous Scholia, because contrary
   to the opinions which he avowed in his lifetime, were notes taken by
   Grotius in the course of his reading, and by no means to be regarded as
   expressing his own views. Owen, in his "Vindiciæ Evangelicæ," proceeded
   to trace the perfect correspondence between Grotius and the Socinians,
   in their exegesis of those passages in Scripture which relate to the
   person of Christ. Hammond issued his "Second Defence of Grotius." Owen
   answered him in the following treatise; and was answered by his
   indefatigable adversary in "A Continuation of the Defence of Grotius."
   If the position of Owen had been that Grotius was in reality a
   Socinian, he would have been worsted in this collision with Hammond;
   but he guards himself against being supposed to assume it, making
   express admission that Grotius allowed one text to be proof of the
   Saviour's Godhead. That Grotius played into the hands of the enemy, by
   the surrender of almost every other scriptural fortress in defence of
   this cardinal doctrine, and spoke of it in terms which betokened no
   very cordial appreciation of its importance, is what Owen asserted, and
   what cannot be disproved, except by the most worthless special
   pleading. Hammond could only make out his case for Grotius by denying
   all authority to his posthumous Annotations, "which," says he, "I deem
   not competent measures to judge him by." -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   A second consideration

   of

   the annotations of Hugo Grotius.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Having, in my late defence of the doctrine of the gospel from the
   corruptions of the Socinians, been occasioned to vindicate the
   testimonies given in the Scripture to the deity of Christ from their
   exceptions, and finding that Hugo Grotius, in his Annotations, had (for
   the most part) done the same things with them as to that particular,
   and some other important articles of the Christian faith, that book of
   his being more frequent in the hands of students than those of the
   Socinians, I thought it incumbent on me to do the same work in
   reference to those Annotations which it was my design to perform
   towards the writings of Socinus, Smalcius, and their companions and
   followers. What I have been enabled to accomplish by that endeavour,
   with what service to the gospel hath been performed thereby, is left to
   the judgment of them who desire aletheuein en agape. Of my dealing with
   Grotius I gave a brief account in my epistle to the governors of the
   university, and that with reference to an apology made for him not long
   before. This hath obtained a new apology, under the name of "A Second
   Defence of Hugo Grotius;" with what little advantage either to the
   repute of Grotius as to the thing in question or of the apologist
   himself, it is judged necessary to give the ensuing account, for which
   I took the first leisure hour I could obtain, having things of greater
   weight daily incumbent on me. The only thing of importance by me
   charged on those Annotations of Grotius was this, -- that the texts of
   Scripture, both in the Old Testament and New, bearing witness to the
   deity and satisfaction of Christ, are in them wrested to other senses
   and significations, and the testimonies given to those grand truths
   thereby eluded. Of those of the first kind I excepted one, yet with
   some doubt, lest his expressions therein ought to be interpreted
   according to the analogy of what he had elsewhere delivered; of which
   afterward.

   Because that which concerns the satisfaction of Christ will admit of
   the easiest despatch, though taking up most room, I shall in the first
   place insist thereon. The words of my charge on the Annotations, as to
   this head of the doctrine of the Scripture, are these: "The condition
   of these famous Annotations as to the satisfaction of Christ is the
   same; -- not one text in the whole Scripture wherein testimony is given
   to that sacred truth which is not wrested to another sense, or at least
   the doctrine in it concealed and obscured by them."

   This being a matter of fact, and the words containing a crime charged
   on the Annotations, he that will make a defence of them must either
   disprove the assertion by instances to the contrary, or else, granting
   the matter of fact, evince it to be no crime. That which is objected in
   matter of fact "aut negandum est aut defendendum," says Quintilian,
   lib. v. cap. de Refut., and "extra hæc in judiciis fere nihil est." In
   other cases, "patronus neget, defendat, transferat, excuset,
   deprecetur, molliat, minuat, avertat, despiciat, derideat;" but in
   matters of fact the first two only have place. Aristotle allows more
   particulars for an apologist to divert unto, if the matter require it.
   He may say of what is objected, E hos ouk estin, e, hos ou blaberon, e
   ou touto, e hos ou telikouto, e ouk adikon, e ou mega, e ouk aischron,
   e ouk echon megethos (Rhet. lib. iii. cap. xv.); all which, in a plain
   matter of fact, may be reduced to the former heads. That any other
   apology can or ought to take place in this or any matter of the same
   importance will not easily be proved. The present apologist takes
   another course; such ordinary paths are not for him to walk in. He
   tells us of the excellent book that Grotius wrote, "De Satisfactione
   Christi," and the exposition of sundry places of Scripture, especially
   of divers verses of Isa. liii. given therein, and then adds sundry
   inducements to persuade us that he was of the same mind in his
   "Annotations;" and this is called a defence of Grotius! The apologist,
   I suppose, knows full well what texts of Scripture they are that are
   constantly pleaded for the satisfaction of Christ by them who do
   believe that doctrine. I shall also for once take it for granted that
   he might without much difficulty have obtained a sight of Grotius'
   Annotations; to which I shall only add, that probably, if he could from
   them have disproved the assertion before mentioned by any considerable
   instances, he is not so tender of the prefacer's credit as to have
   concealed it on any such account. But the severals of his plea for the
   Annotations in this particular, I am persuaded, are accounted by some
   worthy of consideration. A brief view of them will suffice.

   The signal place of Isa. liii., he tells us, "he hath heard taken
   notice of by some" (I thought it had been probable the apologist might
   have taken notice of it himself), as that wherein his Annotations are
   most suspected, therefore on that he will fasten a while. Who would not
   now expect that the apologist should have entered upon the
   consideration of those Annotations, and vindicated them from the
   imputations insinuated? but he knew a better way of procedure, and who
   shall prescribe to him what suits his purpose and proposal?

   This, I say, is the instance chosen to be insisted on; and the
   vindication of the Annotations therein by the interpretation given in
   their author's book, De Satisfactione Christi, is proposed to
   consideration. That others, if not the apologist himself, may take
   notice of the emptiness of such precipitate apologies as are ready to
   be tumbled out without due digestion or consideration, I shall not only
   compare the Annotations and that book as to the particular place
   proposed, and manifest the inconsistency of the one with the other, but
   also, to discover the extreme negligence and confidence which lie at
   the bottom of his following attempt to induce a persuasion that the
   judgment of the man of whom we speak was not altered (that is, as to
   the interpretation of the scriptures relating to the satisfaction of
   Christ), nor is other [i.e., different] in his Annotations than in that
   book, I shall compare the one with the other by sundry other instances,
   and let the world see how, in the most important places contested
   about, he hath utterly deserted the interpretations given of them by
   himself in his book De Satisfactione, and directly taken up that which
   he did oppose.

   The apologist binds me, in the first place, to that of Isa. liii.,
   which is ushered in by 1 Pet. ii. 24.

   "From 1 Pet. ii. 24," says the apologist, "Grotius informs us that
   Christ so bare our sins that he freed us from them, so that we are
   healed by his stripes.'?"

   This, thus crudely proposed, -- Socinus himself would grant it, -- is
   little more than barely repeating the words. Grotius goes farther, and
   contends that aneenken, the word there used by the apostle, is to be
   interpreted "tulit sursum eundo, portavit;" and tells us that Socinus
   would render this word "abstulit," and so take away the force of the
   argument from this place. To disprove that insinuation, he urges sundry
   other places in the New Testament where some words of the same
   importance are used and are no way capable of such a signification. And
   whereas Socinus urges to the contrary Heb. ix. 28, where he says
   anenenkein hamartias signifies nothing but "auferre peccata," Grotius
   disproves that instance, and manifests that in that place also it is to
   be rendered by "tulit," and so relates to the death of Christ.

   That we may put this instance, given us by the apologist to vindicate
   the Annotations from the crime charged on them, to an issue, I shall
   give the reader the words of his Annotations on that place. They are as
   follow:--

   Hos tas amartias hemon autos anenenken, etc. "?Aneenken hic est
   abstulit, quod sequentia ostendunt, quomodo idem verbum sumi notavimus,
   Heb. ix. 28, eodem sensu; airei hamartian, Johan. i. 29; et ns'? et
   svl?, Esa. liii. 4, ubi Græci pherei. Vitia nostra ita interfecit,
   sicut qui cruci affiguntur interfici solent. Simile loquendi genus,
   Col. ii. 14; vide Rom. vi. 6, Gal. ii. 20, v. 24. Est autem hic
   metalepsis. Non enim proprie Christus cum crucifigeretur vitia nostra
   abstulit, sed causas dedit per quas auferrentur. Nam crux Christi
   fundamentum est prædicationis; prædicatio vero poenitentiæ: poenitentia
   vero aufert vitia."

   How well the annotator abides here by his former interpretation of this
   place the apologist may easily discover. 1. There he contends that
   aneenke, is as much as "tulit" or "sursum tulit," and objects out of
   Socinus that it must be "abstulit," which quite alters the sense of the
   testimony; here he contends, with him, that it must be "abstulit." 2.
   There, Heb. ix. 28 is of the same importance with this 1 Pet. ii. 24,
   as there interpreted; here, "as here," -- that is in a quite contrary
   sense, altogether inconsistent with the other. 3. For company, svl?,
   used Isa. liii. 4, is called into the same signification, which in the
   book De Satisfactione he contends is never used in that sense, and that
   most truly. 4. Upon this exposition of the words he gives the very
   sense contended for by the Socinians: "Non enim proprie Christus cum
   crucifigeretur vitia nostra abstulit, sed causas dedit per quas
   auferrentur." What are these causes? He adds them immediately: "Nam
   crux Christi fundamentum est prædicationis; prædicatio vero
   poenitentiæ: poenitentia vero aufert vitia." He that sees not the whole
   Socinian poison wrapped up and proposed in this interpretation is
   ignorant of the state of the difference as to that head between them
   and Christians. 5. To make it a little more evident how constant the
   annotator was to his first principles, which he insisted on in the
   management of his disputes with Socinus about the sense of this place,
   I shall add the words of Socinus himself, which then he did oppose:--
   "Verum animadvertere oportet primum in Græco, verbum, quod interpretes
   verterunt pertulit, est anenenkein, quod non pertulit sed abstulit
   vertendum erat, non secus ac factum fuerit in epistola ad Hebræos, cap.
   ix. 28, ubi idem legendi modus habetur, unde constat anenenkein
   hamartias non perferre peccata, sed peccata tollere, sive auferre,
   significare," Socin. de Jes. Christ. Serv. lib. ii. cap. vi.

   What difference there is between the design of the annotator and that
   of Socinus, what compliance in the quotation of the parallel place of
   the Hebrews, what direct opposition and head is made in the Annotations
   against that book De Satisfactione, and how clearly the cause contended
   for in the one is given away in the other, need no farther to be
   demonstrated. But if this instance make not good the apologist's
   assertion, it may be supposed that that which follows, which is ushered
   in by this, will do it to the purpose. Let, then, that come into
   consideration.

   This is that of Isa. liii.. Somewhat of the sense which Grotius in his
   book De Satisfactione contends for in this place is given us by the
   apologist:--

   The 11th verse of the chapter, which he first considers (in my book, p.
   14), he thus proposes and expounds:-- "Justificabit servus meus, justus
   multos et iniquitates ipsorum bajulabit, in Heb. est, vvntm hv' ysbl?.
   Vox autem vn? iniquitatem significat, atque etiam iniquitatis poenam, 2
   Reg. vii. 9; vox autem svl? est sustinere, bajulare, quoties autem
   bajulare ponitur cum nomine peccati aut iniquitatis, id in omni lingua
   et maxime in Hebraismo significat poenas ferre;" with much more to this
   purpose. The whole design of the main dispute in that place is from
   that discourse of the prophet to prove that Jesus Christ "properly
   underwent the punishment due to our sins, and thereby made satisfaction
   to God for them."

   To manifest his constancy to this doctrine, in his Annotations he gives
   such an exposition of that whole chapter of Isaiah as is manifestly and
   universally inconsistent with any such design in the words as that
   which he intends to prove from them in his book De Satisfactione. In
   particular (to give one instance of this assertion) he contends here
   that svl? is as much as "bajulare, portare," and that joined with
   "iniquity" (in all languages, especially in the Hebrew), that phrase of
   "bearing iniquity" signifies to undergo the punishment due to it. In
   his Annotations on the place, as also in those on 1 Pet. ii. 24, he
   tells you the word signifies "auferre," which with all his strength he
   had contended against. Not to draw out this particular instance into
   any greater length, I make bold to tell the apologist (what I suppose
   he knows not) that there is no one verse of the whole chapter so
   interpreted in his Annotations as that the sense given by him is
   consistent with, nay, is not repugnant to, that which from the same
   verse he pleads for in his book De Satisfactione Christi. If,
   notwithstanding this information, the apologist be not satisfied, let
   him, if he please, consider what I have already animadverted on those
   Annotations, and undertake their vindication. These loose discourses
   are not at all to the purpose in hand nor to the question between us,
   which is solely whether Grotius, in his Annotations, have not perverted
   the sense of those texts of Scripture which are commonly and most
   righteously pleaded as testimonies given to the satisfaction of Christ.
   But as to this particular place of Isaiah, the apologist hath a farther
   plea, the sum whereof (not to trouble the reader with the repetition of
   a discourse so little to the purpose) comes to this head, that Grotius,
   in his book De Satisfactione Christi, gives the mystical sense of the
   chapter, under which consideration it belongs to Christ and his
   sufferings; in his Annotations, the literal, which had its immediate
   completion in Jeremiah; which was not so easily discoverable or
   vulgarly taken notice of. This is the sum of his first observation on
   this place, to acquit the annotator of the crime charged upon him.
   Whether he approve the application of the prophecy to Jeremiah or no, I
   know not. He says, "Grotius so conceived." The design of the discourse
   seems to give approbation to that conception. How the literal sense of
   a place should come to be less easily discovered than the mystical,
   well I know not. Nor shall I speak of the thing itself, concerning the
   literal and mystical sense supposed to be in the same place and words
   of Scripture, with the application of the distinction to those
   prophecies which have a double accomplishment, in the type and thing or
   person typified (which yet hath no soundness in it): but, to keep to
   the matter now in hand, I shall make bold, for the removal of this
   engine applied by the apologist, and for the preventing all possible
   mistake or controversy about the annotator's after-change in this
   matter, to tell him that the perverting of the first, literal sense of
   the chapter, or giving it a completion in any person whatsoever, in a
   first, second, or third sense, but the Son of God himself, is no less
   than blasphemy; which the annotator is no otherwise freed from but by
   his conceiving a sense to be in the words contrary to their literal
   importance, and utterly exclusive of the concernment of Jesus Christ in
   them. If the apologist be otherwise minded, I shall not invite him
   again to the consideration of what I have already written in the
   vindication of the whole prophecy from the wretched, corrupt
   interpretation of the annotator (not hoping that he will be able to
   break through that discouragement he hath from looking into that
   treatise by the prospect he hath taken of the whole by the epistle),
   but do express my earnest desire, that, by an exposition of the
   severals of that chapter, and their application to any other (not by
   loose discourses foreign to the question in hand), he would endeavour
   to evince the contrary. If, on second thoughts, he find either his
   judgment or ability not ready or competent for such an attempt, I
   heartily wish he would be careful hereafter of ingenerating
   apprehensions of that nature in the minds of others by any such
   discourses as this.

   I cannot but suppose that I am already absolved from a necessity of any
   farther procedure as to the justifying of my charge against the
   Annotations, having sufficiently foiled the instance produced by the
   apologist for the weakening of it. But yet, lest any should think that
   the present issue of this debate is built upon some unhappiness of the
   apologist in the choice of the particulars insisted on, which might
   have been prevented, or may yet be removed, by the production of other
   instances, I shall, for their farther satisfaction, present them with
   sundry other the most important testimonies given to the satisfaction
   of Christ, wherein the annotator hath openly prevaricated, and doth
   embrace and propose those very interpretations and that very sense
   which in his book De Satisfactione Christi he had strenuously opposed.

   Page 8 of his book De Satisfactione, he pleads the satisfaction of
   Christ from Gal. ii. 21, laying weight on this, that the word dorean
   signifies the want of an antecedent cause, on the supposition there
   made. In his Annotations he deserts this assertion, and takes up the
   sense of the place given by Socinus, De Servatore, lib. ii. cap. xiv.
   His departure into the tents of Socinus on Gal. iii. 13 is much more
   pernicious. Pages 25-27, urging that place and vindicating it from the
   exceptions of Socinus, he concludes that the apostle said Christ was
   made a curse: "Quasi dixerit Christum factum esse to Theo epikataraton,
   hoc est poenæ a Deo irrogatæ, et quidem ignominiosissimæ obnoxium." To
   make good this, in his Annotations he thus expounds the words: "Duplex
   hic figura; nam et katara pro kataratos, quomodo circumcisio pro
   circumcisis, et subauditur hos: nam Christus ita cruciatus est, quasi
   esset Deo kataratos. Nihil homini pessimo in hac vita pejus evenire
   poterat;" which is the very interpretation of the words given by
   Socinus which he opposed, and the same that Crellius insists upon in
   his vindication of Socinus against him. So uniform was the judgment of
   the annotator with that of the author of the book De Satisfactione
   Christi!

   Pages 32, 33, etc., are spent in the exposition and vindication of Rom.
   iii. 25, 26. That expression, eis endeixin tes dikaiosunes autou,
   manifesting the end of the suffering of Christ, is by him chiefly
   insisted on. That by dikaiosune is there intended that justice of God
   whereby he punisheth sin, he contends and proves from the nature of the
   thing itself, and by comparing the expression with other parallel texts
   of Scripture. Socinus had interpreted this of the righteousness of
   Christ's fidelity and veracity, De Servatore, lib. ii. cap. ii. ("Ut
   ostenderet se veracem et fidelem esse"); but Crellius, in his
   vindication of him, places it rather on the goodness and liberality of
   God, "which is," saith he, "the righteousness there intended." To make
   good his ground, the annotator thus expounds the meaning of the words:
   "Vocem dikaiosunes malim hic de bonitate interpretari, quam de fide in
   promissis proestandis, quia quæ sequuntur non ad Judæos solos
   pertinent, sed etiam ad gentes, quibus promissio nulla facta erat." He
   rather, he tells you, embraces the interpretation of Crellius than of
   Socinus; but for that which himself had contended for, it is quite shut
   out of doors, as I have elsewhere manifested at large.

   The same course he takes with Rom. v. 10, which he insists on p. 26,
   and 2 Cor. v. 18-21; concerning which he openly deserts his own former
   interpretation, and closes expressly with that which he had opposed, as
   he doth in reference to all other places where any mention is made of
   reconciliation, the substance of his annotations on those places
   seeming to be taken out of Socinus, Crellius, and some others of that
   party.

   That signal place of Heb. ii. 17 in this kind deserves particularly to
   be taken notice of. Cap. vii. p. 141, of his book De Satisfactione, he
   pleads the sense of that expression, Eis to hilaskesthai tas hamartias
   tou laou, to be Hilaskesthai Theon peri ton hamartion, and adds,
   "Significat ergo ibi expiationem quæ fit placando." But Crellius;
   defence of Socinus had so possessed the man's mind before he came to
   write his Annotations, that on that place he gives us directly his
   sense, and almost his words, in a full opposition to what he had before
   asserted: "?Hilaskesthai hamartias. Hoc quidem loco, ut ex sequentibus
   apparet, est auferre peccata, sive purgare a peccato, id est, efficere
   ne peccetur, vires suppeditando pro modo tentationum." So the annotator
   on that place, endeavouring farther to prove his interpretation! From
   Rom. iv. 25, cap. i. p. 47 of his book De Satisfactione, he clearly
   proves the satisfaction of Christ, and evinces that to be the sense of
   that expression, "Traditus propter peccata nostra;" which he thus
   comments on in his Annotations: "Poterat dicere qui et mortuus est et
   resurrexit ut nos a peccatis justificaret, id est, liberaret. Sed amans
   antitheta morti conjunxit peccata, quæ sunt mors animi, resurrectioni
   autem adeptionem justitiæ, quæ est animi resuscitatio. Mirè nos et a
   peccatis retrahit et ad justitiam ducit, quod videmus Christum mortem
   non formidasse pro doctrinæ suæ peccatis contrariæ et ad justitiam nos
   vocantis testimonio; et a Deo suscitatum, ut eidem doctrinæ summa
   conciliaretur auctoritas." He that sees not, not only that he directly
   closes in with what before he had opposed, but also that he hath here
   couched the whole doctrine of the Socinians about the mediation of
   Christ and our justification thereby, is utterly ignorant of the state
   of the controversy between them and Christians. I suppose it will not
   be thought necessary for me to proceed with the comparison instituted.
   The several books are in the hands of most students, and that the case
   is generally the same in the other places pleaded for the satisfaction
   of Christ, they may easily satisfy themselves. Only, because the
   apologist seems to put some difference between his Annotations on the
   Revelation, as having "received their lineaments and colours from his
   own pencil," and those on the Epistles, which he had not so completed;
   as I have already manifested that in his annotations on that book he
   hath treacherously tampered with and corrupted the testimonies given to
   the deity of our blessed Saviour, so shall I give one instance from
   them also of his dealing no less unworthily with those that concern his
   satisfaction.

   Socinus, in his second book against Covet, second part, and chap.
   xvii., gives us this account of these words of the Holy Ghost, Rev. i.
   5, "Who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood:"
   "Johannes in Apocalyp. cap. i. 5, alia metaphora seu translatione (quæ
   nihil aliud est quam compendiosa quædam comparatio) utens, dixit de
   Christo et ejus morte, Qui dilexit nos et lavit nos a peccatis in
   sanguine suo,' nam quemadmodum aqua abluuntur sordes corporis, sic
   sanguine Christi peccata, quæ sordes animi sunt, absterguntur.
   Absterguntur, inquam, quia animus noster ab ipsis mundatur," etc. This
   interpretation is opposed and exploded by Grotius, De Satisfactione,
   cap. x. p. 208, 209; the substance of it being that Christ washed us
   from our sins by his death, in that he confirmed his doctrine of
   repentance and newness of life thereby, by which we are turned from our
   sins, as he manifests in the close of his discourse. "Hoc sæpius
   urgendum est," saith Socinus, "Jesum Christum ea ratione peccata nostra
   abstulisse, quod effecerit, ut a peccando desistamus." This
   interpretation of Socinus being re-enforced by Crellius, the place
   falls again under the consideration of Grotius in those Annotations on
   the Revelation; which, as the apologist tells us, "received their very
   lineaments and colours from his own pencil." There, then, he gives us
   this account thereof: "Kai lousanti hemas apo ton hamartion hemon en to
   haimati hautou. Sanguine suo, id est, morte tolerata, certos nos
   reddidit veriatis eorum quæ docuerat, quæ talia sunt, ut nihil sit
   aptius ad purgandos a vitiis animos. Humidæ naturæ, sub qua est et
   sanguis, proprium est lavare. Id vero per egregiam allegorian ad animam
   transfertur. Dicitur autem Christus suo sanguine nos lavasse, quia et
   ipse omnia præstitit quæ ad id requirebantur et apparet secutum in
   plurimis effectum." I desire the apologist to tell me what he thinks of
   this piece, thus perfected, with all its lineaments and colours, by the
   pencil of that skilful man, and what beautiful aspect he supposeth it
   to have. Let the reader, to prevent farther trouble in perusing
   transcriptions of this kind, consider Rev. xiii. 8, p. 114; Heb. ix. 25
   to the end, which he calls "an illustrious place," in the same page and
   forward; 1 John ii. 2, p. 140; Rom. v. 10, 11, p. 142, 143; Eph. ii.
   16, p. 148, 149; Col. i. 20-22, Tit. ii. 14, p. 156; Heb. ix. 14, 15,
   p. 157, 158; Acts xx. 28, and many others, and compare them with the
   annotations on those places, and he will be farther enabled to judge of
   the defence made of the one by the instance of the other. I shall only
   desire that he who undertakes to give his judgment of this whole matter
   be somewhat acquainted with the state of the difference about this
   point of the doctrine of the gospel between the Socinians and us; that
   he do not take "auferre peccata" to be "ferre peccata;" "nostri causa"
   to be "nostra vice" and "nostro loco;" causa proegoumene to be
   prokatarktike; "liberatio a jugo peccati" to be "redemptio a reatu
   peccati;" "subire poenas simpliciter" to be "subire poenas nobis
   debitas;" to be lutron," and 'sm?, in respect of the event, to be so as
   to the proper nature of the thing; "offerre seipsum in coelo," to be as
   much as "offerre seipsum in cruce," as to the work itself; that so he
   be not mistaken to think that when the first are granted the latter are
   so also. For a close of the discourse relating to this head, a brief
   account may be added why I said not positively that he had wrested all
   the places of Scripture giving testimony to the satisfaction of Christ
   to another sense, but that he had either done so or else concealed or
   obscured that sense in them.

   Though I might give instances from one or two places in his Annotations
   on the Gospels giving occasion to this assertion, yet I shall insist
   only on some taken from the Epistle to the Hebrews, where is the great
   and eminent seat of the doctrine of Christ's satisfaction. Although in
   his annotations on that epistle he doth openly corrupt the most clear
   testimonies given to this truth, yet there are some passages in them
   wherein he seems to dissent from the Socinians. In his annotations on
   chap. v. 5 he hath these words: "Jesus sacerdotale quidem munus suum
   aliquo modo erat auspicatus; cum semet patri victimam offerret." That
   Christ was a priest when he was on the earth was wholly denied by
   Socinus, both in his book De Servatore, and in his epistle to
   Niemojevius, as I have showed elsewhere. Smalcius seems to be of the
   same judgment in the Racovian Catechism. Grotius says, "Sacerdotale
   munus erat aliquo modo auspicatus;" yet herein he goes not beyond
   Crellius, who tells us, "Mortem Christus subiit duplici ratione, partim
   quidem ut foederis mediator seu sponsor, partim quidem ut sacerdos Deo
   ipsum oblaturus," De Caus. Mort. Christi, p. 6. And so Volkelius fully
   to the same purpose. "Partes," saith he, "muneris sacerdotis, hæc sunt
   potissimum; mactatio victimæ, in tabernaculum ad oblationem peragendam
   ingressio, et ex eodem egressio: ac mactatio quidem mortem Christi,
   violentam sanguinis profusionem continet," De Relig. lib. iii. cap.
   xlvii., p. 145. And again: "Hinc colligitur solam Christi mortem
   nequaquam illam perfectam absolutamque ipsius oblationem (de qua in
   Epistola ad Hebræos agitur) fuisse, sed principium et præparationem
   quandam ipsius sacerdotii in coelo demum administrandi extitisse,"
   ibid. So that nothing is obtained by Grotius' "Munus sacerdotale aliquo
   modo erat auspicatus," but what is granted by Crellius and Volkelius.
   But in the next words, "Cum semet offerret patri victimam," he seems to
   leave them: but he seems only so to do; for Volkelius acknowledgeth
   that he did slay the sacrifice in his death, though that was not his
   complete and perfect oblation, which is also afterward affirmed by
   Grotius, and Crellius expressly affirms the same. Nor doth he seem to
   intend a proper expiatory and satisfactory sacrifice in that
   expression; for if he had, he would not have been guilty of such an
   akurologia as to say, "Semet obtulit patri." Besides, though he doth
   acknowledge elsewhere that this "victima" was 'sm?, and huper
   hamartion, yet he says in another place (on verse 3), "Sequitur
   Christum quoque obtulisse pro se huper hamartion:" giving thereby such
   a sense to that expression as is utterly inconsistent with a proper
   expiatory sacrifice for sin. And, which is yet worse, on chap. ix. 14
   he gives us such an account why expiation is ascribed to the blood of
   Christ, as is a key to his whole interpretation of that epistle.
   "Sanguini," saith he, "purgatio ista tribuitur, quia per sanguinem, id
   est, mortem Christi, secutâ ejus excitatione et evectione, giguitur in
   nobis fides, quæ deinde fides corda purgat." And, therefore, where
   Christ is said to offer himself by the eternal Spirit, he tells us,
   "Oblatio Christi hîc intelligitur illa, quæ oblationi legali in adyto
   factæ respondet, ea autem est, non oblatio in altari crucis facta, sed
   facta in adyto coelesti." So that the purgation of sin is an effect of
   Christ's presenting himself in heaven only; which how well it agrees
   with what the apostle says, chap. i. 3, the reader will easily judge.
   And to manifest that this was his constant sense, on these words, verse
   26, Eis athetesin hamartias dia tes thusias hautou, he thus comments:
   "Eis athetesin hamartias. Ut peccatum in nobis extingueretur; fit autem
   hoc per passionem Christi, quæ fidem nobis ingenerat, quæ corda
   purificat." Christ confirming his doctrine by his death, begets faith
   in us, which doth the work. Of the 28th verse of the same chapter I
   have spoken before. The same he affirms again more expressly on chap.
   x. 3; and verses 9, 12, he interprets the oblation of Christ, whereby
   he took away sin, to be the oblation or offering of himself in heaven,
   whereby sin is taken away by sanctification, as also in sundry other
   places where the expiatory sacrifice of Christ on earth, and the taking
   away of the guilt of sin by satisfaction, are evidently intended. So
   that notwithstanding the concession mentioned, I cannot see the least
   reason to alter my thoughts of the Annotations as to this business on
   hand.

   Not farther to abound in causa facili, in all the differences we have
   with the Socinians about Christ's dying for us, concerning the nature
   of redemption, reconciliation, mediation, sacrifice, the meaning of all
   the phrases and expressions in which these things are delivered to us,
   the annotator is generally on the apostate side throughout his
   Annotations; and the truth is, I know no reason why our students should
   with so much diligence and charge labour to get into their hands the
   books of Socinus, Crellius, Smalcius, and the rest of that crew, seeing
   these Annotations, as to the most important heads of Christian
   religion, about the deity, sacrifice, priesthood, and satisfaction of
   Christ, original sin, free will, justification, etc., afford them the
   substance and marrow of what is spoken by them; so that as to these
   heads, upon the matter, there is nothing peculiar to the annotator but
   the secular learning which in his interpretations he hath curiously and
   gallantly interweaved. Plautus makes sport, in his Amphitryo, with
   several persons, some real, some assumed, of such likeness one to
   another that they could not discern themselves by any outward
   appearance; which caused various contests and mistakes between them.
   The poet's fancy raised not a greater similitude between Mercury and
   Sosia, being supposed to be different persons, than there is a
   dissimilitude between the author of the book De Satisfactione Christi
   and of the Annotations concerning which we have been discoursing, being
   one and the same. Nor was the contest of those different persons, so
   like one another, so irreconcilable as are these of this single person,
   so unlike himself in the several treatises mentioned. And I cannot but
   think it strange that the apologist could imagine no surer measure to
   be taken of Grotius' meaning in his Annotations than his treatise of
   the Satisfaction of Christ doth afford, there being no two treatises
   that I know, of any different persons whatever, about one and the same
   subject, that are more at variance. Whether now any will be persuaded
   by the apologist to believe that Grotius was constant in his
   Annotations to the doctrine delivered in that other treatise I am not
   solicitous.

   For the re-enforced plea of the apologist, that these Annotations were
   not finished by him, but only collections, that he might after dispose
   of, I am not concerned in it, having to deal with that book of
   Annotations that goes under his name. If they are none of his, it is
   neither on the one hand nor other of any concernment unto me. I say not
   this as though the apologist had in the least made good his former plea
   by his new exceptions to my evidence against it, from the printer's
   preface to the volume of Annotations on the Epistles. He says, "What
   was the opus integrum that was commended to the care of ho deina?" and
   answers himself, "Not that last part or volume of Annotations, but opus
   integrum, the whole volume or volumes that contained his anekdota
   adversaria on the New Testament." For how ill this agrees with the
   intention and words of the prefacer, a slight inspection will suffice
   to manifest. He tells us that Grotius had himself published his
   Annotations on the Gospels five years before; that at his departure
   from Paris, he left a great part of this volume (that is this on the
   Acts and Epistles) with a friend; that the reason why he left not opus
   integrum, that is, the whole volume, with him was because the residue
   of it was not so written as that an amanuensis could well understand
   it; that, therefore, in his going towards Sweden, he wrote that part
   again with his own hand, and sent it back to the same person (that had
   the former part of the volume committed to him) from Hamburg. If the
   apologist read this preface, he ought, as I suppose, to have desisted
   from the plea insisted on. If he did not, he thought assuredly he had
   much reason to despise them with whom he had to do. But, as I said,
   herein am I not concerned.

   The consideration of the charge on the Annotations relating to their
   tampering with the testimonies given in the Scripture to the deity of
   Christ, being another head of the whole, may now have place.

   The sum of what is to this purpose by me affirmed is, that in the
   Annotations on the Old and New Testament, Grotius hath left but one
   place giving testimony clearly to the deity of Christ. To this
   assertion I added both a limitation and also an enlargement in several
   respects; -- a limitation, that I could not perceive he had spoken of
   himself clearly on that one place. On supposition that he did so, I
   granted that perhaps one or two places more might accordingly be
   interpreted. That this one place is John i. 1, I expressly affirmed;
   that is the one place wherein, as I say, he spake not home to the
   business. The defence of the apologist in the behalf of Grotius
   consists of sundry discourses:-- First, To disprove that he hath [not]
   left more than that one of John free from the corruption charged, he
   instances in that one of John i. 1, wherein, as he saith, he expressly
   asserts the deity of Christ; but yet wisely foreseeing that this
   instance would not evade the charge, having been expressly excepted (as
   to the present inquiry) and reserved to farther debate, he adds the
   places quoted by Grotius in the exposition of that place, as Prov.
   viii. 21-27, Isa. xlv. 12, xlviii. 13, 2 Pet. iii. 5, Col. i. 16: from
   all which he concludes that the Annotations have left more testimonies
   to the deity of Christ untampered withal and unperverted than my
   assertion will allow, reckoning them all up again, section the 10th,
   and concluding himself a successful advocate in this case, or at least
   under a despair of ever being so in any if he acquit not himself
   clearly in this. If his failure herein be evinced by the course of his
   late writings, himself will appear to be most concerned. I suppose,
   then, that on the view of this defence, men must needs suppose that in
   the annotations on the places repeated, and mustered a second time by
   the apologist, Grotius does give their sense as bearing witness to the
   deity of Christ. Others may be pleased to take it for granted without
   farther consideration; for my part, being a little concerned to
   inquire, I shall take the pains to turn to the places, and give the
   reader a brief account of them.

   For Prov. viii., his first note on the wisdom there spoken of is, "Hæc
   de ea sapientia quæ in Lege apparet exponunt Hebræi: et sane ei, si non
   soli, at præcipue hæc attributa conveniunt." Now, if the attributes
   here mentioned agree either solely or principally to the wisdom that
   shines in the law, how they can be the attributes of the person of the
   eternal Son of God I see not. He adds no more to that purpose until he
   comes to the 22d verse, the verse of old contested about with the
   Arians. His words on that are, "Græcum Aquilæ est, ektesato me, ut et
   Symmachi et Theodotionis, respondetque bene Hebræo qnny?. At Chaldæus
   habet br'?, et LXX. ektise, sensu non malo, si creare sumas pro facere
   ut apparent. Viæ Dei sunt operationes ipsius. Sensum hujus loci et
   sequentium non male exprimas cum Philone de Coloniis: Ho logos ho
   presbuteros ton genesin eilephoton ou kathaper oiakos eneilemenos ho
   ton holon kubernetes pedaliouchei ta sumpanta, kai hote ekosmoplastei
   chresamenos organo touto pros ten anupaition ton apoteloumenon
   sustasin." On verse 27 he adds, "Aderam, id est, en pros ton Theon, ut
   infra Johan. Evang. i. 1.'

   What clear and evident testimony, by this exposition, is left in this
   place to the deity of Christ, I profess myself as ignorant as I was
   before I received this direction by the apologist. He tells us that
   qnny? is rendered not amiss by the Chaldee br'?, and the LXX. ektise,
   though he knew that sense was pleaded by the Arians, and exploded by
   the ancient doctors of the church. To relieve this concession, he tells
   us that "creare" may be taken for "facere ut appareat," though there be
   no evidence of such a use of the word in Scripture, nor can he give any
   instance thereof. The whole interpretation runs on that wisdom that is
   a property of God, which he manifested in the works of creation. Of the
   Son of God, the essential Wisdom of God, subsisting with the Father, we
   have not one word. Nor doth that quotation out of Philo relieve us in
   this business at all; we know in what sense he used the word ho logos.
   How far he and the Platonics, with whom in this expression he
   consented, were from understanding the only-begotten Son of God, is
   known. If this of Philo has any aspect towards the opinion of any
   professing themselves Christians, it is towards that of the Arians,
   which seems to be expressed therein. And this is the place chosen by
   the apologist to disprove the assertion of none being left, under the
   sense given them by the Annotations, bearing clear testimony to the
   deity of Christ! His comparing sm 'ny?, "ibi ego," which the Vulgar
   renders "aderam," with en pros ton Theon, seems rather to cast a
   suspicion on his intention in the expression of that place of the
   evangelist than in the least to give testimony to the deity of Christ
   in this. If any one be farther desirous to be satisfied how many clear,
   unquestionable evidences of the deity of Christ are slighted by these
   annotations on this chapter, let him consult my vindication of the
   place in my late "Vindiciæ Evangelicæ," where he will find something
   tendered to him to that purpose. What the apologist intended by adding
   these two places of Isaiah, chap. xlv. 12 and chap. xlviii. 13 (when in
   his annotations on these places Grotius not once mentions the deity of
   Christ, nor any thing of him, nor hath occasion so to do, nor doth
   produce them in this place to any such end or purpose, but only to show
   that the Chaldee paraphrase doth sundry times, when things are said to
   be done by God, render it that they were done by the word of God), as
   instances to the prejudice of my assertion, I cannot imagine.

   On that of Peter, 2 Epist. iii. 5, To tou Theou logo, he adds, indeed,
   "Vide quæ diximus ad initium Evangelii Johannis;" but neither doth that
   place intend the natural Son of God, nor is it so interpreted by
   Grotius.

   To these he adds, in the close, Col. i. 16, in the exposition whereof
   in his Annotations he expressly prevaricates, and goes off to the
   interpretation insisted on by Socinus and his companions; which the
   apologist well knew.

   Without farther search upon what hath been spoken, the apologist gives
   in his verdict concerning the falseness of my assertion before
   mentioned, of the annotator's speaking clear and home to the deity of
   Christ but in one, if in one, place of his Annotations. But, --

   1. What one other place hath he produced whereby the contrary to what I
   assert is evinced? Any man may make apologies at this rate as fast as
   he pleases.

   2. As to his not speaking clearly in that one, notwithstanding the
   improvement made of his expressions by the apologist, I am still of the
   same mind as formerly; for although he ascribes an eternity to logo,
   and affirms all things to be made thereby, yet, considering how careful
   he is of ascribing an hupostasis to logo, how many Platonic
   interpretations of that expression he interweaves in his expositions,
   how he hath darkened the whole counsel of God in that place about the
   subsistence of the Word, his omnipotency and incarnation, so clearly
   asserted by the Holy Ghost therein, I see no reason to retract the
   assertion opposed. But yet as to the thing itself, about this place I
   will not contend: only, it may not be amiss to observe, that not only
   the Arians, but even Photinus himself, acknowledged that the world was
   made to Theou logo, [so] that how little is obtained towards the
   confirmation of the deity of Christ by that concession may be
   discerned.

   I shall offer also only at present, that; ho logos tou Theou is
   threefold, -- logos hupostatikos, endiathetos, and prophorikos. The
   logos hupostatikos or ousiodes is Christ, mentioned John i. 1, his
   personal and eternal subsistence, with his omnipotency, being there
   asserted. Whether Christ be so called anywhere else in the New
   Testament may be disputed; Luke i. 2 compared with 1 John i. 1, 2 Pet.
   i. 19, Acts xx. 32, Heb. iv. 12, are the most likely to give us that
   use of the word. Why Christ is so termed I have showed elsewhere. That
   he is called dvr?, Ps. xxxiii. 6, is to me also evident. mlh? is better
   rendered rhema or lexis than logos. Where that word is used, it denotes
   not Christ, though 2 Sam. xxiii. 2, where that word is, is urged by
   some to that purpose. He is also called dvr?, Hag. ii. 5; so perhaps in
   other places. Our present Quakers would have that expression of the
   "word of God," used nowhere in any other sense; so that destroying
   that, as they do, in the issue they may freely despise the Scripture,
   as that which they say is not the word of God, nor anywhere so called.
   Logos endiathetos amongst men is that which Aristotle calls ton eso
   logon. Logos en no lambanomenos, says Hesychius. Logos endiathetos is
   that which we speak in our hearts, says Damascen. De Orthod. Fid. lib.
   i. cap xviii.: so Ps. xiv. 1, 'mr nvl blbv?. This, as spoken in respect
   of God, is that egress of his power whereby, according to the eternal
   conception of his mind, he worketh any thing: so Gen. i. 2, "God said,
   Let there be light; and there was light." Of this word of God the
   psalmist treats, Ps. cxlvii. 18, "He sendeth out dvrv?, and melteth the
   ice;" and Ps. cxlviii. 8 the same word is used; -- in both which places
   the LXX. render it by ho logos. This is that which is called rhema tes
   dunameos, Heb. i. 3, xi. 3, where the apostle says, "The heavens were
   made rhemati Theou:" which is directly parallel to that place of 2 Pet.
   iii. 5, where it is expressed to tou Theou logo; for though rhema more
   properly denotes logon prophorikon, yet in these places it signifies
   plainly that egress of God's power for the production and preservation
   of things, being a pursuit of the eternal conception of his mind, which
   is logos endiathetos. Now, this infinitely wise and eternal conception
   of the mind of God exerting itself in power, wherein God is said to
   speak ("He said, Let there be light"), is that which the Platonics, and
   Philo with them, harped on, never once dreaming of a co-essential and
   hypostatical Word of God, though the word hupostasis occurs amongst
   them. This they thought was unto God, as in us, logos endiathetos or ho
   eso pros noun: and, particularly, it is termed by Philo, phone tes
   dianoias eurunomene, De Agric. That this was his ho logos is most
   evident. Hence he tells us, Ouden an heteron eipoi ton noeton einai
   kosmon e Theou logon ede kosmopoiountos oude gar he noete polis heteron
   ti estin, e ho tou architektonos logismos, ede ten noeten polin ktizein
   dianoumenou. Moseos gar to dogma touto, ouk emon, De Mund. Opific. And
   a little after, Ton de aoraton kai noeton theion logon, eikona legei
   Theou; kai taupses eikona ton noeton phos ekeino, ho theiou logou
   gegonen eikon tou diermeneusantos ten genesin autou, kai estin
   huperouranios aster. The whole tendency of his discourse is, that the
   word of God, in his mind, in the erection of the world, was the image
   of himself, and that the idea or image of the things to be made, but
   especially of light. And whereas (if I remember aright, for I cannot
   now find the place) I have said somewhere that Christ was logos
   endiathetos, though therein I have the consent of very many learned
   divines, and used it merely in opposition to prophoriko, yet I desire
   to recall it; nor do I think there is any propriety in that expression
   of emphutos used of Christ, but only in those of hupostatikos and
   ousiodes, which the Scripture (though not in the very terms) will make
   good. In this second acceptation, tou logou, Photinus himself granted
   that the world was made by the word of God. Now, if it be thought
   necessary that I should give an account of my fear that nothing but ho
   logos in this sense, decked with many Platonical encomiums, was
   intended in the Annotations on John i. (though I confess much, from
   some quotations there used, may be said against it), I shall readily
   undertake the task; but at present, in this running course, I shall add
   no more.

   But now, as if all the matter in hand were fully despatched, we have
   this triumphant close attending the former discourse and
   observations:--

   "If one text acknowledged to assert Christ's eternal divinity" (which
   one was granted to do it, though not clearly) "will not suffice to
   conclude him no Socinian" (which I said not he was, yea, expressly
   waived the management of any such charge); "if six verses in the
   Proverbs, two in Isaiah, one in St Peter, one in St Paul, added to many
   in the beginning of St John" (in his annotations on all which he speaks
   not one word to the purpose), "will not yet amount to above one text;
   or, lastly, if that one may be doubted of also which is by him
   interpreted to affirm Christ's eternal subsistence with God before the
   creation of the world" (which he doth not so interpret as to a personal
   subsistence), "and that the whole world was created by him, -- I shall
   despair of ever being a successful advocate for any man:" from which
   condition I hope some little time will recover the apologist.

   This is the sum of what is pleaded in chief for the defence of the
   Annotations; wherein what small cause he hath to acquiesce who hath
   been put to the labour and trouble of vindicating near forty texts of
   Scripture, in the Old Testament and New, giving express testimony to
   the deity of Christ, from the annotator's perverse interpretations, let
   the reader judge. In the 13th section of the apologist's discourse, he
   adds some other considerations to confirm his former vindication of the
   Annotations.

   He tells us that he "professeth not to divine what places of the Old
   Testament, wherein the deity of Christ is evidently testified unto, are
   corrupted by the learned man; nor will he, upon the discouragement
   already received, make any inquiry into my treatise." But what need of
   divination? The apologist cannot but remember at all times some of the
   texts of the Old Testament that are pleaded to that purpose; and he
   hath at least as many encouragements to look into the Annotations as
   discouragements from casting an eye upon that volume, as he calls it,
   wherein they are called to an account. And if he suppose he can make a
   just defence for the several places so wrested and perverted without
   once consulting them, I know not how by me he might possibly be engaged
   into such an inquiry; and therefore I shall not name them again, having
   done somewhat more than name them already.

   But he hath two suppletory considerations that will render any such
   inquiry or inspection needless. Of these the first is, --

   "That the word of God being all and every part of it of equal truth,
   that doctrine which is founded on five places of divine writ must by
   all Christians be acknowledged to be as irrefragably confirmed as a
   hundred express places would be conceived to confirm it."

   Ans. It is confessed that not only five, but any one express text of
   Scripture, is sufficient for the confirmation of any divine truth; but
   that five places have been produced out of the Annotations by the
   apologist, for the confirmation of the great truth pleaded about, is
   but pretended, -- indeed there is no such thing. The charge on Grotius
   was, that he had depraved all but one. If that be no crime, the defence
   was at hand; if it be, though that one should be acknowledged to be
   clear to that purpose, here is no defence against that which was
   charged, but a strife about that which was not. Let the places be
   consulted: if the assertion prove true by an induction of instances,
   the crime is to be confessed, or else the charge denied to contain a
   crime. But, secondly, he says, --

   "That this charge, upon inquiry, will be found in some degree, if not
   equally, chargeable on the learnedest and most valuable of the first
   reformers, particularly upon Mr Calvin himself, who hath been as
   bitterly and unjustly accused and reviled upon this account (witness
   the book intitled Calvino Turcismus') as ever Erasmus was by Bellarmine
   and Beza, or as probably Grotius may be."

   Though this, at the best, be but a diversion of the charge, and no
   defence, yet, not containing that truth which is needful to countenance
   it for the end for which it is proposed, I could not pass it by. It is
   denied (which in this case, until farther proof, must suffice) that any
   of the learnedst of the first reformers, and particularly Mr Calvin,
   are equally chargeable, or in any degree of proportion, with Grotius,
   as to the crime insisted on. Calvin being the man instanced in, I
   desire the apologist to prove that he hath, in all his commentaries on
   the Scripture, corrupted the sense of any text of the Old Testament or
   New giving express testimony to the deity of Christ, and commonly
   pleaded to that end and purpose; although I deny not but that he
   differs from the common judgment of most in the interpretation of some
   few prophetical passages judged by them to relate to Christ. I know
   what Genebrard and some others of that faction raved against him; but
   it was chiefly from some expressions in his Institutes about the
   Trinity (wherein yet he is acquitted by the most learned of
   themselves), and not from his expositions of Scripture, from which they
   raised their clamours. For the book called "Calvino Turcismus," written
   by Reynolds and Giffard, the apologist has forgotten the design of it.
   Calvin is no more concerned in it than others of the first reformers;
   nor is it from any doctrine about the deity of Christ in particular,
   but from the whole of the reformed religion, with the apostasies of
   some of that profession, that they compare it with Turcism. Something,
   indeed, in a chapter or two, they speak about the Trinity, from some
   expressions of Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, and others; but as to
   Calvin's expositions of Scripture, they insist not on them. Possibly
   the apologist may have seen Paræus' "Calvinus Orthodoxus," in answer to
   Hunnius' "Calvinus Judaizans;" if not, he may at any time have there an
   account of this calumny.

   Having passed through the consideration of the two considerable heads
   of this discourse, in the method called for by the apologist (having
   only taken liberty to transpose them as to first and last), I must
   profess myself as yet unsatisfied as to the necessity or suitableness
   of this kind of defence. The sum of that which I affirmed (which alone
   gives occasion to the defensative now under consideration) is, that, to
   my observation, Grotius in his Annotations had not left above one text
   of Scripture, if one, giving clear evidence to the deity of Christ. Of
   his satisfaction I said in sum the same thing. Had the apologist been
   pleased to have produced instances of any evidence for the disprovement
   of my assertion, I should very gladly and readily have acknowledged my
   mistake and oversight. I am still, also, in the same resolution as to
   the latitude of the expression, though I have already, by an induction
   of particulars, manifested his corrupting and perverting of so many,
   both in respect of the one head and of the other, with his express
   compliance with the Socinians in his so doing, as that I cannot have
   the least thought of letting fall my charge, which, with the limitation
   expressed (of my own observation), contains the truth in this matter,
   and nothing but that which is so.

   It was, indeed, in my thoughts to have done somewhat more in reference
   to those Annotations than thus occasionally to have animadverted on
   their corruption in general, -- namely, to have proceeded in the
   vindication of the truths of the gospel from their captivity under the
   false glosses put upon them by the interpretations of places of
   Scripture wherein they are delivered. But this work being fallen on an
   abler hand, namely, that of our learned professor of divinity, my
   desire is satisfied, and the necessity of my endeavour for that end
   removed.

   There are sundry other particulars insisted on by the apologist, and a
   great deal of rhetoric is laid out about them; which certainly deserve
   not the reader's trouble in the perusal of any other debate about them.
   If they did, it were an easy matter to discover his mistakes in them
   all along. The foundation of most of them lies in that which he
   affirms, sect. 4, where he says that "I thus state the jealousies about
   H. G. as far as it is owned by me, namely, that being in doctrine a
   Socinian, he yet closed in many things with the Roman interest:" to
   which he replies, that "this does not so much as pretend that he was a
   Papist;" as though I undertake to prove Grotius to be a Papist, or did
   not expressly disown the management of the jealousy stated as above, or
   that I did at all own it, all which are otherwise.

   Yet I shall now say, whether he was in doctrine a Socinian or no let
   his Annotations before insisted on determine; and whether he closed
   with the Roman interest or no, besides what hath been observed by
   others, I desire the apologist to consider his observation on Rev. xii.
   5, that book (himself being judge) having received his last hand. But
   my business is not to accuse Grotius, or to charge his memory with any
   thing but his prevarication in his Annotations on the Scripture. [1]

   And as I shall not cease to press the general aphorism, as it is
   called, That no drunkard, etc., nor any person whatever not born of
   God, or united to Christ, the head, by the same Spirit that is in him,
   and in the sense thereof perfecting holiness in the fear of God, shall
   ever see his face in glory, so I fear not what conclusion can
   regularly, in reference to any person living or dead, be thence
   deduced.

   It is the Annotations whereof I have spoken, which I have my liberty to
   do, and I presume shall still continue, whilst I live in the same
   thoughts of them, though I should see, -- a third defence of the
   learned Hugo Grotius!
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Epistles of Grotius to Crellius mentioned by the apologist in his
   first defence of him, giving some light to what hath been insisted on,
   I thought it not unfit to communicate them to the reader as they came
   to my hand, having not as yet been printed, that I know of:--

   Reverendo summæque eruditionis ac pietatis viro, Domino Johanni
   Crellio, pastori Racov. H. G. S.

   Libro tuo quo ad eum quem ego quondam scripseram (eruditissime Crelli)
   respondisti, adeo offensus non fui, ut etiam gratias tunc intra animum
   meum egerim, nunc et hisce agam literis. [2] Primo, quod non tantum
   humanè, sed et valde officiosè mecum egeris, ita ut queri nihil possim,
   nisi quod in me prædicando, modum interdum excedis, deinde vero, quod
   multa me docueris, partim utilia, partim jucunda scitu, meque exemplo
   tuo incitaveris ad penitius expendendum sensus sacrorum librorum. Bene
   autem in epistola tua quæ mihi longe gratissima advenit, de me judicas,
   non esse me eorum in numero qui ob sententias salva pietate dissidentes
   alieno a quoquam sim animo, aut boni alicujus amicitiam repudiem.
   Equidem in libro "De Vera Religione," quem jam percurri, relecturus et
   posthac, multa invenio summo cum judicio observata. [3] Illud vero
   sæculo gratulor, repertos homines qui neutiquam in controversiis
   subtilibus tantum ponunt quantum in vera vitæ emendatione, et
   quotidiano ad sanctitatem profectu. Utinam et mea scripta aliquid ad
   hoc studium in animis hominum excitandum inflammandumque conferre
   possint: tunc enim non frustra me vixisse hactenus existimem. Liber "De
   Veritate Religionis Christianæ" magis ut nobis esset solatio, quam ut
   aliis documento scriptus, non video quid post tot aliorum labores
   utilitatis afferre possit, nisi ipsa forte brevitate. Siquid tamen in
   eo est, quod tibi tuique similibus placeat, mihi supra evenit. Libris
   "De Jure Belli et Pacis" mihi præcipue propositum habui, ut feritatem
   illam, non Christianis tantum, sed et hominibus indignam, ad bella pro
   libitu suscipienda, pro libitu gerenda, quam gliscere tot populorum
   malo quotidie video, quantum in me est, sedarem. Gaudeo ad principum
   quorundam manus eos libros venisse, qui utinam partem eorum meliorem in
   suum animum admitterent. Nullus enim mihi ex eo labore suavior fructus
   eontingere possit. Te vero quod attinet, credas, rogo, si quid unquam
   facere possim tui, aut eorum quos singulariter amas, causa, experturum
   te, quantum te tuo merito faciam. Nunc quum aliud possim nihil, Dominum
   Jesum supplice animo veneror, ut tibi aliisque, pietatem promoventibus
   propitius adsit.

   Tui nominis studiosissimus,

   x. Maii. M.DC.XXVI.

   H. G.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Tam pro epistola (vir clarissime) quam pro transmisso libro, gratias
   ago maximas. Constitui et legere et relegere diligenter quæcunque a te
   proficiscuntur, expertus quo cum fructu id antehac fecerim. Eo ipso
   tempore quo literas tuas accepi, versabar in lectione tuæ
   interpretationis in Epistolam ad Galatas. [4] Quantum judicare possum
   et scripti occasionem et propositum, et totam seriem dictionis, ut
   magna cum cura indagasti, ita feliciter admodum es assequutus. Quare
   Deum precor, ut et tibi et tui similibus vitam det, et quæ alia ad
   istiusmodi labores necessaria. Mihi ad juvandam communem Christianismi
   causam, utinam tam adessent vires, quam promptus est animus: quippe me,
   a prima ærate, per varia disciplinarum genera jactatum, nulla res magis
   delectavit quam rerum sacrarum meditatio. Id in rebus prosperis
   moderamen, id in adversis solamen sensi. Pacis consilia et amavi semper
   et amo nunc quoque; eoque doleo, quum video, tam pertinacibus iris
   committi inter se eos, qui Christi se esse dicunt. Si recte rem
   putamus, quantillis de causis ? !

   Januarii. M.DC.XXXII. Amstelodam i.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] "Grotius ad nocentissimæ hæreseos atque effrenis licentiæ Scyllam;
   iterumque, ad tyrannidis Charybdin declinavit fluctuans." -- Essen.

   [2] This book of Crellius lay unanswered by Grotius above twenty years;
   for so long he lived after the publishing of it. It is since fully
   answered by Essenius.

   [3] That is the body of Socinian divinity written by Crellius and
   Volkelius.

   [4] Let the reader judge what annotations on that epistle we are to
   expect from this man.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:2

   2 Samuel

   [2]23:2

   2 Kings

   [3]7:9

   Psalms

   [4]14:1   [5]33:6   [6]147:18   [7]148:8

   Proverbs

   [8]8   [9]8:21-27   [10]8:22   [11]8:27

   Isaiah

   [12]45:12   [13]45:12   [14]48:13   [15]48:13   [16]53   [17]53
   [18]53   [19]53   [20]53   [21]53:4   [22]53:4   [23]53:4

   Haggai

   [24]2:5

   Luke

   [25]1:2

   John

   [26]1   [27]1:1   [28]1:1   [29]1:1   [30]1:1   [31]1:29

   Acts

   [32]20:28   [33]20:32

   Romans

   [34]3:25-26   [35]4:25   [36]5:10   [37]5:10-11   [38]6:6

   2 Corinthians

   [39]5:18-21

   Galatians

   [40]2:20   [41]2:21   [42]3:13   [43]5:24

   Ephesians

   [44]2:16

   Colossians

   [45]1:16   [46]1:16   [47]1:20-22   [48]2:14

   Titus

   [49]2:14

   Hebrews

   [50]1:3   [51]1:3   [52]2:17   [53]4:12   [54]5:3   [55]5:5
   [56]9:14   [57]9:14-15   [58]9:25   [59]9:26   [60]9:26   [61]9:28
   [62]9:28   [63]9:28   [64]9:28   [65]10:3   [66]10:9   [67]10:12
   [68]11:3

   1 Peter

   [69]2:24   [70]2:24   [71]2:24   [72]2:24

   2 Peter

   [73]1:19   [74]3:5   [75]3:5   [76]3:5

   1 John

   [77]1:1   [78]2:2

   Revelation

   [79]1:5   [80]1:5   [81]12:5   [82]13:8
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Citations

     * Aristotle: Rhetoric: [83]1
     * Crell, John: De Causis Mortis Christi: [84]1
     * Damascene, John: De Fide Orthodoxa: [85]1
     * Essenius, Andrew: [86]1
     * Grotius, Hugo: Annotations on the Bible: [87]1 [88]2 [89]3 [90]4
       [91]5 [92]6 [93]7 [94]8 [95]9 [96]10 [97]11 [98]12 [99]13 [100]14
       [101]15 [102]16 [103]17 [104]18 [105]19 [106]20 [107]21 [108]22
       [109]23 [110]24 [111]25 [112]26 [113]27 [114]28 [115]29 [116]30
       [117]31 [118]32 [119]33 [120]34 [121]35 [122]36 [123]37 [124]38
       [125]39 [126]40 [127]41 [128]42 [129]43 [130]44 [131]45 [132]46
       [133]47 [134]48 [135]49 [136]50 [137]51 [138]52 [139]53 [140]54
       [141]55 [142]56 [143]57 [144]58 [145]59 [146]60 [147]61 [148]62
       [149]63 [150]64
     * Grotius, Hugo: Defensio fidei catholicæ de satisfactione Christi
       adversus Faustum Socinum Senensem: [151]1 [152]2 [153]3 [154]4
       [155]5 [156]6 [157]7 [158]8 [159]9 [160]10 [161]11 [162]12 [163]13
       [164]14 [165]15 [166]16 [167]17 [168]18 [169]19
     * Hammond, Dr Henry: A Continuation of the Defence of Grotius: [170]1
     * Hammond, Dr Henry: A Second Defence of Hugo Grotius: [171]1 [172]2
     * Hammond, Dr Henry: An Answer to the Animadversions on the
       Dissertations concerning the Epistles of Ignatius: [173]1
     * Hammond, Dr Henry: Annotations on the Scripture: [174]1
     * Hunnius, Ægidius: Calvinus Judaizans: [175]1
     * Owen, John: Perseverance of the Saints: [176]1
     * Owen, John: Vindiciæ Evangelicæ: [177]1 [178]2
     * Paræus, David: Calvinus Orthodoxus: [179]1
     * Philo: De Agricultera: [180]1
     * Philo: De Opificio Mundi: [181]1
     * Plautus: Amphitryo: [182]1
     * Quintlian: Institutio Oratoria: [183]1
     * Racovian Catechism: [184]1
     * Ravensperger, Hermann: Judicium de Libro Grotii: [185]1
     * Reynolds, William and Gifford, Gabriel: Calvino Turcismus: [186]1
       [187]2
     * Socinus, Faustus: Against Covetus: [188]1
     * Socinus, Faustus: De Jesu Christo Servatore: [189]1 [190]2 [191]3
       [192]4
     * Socinus, Faustus: Epistles: [193]1
     * Voelkel, Johannes: De Vera Religione: [194]1 [195]2
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Names

     * Aristotle: [196]1
     * Bellarmine, Cardinal Robert: [197]1
     * Beza, Theodore: [198]1
     * Calvin, John: [199]1 [200]2 [201]3 [202]4 [203]5 [204]6
     * Charles I., King: [205]1
     * Crell, John: [206]1 [207]2 [208]3 [209]4 [210]5 [211]6 [212]7
       [213]8 [214]9 [215]10 [216]11 [217]12 [218]13 [219]14 [220]15
       [221]16 [222]17
     * Erasmus, Desiderius: [223]1
     * Essenius, Andrew: [224]1 [225]2 [226]3
     * Génebrard, Gilbert: [227]1
     * Gifford, Gabriel: [228]1
     * Grotius, Hugo: [229]1 [230]2 [231]3 [232]4 [233]5 [234]6 [235]7
       [236]8 [237]9 [238]10 [239]11 [240]12 [241]13 [242]14 [243]15
       [244]16 [245]17 [246]18 [247]19 [248]20 [249]21 [250]22 [251]23
       [252]24 [253]25 [254]26 [255]27 [256]28 [257]29 [258]30 [259]31
       [260]32 [261]33 [262]34 [263]35 [264]36 [265]37 [266]38 [267]39
       [268]40 [269]41 [270]42 [271]43 [272]44 [273]45 [274]46 [275]47
       [276]48 [277]49 [278]50
     * Hammond, Dr Henry: [279]1 [280]2 [281]3 [282]4 [283]5 [284]6 [285]7
     * Hesychius: [286]1
     * Hunnius, Ægidius: [287]1
     * Luther, Martin: [288]1
     * Melancthon, Philipp: [289]1
     * Owen, John: [290]1 [291]2 [292]3 [293]4 [294]5 [295]6 [296]7
     * Paræus, David: [297]1
     * Philo: [298]1 [299]2 [300]3 [301]4
     * Photinus: [302]1 [303]2
     * Plautus: [304]1
     * Quintilian: [305]1
     * Ravensperger, Hermann: [306]1
     * Reynolds, William: [307]1
     * Smalcius, Valentinus: [308]1 [309]2 [310]3
     * Socinus, Faustus: [311]1 [312]2 [313]3 [314]4 [315]5 [316]6 [317]7
       [318]8 [319]9 [320]10 [321]11 [322]12 [323]13 [324]14 [325]15
       [326]16 [327]17 [328]18 [329]19 [330]20 [331]21 [332]22 [333]23
       [334]24
     * Stillingfleet, Edward: [335]1
     * Velthuysen, Lambertus van: [336]1
     * Voelkel, Johannes: [337]1 [338]2 [339]3 [340]4
     * Vossius, Gerardus Joannes: [341]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * akurologia: [342]1
     * aletheuein en agape: [343]1
     * allegorian: [344]1
     * anekdota: [345]1
     * aneenke: [346]1
     * aneenken: [347]1
     * anenenkein: [348]1
     * anenenkein hamartias: [349]1 [350]2
     * antitheta: [351]1
     * airei hamartian: [352]1
     * Aneenken: [353]1
     * ektesato me: [354]1
     * ektise: [355]1 [356]2
     * emphutos: [357]1
     * en pros ton Theon: [358]1 [359]2
     * E hos ouk estin, e, hos ou blaberon, e ou touto, e hos ou
       telikouto, e ouk adikon, e ou mega, e ouk aischron, e ouk echon
       megethos: [360]1
     * Hilaskesthai hamartias: [361]1
     * Hilaskesthai Theon peri ton hamartion: [362]1
     * ho eso pros noun: [363]1
     * ho deina: [364]1
     * ho logos: [365]1 [366]2 [367]3 [368]4
     * ho logos tou Theou: [369]1
     * Ho logos ho presbuteros ton genesin eilephoton ou kathaper oiakos
       eneilemenos ho ton holon kubernetes pedaliouchei ta sumpanta, kai
       hote ekosmoplastei chresamenos organo touto pros ten anupaition ton
       apoteloumenon sustasin: [370]1
     * Hos tas amartias hemon autos anenenken: [371]1
     * huper hamartion: [372]1 [373]2
     * hupostasis: [374]1
     * hupostasis to logo: [375]1
     * hupostatikos: [376]1
     * hos: [377]1
     * rhemati Theou: [378]1
     * rhema: [379]1 [380]2
     * rhema tes dunameos: [381]1
     * Eis athetesin hamartias: [382]1
     * Eis athetesin hamartias dia tes thusias hautou: [383]1
     * Eis to hilaskesthai tas hamartias tou laou: [384]1
     * Kai lousanti hemas apo ton hamartion hemon en to haimati hautou:
       [385]1
     * Logos en no lambanomenos: [386]1
     * Logos endiathetos: [387]1 [388]2
     * Ouden an heteron eipoi ton noeton einai kosmon e Theou logon ede
       kosmopoiountos oude gar he noete polis heteron ti estin, e ho tou
       architektonos logismos, ede ten noeten polin ktizein dianoumenou.
       Moseos gar to dogma touto, ouk emon: [389]1
     * Ton de aoraton kai noeton theion logon, eikona legei Theou; kai
       taupses eikona ton noeton phos ekeino, ho theiou logou gegonen
       eikon tou diermeneusantos ten genesin autou, kai estin
       huperouranios aster: [390]1
     * To tou Theou logo: [391]1
     * dikaiosune: [392]1
     * dikaiosunes: [393]1
     * dorean: [394]1
     * eis endeixin tes dikaiosunes autou: [395]1
     * katara: [396]1
     * kataratos: [397]1 [398]2
     * lexis: [399]1
     * logon prophorikon: [400]1
     * logos: [401]1
     * logos endiathetos: [402]1 [403]2 [404]3
     * logos hupostatikos: [405]1
     * logos hupostatikos, endiathetos: [406]1
     * lutron: [407]1
     * metalepsis: [408]1
     * ousiodes: [409]1 [410]2
     * proegoumene: [411]1
     * prokatarktike: [412]1
     * prophorikos: [413]1
     * ton eso logon: [414]1
     * to Theo epikataraton: [415]1
     * to Theou logo: [416]1
     * to logo: [417]1
     * to prophoriko: [418]1
     * to tou Theou logo: [419]1
     * tou logou: [420]1
     * pherei: [421]1
     * phone tes dianoias eurunomene: [422]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * 'mr nvl blbv: [423]1
     * 'sm: [424]1 [425]2
     * br': [426]1 [427]2
     * dvrv: [428]1
     * dvr: [429]1 [430]2
     * vvntm hv' ysbl: [431]1
     * mlh: [432]1
     * ns': [433]1
     * svl: [434]1 [435]2 [436]3 [437]4
     * vn: [438]1
     * qnny: [439]1 [440]2
     * sm 'ny: [441]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Latin Words and Phrases

     * Aderam: [442]1
     * At Chaldæus habet: [443]1
     * Cum semet offerret patri victimam: [444]1
     * Duplex hic figura; nam et: [445]1
     * Est autem hic: [446]1
     * Græcum Aquilæ est: [447]1
     * Grotius ad nocentissimæ hæreseos atque effrenis licentiæ Scyllam;
       iterumque, ad tyrannidis Charybdin declinavit fluctuans.: [448]1
     * Hæc de ea sapientia quæ in Lege apparet exponunt Hebræi: et sane
       ei, si non soli, at præcipue hæc attributa conveniunt: [449]1
     * Hinc colligitur solam Christi mortem nequaquam illam perfectam
       absolutamque ipsius oblationem (de qua in Epistola ad Hebræos
       agitur) fuisse, sed principium et præparationem quandam ipsius
       sacerdotii in coelo demum administrandi extitisse: [450]1
     * Hoc quidem loco, ut ex sequentibus apparet, est auferre peccata:
       [451]1
     * Hoc sæpius urgendum est: [452]1
     * Illud vero sæculo gratulor, repertos homines qui neutiquam in
       controversiis subtilibus tantum ponunt quantum in vera vitæ
       emendatione, et quotidiano ad sanctitatem profectu. Utinam et mea
       scripta aliquid ad hoc studium in animis hominum excitandum
       inflammandumque conferre possint: tunc enim non frustra me vixisse
       hactenus existimem. Liber "De Veritate Religionis Christianæ" magis
       ut nobis esset solatio, quam ut aliis documento scriptus, non video
       quid post tot aliorum labores utilitatis afferre possit, nisi ipsa
       forte brevitate. Siquid tamen in eo est, quod tibi tuique similibus
       placeat, mihi supra evenit. Libris "De Jure Belli et Pacis" mihi
       præcipue propositum habui, ut feritatem illam, non Christianis
       tantum, sed et hominibus indignam, ad bella pro libitu suscipienda,
       pro libitu gerenda, quam gliscere tot populorum malo quotidie
       video, quantum in me est, sedarem. Gaudeo ad principum quorundam
       manus eos libros venisse, qui utinam partem eorum meliorem in suum
       animum admitterent. Nullus enim mihi ex eo labore suavior fructus
       eontingere possit. Te vero quod attinet, credas, rogo, si quid
       unquam facere possim tui, aut eorum quos singulariter amas, causa,
       experturum te, quantum te tuo merito faciam. Nunc quum aliud possim
       nihil, Dominum Jesum supplice animo veneror, ut tibi aliisque,
       pietatem promoventibus propitius adsit.: [453]1
     * Januarii. M.DC.XXXII. Amstelodam i.: [454]1
     * Jesum Christum ea ratione peccata nostra abstulisse, quod
       effecerit, ut a peccando desistamus: [455]1
     * Jesus sacerdotale quidem munus suum aliquo modo erat auspicatus;
       cum semet patri victimam offerret: [456]1
     * Johannes : [457]1
     * Justificabit servus meus, justus multos et iniquitates ipsorum
       bajulabit: [458]1
     * Libro tuo quo ad eum quem ego quondam scripseram (eruditissime
       Crelli) respondisti, adeo offensus non fui, ut etiam gratias tunc
       intra animum meum egerim, nunc et hisce agam literis.: [459]1
     * Mortem Christus subiit duplici ratione, partim quidem ut foederis
       mediator seu sponsor, partim quidem ut sacerdos Deo ipsum
       oblaturus: [460]1
     * Munus sacerdotale aliquo modo erat auspicatus: [461]1
     * Nam crux Christi fundamentum est prædicationis; prædicatio vero
       poenitentiæ: poenitentia vero aufert vitia: [462]1
     * Nihil homini pessimo in hac vita pejus evenire poterat: [463]1
     * Non enim proprie Christus cum crucifigeretur vitia nostra abstulit:
       [464]1
     * Non enim proprie Christus cum crucifigeretur vitia nostra abstulit,
       sed causas dedit per quas auferrentur: [465]1
     * Oblatio: [466]1
     * Partes: [467]1
     * Poterat dicere qui et mortuus est et resurrexit ut nos a peccatis
       justificaret: [468]1
     * Primo, quod non tantum humanè, sed et valde officiosè mecum egeris,
       ita ut queri nihil possim, nisi quod in me prædicando, modum
       interdum excedis, deinde vero, quod multa me docueris, partim
       utilia, partim jucunda scitu, meque exemplo tuo incitaveris ad
       penitius expendendum sensus sacrorum librorum. Bene autem in
       epistola tua quæ mihi longe gratissima advenit, de me judicas, non
       esse me eorum in numero qui ob sententias salva pietate dissidentes
       alieno a quoquam sim animo, aut boni alicujus amicitiam repudiem.
       Equidem in libro "De Vera Religione," quem jam percurri, relecturus
       : [469]1
     * Quantum judicare possum et scripti occasionem et propositum, et
       totam seriem dictionis, ut magna cum cura indagasti, ita feliciter
       admodum es assequutus. Quare Deum precor, ut et tibi et tui
       similibus vitam det, et quæ alia ad istiusmodi labores necessaria.
       Mihi ad juvandam communem Christianismi causam, utinam tam adessent
       vires, quam promptus est animus: quippe me, a prima ærate, per
       varia disciplinarum genera jactatum, nulla res magis delectavit
       quam rerum sacrarum meditatio. Id in rebus prosperis moderamen, id
       in adversis solamen sensi. Pacis consilia et amavi semper et amo
       nunc quoque; eoque doleo, quum video, tam pertinacibus iris
       committi inter se eos, qui Christi se esse dicunt. Si recte rem
       putamus, quantillis de causis ? !: [470]1
     * Quasi dixerit Christum factum esse: [471]1
     * Reverendo summæque eruditionis ac pietatis viro, Domino Johanni
       Crellio, pastori Racov. H. G. S.: [472]1
     * Sacerdotale munus erat aliquo modo auspicatus: [473]1
     * Sanguine suo: [474]1
     * Sanguini: [475]1
     * Semet obtulit patri: [476]1
     * Sequitur Christum quoque obtulisse pro se: [477]1
     * Significat ergo ibi expiationem quæ fit placando: [478]1
     * Tam pro epistola (vir clarissime) quam pro transmisso libro,
       gratias ago maximas. Constitui et legere et relegere diligenter
       quæcunque a te proficiscuntur, expertus quo cum fructu id antehac
       fecerim. Eo ipso tempore quo literas tuas accepi, versabar in
       lectione tuæ interpretationis in Epistolam ad Galatas.: [479]1
     * Traditus propter peccata nostra: [480]1
     * Tui nominis studiosissimus,: [481]1
     * Ut ostenderet se veracem et fidelem esse: [482]1
     * Ut peccatum: [483]1
     * Verum animadvertere oportet primum in Græco, verbum, quod
       interpretes verterunt pertulit, est: [484]1
     * Vide quæ diximus ad initium Evangelii Johannis: [485]1
     * Vitia nostra ita interfecit, sicut qui cruci affiguntur interfici
       solent. Simile loquendi genus: [486]1
     * Vocem: [487]1
     * Vox autem: [488]1
     * abstulit: [489]1 [490]2 [491]3
     * ad animam transfertur. Dicitur autem Christus suo sanguine nos
       lavasse: [492]1
     * aderam: [493]1
     * adversaria: [494]1
     * alia metaphora seu translatione (quæ nihil aliud est quam
       compendiosa quædam comparatio) utens, dixit de Christo et ejus
       morte, Qui dilexit nos et lavit nos a peccatis in sanguine suo,'
       nam quemadmodum aqua abluuntur sordes corporis, sic sanguine
       Christi peccata, quæ sordes animi sunt, absterguntur. Absterguntur,
       inquam, quia animus noster ab ipsis mundatur: [495]1
     * auferre: [496]1
     * auferre peccata: [497]1 [498]2
     * aut negandum est aut defendendum: [499]1
     * bajulare, portare: [500]1
     * causa: [501]1
     * creare: [502]1
     * eodem sensu: [503]1
     * est sustinere, bajulare, quoties autem bajulare ponitur cum nomine
       peccati aut iniquitatis, id in omni lingua et maxime in Hebraismo
       significat poenas ferre: [504]1
     * et: [505]1 [506]2
     * et LXX.: [507]1
     * et posthac, multa invenio summo cum judicio observata.: [508]1
     * extra hæc in judiciis fere nihil est: [509]1
     * facere ut appareat: [510]1
     * ferre peccata: [511]1
     * hic est abstulit: [512]1
     * hoc est poenæ a Deo irrogatæ, et quidem ignominiosissimæ obnoxium:
       [513]1
     * ibi ego: [514]1
     * in: [515]1
     * in causa facili: [516]1
     * iniquitatem significat, atque etiam iniquitatis poenam: [517]1
     * liberatio a jugo peccati: [518]1
     * malim hic de bonitate: [519]1
     * morti: [520]1
     * muneris sacerdotis, hæc sunt potissimum; mactatio victimæ, in
       tabernaculum ad oblationem peragendam ingressio, et ex eodem
       egressio: ac mactatio quidem mortem Christi, violentam sanguinis
       profusionem continet: [521]1
     * nam Christus ita cruciatus est, quasi esset Deo: [522]1
     * non perferre peccata, sed peccata tollere, sive auferre,
       significare: [523]1
     * nostra vice: [524]1
     * nostri causa: [525]1
     * nostro loco: [526]1
     * offerre seipsum in coelo: [527]1
     * offerre seipsum in cruce: [528]1
     * opus integrum: [529]1 [530]2 [531]3
     * patronus neget, defendat, transferat, excuset, deprecetur, molliat,
       minuat, avertat, despiciat, derideat: [532]1
     * pro: [533]1
     * purgatio ista tribuitur, quia per sanguinem, id est, mortem
       Christi, secutâ ejus excitatione et evectione, giguitur in nobis
       fides, quæ deinde fides corda purgat: [534]1
     * quod non pertulit sed abstulit vertendum erat, non secus ac factum
       fuerit in: [535]1
     * quomodo circumcisio: [536]1
     * redemptio a reatu peccati: [537]1
     * sensu non malo, si creare: [538]1
     * subire poenas nobis debitas: [539]1
     * subire poenas simpliciter: [540]1
     * sursum tulit: [541]1
     * tulit: [542]1 [543]2
     * tulit sursum eundo, portavit: [544]1
     * ubi Græci: [545]1
     * ubi idem legendi modus habetur, unde constat: [546]1
     * ut et Symmachi et Theodotionis, respondetque bene Hebræo: [547]1
     * ut infra: [548]1
     * victima: [549]1
     * vide: [550]1
     * vox autem: [551]1
     * x. Maii. M.DC.XXVI.: [552]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [553]617  [554]618  [555]619  [556]620  [557]621  [558]622  [559]623
   [560]624  [561]625  [562]626  [563]627  [564]628  [565]629  [566]630
   [567]631  [568]632  [569]633  [570]634  [571]635  [572]636  [573]637
   [574]638  [575]639
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#i.iv-p34.29
   2. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=2#i.iv-p34.18
   3. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=7&scrV=9#i.iv-p14.7
   4. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#i.iv-p34.27
   5. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=6#i.iv-p34.13
   6. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=18#i.iv-p34.30
   7. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=8#i.iv-p34.32
   8. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=0#i.iv-p27.1
   9. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=21#i.iv-p26.8
  10. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=22#i.iv-p27.3
  11. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=27#i.iv-p27.14
  12. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=12#i.iv-p26.9
  13. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=12#i.iv-p28.15
  14. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=13#i.iv-p26.9
  15. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=13#i.iv-p28.16
  16. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#i.iv-p3.14
  17. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#i.iv-p4.1
  18. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#i.iv-p6.1
  19. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#i.iv-p13.1
  20. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=0#i.iv-p15.2
  21. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#i.iv-p10.12
  22. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#i.iv-p11.10
  23. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#i.iv-p14.1
  24. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=5#i.iv-p34.20
  25. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=2#i.iv-p34.7
  26. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#i.iv-p34.64
  27. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.iv-p26.4
  28. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.iv-p26.6
  29. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.iv-p27.18
  30. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.iv-p34.6
  31. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#i.iv-p10.7
  32. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#i.iv-p21.30
  33. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=32#i.iv-p34.10
  34. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#i.iv-p18.1
  35. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#i.iv-p20.11
  36. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#i.iv-p19.1
  37. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#i.iv-p21.25
  38. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=6#i.iv-p10.18
  39. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=18#i.iv-p19.2
  40. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#i.iv-p10.19
  41. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=21#i.iv-p17.2
  42. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#i.iv-p17.9
  43. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=24#i.iv-p10.19
  44. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=16#i.iv-p21.26
  45. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#i.iv-p26.11
  46. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#i.iv-p30.1
  47. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=20#i.iv-p21.27
  48. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#i.iv-p10.16
  49. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=14#i.iv-p21.28
  50. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.iv-p22.41
  51. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#i.iv-p34.35
  52. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=17#i.iv-p20.1
  53. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#i.iv-p34.11
  54. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=3#i.iv-p22.34
  55. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=5#i.iv-p22.2
  56. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#i.iv-p22.37
  57. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#i.iv-p21.29
  58. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=25#i.iv-p21.23
  59. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=26#i.iv-p22.42
  60. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=26#i.iv-p22.46
  61. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=28#i.iv-p8.8
  62. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=28#i.iv-p10.4
  63. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=28#i.iv-p11.7
  64. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=28#i.iv-p11.19
  65. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=3#i.iv-p22.47
  66. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=9#i.iv-p22.48
  67. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=12#i.iv-p22.48
  68. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=3#i.iv-p34.35
  69. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=24#i.iv-p6.2
  70. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=24#i.iv-p7.1
  71. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=24#i.iv-p11.8
  72. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=24#i.iv-p15.7
  73. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#i.iv-p34.9
  74. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#i.iv-p26.10
  75. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#i.iv-p29.1
  76. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=5#i.iv-p34.37
  77. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#i.iv-p34.8
  78. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#i.iv-p21.24
  79. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#i.iv-p21.3
  80. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#i.iv-p21.7
  81. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=5#i.iv-p47.2
  82. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=8#i.iv-p21.22
  83. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.11
  84. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.13
  85. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.26
  86. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p48.2
  87. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.11
  88. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.12
  89. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.14
  90. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.19
  91. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.35
  92. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.3
  93. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.4
  94. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.11
  95. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p2.2
  96. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p2.3
  97. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.1
  98. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.15
  99. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.18
 100. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.19
 101. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p4.2
 102. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p4.3
 103. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p5.1
 104. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p5.3
 105. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p5.4
 106. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p9.1
 107. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p9.2
 108. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p12.2
 109. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.1
 110. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.6
 111. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.9
 112. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.11
 113. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.13
 114. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.17
 115. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p16.1
 116. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.5
 117. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.14
 118. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.8
 119. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.14
 120. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.18
 121. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.19
 122. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.17
 123. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.1
 124. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.49
 125. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.2
 126. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.6
 127. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.11
 128. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.13
 129. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.16
 130. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.1
 131. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.3
 132. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.4
 133. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.7
 134. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.12
 135. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p25.1
 136. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p26.1
 137. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p26.12
 138. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.9
 139. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p30.2
 140. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p31.1
 141. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.63
 142. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p37.1
 143. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p37.2
 144. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p38.1
 145. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p41.1
 146. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p44.2
 147. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p45.1
 148. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p47.1
 149. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p47.4
 150. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p50.1
 151. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.3
 152. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.16
 153. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.13
 154. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p5.2
 155. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p5.5
 156. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.11
 157. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p12.3
 158. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p13.3
 159. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.3
 160. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.10
 161. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.15
 162. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p16.2
 163. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.1
 164. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.27
 165. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.2
 166. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.12
 167. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.10
 168. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.10
 169. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.14
 170. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.26
 171. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.24
 172. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.9
 173. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.7
 174. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p1.4
 175. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.16
 176. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.2
 177. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.21
 178. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.14
 179. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.14
 180. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.48
 181. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.51
 182. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.9
 183. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.6
 184. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.8
 185. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.5
 186. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p42.2
 187. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.5
 188. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.2
 189. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.23
 190. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.7
 191. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.5
 192. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.5
 193. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.6
 194. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.17
 195. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.19
 196. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.9
 197. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p42.4
 198. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p42.5
 199. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p42.1
 200. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.1
 201. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.3
 202. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.8
 203. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.11
 204. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.12
 205. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p1.3
 206. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.7
 207. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.9
 208. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.10
 209. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.18
 210. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.25
 211. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.7
 212. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.11
 213. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p19.4
 214. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.6
 215. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.15
 216. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.11
 217. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.22
 218. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.28
 219. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.4
 220. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p51.2
 221. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p54.1
 222. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p55.1
 223. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p42.3
 224. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.10
 225. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p48.3
 226. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p54.3
 227. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.4
 228. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.7
 229. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p1.6
 230. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.1
 231. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.8
 232. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.4
 233. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.8
 234. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.13
 235. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.15
 236. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.20
 237. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.22
 238. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.28
 239. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.30
 240. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.31
 241. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.34
 242. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.2
 243. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.8
 244. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.10
 245. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.12
 246. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.16
 247. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.17
 248. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p7.2
 249. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.2
 250. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.11
 251. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p13.2
 252. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.12
 253. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.14
 254. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.19
 255. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.9
 256. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.16
 257. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.9
 258. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.20
 259. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.27
 260. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.12
 261. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.15
 262. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.11
 263. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p26.2
 264. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p26.5
 265. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p26.7
 266. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p26.13
 267. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.17
 268. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p29.4
 269. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p41.2
 270. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p42.6
 271. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.2
 272. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p44.1
 273. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p46.1
 274. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p46.2
 275. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p47.3
 276. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p51.1
 277. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p54.2
 278. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p57.3
 279. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p1.1
 280. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.3
 281. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.6
 282. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.17
 283. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.23
 284. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.29
 285. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.33
 286. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.24
 287. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.15
 288. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.9
 289. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.10
 290. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p1.5
 291. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.1
 292. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.5
 293. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.9
 294. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.25
 295. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.27
 296. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p3.32
 297. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.13
 298. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.6
 299. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.8
 300. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.42
 301. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.46
 302. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p33.4
 303. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.60
 304. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.8
 305. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.5
 306. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.4
 307. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p43.6
 308. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.6
 309. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.7
 310. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.5
 311. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.2
 312. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.5
 313. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.1
 314. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.5
 315. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.7
 316. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.4
 317. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.14
 318. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.15
 319. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p12.1
 320. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.6
 321. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.8
 322. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.10
 323. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.24
 324. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.26
 325. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.4
 326. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.12
 327. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p19.3
 328. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.7
 329. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.1
 330. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.12
 331. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.14
 332. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.4
 333. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.3
 334. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p30.3
 335. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.12
 336. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.11
 337. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.14
 338. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.23
 339. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.26
 340. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p55.2
 341. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-p2.6
 342. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.29
 343. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p1.7
 344. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.20
 345. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.9
 346. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.1
 347. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.3
 348. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.17
 349. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.9
 350. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.21
 351. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.16
 352. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.6
 353. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.2
 354. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.5
 355. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.11
 356. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.3
 357. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.56
 358. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.16
 359. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.13
 360. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.10
 361. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.9
 362. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.4
 363. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.45
 364. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.6
 365. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.7
 366. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.33
 367. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.49
 368. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.62
 369. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.1
 370. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.13
 371. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.1
 372. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.33
 373. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.36
 374. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.43
 375. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p33.3
 376. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.57
 377. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.20
 378. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.36
 379. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.15
 380. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.39
 381. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.34
 382. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.44
 383. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.43
 384. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.3
 385. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.18
 386. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.23
 387. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.21
 388. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.25
 389. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.50
 390. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.52
 391. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p29.2
 392. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.3
 393. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.9
 394. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.3
 395. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.2
 396. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.16
 397. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.18
 398. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.22
 399. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.16
 400. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.40
 401. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.17
 402. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.41
 403. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.44
 404. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.54
 405. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.4
 406. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.2
 407. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.43
 408. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.21
 409. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.5
 410. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.58
 411. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.37
 412. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.38
 413. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.3
 414. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.22
 415. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.12
 416. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p33.5
 417. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p33.2
 418. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.55
 419. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.38
 420. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.59
 421. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.14
 422. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.47
 423. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.28
 424. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.44
 425. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.32
 426. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.9
 427. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.2
 428. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.31
 429. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.12
 430. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.19
 431. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p14.3
 432. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p34.14
 433. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.9
 434. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.11
 435. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.9
 436. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p14.9
 437. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.4
 438. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p14.5
 439. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.7
 440. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.1
 441. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.10
 442. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.15
 443. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.8
 444. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.24
 445. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.15
 446. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.20
 447. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.4
 448. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p48.1
 449. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.2
 450. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.18
 451. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.10
 452. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.11
 453. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p55.3
 454. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p60.1
 455. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.13
 456. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.3
 457. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.5
 458. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p14.2
 459. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p53.1
 460. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.12
 461. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.21
 462. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.13
 463. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.23
 464. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.22
 465. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.12
 466. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.40
 467. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.15
 468. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.15
 469. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p54.4
 470. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p59.1
 471. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.11
 472. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p52.1
 473. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.10
 474. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.19
 475. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.38
 476. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.30
 477. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.35
 478. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.5
 479. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p58.1
 480. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.13
 481. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p56.1
 482. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.6
 483. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.45
 484. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.16
 485. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p29.3
 486. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.15
 487. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.8
 488. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p14.4
 489. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.6
 490. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.5
 491. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.6
 492. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.21
 493. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.12
 494. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.10
 495. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.8
 496. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.8
 497. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.10
 498. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.31
 499. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.4
 500. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p15.5
 501. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.36
 502. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.4
 503. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.5
 504. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p14.10
 505. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.8
 506. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.10
 507. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.10
 508. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p54.5
 509. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.7
 510. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.5
 511. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.32
 512. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.3
 513. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.13
 514. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p28.11
 515. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.6
 516. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p23.1
 517. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p14.6
 518. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.39
 519. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p18.10
 520. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p20.17
 521. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.16
 522. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.21
 523. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.22
 524. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.34
 525. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.33
 526. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.35
 527. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.45
 528. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.46
 529. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.5
 530. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.8
 531. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p24.13
 532. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p3.8
 533. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.17
 534. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.39
 535. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.18
 536. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p17.19
 537. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.40
 538. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.12
 539. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.42
 540. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p21.41
 541. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.3
 542. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.12
 543. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.2
 544. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p8.4
 545. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.13
 546. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p11.20
 547. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.6
 548. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p27.17
 549. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p22.31
 550. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p10.17
 551. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p14.8
 552. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-p57.1
 553. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.i-Page_617
 554. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.ii-Page_618
 555. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iii-Page_619
 556. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_620
 557. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_621
 558. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_622
 559. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_623
 560. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_624
 561. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_625
 562. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_626
 563. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_627
 564. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_628
 565. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_629
 566. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_630
 567. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_631
 568. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_632
 569. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_633
 570. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_634
 571. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_635
 572. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_636
 573. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_637
 574. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_638
 575. file:///ccel/o/owen/grotius/cache/grotius.html3#i.iv-Page_639
